THE KING's Right of Indulgence IN SPIRITUAL MATTERS, WITH The EQUITY thereof,
Asserted.

BY A Person of Honor, and Eminent Minister of State lately Deceased.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCLXXXVIII.

TO THE READER.
IT was the Opinion of the Great Lord Verulam, That Books (such as in earnest
deserve that Title) need no other Patrons than Truth and Reason. Let the
Abortives of the Press Court your favor; This Treatise securely Appeals to
your severest (provided it be but unprejudiced) Judgment.

It was Composed diverse years ago, by the Dictates of a NOBLE PERSON, of whom,
when I have said, That he was an Eminent Minister of State, a known Protestant,
and one of the most Studious Gentlemen of our Age, equally diligent and happy
in Reading both Books and Men, I shall have expressed but part of His
Character: The rest of which, when you have perused this Elaborate Discourse,
you will better be enabled to supply by those Idaea's of Veneration, which it
cannot but raise in minds that have any respect to Truth, Piety, or Learning.

As the Dead can neither Cajole, nor be Flattered, so ought they not to be
Envied; you have here the free and well-poiz'd Thoughts of a late Peer of
England on this Important matter, long before His present Majesty came to the
Crown.

All that I can pretend to, is the Honor of being a little Instrumental to
hand That forth to public Light, which I thought was too valuable to be doomed
to the Obscurity of a private Closet; as being unwilling the Inquisitive World
should be deprived of one of the most accurate Pieces that have been, or
perhaps can be, Written on this Subject.

If any thing therein occur less suitable to present times, you are desired to
remember how long ago it was Compiled; And withal to Pardon any Errors of the
Press that may have escaped Correction. Which is all I thought necessary you
should be Advertised of, by

Black-Fryars, October. 26, 1687. Your Humble Servant, HEN. CARE.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The meaning of the Title. SECT.
1 OF Right. 2 Of the Kings Right. 3 Of the King's Grant. 4 Of Indulgence. 5 Of
Spiritual Matters. 6 What is not meant by such Indulgence. 7 What is meant by
Spiritual Matters.
CHAP. II. That from Grounds of Policy, Indulgence in Spiritual matters is fit
to be granted.
1 THE preservation of the Public Peace. 2 From the Examples of our
Neighbors. 3 From Examples of Elder Times. 4 From the Present State of our
Affairs. 5 From the Advancement of Trade. 6 From the Increase of People. 7 From
the Dependence upon the Prince. 8 From the satisfaction of Men's Minds.
CHAP. III. That from grounds of Piety, it is fit to grant Indulgence in
Spiritual Matters.
1 FRom the Rule of doing as we would be done by. 2 From the Note of being
tender and kind-hearted. 3 From the ground of Leaving to God his own Works. 4
From the Subject Matter, being Spiritual. 5 From the Practice of the Church in
best times. 6 From the ground of sparing Christian Blood. 7 From the difficulty
to search out Truth. 8 From the aptness of good men to err. 9 From the
Introduction of Christianity.
CHAP. IV. Of Supreme, Spiritual Jurisdiction; and consequently a Right of
Indulgence in Kings.
1 OF Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction. 2 Of the Matter of Fact, and consequence
thereof. 3 That this Jurisdiction was in Fathers of Families. 4 That it was in
the Hebrew Princes. 5 That it was in the Heathen Princes. 6 That it was in the
Emperors. 7 That it was in the Kings of France. 8 That it was in the Kings of
Spain. 9 That it was in the Kings of Sweden. 10 That it was in several other
Christian Princes.
CHAP. V. The Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction in England, is in Kings.
1 THat it was in our British Kings. 2 That it was in our Saxon and Danish
Kings. 3 That it was in William 1. William Rufus, and Henry 1. 4 That it was in
King Stephen, Henry 2. and Richard 1. 5 That it was in King John, and Henry 3.
6 That it was in Edward 1. and Edward 2. 7 That it was in Edward 3. and Richard
2. 8 That it was in Henry 4. Hen. 5. H. 6. E. 4. R. 3. and H. 7. 9 That it was
in King Henry 8. 10 That it was in the succeeding Princes.
CHAP. VI. That the Right of Granting Indulgence in Spiritual Matters, is in
our King.
1 AS he is a Mixed Person. 2 As he is a Spiritual person. 3 As he is Head of
the Church of England. 4 From the Grounds of Reason. 5 From the Common Law. 6
From the Precedents before W. 1. 7 From Precedents of W. 1. till our time. 8
From Precedents in our time. 9 From several Acts of Parliament. 10 From the
Statute of 25 Henry 8.
CHAP. VII. The Answers to Objections against this Right of the King.
1 That it would encourage Schisms. 2 That it would hinder Uniformity. 3 That
it would cause Discontent. 4 That it would countenance Disobedience. 5 That the
King might then Repeal Statutes. 6 That the late Act of Uniformity bars this
Right.
CHAP. VIII. Observations upon Examples of Persecution.
1 OF Cain 's persecution. 2 Of Pharaoh 's persecution. 3 Of Haman 's
persecution. 4 Of Nebuchadnezzar 's persecution. 5 Of Darius his persecution. 6
Of the Persecutors of our Savior. 7 Of Christ's Disciples persecuted. 8
Further Observations upon the Examples. 9 The Comfort of Persecution.
CHAP. IX. Observations upon Examples of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters.
1 OF Indulgence to Noah. 2 Of Indulgence to the Patriarchs. 3 Of Indulgence by
the Egyptians. 4 Of Indulgence by Moses. 5 Of Indulgence by Joshua. 6 Of
Indulgence by the Judges and Kings. 7 Of Indulgence by our Savior. 8 Of
Indulgence by the Disciples of Christ. 9 The Sum and Conclusion of the
Treatise.
THE King's Right OF INDULGENCE In Spiritual Matters, ASSERTED.
CHAP. I. The Meaning of the Title.
1. TO explain the meaning of the Title of this Work: Lib. feud. 2. tit. 2. ss.
2. and tit. 3. ss. 1. Idem quod justum id est quod recto jure Constitutum.
Instit. de fidei commis-haered. Secundum juris civilis praescripta and regulos.
Bracton, l. 5. de exceptionibus, c. 28. ss. 2. fol. 434. Jus possessionis. Jus
proprietatis. Cook on Littleton, f. 345.
It may be inquired first, what is meant by the word Right?

The Civilians say that Right is the same with Just; that which is constituted
by right Law, and by just and lawful means, that is Right.

Justinian called the Law Right, Rectum; so the French say Droict. That which
the Civil Lawyers term, what is according to the Praescripts and Rules of the
Civil Law.

The same signification it bears in our Law, and our ancient Authors call it
Jus, as Right of Possession and Right of Property.

And if a Tenant in Fee make a Lease for Years, and afterward release all his
Right, his whole Estate is thereby past away, and what he had by Law, he has
given away by this Release of his Right.

That which we call a Man's Right, is that which is due, which by Law and
Justice he ought to have.

2. Next, We may consider the King's Right, which is, what the Law and Justice
gives to the King, that which is due to him.

The Right of the King of England is no new upstart Right, but of great
Antiquity, enjoyed by his Predecessors from the beginning of Government amongst
us. It is no Usurped Right, but descended to him from his Royal Ancestors, by
Succession and Inheritance.

It is no disputable Right, but certain and clear, defined by the known Laws of
this Kingdom, and general Consent of his People, who have submitted thereunto.

It is no Subordinate Right, our King acknowledges no Superior, his Empire is
Independent, under God, and as Sovereign by Law, as any Prince's in Christendom.

3. Of the King's Grant, may be our next Argument, wherein I intend not to
argue the several sorts of the King's Grants under the Great Seal, the Privy
Seal, or his Sign Manuel, and the force of such Grants.

This is not our present business, but the meaning of the King's Grant, as we
intend it, is, where he gives or bestows his Favor and Indulgence to any of
his Subjects, by such ways and legal Conveyance or Grant thereof, as is Valid
and Effectual, to those to whom it is made, be it under the Great Seal or
otherwise; this is meant by the King's Grant.

And it is the Honorable Intention of the King, that all his Grants should be
effectual and valid, as the Grants of a King ought to be, else his Officers do
not their duty.

4. We may now inquire the meaning of Indulgence.

The word Indulgentia, Spieg. Is cui alimenta relicta fuerant in metallis,
damnatus. Dd. in exped. ard. de Por. c. ult. l. 6. Spieg. Lib. in quasd. 13.
ss. 4. cap. de Sen. pass. and restit. 9. in Extra. de Paen. and remis. L.
2.3.11. c. de sent. pas. Bris.
was properly used for the leaving of Victuals for one, who is condemned to the
Mines.

It comprehends generally a Permission, a Condescension, a certain Lenity or
mildness; So it used in the Civil Laws, and the Canonists take it for a Pardon.

It comprehends a Recovery or Restitution of Dignity, Lands, and of all things
lost.

Most pertinent to our purpose is the Sense, wherein the Gloss takes it, that
it means a relaxation of Punishment, which one is to undergo for his Offenses,
a grant of the Prince's Clemency, by which a Subject is freed from Punishment,
and in this sense does the Law of England also mean an Indulgence, and is the
same with a License, an Exemption, a Pardon, or a Dispensation.

5. We may likewise inquire the meaning of Spiritual Matters; by them are
meant, such matters as concern the Soul or Spirit, such as concern the Worship
of God, in Doctrine and Discipline.

It is no loose Consideration, Seneca Epist. 27.
by what Care and Cost Kingdoms and States should be preserved, being they
derive and uphold all happiness to Men. The only infallible ground of their
preservation is true Religion, the worship of God in Spirit and in Truth.

And though ill manners are by accident, the cause, Ex malis moribus bonae
leges.
or rather occasion of good Laws, which are better in execution and best in
obedience, yet good manners cause obedience, and Religion begets good manners.

Spiritual matters are matters of Religion, but Religion cannot consist without
Public Exercise and action, and the requisits thereof.

If the Expression Spiritual, P. Nigh of the Kings Supremacy.
be interpreted by the contradistinct member Temporal, it seems to direct us to
understand such matters as concern Eternity, for that is the true opposite to
what is Temporal. The things that are seen are Temporal; 2 Cor. 4.18.
and the things that are not seen, are Eternal. This we mean by Matters
Spiritual.

6. But it may be now not improper to express in the negative, what I do not
mean by this Indulgence, and then what I do mean by it.

By Indulgence I do not mean that a toleration should be granted by the King of
any known Blasphemy or Sin. Neither do I mean such Indulgences whereof Luther
complains, that for Money Indulgence was granted for Sin, and redemption out of
Purgatory; surely none can pardon Sin but God alone, and Money got by such
means perishes with the getter.

7. But in the affirmative, by Indulgence in Spiritual matters, is meant a
permission of Liberty of men's Consciences, in matters not sinful of themselves,
and whereby there is no disturbance of the Public Peace.

That where Men out of tenderness of Conscience cannot submit to some
particulars enjoined by Authority, in matters touching God's Worship, fearing
or doubting, least if they should do it, they should offend God, and hazard the
salvation of their precious Souls; and upon these grounds do not conform, yet
live peaceably.

For an Indulgence and Permission to these Persons to serve God as they think
most for the good of their own Souls, especially when they agree in
Fundamentals with the rest of their Brethren. That these may not be punished in
their Estates or Liberties, much less in their Lives, for Nonconformity. This
is that Indulgence which is meant in matters Spiritual.

CHAP. II. That from Grounds of Policy, Indulgence in Spiritual Matters is fit
to be granted.
1. IT will be needless to discourse of the King's Right to grant Indulgence in
Spiritual matters, unless it be fit and expedient that such Indulgence be
granted.

If it be not fit to be granted, the King will not grant it, his wisdom and
affection to his People, will dissuade him from it; therefore before we proceed
any further in this Argument, it will not be impertinent to enquire, whether
such Indulgence be fit to be granted or not.

And it seems to me very clear, that it is fit to be granted; and that first
from grounds of Polity.

The chief grounds of Polity is the preservation of the Public Peace, to which
nothing more conduces, than the granting such Indulgence. Other grounds of
Polity therein, are the encouragement of Trade, the increase of People, their
dependence upon the Prince, and the quieting of men's troubled minds.

Upon all which grounds is inferrd, and that in Polity, the granting of such
Indulgence; and we shall take the liberty to treat somewhat of them in order.

1. It seems fit, for the better preservation of the Public Peace, that such
Indulgence be granted. Tacitus notes, That it is safer to let pass things grown
up and strong in discrepancy, than to provoke them to future discords.

When things are old and rooted, they labor in vain, who would remove them by
violence, the shaking of them makes them but the firmer. To unite Men in
Religion by force, is to cause the Sword to be drawn, French History, H. 4.
which is not so easily sheathed again.

Princes well advised, have never put some of their Subjects to death, to make
others believe, that they have not wasted their Provinces by War, but to
instruct the Consciences of their Subjects by the Sword; knowing that Religion
is an act of Union, Concord, and Instruction; War nothing else but Misery and
Destruction. And they who have moved Heaven and Earth, that is, have made use
of every Engine to force the Consciences of their Subjects, into the same
Religion, have been constrained at last to desist, rejecting the Counsels of
bad Physicians, who have nothing but Stibium and letting of blood, for all
sorts of Diseases. Where Liberty of Conscience cannot be enjoyed, the Canker of
Civil Discord frets and eats till it can break forth into open Sedition. But by
granting an Indulgence, both their Minds and Persons become peaceable.

2. That this is so, appears from the Examples of some of our Neighbors, who
had many troubles and much disturbances of their Peace, before Indulgence was
granted to Dissenters among them, and much Peace and Security after it.

This was the case of the Netherlanders, whom their Governors could not retain
in Peaceful Obedience, till they had granted this Indulgence, which with them
is very large, yet is esteemed a chief cause of their Peace and Civil Unity;
nor do any flourish more in Trade and all Security.

That wise and gallant Prince, H. IV. of France, saw so great Mischiefs in his
State, and such a flood of Civil Dissension, for want of this Indulgence, that
he thought fit to grant it, and told his Parliament, That Necessity and Utility
moved him to do it by the Advice of all his Council, who found it good and
necessary for the State of his Affairs, and the good of his Service, to confirm
the Indulgence, and to dissipate those unhappinesses that Discord had produced,
and it would be found equally prudent, peaceful and happy, for every Prince to
follow this Example.

3. That by such Indulgence the Peace will be the better preserved, appears
further by Examples of elder times, Christians have been so strangely hated and
persecuted in the Birth of the Church, that some gave them no other Names but
of Impostors; others accused them of the injury of the Air, of the sterility of
the Seasons, of the overflowing of Rivers, and of Earthquakes.

But the Emperor Adrian would not that they should be curiously searched into,
as to the matter of Religion; and Antoninus his Successor, commanded that he
that accused them should be burnt alive.

After the whole Empire had found the public Prosecutions of Dioclesian and
Maximinius to be vain and fruitless, and that for one Christian they caused to
be Burnt, an hundred sprang up out of their Ashes; their Successors found it
true, Curtius L. 7. nemo Rex perinde animis imperare Potest.
That Kings have not the same command over Hearts as over Bodies. That Religion
could not be forced, that Truth could not be joined with Violence, nor Justice
with Cruelty; and that there is nothing so free as Religion, nothing so
voluntary; that the Permission and Indulgence of that freedom tends most to the
preservation of Public Peace, a main ground of all Polity.

Pagan Princes have found it so, Pagans have Indulged Christians.
by Indulging the Christians. And it was Objected against Decius, that his want
of Moderation toward the Christians, robbed him of the Title of a Great and
Righteous Prince.

Christian Princes also have Indulged Pagans, Christians have Indulged Pagans.
and would not have Paganism among them to be Punished.

The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius though burning with the Zeal of
advancing their Religion, yet would not that the Heathens should be forced to
be Christians; and required of all Judges and Presidents of Provinces, not to
trouble them, so long as they did live without Disturbance or Sedition. It were
hard for Christians to deny the like favor and Indulgence to one another.

The Jews, Jews have been Indulged by Pagans.
although irreconcilable Enemies to the Ethnicks, and to the multitude of their
Gods, yet have they dwelt with the greatest security among the Grecians,
Parthians, Medes, Elamites and Mesopotamians; none ever chaced them out of the
Roman Empire, they have had there in all times their Synagogues, especially
under Nerva and Antoninus Pius.

They have lived peaceably and been Indulged in England, And by Christians.
France, Spain, and other Countries, and wheresoever they were driven out of
any Kingdom, it was not for their Religion, but for their Vsuries and great
Cruelties; and it would be hard to see these in quiet who deny Christ, and
Protestants hurried to Prison for disliking Surplices or some little things.

Doubtless, A violent way of force will never be found a way to preserve Peace,
where a mild way of Indulgence is open, and having been taken, it appears by
Examples both of elder and latter times, that it has been found by Princes,
the best way to preserve their Tranquillity.

4. Upon the grounds of Polity, from the consideration of the the present state
of our Affairs in England, it seems sit that this Indulgence be granted, and
that thereby our Peace will the better be preserved.

The Baltique and other deep Seas being once moved by Tempests, do swell and
roll high for many hours after, and a small new Storm raises them yet much
higher.

After hideous Storms of Civil Discord in England, the Affairs thereof through
the miraculous goodness of God in his Majesty's Restoration, are come into a
calm state, yet the more apt to rage, because so lately moved, and therefore
surely all Tempestuous courses are to be avoided, and Provocations laid aside.

There are three ways of stopping Commotion from raging again, by Force, by
Extirpation, or by Indulgence.

If Force be used to keep Dissenters quiet, and to compel Conformity, this
Force cannot be maintained without a vast Charge; this Charge will increase
Discontent in them and others; that must cause increase of Force; that again,
increase of Charge; and that, of Discontent; and so it will run round in a
course of unhappiness and unsetledness.

It were Impiety in a Prince to be angry with his own Country, he ought rather
to imitate good Physicians, who having used sharp Remedies without profit, do
apply sweet ones.

Those who are for an Extirpation of the Nonconformists, would un-people their
Native Country, disarm their Prince of so may thousands of Strong and Valiant
Subjects, abate their own Revenue, and the public Wealth and Trade, to enrich
Foreign Countries. Some merciless Fancies would force a Conformity on Pain of
Death, a sure way of Extirpation.

Such Tyrannous men are like their Predecessor, infamous in History, who would
have all conform to his Stature; those who were not so tall as he, to be racked
out to his length; those who were taller then he, to be cut stort to the length
of his Bed.

Certainly there is as much difference in Judgments as in Statures, and as
little reason to except against the one as the other, or to impose Conformity
in Opinion, as in Complexion.

But these (who are no kin to Moses) fancy Impossibilities when they fancy an
Extirpation; by these means did the Massacre in France Extirpate those of the
Religion? It did indeed those who were Murdered, but it made the Dissent to
grow.

They are like Camomile, the more they are bruised and trod upon, the more they
flourish, as the stories of the Church do manifest.

In the last and best place it will be found that the granting of Indulgence is
the surest and most probable way of preserving the Public Peace.

But hereof there will be occasion to Treat more at large in a following
Section.

5. Another ground of Polity for the allowing of this Indulgence, is for the
Advancement of the TRADE of the Kingdom.

The Dissenters are generally Sober Industrious Trading men, not Debauched
Drones, Born only to consume Corn and Wine; but such as can do more Service for
their Prince than merely to Drink his Health. Every Trader, Merchant, or
Artificer, brings Wealth to the Public, and adds to the Kings Revenue; they
are considerable Members of a State, and add much to common Riches and Safety.
Merchants are honorable, and Artificers had the title of Fathers, and both
deserve encouragement.

But without this Indulgence, there will need no Law to banish multitudes of
these men, they will banish themselves, if they cannot enjoy their dearest
interest, the Liberty of their Conscience.

If this be denied them in their native Country, they will seek it in the
remotest Regions, rather than not enjoy it. And they will be welcome
wheresoever they go. Even Pagans will allow them this liberty, if their fellow
Protestants will not.

But I suppose and hope that no sober English man will think of any such way as
extirpation, by banishment or death of those who differ in Opinion from them.
If these Dissenters be encouraged by Indulgence, it will highly tend to the
advancement of the Trade of the Kingdom. If they be forced out of it, the
Nobility and Gentry will find it in the decay of their Rents; the King will
find it in the emptiness of his Coffers; and the People, as well as their
Prince, will be sensible of the mischief upon any contest with Foreigners.

6. Another ground of Polity for the granting of this Indulgence is, That
thereby the People of the Kingdom will be increased, they will be kept from
going out of it, and live comfortably, and increase within it. But by denial of
this Indulgence, the great numbers of People and their Children, and Childrens
Children, which will leave the Kingdom, and be born, and inhabit other
Countries, will dispeople and weaken England. The strength and wealth of a
Prince and People consists in their multitude; happy is that Prince who has
his Quiver full of People. He shall not be ashamed when he speaks with his
Enemy; but the loss of every single Industrious Man, is a loss both to King and
Kingdom. It was the blessing to Abraham, Genesis 17.5.
that his Seed should be as the Stars of Heaven for multitude, and therefore
God would have his Name called Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have I
made thee. And the Word Abraham, signifies a high Father of a multitude. Every
Prince is a Father of his Country, Pater exce'sus multitudinis.
and the more Subjects he has, the more Children he has, and the more happy
and strong he is, and the loss of any one, is the loss of a Child to him. It
was the answer of Queen Elizabeth to her Parliaments advice for her to marry,
that she might have Children to succeed her, That every English man was her
Child. Now the granting of this Indulgence will keep the Children at home with
their politic Father, whose Riches, and Honor, and Strength, will be
increased by their increase. But by driving them away, the Prince will lose his
Children, impare his Revenue, and weaken his Kingdom, encourage a Foreign
Invasion, and Domestic troubles.

7. Another ground of Polity for this Indulgence, is because thereby the
Persons to whom it is granted, will be brought to an entire dependence on their
Prince who grants it. No interest in the world is so dear to these Dissenters
as the liberty of their Conscience; and where they have this, the interest of
it obliges them to be faithful to that Power which gives it, else they are not
faithful to their own interest. Nothing binds more firmly than Interest, and no
interest is more strong to bind, more beloved, or more desired than this
Freedom, and therefore binds those to faithfulness where they have it.
Subjection is due in regard of Protection, and where these Men have the liberty
of their Consciences from a Prince, the interest of preserving that Liberty
obliges them to be faithful to, and to preserve his Power, by which this great
interest of theirs is preserved. If the Prince fall who grants this Liberty,
the Liberty falls with him, they that will maintain the Gift, know that they
must support the Giver also. It is safe for a Prince by such ways, to oblige
his Subjects, especially such as these, who are for the most part of constant,
stout, and industrious Spirits, to a dependence on him, whose service will be
the more available to him. And it is their Tenet that this Indulgence cannot be
enjoyed with so much certainty and stability under any other, as under their
native Legal Government. Religion has its name from binding, and there can be
no firmer bond of Subjects to their Sovereign, than when they enjoy the freedom
of their Religion from their Princes favor; and the continuance of this
highest comfort and interest, depends upon the safety and good of him that
grants it.

8. The last ground of Polity which I shall now mention for the granting of
this Indulgence, is, because thereby Men's minds will be satisfied. Whilst
Dissenters are in doubts and fears least they may be punished and persecuted
for their Dissent, whilst they see and feel Laws rigorously executed upon them,
or others in the same condition, this perplexeth their thoughts, disturbs them
in their business, causes them to transport their Stocks or part of them into
other Countries, and sometimes their Persons and Trades with them, which has
been no small detriment to England heretofore, and may it be so no more. But by
such Indulgence Men's minds will be quieted, they will cheerfully and
undisturbed follow their Vocations, whereby Trade will be promoted, and the
Wealth, Strength, and Peace of the King and his Kingdom will be advanced.

CHAP. III. That from Grounds of PIETY it is fit to grant Indulgence in
Spiritual Matters.
1. Matt. 2.12.
I Shall consider the ground of Piety, To do as we would be done unto, which is
part of our Savior's Sermon, Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them; and he is pleased to give a Reason of it, For this is the
Law and the Prophets. If a Dissenter might expostulate with one in Authority,
and say to him, What if men's Opinions should alter? or if I were in Authority,
and you in Obedience, would you think I did well to impose things upon you
against your Conscience, and to compel you to do them, or else to ruin you,
and your Wife and Children? The man in Power doubtless would answer, When it
was his own case to suffer, It is against the Rules of Piety so to impose upon
me, and to force me to do against my Conscience: and may not a present Sufferer
say the same to an Imposing Power? He might say, or enact that another shall be
ruined because he differs from the Imposer in Countenance, with as much Reason
and Piety, as because he differs in Opinion. He will one day find the truth of
that Scripture, With the same measure that ye meet withal, Luke 6.38.
it shall measured to you again.

2. Another ground of Piety, for this Indulgence, is from that Rule of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.32.
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted. And surely these are too far from
it, who have no kindness or regard to tender Consciences. The same Apostle
demands, Why is my liberty judged of another Conscience? implying, that it
ought not to be so, none can judge of another Conscience but God. To be tender
hearted to a Brother, is the way to gain tender mercies from our Heavenly
Father; and to be kind to others, will gain kindness to our selves in the
conclusion. But for another Conscience to judge of my Liberty; to impose upon
others Consciences who differ from us, and vigorously to require them to obey
Man rather than God, (as they esteem it) To order their Conformity to such
things as they scruple in their Consciences (and it is Sin to do what We doubt
is unlawful) To exact these things from their Brethren, on pain to be ruined,
to lose their Esta^es, Liberties, and Lives too, if they do not Conform; this
will hardly be judged at the Great Day, to have been kind to one another, or to
have been tenderhearted. But to bear with the Infirmities of others, to
indulge them in such things as are not sinful in themselves, not to force their
Consciences; this is agreeable to the Rules of Christianity, and is a ground of
Piety for granting this Indulgence.

3. Another ground of Piety for the same, is, That we are to leave it to God to
perform his own Works. We ought to leave the triumph and conquest of Souls to
the eternal Wisdom, who re-makes and fashions Hearts as he pleases, History of
France, H. 4.
and gives the Signal to so many straying Souls to cause them to enter into
Salvation, it being impossible for Men to impose any necessity upon things
which God has left free, as men's Consciences are, which ought to be as free in
a State as their Thoughts. And those who impose upon them, and would help God
by that way to save Souls, presume too much upon their own judgments, and have
too little veneration of God's omnipotence. What he has commanded, his
Vicegerents are to see done, but no command of such imposing is to be found;
rather to be believed that God has reserved the directing of those things to
himself as his own Work. It was wise Counsel of the Doctor of the Law,
Gamaliel, to the Public Assembly, Refrain from these men, and let them alone;
Acts 5.35, 39.
for if this Counsel, or this Work be of Men, it will come to naught; but if it
be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. It were well if some in our Age had taken this Counsel, and left
the Works of God to be done by God, who is more wise and able to perform them,
than his poor, sinful, weak Creatures are. If that which is called by some a
Schism, be formed in a State, or that which others call Evil, be grown old, it
will be difficult to shake that which is deeply rooted, especially by the weak
hand of feeble Men, but God will surely root it up, if it be Evil.

4: Another ground of Piety for this Indulgence is, because the subject matter
is altogether Spiritual. Bishop Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying:
It is excellently said by Bishop Tailor on this subject: That to believe so,
or not so, when there is no more but mere believing, is not in the Magistrates
power to enjoin, therefore not to punish. And it is not only lawful to
Tolerate disagreeing Persuasions, but the authority of God only is competent
to take notice of it, and fit to judge, because Infallible to determine it. And
therefore (says the Bishop) No Humane Authority is sufficient to do those
things which can justify the inflicting Temporal Punishments upon such as do
not conform in their Persuasions, to a Rule or Authority which is not only
fallible, but supposed by the disagreeing Persons to be actually deceived. And
none can judge between them in this Spiritual matter, but God alone. If men
shall do despite to the Spirit of Grace, God will Punish them with much more
Severity than this World can execute, Heb. 10.30.31.
as the Apostle Notes, For we know him that has said, Vengeance belongs unto
me, I will Recompense, says the Lord: And again, The Lord shall judge his
People. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. By this
and sundry other Texts, it seems to me not obscure, that God reserves to
himself the Punishment of matters merely Spiritual, and which are not Sin in
themselves, or but doubtful; in those cases he would not have the Civil
Magistrate to determine and punish. But if he do impose upon Gods Servants, and
Persecute them as Evil doers, when perhaps they are not so (which in these
Spiritual matters no man can judge) This will be to tread under foot the Son of
God; and if the Nonconformists shall do so, or the Imposers shall do so,
Vengeance is Gods; a temporal Magistrate cannot inflict a Punishment according
to the demerit.

5. A fifth ground of Piety for this Indulgence is from the practice of the
Church in the best times. The Church has always detested Heresies, and yet the
Punishments which she has used, have been more Shameful then Cruel, more
Medicinal than Mortal, loving rather to see their Faces Blush with Shame, Math.
Westminster. p. 152.
then their Veins emptied of Blood. When Germanus and Lupus came into Britain
to confute the Pelagian Heresy, they used no violent means to do it, but
allowed freedom of dispute to the Heretics, Copiam dispu^^ndi praeponendique
adversarijs probuerunt, loquacit^ti^que garritum evomere permiserunt.
and permitted their Gagling Loquacity. The Weapons which they used against
them were Torreuts of Eloquence, with Showers of Apostolic and Evangelical
Truths, Modest Assertions, and especially Divine Testimonies, which sooner and
better Convinced the Opposites, then Tortures could have done. The Emperor
Theodosius ordained great Punishments, but he Executed none. He would restore
his Subjects to the Concord of Religion and of Divine things, more by sweetness
then by force, more by favor and by love, than by cruelty and punishment,
which were true grounds of Piety for his Indulgence, and a Pattern worthy
Imitation. The four first Councills did not use other Arms against Dissenters
than the Word of God. That of Nice of 300 Bishops against Arrius. That of
Constantinople of 150 against Macedonius. That of Ephesus of 200 against
Nestorius, and 630 against Eutiches. These Reverend Fathers held, that Heresy
is an Obstinacy of Soul, which is not subjected to the Torments of Bodily
Death. That Punishments do rather discover and give breath to the Sect, than
smother and strangle it. And that Punishments are of no use, except it be to
break the Bonds of Affection; for meeting with Souls so resolved and constant,
it draws away more in an hour, then their Lives could have done in ten years.
If the Church in those times of her Purity were thus tender and indulgent to
those they esteemed Obstinate Heretics, why may not the present Dissenters,
most of them being in Ceremonies and matters not Fundamental, be in hopes of
such an Indulgence as may free them from the Rigor of some Laws, and preserve
the Liberty of their Consciences, which upon grounds of Piety is fit to be
granted, especially to those that live peaceably.

6. From the ground of Piety, to avoid the effusion of Christian-blood, this
Indulgence is fit to be granted. War (says the History of H. IV.) is not dead
in an Estate, where Consciences are divided, but only Sleeps; there is
nothing that does more slide and speedily penetrate into the Persuasions of men
to stand one against another, than this Religion; every one thinks his own way
best, and judges so, more by Zeal and Persuasion, than by Knowledge and
Reason. From hence it has too often fallen out, that there has been much
Effusion of Christian-blood, when there has been attempts to force men
contrary to their Persuasions; and nothing does more allay and stop this
Sanguinary Issue, than an Indulgence to these men; Fulges. l. 3. c 11.
Suetonius. Vt uno ictu omnes interficere simul posset.
and it is a great ground of Piety to avoid such Effusion of the Blood of our
Fellow Christians. A Prince must not be of the mind of Caligula, who wished
that all the People of Rome had but one Neck, that with one stroke he might cut
them all off. Nor of Vitelius, who when diverse, by reason of the stench of dead
Bodies, went out of the way, Suetonius.
the Emperor went straight forward through the heaps of the dead Carkases,
saying, That the dead Body of an Enemy did smell excellently well, Optime olere
Hostem, praesertim Cive^.
but especially that of a Citizen. Nor that of Hannibal, who when he saw a
Ditch full of men's Blood, is reported to say, That it was a most Beautiful
sight. Such pleasure did these Beasts take in Wickedness and the Effusion of
Humane Blood; but a good Prince and Christian, detests such Cruelty, and
labors to avoid such Rigors, especially upon his Subjects, whose Blood is
better kept in their Bodies, for the Defense and Service of their Prince and
Country. Bloodiness is an opposite to Right as the wise man Notes, Prove.
29.10. Psalm. 5.6. Rev. 19.2.
That the Blood-thirsty hates the Upright, and we are assured that the Lord
will abhor the Bloody man, and avenge the Blood of his Servants. Nothing more
Defiles a Nation, nor brings heavier Punishments on them, than the shedding of
Innocent Blood. Bishop Halls contemplation on Abel and Cain.
Nothing (says the Ingenuous Bishop Hall) has a louder Voice then Blood; the
Cry of it is heard from Earth to Heaven, every drop of Innocent Blood has a
Tongue, and is not only Vocal, but Importunate. How careful then ought Princes
and Magistrates to be, to avoid the Effusion of Blood, which will so much
polute the Land, if it be Innocent, and Cry so loud against them. If they would
prevent this Effusion of Christian Blood, either by the Sword of War or of
Peace, it must be by Indulgence, the most likely way to do it, and a ground of
much Piety for it.

7. Dr. Jerem. Tailor, his liberty of Prophesying. 521.
Another ground of Piety for this Indulgence, is from the difficulty to search
out the truth. The Reverend Bishop Tailor gives this Reason for it, It is
impossible (says he) for any Industry to consider so many particulars in the
infinite numbers of Questions as are necessary to be considered before we can
with certainty determine any. And after all the considerations we can have in a
whole Age, we are not sure not to be deceived. The obscurity of some Questions,
the nicety of some Articles, the intricacy of some Revelations, the variety of
Humane Understanding, the windings of Logic, the tricks of Adversaries, the
sub^ilty of Sophisters, the engagement of Education, Personal Affections, the
portentous number of Writers, the infinity of Authorities, the vastness of some
Arguments, as consisting in enumeration of many particulars, the incertainty of
others, the several degrees of Probability, the difficulty of some Texts, the
invalidity of probation of Tradition, the opposition of Exterior Arguments to
each other, and their open contestation, the public violence done to Authors
and Records, the private Arts and Supplantings, the falsifyings, the
indefatigable industry of some men to abuse all Understandings and all
Persuasions, into their own Opinions. These and thousands more, even all the
difficulty of things, and weaknesses of man, and all the arts of the Devil,
have made it I conceive, next to impossible for any man, in so great variety of
matter, not to be deceived. If then it be so easy a matter for men of the
greatest Learning and Parts to be mistaken in these matters; If it be so
difficult a thing, for the ablest and most judicious men to find out the Truth
in these matters of dispute and difference in Religious things; It would be
uncharitable and against the grounds of Piety to force these men, who are not
all learned, nor of the deepest knowledge, to conform to the judgments of
others in matters of this nature, under grievous punishments if they do not.
But surely it is more consonant to the grounds of Piety, being it is so very
difficult (as the Bishop shows) not to be deceived, and to search out Truth,
that an Indulgence be allowed to these Dissenters, and that those in Power do
remember, that even themselves may be deceived.

8. Another ground of Piety for this Indulgence, is from the aptness of good
men to Err. The Bishop has showed the difficulties which must be passed
through in the search of Truth, wherein learned, able, good, and pious men may
easily be deceived. And where there is so much occasion to lead them into an
Error, it were uncharitable, and against the grounds of Piety, not to grant
Indulgence to them; especially if we consider, that we are not only uncertain
in finding out Truths in disputable matters, but we are certain that the best
and ablest Doctors in Christendom have been actually deceived in matters of
great Concernment, which thing is evident in all those Instances of Persons
from whose Doctrines all sorts of Christians respectively take liberty to
dissent. The Errors of Papias, Iraenaeus, Lactantius, and Justin Martin, in the
Millenary opinion; of St. Cyprian, the Asian and African Fathers in the
question of Rebaptization; St. Augustine in his uncharitable Sentence against
the Unbaptized Children of Christian Parents. The Roman or the Greek Doctors in
the question of the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and in the matter of Images,
are Examples beyond exception. Now if these great Personages had been
persecuted or destroyed for their Opinion, who should have answered the
invaluable loss the Church of God should have sustained in missing so
excellent, so exemplary, so great Lights? But then if these Persons Erred, and
by consequence might have been destroyed, what would have become of others,
whose Understanding was lower, and their Security less, their Errors more, and
their Dangers greater. At this rate all men should have passed through the
Fire, for who can escape when St. Cyprian and St. Augustine cannot? But since
good Men are so apt to Err, the Piety of Christians did then, and ought now to
indulge the Men, though not the Errors.

9. The last ground of Piety for this Indulgence, which I shall now mention, is
from the consideration of the Introduction of Christianity. It is (says Bishop
Tailor) one of the Glories of Christian Religion, that it was so Pious,
Excellent, Miraculous, and Persuasive, that it came in upon its own Piety and
Wisdom, with no other force but a terrent of Arguments and demonstration of the
Spirit, a mighty rushing Wind to break down all strong Holds, and every high
Thought and Imagination. But toward the Persons of Men it was always full of
Meekness and Charity, Compliance and Toleration, Condescension, and bearing
with one another, restoring Persons overtaken with an Error in the Spirit of
meekness; considering least we also be tempted. The consideration is as
prudent, and the Proportion as just, as the Precept is charitable, and the
President was pious and holy. Now every thing is best conserved with that which
gave it the first Being, and is agreeable to its temper and constitution. The
Precept which the Christian Religion chiefly preaches, in order to all the
Blessedness in this and the other World, is Meekness, Mercy, and Charity: And
this should also help and preserve it self, and promote its own interest; for
indeed nothing will do it so well, nothing does so excellently insinuate it
self into the understandings and affections of Men, as when the actngs and
persuasions of a Sect, and every part and principle are tending to a universal
Good. And it would be a mighty disparagement to so glorious an Institution,
That in its Principles it should be merciful and humane, and yet in the
promotion and propagation of it, so inhumane. And it would be improbable and
unreasonable, that the Sword should be used in persuasion of one Proposition,
and yet in the persuasion of the whole Religion, nothing like it. To do so, may
sometimes seem, and but seem to serve the Interests of a Temporal Prince, but
never promote the honor of Christ's Kingdom; it may secure a Design of
Inquisitors, but it will much disserve Christendom to offer to support it by
that which good Men believe to be a distinctive Cognizance of the Mahumetan
Religion, from the Excellency and Piety of Christianity, whose Essence and
Spirit is described in these excellent words of St. 2 Timothy 2.14.
Paul, The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men in
meekness of instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging the Truth. And as it is unnatural, so
it is unreasonable that Sempronius should force Caius to be of his Opinion,
because Sempronius is Consul this Year, and commands the Lictors; as if he that
can kill a man cannot but be infallible; and if he be not, why should I do
violence to my Conscience, because he can do violence to my Person? There is
nothing under the Almighty that has power over the Soul of Man, so as to
command a Persuasion, or to judge a disagreement; and because no Man's command
is a satisfaction to the Understanding, or a verification of the Proposition,
therefore the Understanding is not subject to Humane Authority. We see that the
greatest Persecutions that ever have been, were against Truth, even against
Christianity it self; and it was a Prediction of our Blessed Savior, That
Persecution should be the Lot of true Believers. And if we compute the
experience of Suffering- Christendom, and the Prediction, That Truth should
suffer, with those few Instances of Suffering-Hereticks, it is odds but
Persecutions are on the wrong side; and that is Error and Heresy, that is cruel
and tyrannical; especially since the Truths of Jesus Christ and of his
Religion, are so meek, so charitable, and so merciful. And we may in this Case
exactly use the words of St. Paul; But as then he that was born after the
Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now; and so
it ever will be, till Christ's second coming. This may give us a good ground of
Piety from the meekness of the Introduction of Christianity, that the most
proper way, and most agreeable to the example of our Savior, and of his holy
Disciples, for the propagation thereof, is by the same Meekness, Charity, and
Mercy in which it was Instituted, and consequently, to give Indulgence to
tender Consciences.

CHAP. IV. Of Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction, and consequently a Right of
Indulgence in KINGS.
1. OF Spiritual Matters, somewhat has been before discoursed; We may now, for
the clearer understanding of the Intent of this Chapter, inquire the meaning of
Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction.

Supreme, is that which is the Highest on Earth next under God, according to
Law. So the meaning thereof is expressed in the Statute of H. 8. 24 H. 8. C. 12.
That this Realm is an Empire governed by one supreme Head and King, whom both
the Spiritualty and Temporalty ought to obey. 28 H. 8. C. 1. 1 E. 6. C. 12.
So another Act declares him supreme Head of the Church upon Earth. So the
King is declared by an Act of E. 6. Supreme Head of the Church in England,
immediately under God.

The Oath of Supremacy is enacted. 5 Eliz. C. 5. Pro supreme Jupiter.
The Latins from whence we borrow the Word, have it in the same sense, for the
highest and chi^fest. So Terence faith, O supreme Jupiter; and Virgil calls the
highest Mountains, Supremi Montes.
the Supreme Mountains. Supreme Jurisdiction then, is the highest and chiefest
Authority according to Law, the speaking or declaring of Law, the sovereign, or
the highest lawful Authority. Spiritual Jurisdiction is about matters relating
to the Spirit or Souls of Men to Eternity, wherein a King in the strict
acceptance of the Word, can have no Jurisdiction, for no Power can command the
Spirit or Soul of Man, but God only. French Academy, c. 33. p 540, 541.
Accordingly, an Ingenious French Author holds, That one part of Man's
building, the Soul, is created free for ever, and to be exempted from the yoke
of Humane Power, acknowledging only the Divine Jurisdiction, as the Apostle
intimates, Standfast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal.
5.18.
ye have been called unto Liberty. The Spiritual Jurisdiction whereof we speak,
is, and can only be exercised upon the Body, concerning some actions which may
have a relation to the Spirit and eternal condition of Man, wherein the
Magistrates power is exercised to suppress Idolatry and Sin. Field of the
Church, p. 680.
Dr. Field says, that Spiritual Causes are of two sorts, some are originally
and naturally such, and some only in that they are referred to the cognizance
of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Persons, as the Ecclesiastical Testaments,
Matrimony, Sir John Davis rep. Case of the Praemunire.
etc. And Sir John Davis says, that for 300 Years this distinction of
Spiritual (or Ecclesiastical) and Civil, was not known or heard of in the
Christian World. The causes of Testaments, Matrimony, etc. termed
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, were indeed merely Civil, and determined by the
Laws of the Secular Magistrate: for making of Wills, and Marrying, were
regarded by Heathens as well as Christians. But for Causes and Persons
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, that are properly and indeed such, as
Firsttable-duties, which concern matters of Faith and Holiness, and what
conduces to the eternal welfare of Men's Souls. Some hold there is a Right in
the Civil Magistrate more suo, to give Commands, and exercise lawful
Jurisdiction about things of that nature. And it is meant, and will in part be
made appear, that as to Spiritual Matters, a Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction,
which is always to be intended according to Law, over Persons and Matters which
are usually termed Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, is in Kings.

2. In the next place we may consider the matter of fact, and the consequence
of the Argument thereupon. The matter of Fact will be showed to be the constant
and general practice and exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction in Spiritual Matters
by most Kings and Princes, both Christians and Pagans, and from the eldest
Times to our present Age, which will be distinguished, and some particulars of
this Practice, briefly noted in the following Sections. The consequence and
conclusion thereupon will be this.

If Kings and Princes have Supreme Jurisdiction in Spiritual Matters, as the
practice thereof, and the Authorities proving the same, do demonstrate that
they have. It will then necessarily follow, that the Right of Indulgence, which
is a part of that Supreme Jurisdiction, is likewise in those Princes. He that
has Right in the whole; has Right in every part thereof; and the grant of
Indulgence is an Act of Jurisdiction in Spiritual matters, comprehended within
the general Jurisdiction which belongs to Princes, and consequently does belong
to those to whom the Supreme Jurisdiction does belong in Spiritual matters, and
that is, to Kings and Princes.

We may begin with the eldest exercise of this Jurisdiction.

3. The first Exercise whereof, was in Fathers of Families, and by the same
reason is proper to be in Kings, who are Fathers of their Countries.

The first guide of the Requisites, Calibute Downing 's Discourse of the Estate
Ecclesiastical, p. 57.
as to Public Exercise and actions of Religion, was the original Domestic
Discipline in Private Families, where the Father was a King and Priest. Adam
directed his Sons to Sacrifice. Seth, Noah, Abraham, and the Princes of those
times, Fathers of Families, were Priests also. That the Priesthood was in the
Firstborn, as in Melchisedeck, who is taken for Shem the firstborn of Noah;
and in the rest of the firstborn, the Fathers of Families in those times
before Aaron, is admitted both by Christians and Hebrews. Abraham, and every
Patriarch or Prince within his Territory, and every Father of a Family within
his Family, did exercise the office of Priest also. So it is, or ought to be at
this day, That every Father of a Family is either in his own Person (if he be
able) or by providing some fit Person (if his Estate will bear it) to perform
Religious Duties in his Family, to pray and expound the Holy Scriptures there.
It will not be denied, but that every such Father of a Family may dispense
with, and indulge any of his Children or Servants to be absent from those
Family Duties, when he shall see just cause for it. And it would be hard to
deny a Prince the same power of Indulgence to his Subjects, which is allowed to
every Father of a Family, to his Children and Servants.

4. We may in the next place look into this Jurisdiction, Exodus 29.9. Numb.
3.10.
as it was exercised by the Hebrew Princes. Moses Consecrated, and commanded
Aaron; and Moses is styled the Priest of Priests, and the Supreme King, Rex
summus item and Sacerdos. Jos. 1.5. Jos. 7.
and also Priest, which is testimony sufficient of his Supremacy in Spiritual
things. Joshua had the presence of God with him, as Moses had, and commanded
all as he did, both Persons and Causes, he built an Altar in Mount Ebal, and
offered Sacrifices there, and read the Law to the Levites and Priests. Deborah
was Prophetess, and Judge, or Prince of Israel. Samuel was a Prophet, and he
and most of the Judges of Israel, did exercise Supreme and Spiritual, as well
as Temporal Jurisdiction in Israel. So did David, Solomon, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, and other Kings of Israel, Bertramus, Menechius, Seldenus, Sigonius,
etc.
and of Judah, whereof there is plentiful mention in the holy Story, and in
those Authors named in the Margin, who have written on this Subject, and it is
the best Pattern to be followed by other Princes. The Hebrew Word for a Priest,
signifies likewise the Prince of a Territory; not that Priesthood made one a
Prince, or did carry Command with it; but that Princes were chief Priests also
in their Territories. Before the Law given in Sinai, Moses had cognizance as
well of Sacred, as of Profane Matters together (as they were termed) without
the distinction of Spiritual and Civil: And this appears in the Tribunals set
up by Jethroes advice, and in his Judgments in those Sacred Causes; and to him
the Appeals were made, whether the Matters were Sacred or Profane; and
doubtless in the exercise of this Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction, the power of
Indulgence, where he saw cause, was not denied him.

5. The like Jurisdiction was in the Heathen Princes, who from the Presidents
of the Hebrews (although miserably depraved) drew their Customs to have public
Priesthoods, which were Patrimonial and Hereditary; and among them the Prince
was also the High Priest. Synes. Ep. 12.
The Caldean Kings were Priests also. A Priest and a Prince was all one amongst
the Egyptians, so the Magi among the Persians, and the Priests of Apollo at
Delphos, among the Grecians. Arist. Polit. c. 10.
Aristotle speaking of Kings in the time of the Heroes, says, That they were
Rulers of matters of War and of Sacrifices or sacred Things, which pertained to
the Sacerdotal Function. In another place he says, That the King was Leader or
General of the War, and Judge or Moderator of divine Things; and to be
Moderator, implies a Power and Right of Indulgence. In like manner the Roman
Emperors, before the Birth of Christ, were their High Priests also. Pontisiciam
potestatem cum Caesarea potentia conjunxit.
It is noted of Julius Caesar, that to the end he might fully recover into his
Power the Temporalty, he joined the Pontifical Authority with the Caesarian
Power; and so have all wise Princes, his Successors: And it is not improbable,
where those two Powers are joined together, Sr. Walt. Rawleigh in his Treatise
of War.
that the right of Indulgence was part of them. The Mufty among the Turks holds
all he has at the discretion of the Great Sultan. Most Nations of the World,
after the President of the Hebrews, placed the Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction
in their Kings and Supreme Rulers, and it were improbable to conclude that the
right of Indulgence was excepted out of that Jurisdiction.

6. It is likewise evident, That this Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction was in the
Emperors, both as to Persons and matters which were termed Spiritual. Writers
of Church matters do show that the Clergy for 850 years together, claimed no
Superiority or Jurisdiction, but left the same, and submitted themselves
therein to their own Princes, who took upon them the Sovereignty in the
matters, and over the Persons which were afterward called Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical.

By Constantius were the Bishops Julius and Liberius Banished. Martin Dort. in
Jub. et Lib.
Boniface I. by Honorius. Silenus and Virgilius by Justinian. Martin I. by
Constantine III. Platin. in Bonifac.


Leo IV. submitted himself in all things, great and small, Claus. 2. q. 7.
to the command of Lodowick, and offered to amend all that was amiss by the
Princes judgment.

In the strife between Donatus and Cecilianus, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5. Optat. l. 1.
cont. Parm. August. Ep. 162.166.
the matters and Persons both Ecclesiastical, Meltiades then Bishop of Rome,
was appointed with others by Constantine, to determine the matter, from whose
judgment, the parties Appealing, the Emperor appointed new Judges, from whom
they appealing likewise, at last Constantine determined it, sitting himself in
Person.

Under Theodosius the elder, Damascus, Sericius and Anastacius, Theodos. l. 5.
c. 23. Gozon. l. 8. cap. 28. Niceph. l. 15. c. 30. Lib. Pontific in viz. Bonif.
Ep. Bonif. ad Honor. Aug. rescrip. Honor ad Bonif. Leo Epist. 9.12, 13, 17.
Epist. 43.50. Conoil Chalced, Art. 1.
complained against Flavianus, but the Prince heard and justified him.
Innocentius desiring the Emperor to appoint a Council for the trial of
Chrisostomes cause, it was denied.

Honorius commanded Bonifacius and Eulavius chosen Bishops of Rome in a tumult,
to depart the City; and Boniface being restored, put up a supplication to the
Prince for a Decree for future Elections, which was made by him.

Leo Bishop of Rome made suit to Theodosius the younger, to command a Council
in Italy, for suppressing Eutiches his Error, but the Emperor appointed it at
Ephesus, and would not be persuaded to reverse the Judgment. But his Son
Martian did it upon the supplication of the Pope, and commanded the Council of
Chalcedon, where himself sitting in Person, forbad the Bishops to defend or
avouch any thing of the Flesh and Birth of our Savior, otherwise than the
Nicene Creed did contain. Novel. Constit. 1. l. 23. Gregory Epist. l. 4. c. 76.
78.
Justinian says, We command the Blessed Archbishop of Rome, etc. to obey the
Law he then made. Gregory I. writing to Mauritius, uses this style, My Lord,
my most gracious Lord, I your Servant, and Subject to your command, and makes
many submissions to the Emperor, Sixth Synod. Art. 4.
who overruled him in his Episcopal Jurisdiction. Agatho Bishop of Rome 685
years after Christ, when Constantine I. sent for some Learned men out of the
West parts, to come to the general Council, returns this Answer, Agathan. Epist
2.
Your Princely Favor mildly commanding, our Baseness has obediently fulfilled
that which was by you commanded. And in another Epistle, Distinct. 10. l. de
Captulis.
he says, All Bishops of the North and West parts Servants of your Christian
Empire. Leo IV. submitted himself to Lodowick the Father, and afterward
confirmed his obedience to Lotharius the Son, promising submission to their
Decrees. In the 20 Constitutions, Novel. Constit. 3.5, 6, 16. etc.
wherein Justinian disposes of crimes and causes Ecclesiastical, almost every
Sentence is a command. The like in 123. Socrates. l. 1.
Entitled of diverse Ecclesiastical Chapters. The like is in the Laws of
Constantine, Charles, Lodowick, Lotharius, and others. By all which, and many
of the like nature which are omitted, it appears, That all the submission and
obedience that Subjects do owe their Prince, was acknowledged and given by the
Clergy, as well as others, to the Emperors. And that they did exercise Supreme
Spiritual Jurisdiction both over the Persons, and in the matters termed
Spiritual. It would be hard then not to admit them, Gers. 4. part. pro Jo.
Manius de Schism and Council. c. 22. Lazan. Epist. c. 267.
as a consequent thereof, the Right of Indulgence also.

7. This Jurisdiction was likewise in the Kings of France, and exercised by
them. The Divines of Paris, by the Kings encouragement, did condemn Pope Julius
his Doctrine with the sound of Trumpets, taking as much supremacy to himself as
Charles did, who by advice of his Bishops, Princes, and Universities, Decreed
that the whole Church of France should depart from the obedience of Benedict,
Naucter General. 48. Leland 448.
and be under their own King in matters Spiritual. And Charles the VII. made a
Law called the Pragmatical Sanction, for the perpetual Observation of those
things which the Council of Bazil had Decreed, Lateraneus Council sub Leo 10.
Sespred. 10.
which curbed and cashired the Popes Jurisdiction, and advanced the Kings. And
though the Pope reversed it, and labored the King to do it, yet the Clergy of
France adhered to the King, Oron Matraej in Anno. 1510.
owning his Authority. A little before that, in a Council at Tours, the
Praelates of France gave their full resolution to Lewis the XII. That it was
Lawful for him to forsake the Popes Obedience, Taricuske Hist. Universe. Ep. l.
9. Philade Cominos, l. 9.
and to despise his Curses, being himself Supreme in his Kingdom. But Philip
the Fair, before that, clapped the Popes Legate by the heels, and Sequestered
himself and his whole Realm from his Obedience, and at length caught the Popes
own Person, and kept him in Prison till he dyed. Here was exercise of Supreme
Power to he highest. And when Francis I. Concordat. Gall. Budovus de Astr.
in his Interview with Leo X. did remit the Force of the Pragmatical Sanction,
his Secretary said, That the Garland of France was betrayed. So much they
valued the King's Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction; whereof many more Instances
are in the Story of that Nation.

8. The like Supreme Jurisdiction was exercised by the Kings of Spain. In
Castile, they have some limited Ecclesiastical Power by a late Privilege of
Adrian VI. granted to Charles V. But when they see their time, they are pleased
to take so much as shall serve their turn. As Philip II. seized upon the
Temporalties of the Archbishop of Toledo; then when the Bishop of Gorusa was
apprehended at Rome for New Heresy; And when Sixtus V. sent to him, That if he
would undertake the War against England, Thuanus Hist. l. 71. Prudentissimus
princeps respondit se nil de suo Pontifici largiri. Thesaur. Polit. Apol.
Epist. 49. Nullis personis Ecclesiastici vel Sacres Locis ullam rem immobilem
absque Principis licentia acceptare vel habere. Hug. tui Jul. de Repub.
Portugal. Botar. Net. orais quaest. l. 3. Guicchard. Hist. l. 4. Boron. Annal.
1209.
he would remit to him the Revenues of that Bishopric. This wise Prince
answered, That he would receive nothing from the bounty of his own Bishop. And
though at home his Power is but what he pleases to take, yet in other his
Territories it is lawfully, and in Spiritual matters, as large a Jurisdiction
as that of any other Prince. As in Burgundy and Flanders, he had the same Right
that the King of France once had: As Charles V. made a Statute of Mortmain.
That it should not be lawful for any Ecclesiastical Persons, or Sacred Places,
to take or have any Immovable Things without the License of the Prince, and his
Indulgence in that behalf. Philip II. his Son, in publishing the Council of
Trent in the Netherlands, did not let it pass in all points, with the strength
of an Ecclesiastical Law, but restrained it with an express Clause, That it
should not prejudice any privilege of the King, touching Possessory Judgments,
or Ecclesiastical Livings, or Nominations thereunto. In Portugal they had the
Right of Presentation to all Bishoprics and Abbeys, which is no small
Testimony of Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction. Sicily has been held of the Sea
of Rome as a Spiritual See, yet there the Kings of Spain do not only claim
Supremacy of Over-seeing, but likewise Superindency in doing of Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual Affairs; and there in all his Dominions the King of Spain does
exercise Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction, to which the Right of Indulgence is
incident.

9. The like Supreme Jurisdiction was also exercised, and still is, by the
Kings of Sweden in Spiritual matters. They bestow the Bishoprics and
Superintendencies upon such Persons as they judge fittest for them; which
Donation is no slender Proof of this Supreme Jurisdiction; and the Bishops and
Superintendents there, who are the same in Office and Authority, though not in
Name, with the Bishops; These chief Rulers, I say, of the Clergy, and the
Clergy themselves, are in perfect Obedience and Submission to the King, as
their Supreme in matters Spiritual. All Appeals from the Proceedings of their
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Courts, as they likewise term them, are made to the
King in his Chancery; who thereupon Ordains, under the Great Seal of Sweden,
certain Commissioners or Delegates, who hear and determine those matters by the
King's authority. And in some Cases of extraordinary weight or difficulty, the
King himself, with the advice of his Senate or Council of State, as in the last
Resort, resolves them. The Bishops, Superintendents, and the rest of the
Clergy, are excluded from any Office or intermedling with Secular Public
Affairs, which some of them relate to be occasioned by the height and busy
interposing in such matters by some of their Archbishops and Bishops. But of
that I can say nothing, only I know the present Archbishop and some of their
Bishops to be learned, grave, and pious Men, and very observant to their King,
whose Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction is acknowledged by them, and all other his
Subjects, and surely comprehends therein his clear Right of Indulgence, which
he exercises in many places.

10. Thesaur. Pol. Apol. 50. Herbert. Hist. Pol. l. 2. c. 7. Thesaur. Hist. l.
56. Dicunt suoque arbitrio eligunt. Garnier. Comment. Pragmat. Sancta de Sanat.
Patriam a Daniaes simul and Pontificis servitute asseruit. Sir Jer. Davis rep.
f. 88. 10 H. 7. C. 5. 33 H 6. C. 9. 22 H. 6. C. 3. 40 E. 3. C. 13. 7 E. 4. C.
10. 16 E. 4. C. 4.
This Jurisdiction was likewise in several other, if not in all the rest of the
Princes of Christendom. Poland and Hungary were by Benedict VII. Converted from
Paganism, and thereupon wholly at the dispose of the Pope in matters Spiritual;
yet they appoint and choose, at their pleasure, Archbishops, Bishops, and
Abbots. The Kings of Hungary use the same Power as the Kings of England do;
whereof a Canonist says, Tho of Right they cannot, yet the Kings of England
and Hungary bestow Benefices by allowance from the Pope. Thus he is pleased to
declare his opinion, tho grossly mistaken as to the Allowance; whereas they
claim and exercise this Right only by Virtue of their own Supreme Spiritual
Jurisdiction according to Law. In which point, besides the Presidents as to
England, an English Lawyer may hope for as much Credit as a Canonist. The
Princes of Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and of the Netherlands, have exercised the
like Spiritual Jurisdiction, especially when they Introduced the Reformation of
Religion, and abolished the Power of the Sea of Rome; Whereupon it is said,
that Gustave I. of Sweden, asserted his Country from the Danish and Popish
Servitude. Scotland has likewise vindicated the Jurisdiction of her Prince in
these Spiritual matters. And of Ireland it is affirmed, That they have there
made as many Laws against Provisions, Citations, Bulls, and Briefs of Rome, as
are to be found in all the Parliament Rolls of England. Besides, Poynings Law,
Enacts there the Statutes of Provision, and all other Laws against the Sea of
Rome. Also in the Parliament of Kilkenny, and in another Parliament in that
Kingdom, it is declared, That the publishing of Bulls of Provision from Rome,
is High Treason. But I may incur the Censure of tediousness to bestow more time
on this Argument, which can receive little opposition; but it must be
acknowledged, that generally the Princes of Christendom, and other Princes
before and out of Christanity, and the first Princes and Fathers of Families,
have exercised Supreme Jurisdiction in Spiritual matters within their
Territories, as a Right belonging to them; and consequently the Right of
Indulgence, as part of that Jurisdiction, can hardly be denied to them.

CHAP. V. That supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction in England, is in our Kings.
1. IT may be shown in a few Instances of many, that this Jurisdiction was in
our Kings, in all ages, according to Law.

If for the Stories-sake we should take our first step as high as our British
Kings, we may find in them some testimonies of it, before Christianity was
introduced; our British Kings were supreme over the Druides, the Priests, the
Arch-Flamines and Flamines, and ordered their Sacrifices.

They ordered likewise all matters of that Nature, as to the supreme
Jurisdiction of them.

The first Christian British King Lucius, if you credit that Story, made that
blessed change from Paganism to the Light of the Gospel, which he and all his
People embraced.

He changed the Arch-Flamines and Flamines into Archbishops and Bishops, and
for the Druides, entertained the Ministry of the Gospel; and the actions of
this King and of his Successors, in the Progress of Christianity among them, do
give testimony that supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction was then taken to be in our
Kings.

Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, in his Answer to the Letters of Lucius and his
Nobles, styles the King, Gods Vicar within his Kingdom; and the Vicar is in the
stead of his Master, and invested with his Power; which no earthly Prince is
capable of, as to command over the heart, and to eternity, but the eternal King
of Kings: Yet as to power in this World, Kings are deputed by God as his Vicars
on Earth, with as much Supremacy in Spiritual Matters, whereof men are capable,
as of Temporal.

It has been showed, that the Commands of Christ were full of Meekness: We
read that indeed he did Scourge some out of the Temple, but never that he
Scourged any into the Temple. He exhorts his Vicars, and all others, Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly; which is commendable in all who are his Vicars, to
be thus like their Master.

2. In the next place a view may be taken of the exercise of this Jurisdiction
by our Saxon and Danish Kings.

Ina says, in the Preface to his Laws, Leg. Inae Reg. c. 1.
That he Studied the health of the Souls of his People; which argues, that he
took himself to have spiritual Jurisdiction.

He makes Laws for the Form of Life of Gods Ministers, and such spiritual
Matters.

King Alured begins his Laws with the Decalogue and Judicial Laws, Leg.
Aluredis, Reg. c. 1.
and enacts the immunity of the Church, as Head of it.

In the League between Edward and Guthrune the Dane, it enacts, that before all
things they worship one God alone, laying aside all barbarous Worship.

Athelstane enacts also Spiritual Laws: Leg. Athelstani Regis. Leg. Edm. Reg.
c. 1. Not. in Eadmer. p. 161. de quorum omnium moribus ad nos spectat examen.
Leg. Eadgeri Reg.
So does King Edmond, and declares that he had consulted how the Christian
Faith might be promoted.

King Edgar in his Oration to his Clergy, says, That the examination of all
their Manners did belong to him.

He made many Canons of matters merely spiritual; as touching the Demeanor and
Duty of Priests, Parents instructing their Children in the Christian Faith, and
to abstain from filthy and blasphemous Words and Songs; that Priests do Preach
every Lords day, and against Swearing and Sabbath-breaking: Matters
sufficiently spiritual, and not unworthy or improper for a Princes care.

King Canute commands all his Subjects to Worship God, Leg. Canuti Reg.
and to keep the Rules of Christian Religion; makes many Ecclesiastical Canons,
forbids barbarous Worship and Superstition, yet without severe Penalties, and
professes to do all things for confirmation of Christian Piety.

Aelfric in his Canons, Canones Aelfrici ad Wulfinum Episcopum.
says unto the Priests, I tell you, I will not bear your negligence in your
Ministry, and all his Laws are concerning spiritual Matters.

Edward the Confessor, Leg Edvardi Confessor.
in his Laws, calls himself the Vicar of the most high God; and says, that he
was constituted to that end, that he should govern the Kingdom and People of
God, and above all, the holy Church; which is agreeable to the Writ of Summons
to Parliament to this day.

These ancient Kings did use to give the Bishoprics by the Ring and Staff, as
the Investiture: And these, with many other Instances which are omitted, do
testify the supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction to be exercised by these Kings.

3. The like Jurisdiction appears also to have been in William the first,
called by the flattering Monks, the Conqueror; though he came into England to
recover his Claim to the Crown, Eadmer. Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo,
quia nec ego promisi, nec Antecessores meos, Antecessoribus tuis id ye^isse
comperio.
and had the Popes Benediction, who sent him an hallowed Banner, with one of
St. Peter's Hairs in it.

Yet when the Legate required him to do fealty to the Pope, he would
acknowledge no Superior to himself, but answers, Fealty I would not do, nor
will I do it, because neither I have Promised it, nor do I find that my
Ancestors have done it to your Ancestors.

He appropriated Churches with Cure to Ecclesiastical Persons, 7 E. 3. Quar.
Imp. 19. Eadmer. f. 6. Cuncta divina simul, and humana ejus nutum expectabant.
Mat. Paris in W. 2. Ann. 1094. Anselm. Epist. 36. ad Paschal.
and did many the like Acts; whereupon Eadmerus reports, that all things, both
Divine and Humane, were at his beck; which sufficiently testifies his supreme
Jurisdiction in Spiriritual Matters.

His Son William Rufus denied leave to Anselme to go to Rome, and told him,
that no Archbishop or Bishop of his Realm, should be subject to the Pope, or
Court of Rome; and that if he asked this leave any more, or appealed to Rome,
he should speedily depart out of his Realm.

And because he went thither without a License from the King, all his Goods and
Chattels were seized to the Kings use, and he constrained to live in Banishment
during the Kings Life.

In King Henry 1. time he was permitted to return into England, Mat. Paris in
H. 1. Anno 1104.
but not without Promise first made, that he would perform the Customs of W. 1.
and of William Rufus: And when H. 1. perceived that Anselme combined with the
Pope, Coke Rep. 5. Gale 's Case, fol. 106.
to hinder the Kings donation of Bishoprics, the King wrote to the Pope,
challenging that right; and his Proctor in Rome told the Pope, that his Master
would rather lose his Kingdom, than the Donation of Bishoprics.

In his Charter to the Abbey of Reading, he says, We Ordain as well in regard
of Ecclesiastical as Regal Power.

4. We come next in order to the time of King Stephen, Sir John Davis Rep. f.
40. Apellationes in usu non erant, donee H. Winton. Episcop. malo suo, dum
Legatus esset crudeliter intrusit.
whereof a Monk writes, that Appeals to Rome were not in use until Henry Bishop
of Winchester, by his mischief while he was Legate did cruelly intrude them:
before this, they were made to the King, as having supreme spiritual
Jurisdiction.

H. 2. was a strong opposer of the Sea of Rome, as appears by the Story of
Thomas of Becket, and by the Laws made at Clarendon, abridging the Popes
authority, forbidding Appeals, and payment of Peter pence, Guliel. Nubrigens.
Cro. Anglor. 1.2. c. 16. Mat. Paris Anno 1164. Roger Hovenden, f. 496.
and commanding that none should bring Decrees from Rome to be executed here,
on pain of Imprisonment and confiscation; nor Bulls of interdicting the Realm,
on pain of high Treason.

Generally this King asserted and maintained his supreme spiritual
Jurisdiction, but he began a little to relent when the Pope armed his sons and
Neighbors against him; he constantly made all the resistance he was able
against the incroachment of the Clergy, and for the vindication of his own
Right (as his Laws also testify) in matters spiritual. King Richard 1. Coke
Epist. 6: Rep.
gave the Bishoprics by the investiture of the Ring and Staff, which was a
great testimony of this Jurisdiction acknowledged to be in him.

He went further in a Droll which brought him in Money, to make a Bishop an
Earl, Mat. Paris, p. 144. 50. Juvenem feci Comitem de Episcopo veterano.
saying, That of an old Bishop he had made a young Earl.

He granted great privileges and exemptions to some of his Clergy and Subjects
of Normandy, as well as those in England.

5. The next are the Reigns of King John, and Henry the 3. who exercised the
like Jurisdiction; Mat. Paris, anno. 1203. and 1216.
yet it must be acknowledged, that in King John's time the power of the Bishop
of Rome did swell to a great height in this Kingdom, the Pope neglecting no
means for the increase thereof.

For which end he scrupled not to absolve the people of England from their
Oaths, and Allegiance to their Sovereign.

And then turning the Tables, interdicting the Kingdom for opposing his will
and pleasure: By which means he brought the King to surrender the Crown to the
Popes Legate, and to take it again as his Farmer.

But the Barons were so sensible of the Right and Supremacy of the Crown of
England, that they told the Legate; That the Kingdom of England never was, nor
should be St. Peter's Patrimony, and spoke homely of the Clergy, Polydore
Virgil. in Joh. l. 15.
who assisted the Popes proceedings, crying out upon these shrivled Ribbaulds.

Neither this King, nor any that succeeded him, observed any part of this
Submission.

And notwithstanding all this, Not. in Eadmar. p. 143. donationem baculi
pastoralis Abbathiae de Nutlega.
the same King held it not only his Right himself to give the Pastoral Staff,
but granted this Right to others: As to William Marshal and his Heirs, he
granted the Donation of the Pastoral Staff of the Abbey of Nutlege, which was
a mere spiritual Right, and exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction in those matters.

In the time of his son H. 4 H. 3: 7 H. 3. prohibition. 15. H. 3. prohibit. 15.
and 22. to 5. respects Cas. 11. f.
3. prohibitions were very frequent, which is a strong vindication of this
Jurisdiction in the King.

So was the writing in the Kings name to the Bishop, to absolve a Person
Excommunicate, and to certify Loyalty of Marriage, Bastardy and the like,
which were often done in this Kings Reign.

Also in this Kings time, 45 H. 3. rot. stans in 14. dorso.
there are some Records yet extant, by which it is forbidden that any man be
drawn in Plea out of the Realm, there being sufficient Jurisdiction in the
King, to do his Subjects Justice, in all matters whatsoever.

6. We may now look into the Reigns of Edw. 1. and Edw. 2. and find the same
Jurisdiction exercised by them.

E. 1 E. 1. rot. stans. in 5. dors.
1. A stout and wise Prince, did much recover this right to his Crown: He would
not suffer those of the Clergy to go to Rome without his License.

In his time the Statute of Mortmaine was made, 7 E. 1. stat. of Mortmain.
which much ^mpaired the growth of the Clergy, and increased the Kings
Ju^isdiction.

He forbad the Popes Provisions without his knowledge and leave, 11 E. 1. rot.
fin. M. 5. 11 E. 1. c. 32.
and shortly after this was the Statute of Carlisle made; which re^ites the
Usurpations of the Pope in giving Ecclesiastical Benefi^es to Aliens, and
Enacts that those oppressions should be no more suffered.

This King denied William of Nottingham to prosecute his Appeal to Rome,
because it would infringe the Kings Jurisdiction, 18 E. 1. Petitiones coram
Rege. f. 1. 3.
but bad him to enter it here, if he would.

He set a penalty upon the Provisions of Appropriation, 18 E. 1. Pleas in
Parliament. 28 E. 1. in Scaccario.
and being cited by the Pope to appear before him: The great Council were
highly offended at it; and wrote to the Pope, that it was notorious, That the
King of England was not to appear before ^he Pope or any other, and although he
would, yet he could not do it, being himself Supreme in those as well as other
matters.

This King denied the Popes Bulls and Peter pence, 33 E. 1. lib. ^pud Turrim.
f. 1. 114. 35 E. 1. 16 f. 150. 35 E. 1. rot. Pat. M. 25. Sr Jo. Davis, Rep. f.
95.
and other Exactions of Rome, and would not License his Bishops to repair to
the General Council, till they had taken an Oath not to receive the Popes
Blessing.

He regarded not the Popes prohibition of his Wars against Scotland. He forbad
the payment of First fruits to the Pope, and seized the Temporalties of the
Clergy for refusing to pay him a tenth, though the Pope forbad them.

In his time, 50 E. 3. lib. Assis pl. 19. Brook praemunire. 10. Coke 5 Rep.
Eccles. Case. f. 12. 9 E. 1. quare admisit. 7. 39 E. 3.
it was adjudged Treason for one Subject to bring in a Bull of Excommunication
against another; and a high contempt against the Crown to bring in Bulls of
Provision, or Briefs of Citation.

And the Archbishop of York had all his Lands seized into the Kings hands, and
lost, during his life, for a contempt in refusing to admit the Kings Clerk to a
Benefice, against the Popes Provision, and all this was held to be according to
the Common Law of England, and an high Testimony of the Kings Supremacy.

In E. 2. time, Stat. 9 E. 2.
the Clergy put up again for a share of this Supremacy, and got the Statute of
Articuli Cleri to be made, but in them the Right of the Crown is reserved and
manifested.

This King by his Letters civilly and filially entreated the Pope and
Cardinals, 14 E. 2. lib. apud Turrim. f. 85.
not to hold plea at Rome of things done in England.

And though in his time the Spiritual Courts held plea, Sr. John Davis Rep. f.
95.
by the Statute of circumspecte agatis, and by general allowance and usage, yet
they thought themselves not safe till the King had granted them Jurisdiction in
these Cases, Coke 5 Rep. Eccles. Case. f. 13. Stat. Articuli Cleri. 9 E. 2.
wherein the Parliament consented by their Act before mentioned. And it was
objected nevertheless against this King, that he had given allowance to the
Popes Bulls and Authority here.

7. We meet with the same practice in the time of E. 3. and of his Grandson,
R. 2.

Edward the third was a wise and Powerful Prince, and his time affords us a
large view of this matter, in the Records and Printed Statutes.

In his minority and in the heat of his wars in France, the Pope sent many
Briefs into England, at which the King and his Subjects were much offended, and
did smartly oppose them.

By the Resolutions of the Judges, Coke 5 Rep. Eccles. Case. f. 15.16, 17.
and of the Parliaments in his time, they admitted no Jurisdiction of the Court
of Rome here, but punished those who did bring any Bulls from thence, or
obtained any Provisions of Benefices, and the like.

He entirely resumed the right of his Crown in supreme spiritual Jurisdiction.

The Statute of Provisors recites the Statute of Carlisle, 25 E. 3. Stat. de
provisor.
and Asserts: That the Church of England was founded in the Estate of the
Prelacy by the Kings and their Predecessors.

And this, 27 E. 3. Stat. provis. c. 1.
and a subsequent Statute forbidding Provisions of Benefices by the Pope, do
testify the authority of the King to be Supreme in Spiritual matters.

So does another Act forbidding those to be cursed, 32 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3.
who shall execute the former Laws.

In the Annals of our Law, 17 E. 3.23.
we also find Resolutions to the same effect, for the Kings right of granting
Exemptions from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, which manifests his own
Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction.

In his time it was resolved, 28 Assis. pl. 20. 38 E. 3. c. 7. Coke 5 Rep.
Eccles. Case. f. 16.
That a Priour being the Kings debtor, might sue a Spiritual Person for Tithes
in the Exchequer; for until a Statute of this King the right of Tithes was
determinable at the Kings Temporal Courts, and in many Manors of the King and
of other Lords, they had probate of Wills.

This King translated Canons Secular into Regular and Religious, 38 Assis. pl.
22.49 E. 3. lib. Assis. pl. 8.
and made of the Priour and Covent of Westminster, who were Regular Persons,
capable in Law to sue and to be sued: All which and diverse others omitted, are
proofs of this Jurisdiction in him.

In the Nonage of R. 2. the Power of Rome again budded, and they attempted to
incroach, by sending hither Bulls, Briefs and Legates: Whereof the People were
so impatient, that they offered to live and dye with the King in withstanding
this Usurpation.

In his time an Act makes it Death, to bring any Summons, 13 R. 2. c. 3.
Excommunication, etc. against those who executed the Statute of Provisors.

Another Statute makes it a Praemunire to purchase or pursue in the Court of
Rome, or elsewhere, any Translations, Provisions, 16 R. 2. c. 5.
and Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, Instruments, or any other things
which touched the King, his Crown and Regality, or his Realm. And declares that
the Crown of England has been in no Earthly Subjection; but free at all times,
and immediately Subject to God in all things, which is full Supremacy, and in
all things, includes Spirituals.

The King had also the ill fortune to have it objected against him in
Parliament, that he had allowed of some Bulls from Rome.

8. We come now to the times of several Kings, who found this point so well
settled, that there was not much need of their stirring in it, yet the same
Jurisdiction was exercised by them.

In H. 4. time, were several Resolutions of the Judges, Coke 5 Rep. Eccles.
Case. f. 22, 23, 24.
expressly disallowing the Supremacy of the Pope in this Realm, and confirming
the Kings.

A Statute makes it a Praemunire to purchase Bulls from Rome. 2 H. 4. c. 3. 6
H. 4. c. 1.


Another forbids the horrible Mischiefs and damnable Customs of the Court of
Rome, about compounding with the Popes Chamber for First Fruits.

Another makes it a Praemunire for any to put in execution here any Bulls for
the discharge of Dismes. 2 H. 4. c. 6.


In his sons time an Act makes it a Praemunire for one by color of Provisions
from Rome, and Licenses thereupon, 2 H. 5. c. 9.
to molest any Incumbent.

In his time the Lands of Religious houses were in some danger to be taken
away, Martin Chron. p. 142.
the King being Petitioned to suppress them, as Nurseries of Idleness,
Gluttony, Leachery and Pride, and that their Revenues would bring yearly to the
Kings Coffers 200000 l. and also maintain 15 Earls, 1500 Knights, and above
6000 men at Arms.

But by the Policy and liberal offer of the Clergy, to supply the Kings
occasions in furtherance of his Title to France, this business was diverted.

In the minority of H. 6. Sir Jo. Davis, Rep. f. 96.
when the Commons had denied the King a Subsidy, the Prelates offered a large
supply for his Wars, if the Act of Provision were repealed: But Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester, who not long before had cast the Popes Bull into the fire,
caused this motion to be denied, as derogatory to the Kings Right and Supremacy.

In this Kings Reign it was adjudged, 1 H. 6. f. 10. 8 H. 6. f. 1.
that the Popes Excommunication is of no force in England, by the Common Law.

The succeeding Kings were not so active in these matters, nor was there so
much occasion for it in their time, as in the Reigns of their Predecessors.

E. 1 H. 7.20. 9 E. 4. f. 3. Fitz. N. B. f. 44. 12 E. 4.46.
4. was full of trouble, yet we find mention of a resolution in his time, that
the Pope could not grant any Sanctuary in England. And that if one Spiritual
Person did sue another at Rome, where he might have Remedy here, he should
incurr a Praemunire.

Another Judgment was, that the Popes Excommunication was of no force in
England.

And when two Legates, 1 H. 7. f. 10.
one after another came into England, they could not be admitted, till they had
taken an Oath, to attempt nothing against the King and his Crown.

R. 2 R. 3. f. 22.
3. had a short and unhappy Reign, after his wicked Usurpation, and was careful
to please the Clergy; yet in his time it was resolved, That a Judgment or
Excommunication at Rome, did not prejudice any man here.

H. 7. was a prudent and wary man, not forward to disoblige any party, 1 H. 7.
f. 10.
especially so great a one as the Clergy; yet in his time diverse Resolutions
passed to the same effect as before, for the vindication of the Kings Supremacy.

The Judges affirmed, 10 H. 7. f. 18. Persona mixta.
that the King is a mixed person, having both spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction in him.

And that the King may dispense with the Ecclesiastical Law for Pluralities, 11
H. 7. f. 12.
and for a Bastard to be made Priest.

9. We are now come to the great Wheel, which turned upside down the whole
course of Ecclesiastical Affairs; King H. 8. who not only resumed absolutely
the whole spiritual Jurisdiction into his own hands, but totally abolished the
Supremacy of the Pope in England.

The cause hereof some would attribute to his Covetousness, but he was rather
prodigal; and though none are more covetous than some prodigal men to get fuel
for their flames, yet the humor of covetousness was spent in his Father, and
his own Education and Practice was otherwise.

His displeasure against the Pope about the business of Queen Katherine, and
the precedent of Woolsey, added to his private grudge; and Haughtiness might
put him upon this work, which he went through with, and that by Parliament,
which he sufficiently commanded.

It chiefly began in the 24 year of his Reign, 24 H. 8. c. 2.
when an Act was made, which fully recites the Kings supreme Jurisdiction both
in Spiritual and Temporal matters, without Appeal to any foreign Princes or
Potentates.

It enacts that all Causes determinable by any spiritual Jurisdiction, shall be
adjudged within the Kings Authority; and if any procure Appeals, Process, etc.
from Rome, he shall iucurre a Praemunire.

The next year an Act was made, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
wherein the Clergy acknowledged the Kings Supremacy, and that they are
convened by his Writ: And no Canons to be of force without his assent; which is
enacted accordingly: And that the King may assign 32 persons to examine the
Canons, and to continue such of them as they think fit, and to restrain the
rest. Appeals to Rome are forbid, and that Appeals from places exempt, and
which were formerly to the Sea of Rome, shall for the future be to the King in
Chancery; which is a great asserting of the Kings Supremacy.

Another Act the same year declares, 25 H. 8. c. 20.
that the King may grant his Conge deslier for Bishops, and in default of
Election of them, the King may nominate the Bishop by his Letters Patents, and
they to be consecrated here.

Another Act reciting the Popes Exactions for Dispensations, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
Licenses, etc. in derogation of the Imperial Crown and Authority Royal, enacts
that none be had from Rome, and gives power to the King therein, which will be
mentioned in another place.

The next Parliament unites to the Crown the title of Supreme Head of the
Church, 28 H. 8. c. 1.
and all Jurisdictions and Authorities thereto belonging.

Another Act gives to the King First Fruits, as the Pope had them. 26 H. 8. c.
3.


Another Act forbids Appeals to Rome. 28 H. 8. c. 7.


Another (since repealed) makes it a Praemunire to extol or defend the
Authority of the Sea of Rome: 28 H. 8. c. 10.
And Officers to be sworn to renounce and resist it.

Another Act makes void Licenses and Indulgences from Rome, 28 H. 8. c. 16.
and those allowable to be confirmed under the Great Seal.

In the 31 year of his Reign, 31 H. 8. c. 9.
an Act gives him power to nominate such number of Bishops, Bishops Seas and
Churches, and to endow them with such Possessions as he will.

Another Act gives to the King all the rest of the Monasteries not dissolved,
and their Possessions. An Act of as much neglect of the Romish Power, and of as
much Supremacy in the King in matters spiritual, as may be imagined.

Which Supremacy was further exercised by this King, in the Laws made for
confirmation of the Romish Doctrine, and the Six Articles, upon which was great
severity, some being put to death for affirming the Popes Supremacy, others for
denying his Doctrine, all at the same time.

10. We come now to the succeeding Princes.

Edw. 6. proceeded in spiritual matters, as to the Doctrinal part, concerning
which sundry Acts of Parliament were made: 1 E. 6. c. 12.
One makes it Treason to affirm, that the King is not, or that the Pope is,
supreme Head of the Church in England.

An Act ordains the Book of Common Prayer. 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 1 and 12.19. 2 and
3 E. 6. c. 20, 21. 3 and 4 E. 6. c. 10. 3 and 4 E. 6. c. 10.


Another is about payment of Tithes, prohibiting flesh on Fasting days; For
payment of Tenths to the King, and Repeal of Laws against Marriage of Priests.
Another takes away Popish Books and Images, repealed by Queen Mary: Another
gives Power to the King to name 32 persons, to examine the Ecclesiastical Laws,
and to set forth such as they think fit.

People are required to come to Church, 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 1.3. 5 and 6 E. 6. c.
12. 1 M. c. 2.9.
the Common Prayer with some Alterations enacted, Fasting days to be observed,
Priests Marriages lawful.

But all the good Laws made by this King, were repealed by his Sister Queen
Mary, and such Service as was in the last year of Hen. 8. to be used: That she
may make Orders for governance of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches.

Acts against Heresy are revived, 1 M. c. 6.
(but this was repealed 1 El. c. 1.) Cardinal Pool dispensed with the Laymens
possession, to retain Abbey-Lands. 2, 3 P. and M. c. 4.
And the Queen remitted First Fruits, and renounced Ecclesiastical Livings.

Queen Elizabeth turned all about again, 1 El. c. 1.
and by Act of Parliament all foreign Jurisdictions spiritual are abolished,
the Statutes of H. 8. her Father, for this purpose, are revived. So are the
Statutes of her Brother, 1 E. 6. c. 1. and she repeals the Statute 1 and 2 P.
and M. c. 6.

And it is enacted, that such Jurisdictions spiritual as lawfully were
exercised before, shall be united to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And the
Queen has power to assign Commissioners in matters Ecclesiastical, and enacts
the Oath of Supremacy. The Act of 1 M. is repealed, and the Book of Common
Prayer of 5 and 6 E. 6. C. 1. is established.

It Is made Penal to maintain the Authority of the Sea of Rome, 1 El. c. 4.
the Oath of Supremacy to be taken, 5 El. c. 1.
Fasting days to be observed. The Bible and Common Prayer to be translated and
confirmed; Bulls from Rome are prohibited, 5 El. c. 5.5. 13 El. c. 1.
and reconciling to that Church, and bringing in of Agnus Dei, Pictures,
Crosses, etc. Made Treason to withdraw any from our Religion to the Romish: 23
El. c. 1. 27 El. c. 1.
Jesuits and Priests are to depart the Realm, and not return on pain of Treason.

Next was a severe Law made against Seditious Sectaries, 35 El. c. 1.
frequenting Conventicles on pretense of any exercise of Religion, contrary to
the Queens Laws; and so it must be, and whether this Act be continued or not,
was questioned. King James proceeded in the ways of Queen Eliz. as to
spiritual matters. 1 Jac. c. 4.
That her Acts against Romish Priests be put in Execution, but with favor upon
Conformity.

Sundry Acts were made in his time, touching fasting days, 1 Jac. c. 2^. and
29. 3 Jac. c. 1. 3 Jac. c. 4.
Prayer for delivery from the Gunpowder Treason, for repressing and
discovering of Popish Recusants, and against absolving to the Church of Rome;
and penalties for not coming to Church. In none of which the Kings power of
Indulgence is impeached, or named.

There is also an Act of King Charles 1. for reforming abuses on the Lords day,
and to restrain sending any beyond Sea to be popishly brought up, and others of
like nature.

In all these Princes Reigns, the writing to the Bishops to absolve Persons
Excommunicate, to certify Loyalty of Marriage, Bastardy, etc. and Prohibitions
to the Ecclesiastical Courts, were very frequent, and testimonies of, together
with a quiet enjoyment of their Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction; which
consequently carries the Right of granting Induigence in Spiritual matters
along with it.

CHAP. VI. 10 H. 7. Rex est persona mixta and unita cum Sacerdotibus. Ab and
Gloss in c. de decimis. Rex non praeesse debet in spiritualibus ut in
temporalibus. A. B. C. de sacro sanct. unctionibus. Quod Rex mere Laicus and
non Ecclesiasticus aut mixtus, quanquam unctus, nec spiritualibus, aut
temporalibus quoad ecclesiam se immiscere posse. In ordine ad spiritualia.
That the right of granting Indulgences in Spiritual matters, is in our King.
1. THis right is in the King of England, as he is a mixed Person, capable of
Spiritual Jurisdiction.

This was affirmed by Judge Bryan in H. 7. time, and that the King is a mixed
person, and united to the Priests of holy Church.

But the Canonists say, that the King is not Supreme in Spirituals, as he is in
Temporals, and they labor much for their own, and their Masters interest, to
make it good.

Some Doctors affirm, that a King is a mere lay person, and not an
Ecclesiastical, or mixed Person, although he be anointed; and that he cannot
intermeddle with matters Spiritual, or with matters Temporal, which do concern
the Church.

It is much for them to abridge a Kings Power in matters Temporal, but it is
not the first time they have made use of the Words in order to Spirituals, to
the prejudice of the Power of Princes. Nor does their opinion determine the
Laws of England, by which our King has this Jurisdiction.

The stories of other Kingdoms as well as of this, do manifest the exercise of
Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction by Princes, and the Non Obstante of the Doctor
(though the King be anointed) is no small objection in their way, carrying
Testimony that Kings are mixed persons.

Especially as it relates to our King, Ca^ibut Downings discourse of the States
Ecclesiastical, p. 57.
whose Anointing is only ancient among the Princes of Christendom.

The old Rhyme of Robert of Gloucester is mistaken, which says of Alured, "And
he was King of England, of all that there come,
"That verst thus yeled was of the Pope of Rome. Oyled or anointed.



For Gildas mentions the anointing of the ancient British Kings (although in a
bad sense, Galfred Muneth, l. 9. c. 3.
) and the Monk of Malmesbury, the anointing of Egbert before Alured.

Jothams speech to the Israelites, (...). Isa. 45.1.
That the Trees went to anoint them a King, and that which is rendered, they
went to make Abimelech King; is in some Greek Copyes they went and anointed
Abimelech to be their King.

This was about 200 years before the beginning of their Kingdom in Saul, who
with his Successors were anointed: So also was the King of Syria, Hazael, and
Cyrus King of Persia in the holy Prophecy is called the Lords anointed, a
frequent expression of Kings in Scripture.

I meddle not with the Miracle, Ceder Roda senim tract Kerisos, Lyr ad Ri. 3.
that the Holy Oil, which was consecrated in Moses time, and used in this
Unction, continued without diminution until the Captivity.

But from those Examples in the Holy Story, the Kings of Christendom took their
custom of being anointed.

Our Sovereign is anointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Emperors when
they were Kings of France, were anointed by the Archbishop of Rhemes, and as
Emperors by the Archbishop of Mentz, Colen and Triers.

But the Kings of France of the first line were not anointed, Du. Haillan, l.
1. de la premiere lignee oinct ny Sacree.
as their Historian testifies; and in a second place says plainly and
peremptorily, There is no mention in our Antiquities of the anointing of the
Kings of the first line.

Though the Kings of Spain are anointed by the Archbishop of Toledo: N^est
faicte aucune mention de sacree ny de onctionee Reys de la premiere lignee.
The Kings of Denmark, (he means of Sweden) by the Archbishop of Vpsal: The
King of Poland by the Archbishop of Guesne: The Kings of Hungary by the
Archbishop of Strigon: The Kings of Navarre by the Bishop of Dampetune: yet
none of them were anciently anointed, but now are; and this real Relation does
more peculiar and appropiate the State Spiritual to our King.

And by it, Downing, f. 96.
he is more than a lay man, he is a mixed person, having Supreme Ecclesiastical
as well as civil Government.

2. Nay, the King of England is not only a mixed Person, but in some sense he
may be termed a Spiritual Person, whereof the former Note of his being
Anointed, and by Spiritual Persons, is some Argument.

The use of Oil, or Unction amongst the Gentiles and Jews, Causabon ad Baron.
Annal. exercit. 14. An. 32. Numb. 26.
whereby they would have even inanimate things Sacred, by pouring Oil on them,
may be omitted. All hold the Anointing of Kings, to difference them from Lay
persons, and that it put a kind of Sacredness upon them, as making them
Spiritual persons.

Hence the French word for it is (sacree) as it were a consecration or
dedication of the King above all others, to the Service of God in Spiritual
matters.

That Kings anointed with holy Oil, Reges sancto Oleo uncti, sunt Spiritualis
Jurisdictionis capaces. 33 E. 3. tit. Aid du Roy. Guimer, tit. 12.. 9. Quod
Reges inuncti, non sunt mere Laici. Psalm. 105.15. 2 Cor. 1.
are capable of spiritual Jurisdiction, was a sentence applied to our King in
the time of E. 3. and to his Predecessors (...) Successors.

And Guimer in his Comment upon the Pragmatical Sanction of France, is
peremptory, that anointed Kings are not merely lay Persons.

And he adds, that from thence it is, that the Kings of England do bestow
Benefices.

The anointed King David puts Prophets and anointed Persons together; Touch not
mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; and Christ's Ministers are frequently
styled Gods anointed.

If our King (as undoubtedly he is) be a spiritual Person, it is not improper
for him to grant Indulgence in matters Spiritual.

The Kings of Israel took themselves to be spiritual Persons, and and to have
spiritual Jurisdiction, as the Judgment and Actions of Moses, Joshua, the
Judges, and their Kings do show.

The excellent and Pious Sermons and Exhortations made by Moses, Joshua,
Samuel, David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat and others, do testify their
being Spiritual Persons.

So does that passage of our first Christian King Lucius, Antiquit. Britan. p.
6.
that he labored the Propagation of the Gospel of Christ; and that having
transported an Army into France, Dum Duces sui bellica tractarent officia, ipse
evangelio praedicando assiduus suit.
whilst his Captains were employed about the business of the War, he himself
was diligent in Preaching of the Gospel.

Our last Saxon King Edward gained the title of Confessor.

And who so reads the Book of our late King Charles the first, will find that
he had admirable Endowments in Spiritual as well as Temporal things.

Though it be not a personal Duty in a Prince to Preach, yet he is trusted to
promote the Gospel as a principal part of his Duty; and for a Prince to Preach
is no strange thing, nor any disparagement, the great Solomon is called the
Preacher; and they may Preach if they please, which is an argument of their
being Spiritual Persons, and that of their fitness to give Indulgence in
Spiritual matters.

3. If our King were not to be taken as a Spiritual Person, he could not so
properly be Head of the Church in England; which by our Law he is, and
therefore the more capable and fit to grant Indulgence in Spiritual Matters.

The Passages before in part remembered, of the actings of our elder and later
Kings, 16 R. 2. c. 5.
do sufficiently evince them to have been Heads of the English Church. An Act
as ancient as R. 2. time, declares that the Crown of England has been so free
at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately
subject to God in all things. H. 8. settling this Supremacy in himself and his
Successors, by the Act in the 24th year of his Reign, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
recites, that by authentic Histories and Chronicles it appears, that this
Realm is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the World; governed by (...)
supreme Head and King, unto whom the Spiritualty and Tempor(...)even bounden and
owen to bear (next under God) a natural and humble Obedience.

In the next year an Act prays thus, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
In regard your Majesty is supreme Head of the Church, which the Convocation
has recognized, that it may be enacted, etc.

Another Act settles it more expressly, which recites, That although the King
rightfully is, and ought to be supreme Head of the Church of England, and so is
recognized by the Clergy in their Convocation; yet for confirmation thereof,
and increase of Virtue, and to extirpate Errors and Heresies, it enacts, That
the King shall be taken and reputed the only Supreme Head in Earth of the
Church of England: And shall have and enjoy, annexed and united unto the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, as well the Title and Style thereof, as all
Honors, Dignities, Preheminencies, Jurisdictions, Privileges and Immunities
to the said Dignity of Supreme Head belonging.

In his Sons time it was enacted to be High Treason, 1 E. 6. c. 12.
to affirm that the King is not, or ought not to be Supreme Head in Earth of
the Church in England, immediately under God; or that the Bishop of Rome, or
any other than the King of England, is, or ought to be by the Laws of God,
Supreme Head of the same Church.

This Title was challenged by the Pope over all the Churches of Christendom,
but the several Acts of Parliament declare it to have been, and to be the right
of our Kings.

And if it ever did belong to any Spiritual Jurisdiction, to grant Indulgence
in Spiritual Matters, it is by these Acts given to the King.

The Pope, when he claimed the Title, did give Indulgence in greater matters;
therefore it may be allowed to our Kings, under this Title, to grant Indulgence
to some of their Subjects, Dissenters, as to some minuter matters of Religion,
as Forms or Ceremonies in Church Discipline, etc.

4. We may examine from the ground of Reason, whether it be not fit that this
Right should be in the King.

When a sudden Tumult and Insurrection has broke forth into a dangerous
Rebellion, the King has in that exigency granted some temporal Indulgences,
Manumissions, and other Immunities and Pardons, which at another time he would
not grant; yet this in reason and consequence has been approved a violent
Storm, being thereby avoided and appeased, and danger to the King and Kingdom
prevented: May it not fall out upon the like grounds of reason, that the King
(who is the public Sentinel) forseeing any Tempest or Danger, or the decay of
the Trade, Wealth or Strength of the Kingdom, may thereupon, and to prevent it,
grant Indulgence to his Subjects in Spiritual Matters.

If this Power should be denied him, it cannot in reason be expected that he
should be so well furnished without it as he should be, to prevent a common
Mischief or Danger.

Bishop Tailor has a Rational as well as Theological Discourse on this
Subject: It is, says he, a great fault, Bishop Tailor 's Book of the Liberty
of Prophesying, page 536, 537.
that men will call the several Sects of Christians by the name of several
Religions.

All the Sects, and all the Pretenses of Christians, are but several Species of
Christianity, if they do but serve the great End; as every man for his own Sect
and Interest believes for his share he does.

In reason, the Prince is to Order and Indulge such of them as he thinks fit,
the better to serve his great end.

To Tolerate, is not to Persecute; and the Question, Whether the Prince may
Tolerate diverse Persuasions, is no more than whether he may lawfully Persecute
any man, for not being of his Opinion?

If he ought not in Justice and Reason to do this, it follows in reason, that
he have a Power to Indulge them.

The Prince is just to Tolerate diversity of Persuasions, as he is ^o Tolerate
public Actions; for no Opinion is Judicable, nor ^o Person Punishable but for
a sin.

If the Nonconformity be no Sin, it is reason that it be Indulged; and in
reason, none is so fit as the Prince to give this Indulgence.

And it is not only lawful to Tolerate disagreeing Persuasions, but the
Authority of God only is competent to take notice of it, and infallible to
determine it, and fit to judge.

And therefore no humane Authority is sufficient to do all these things, which
can justify the inflicting of temporal Punishments upon such as do not Conform
in their Persuasions, to a Rule or Authority which is not only fallible, but
supposed by the disagreeing Persons to be actually deceived.

But I consider, (says the Bishop) that in the Toleration of a different
Opinion, Religion is not properly and immediately concerned, so as in any
degree to be endangered.

It is also a part of Christian Religion, Tertullian ad Scapul. Humani juris
and naturalis potestatis unicuique quod putaverit colere, sed nec Religionis
est cogere religionem quae sucipi sponte debet non vi. Heretici qui pace data
scinduntur persecutione uniuntur. Contra Remp. Dextra praecipue capit
Indulgentia mentes Asperitas odium saevaque Bella parit.
that the Liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved, in all things where
God has not set a limit and made a restraint; that the Soul of man should be
free, and acknowledge no Master but Christ Jesus; that matters Spiritual should
not be restrained by Punishments Corporal.

Thuanus wisely observes, That if you Persecute Heretics or Discrepants, they
Unite themselves as to a common defense; if you Permit and Indulge them, they
divide themselves upon private Interest; and the rather if this Interest was an
ingredient of the Opinion: the reason therefore is much the stronger for this
Indulgence.

In Cases where there is no sin, nor disturbance of the public Peace, it is
not only lawful to permit, but necessary, that Princes and all in Authority
should not Persecute discrepant Opinions.

5. That this right of granting Indulgence is in the King, seems also to be
warranted from the Common Law of England.

The Statute before cited, recites, that by authentic Histories and
Chronicles, it appears, that this Realm is an Empire, and both Spiritualty and
Temporalty subject to it, and that the King is Supreme Head thereof. 24 H. 8.


This being so by the Common Law, He as supreme Head may grant any Indulgence
or Dispensation where the Law does not forbid the same. And I know no Law which
forbids the Kings granting of Indulgence in this Case.

In the time of K. 4 H. 3. 7 H. 3. prohibit. 13, 15 H. 3. prohibit. 15.22. Cok^
5. Rep. Eccles Case, fol. 1.
Hen. 3. and since, Prohibitions were frequent, and granted as the Kings right
by the Common Law. So was the Writing in the Kings Name to the Bishop, to
absolve a person Excommunicate, and to certify Loyalty of Marriage, Bastardy,
and the like.

If in these Spiritual matters, the King by the Common Law might indulge, as to
absolve a person Excommunicate, and the like, he may upon as strong Reason of
the Law give Indulgence in the matters now desired.

We find also in the Annals of our Law, Resolutions that the King may exempt
any Ecclesiastical person from the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, 17 E. 3.24.
and may grant to him Episcopal Jurisdiction and Exemption; this was nothing
else but an Indulgence granted by the King, and that from the grounds of the
Common Law.

By the Common Law the King may dispense with Ecclesiastical Law, 11 H. 7. f.
12.
for Pluralities, and for a Bastard to be made a Priest; by the same ground of
Law he may grant the Dispensation and Indulgence which is now desired.

A Dispensation, or a Non Obstante, is nothing else but an Indulgence in that
particular case, according to the Canon Law.

And it was the Resolution of all the Judges of England, Coke 7 Rep. Case. de
penal Laws, f. 16.37.
in the 2d year of King James, That the King, upon any Cause moving him, in
respect of time, place, person, etc. may grant a Non Obstante to dispense with
any particular person, that he shall not incur the penalty of a Statute; and
this agrees with Books of Law.

Another Resolution was by diverse of the Judges; 10 Apr. 9 Car. 1. at the
Sessions at Newgate.
That the King may pardon an Indictment upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. and that he
may by the Common Law give a License to one to exercise a Trade, for all his
Lifetime, although he had not been an Apprentice to it, because it is not
malum in se, but malum prohibitum.

Upon the same Reason and ground of Law, Coke 11 Rep. f. 88. Dispensatio mali
prohibiti st de jure domino Regi concessa, propter impossibilitatem praevidendi
de om^i us particularibus. Dispensatio est provida relaxatio mali prohibiti,
utilitate seu necessitate pensata. Brittan. f. 280. 282, 283. Fleta, l. 6. c.
8. Coke Comment on Littleton, f. 131.
the King may grant a License of Indulgence in spiritual matters, as well as in
those Cases of temporal matters, especially when the Indulgence is not desired
for any thing that is malum in se, but only, perhaps, Bonum prohibitum.

It is agreed for Law in another Case, in our Books, That the Law has given
power to the King, that of right he may dispense with a prohibited evil,
because of the impossibility of foreseeing all particulars which may fall out.
And that a Dispensation is a provident relaxation, or Indulgence of a
prohibited evil upon consideration of profit or necessity.

The right to do this, being by our Law in the King, comprehends within the
same right of the King, his granting of Indulgence in matters spiritual.

By the old Law, no Lord, or Knight could go beyond Sea, because thereby the
Realm might be disfurnished of valiant men.

Yet in that Case the King might by the Common Law, grant License, or
Indulgence to any Lord, or Knight, or other, to go beyond Sea, and dispense
with that Law.

But I am not arguing at the Bar, a point of Law, to cite all Authorities I can
meet with for it; I only mention a few, to the end that by them, the reason of
the Law, and the Application to our present purpose, may be the better
apprehended: I shall therefore forbear to cite more, and conclude with this one
general ground of our Common Law, the wisdom whereof has thought fit, that
Acts of Grace and Favor should be in the Right of the King, to be dispensed by
him, for the more obliging of his Subjects, and the gaining their affections to
him.

Hence it is, that the granting of Exemptions, Licenses, Faculties,
Dispensations, Non-obstante's, and the like Acts of Grace, are left unto the
King, and are in his right to grant or deny them, as he shall judge fit. So it
is, if a man be convicted of Felony, or Treason, and has judgment of Death
past upon him by the Law, he is to suffer Death; yet the Law gives the Power
and Right to the King, that he may indulge this condemned person, and give him
a pardon for his life, which is every days experience. And many in our time,
have tasted the fruits of his Majesty's Grace and Clemency herein: And if the
Common Law gives this Right of Indulgence for Life to the King, it were hard to
deny it him in Spiritual matters, for not coming to Church, or the like.

6. That this right was in the King by the Common Law, and practice of it, may
appear from many both ancient and later Precedents; some whereof, and first
before the time of W. 1. will be remembered in their order.

It is observed, ^^n ^Rep. ^prae^ f.
that as under the Temoral Monarchy of Rome, Britain was one of the last
Provinces that was won, and one of the first that was lost again; so under the
spiritual Monarchy of the Pope, England was one of the last Countries of
Christendom that received this Yoke, and one of the first that did reject, and
cast it off again.

That the Sea of Rome, before W. 1.s time, had no Jurisdiction in England,
neither in the time of the Brittans, nor of the Saxons (as appears by the
passages of Pelagins, and Colman an Irish Saint, and diverse others in our
story,) but that the Kings then exercised Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction,
appears in part by what has been before noted out of our stories.

It will not be supposed an easy thing, ^ev. ^esbur. ^de ^ccles.
at so great a distance of time, and after so many Revolutions and injuries of
accidents, to find particular apt precedents for that which is our present
argument; yet there seems to have been some even in those times not
impertinent to our purpose. In the Reign of the British King Arviragus, ^Park^
^34.
in the 63 year after the birth of our Savior, it is related, that Joseph of
Arimathea, and eleven more of Philips Disciples, arrived in Brittan, and
preached the name of Christ unto the Brittans, who were then Pagans.

This new Doctrine and Religion wholly contrary to Paganism, and tending to
the subversion of that whereof the Brittans were so blindly zealous, yet tho
they could hardly be persuaded to change the Traditions of their Fathers,
nevertheless they were so far from persecuting of these Non-conformists to the
old Religion, that they freely permitted them to preach, and to instruct the
people in this new Doctrine and Worship, though wholly different from their own
Profession.

And the King did so far grant Indulgence to them, and to all that would hear
them; that every one had the liberty of his own Conscience indulged to them.

And because these Preachers came from far, and that their lives were full of
Modesty and Meekness, and that they instructed the people in pious things; the
King for their maintinance, granted to them the Isle of Glassenbury; each one
of these Non-conformists having an hide of Land given to him, and they twelve
in number, they are called the twelve Hides of Glassenbury to this day.

You see the Pagans were so far from persecuting them, or taking any thing from
them, as they gave them a livelihood.

This Indulgence and grant was confirmed by many of the Saxon Kings their
Successors.

When Paganus and Damianus preached the Gospel of Christ to the Brittans, King
Lucius not only gave them Indulgence, though their Doctrine and Religion was so
contrary to Heathenisme then professed here, but both the King and his People
became Non-conformists to their old Pagan Worship, and embraced the true Faith
of Christ.

How much longer might that blessed Truth have been hid from our eyes, and that
glorious Light of the Sun of Righteousness have been obscured from our eyes,
had it not been for granting Indulgence to the preaching of it? sure we ought
to have the better opinion of Indulgence, since Christianity was introduced by
it.

So it was when Augustine the Monk preached to the Saxons, had he not been
indulged to preach, and the people to hear, our Saxon Ancestors had not been
converted to the knowledge of Christ Jesus.

The Christian Saxon, King Kenulphe, Stamford, 3. c. 38. f. 111. 1 H. 7. f^ 23.
tit. 2 Coke 5 Rep. Eccl^ Case. f. 9. Ab omni Episcopali ju^ re in sempeternum
esse quietus, nu^ lius Episco^ aut suorum officialium jugo inde depremantur.
Leg. Alure^ Reg. c. 2. Bilson. differ, p. 40 Bid l. 1. c. 25.
by the Counfel of his Bishops and Senators, did grant to the Abbey of
Abingdon, certain Lands with an express clause of Indulgence contained in the
grant: That the Abbot and his Successors should be free for ever from all
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and that the Tenants and Inhabitants should not be
depressed by the yoke of any Bishop or his Officials, but in all things should
submit to the Decrees of the Abbot. And although this were done by the Council
of his Bishops and Senators, that does not impeach, but rather fortify the
Kings Right to do it, by their Judgments that it should be done by him.

In the Laws of King Alured, he grants Indulgences and Immunities for the
Clergy themselves.

And when Gregory sent Augustine the Monk and his Companions, to convert the
Saxons, they stayed in the Isle of Thanet, till the Kings pleasure were known,
and whether he would grant them Indulgence to exercise their Religion here, and
instruct others therein; which the King (although it were sufficiently
different from the Religion then professed by the Heathen Saxons) did grant
unto these Dissenters, and encouraged them so far, that at length they became
of their persuasion.

The Application may be thus far proper, That if Pagans gave so much Indulgence
to Christians, it would ill beseem Christians not to give the like to one
another.

7. Some Precedents in the time of W. 1. and after, Eadmerus, f. 165. 167 7 E
3. Quare Imp^ 19. 5 Rep. f. 10^ Mat. Paris Anno 1119 Coke 5 Rep. Eccle^ Case.
f. 106^ Roger Hovenden, f. 496.
down unto our own memories, may be next in order remembered.

W. 1. granted a full Indulgence by his Charter of Exemption unto Battel-Abbey,
that they should be under no Jurisdiction of the Bishop: And it was an
Indulgence to the Freeholders, when he divided the Bishops Court from the
Hundred Court, which before that sat both together.

So was his appropriating of Churches without Cure to Ecclesiastical Persons;
The like exemption and Indulgence is granted by his Charter to the Abbey of
Reading.

H. 1. granted an Indulgence by his Charter to the Abbey of Reading, and says,
he does it as well in regard of Ecclesiastical as Regal Power.

H. 2. granted an Indulgence to his people, That none of the Popes Decrees
should be executed here, nor any of his Bulls of Excommunication. Not. in Ead^
mer p. 14^


He did the like to his Clergy of Normandy, in the Exemptions he granted to
them. 45 H. 3. Rot. Stan^ in 14. dorso^ 1 E. 1. Rot. Stans in. 5. dorso^ H. 11.
E. 1 Rot. fin. M^ 5.


It was a great Indulgence, which King John granted to William Marshal, to have
the Donation of the Pastoral Staff of the Abbey of Nutlege.

H. 3. exercised this Right of Indulgence, when he forbad that men should not
be drawn in Plea out of the Realm.

E. 1. indulged whom he pleased to go to Rome, and indulged his People against
the Provisions of the Pope.

In E. 2. time, as frequently before and since, were Prohibitions to the
spiritual Courts, and Indulgences and Licenses granted by the King in cases of
Pluralities, and Dispensations of several Natures, upon the same reason and
ground of Law as the present Indulgence is desired.

In our Law Annals of E. (...) 3.
3. is a Resolution, that the King may exempt any Ecclesiastical Person from
the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary, and may grant him Episcopal Jurisdiction, and
that this King did so to the religious Houses founded by him.

An Act of as high exercise of the right of Indulgence in Spiritual matters as
may be.

And indeed, all Monasteries and religious Houses in England and elsewhere, are
testimonies of this right of Indulgence in the King; for they all enjoyed such
Exemption, the fruits of that Right, and yet the Spiritual Judges did not think
themselves injured thereby.

The Precedents in R. 2. H. 4. and H. 5. time, as to the like Exemptions, and
granting of Licenses, dispensing with the then received Law in matters
Spiritual, are obvious in our Records.

The like are in H. ^ f. 1.
6. time, when it was adjudged that the Popes Excommunication was of no force,
and his Subjects were much Indulged against them.

This right of the King was also asserted by that Judgment in his time, ^ f. 16.
That the King only may grant a License to found a Spiritual Incorporation.

King E. 4. granted the like Exemptions, Dispensations and Licenses in
spiritual Matters, as his Predecessors had done.

So did H. (...) 7.
7. and in his time the Judges resolved, That the King might dispense with the
Ecclesiastical Law for Pluralities, and for a Bastard to be made a Priest, as
has been remembered.

King H. 8. not only exercised this right himself, but abolished all pretense
and practice thereof by the Bishop of Rome, as has been mentioned; and
procured this to be done, and his own right to be acknowledged, by the
Parliament.

E. 6. and his Sister Queen Mary exercised the same right, only Queen Mary
advanced that which her Father and Brother had abolished.

Queen Elizabeth followed the Precedent of her Brother, and in the beginning of
her Reign, when there was a scarcity of Ministers that would conform to the
Reformation, and it was difficult to get Preachers after that way, the Queen
took upon her to give License and Indulgence to Laymen to Preach publicly,
although they were not in Orders.

And I have been particularly and credibly informed of a Gentleman in
Oxfordshire, who being High Sheriff of that County about 1 Eliz. whose
Grandchild at the writing hereof was the worthy High Sheriff there, That the
Grandfather by special License from the Queen, being a Gentleman of Parts and
Learning, did himself Preach publicly to the Judges at the Assizes, when he
was High Sheriff: Nor would the like be more a crime now than it was in those
days, if there were the same necessity; but Blessed be God we are more
plenteously furnished.

We may now look upon some Precedents of our own time, such as many yet alive
may remember; in the times of the late K. James, K. Charles 1. etc.

In King James his time, it was Resolved by the Judges, That all Proceedings in
the Ecclesiastical Courts Ex Officio, are for the King; for which reason, 2 Ja.
c. B. Tr. Hall's Case. Coke 5 Rep. f. 51.
whatsoever the Suit there be, the King may Pardon it, for those Suits are only
to Convict or Punish the Party, for the Offense or Fault which the King may
Pardon, and not for the particular Interest of the party.

This Precedent and Resolution seems much to testify the Kings Right of
Indulgence to any of his Subjects, whose Opinions in some Ceremonies, or other
matters of Discipline, are different from the Opinions of their Magistrates, to
which in tenderness of Conscience they cannot conform; and for their
Nonconformity are Punishable by the Spiritual Judges, (as they are termed) and
by other Officers, for the Correction of that fault; and this the Judges
Resolved, that the King might Pardon. And for the King to grant an Indulgence
in these matters, is no other but a Pardon of the Offense in them, and the
particular Interest of no Man is concerned to hinder this Pardon or Indulgence:
And therefore by this, and diverse Precedents pursuant to this Resolution, the
Kings right of giving this Indulgence is affirmed.

Another Precedent in King James and King Charles 1. time, seems to me to have
a great resemblance, if not to be the same with the Indulgence now discoursed
of, and therefore I shall be the more particular in the recital of it.

It pleased those Kings in their Clemency and Wisdom, by their Letters Patents
under the great Seal of England, to grant to diverse persons of the French and
Dutch Nations, Protestants then residing England, this Liberty and Indulgence;
That they in distinct Congregations by themselves, and in public Churches or
other Places, might meet and exercise the Reformed Religion and Worship of God,
in such Order, and according to such Forms, and with such Ceremonies as were,
or should be agreed upon among themselves; and after the Rites and Usages of
their particular Churches and Congregations, without Conforming to the Order
and Ceremonies of the Church of England.

This Indulgence and Liberty was enjoyed by them all the time of King James,
after the grant of it.

And under his Son King Charles 1. it was continued and enjoyed also by them,
and they were not compelled to come to any Parish Church, or other place than
their own particular Congregations and Assemblies: Nor were they at all
questioned for the breach of any Law of Conformity; but this Indulgence of the
King did wholly free them from Penalties of those Laws, or molestation in the
different Exercise of their Religion.

The Parliament so far declared their Judgment, that this right of Indulgence
was in the King, that it was one of their Objections against the late
Archbishop Laud, That he endeavored to disturb these Dissenting Protestants
in their enjoyment of this Indulgence, and to have it taken away from them.

The Archbishop answered, That the reason of his so doing, was because the
first Indulgence being granted to Foreigners and Strangers, who fled hither
from Persecution, and as to a Sanctuary to preserve the Liberty of their
Consciences in the Reformed Religion, and therefore it was fit and charitable
to afford them such Protection and Indulgence.

But that those who enjoyed it at present, were not such persecuted People, who
fled hither for their Religion, but were the Children and Posterity of those,
and were now become Natives and Denizens of England; and therefore ought to
yield the same conformity to the Laws as others of the Kings Subjects did, and
for that reason, in regard of their Nonconformity, he said he moved his
Majesty to take away that Indulgence from them.

But this Answer was not approved, the King thought fit to continue his Grace
and Favor to these Sons of Strangers, and to preserve his own right in
granting and confirming this Indulgence.

The Archbishop acknowledged this Right to be in the King, by moving him to
take it away; and the Parliament acknowledged it to be in the King, by their
not being satisfied with the Archbishops answer to their Charge about it, and
by their Proceedings in it.

And the confirmation and continuance of this Indulgence in Spiritual matters
to the Children of those Strangers, now become Natives of this Kingdom, which
they justly and deservedly enjoy to this day, under the Goodness and Favor of
our present Gracious Sovereign, is no slender Argument of his Majesty's Right
to grant the same, and to grant the like Indulgence to any other of his Loyal
Subjects.

Another Precedent in our time, is upon several Acts of Parliament in the time
of Queen Elizabeth and King James, ^ ^ El c 2. ^ Ja. c. 4. ^ Ja. c. 5.
by which all Jesuits and Romish Priests are prohibited from coming into this
Realm, upon Pain of High Treason; and Rewards are given to those who shall
discover them here, and Forfeitures for saying or hearing of Mass. And in these
Statutes nothing is mentioned or reserved as to the Kings right of Dispensing
with them, or granting Indulgence upon them.

Nevertheless we all know, that in our time all along, upon Reasons of State,
for public Service and Occasions, and upon Contracts of Marriage by our Kings
with Foreign Princes, upon great Advice and public Treaties, it was thought
fit and lawful, that our Kings should grant Indulgence to such Romish Priests,
and such a Number of them as was agreed and held expedient for attendance in
the Courts of their Royal Consorts.

And although nothing thereof is mentioned in those Statutes, yet no question
has been made upon the Kings right of Indulgence on this occasion, but the
same remains undisputed and acknowledged.

And surely, upon the same grounds of Reason and Law, by which our Kings have
and exercise this right of granting Indulgence to the Chaplains and Servants of
our Queens, though Romish Priests and Englishmen, and no reservation thereof
in those Acts of Parliament, (but this right taken as Inherent in the Crown,)
our King may likewise owe Indulgence to any other of his Subjects, differing in
smaller matters of Religion.

There will be no need to mention the Precedents in our time, of the late Kings
Order, That no Children of any of the Nobility should be Married, without a
particular License from the King; which he granted, and sometimes permitted the
Archbishop to grant.

Nor of the Kings granting of Licenses or Indulgences under the Great Seal, to
Persons and their Heirs to Eat Flesh on Fasting-dayes, and in Lent; although in
the Statute 5 El. no reservation or mention is of the Kings Power to grant any
such Indulgence, but he does it by Virtue of his Supreme Right in matters
Spiritual.

That one precedent of the Indulgence granted and continued to those of t^^
French and Dutch Protestant Congregations, is a very full testimony and
acknowledgment of this right to be in the King, and that when he pleases he
may extend and grant the like to any other of his Native and faithful Subjects
of this Kingdom.

9. Not only precedents of elder and later, and of our own time, do affirm this
right to be in the King, but it seems also warranted to be in him by several
Acts of Parliament: We may look as high as the time of E. 1. 11 E. 1. c. 32.
in the Statute of Carlisle, forbidding the Provisions of the Pope without the
Kings License: If then he might grant that Indulgence, more strongly he may do
it now.

The Statutes of praemunire do highly assert the Kings right, as do those of
Provisions, and are before in part mentioned.

To come to those which seem nearer our matter: By the Statute of 25 H. 8. it
is enacted, That Appeals from places exempt, which were to the Sea of Rome, 25
H. 8. c. 19.
shall be to the King in Chancery; which asserts his right in those matters a
fortiori, in granting the Indulgence now desired.

By the Statute in the 26 year of this King, it is enacted, That the King may
order, etc. as by any spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, ought or may
lawfully be Ordered, etc.

If then it did or does belong to any spiritual Jurisdiction to grant
Indulgence in spiritual matters, it is by these Statutes given unto the King.

But the Pope practiced to grant Indulgences in greater matters than any upon
earth, even to the Pardon of sins, and freeing Souls out of Purgatory, (which
will not be taken as a precedent.)

And as the Law of the Church was before this Statute taken, he might lawfully
grant Indulgence in any spiritual matters whatsoever, and indulge any
Nonconformity.

It therefore follows, that by this Act, the King has the same right, and may
lawfully order and grant Indulgence in the matters for which the same is now
desired.

By the Statute 28 H. 8. is recited, That the Bishop of Rome, 28 H. 8. c. 16.
for profit used to grant to the Kings Subjects diverse Authorities, Faculties,
Licenses, Indulgences, etc. And it enacts, that all Dispensations from the Sea
of Rome, shall be void, and that the effects and contents of Bulls, Faculties,
etc. purchased of the Sea of Rome, which shall be allowable, shall be confirmed
under the Great Seal.

By the Judgment of this Parliament, this right of Indulgence was declared and
enacted to be in the King: And that such Indulgences, etc. as were necessary
and allowable for the people to have, (whereof the King was Judge) should in
the effect of them be passed under the Great Seal, that is, by the King, whose
Warrant to the Chancellor does authorize him to pass a Grant under the Great
Seal accordingly.

The Statute of 1 El. reeites that in H. 8. time, diverse good Laws, 1 El. c. ^.
were made for the extinguishment of all usurped and foreign Powers, and
Authorities, and for the restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, the ancient Jurisdiction thereto belonging; by reason whereof the
Subjects ever since enjoyed good order, and were disburthened of the
intolerable Charges and Vexations so usurped on them.

That Act abolisheth all foreign Jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
within this Realm, and Enacts, That such Jurisdiction, Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had
heretofore been, or lawfully might be exercised or used for the Visitation of
the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation under, and correction
of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses,
contempts and enormities, should for ever by authority of that Parliament be
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. I shall still forbear
to mention that arrogance of granting Indulgences to reach to Eternisy, to
pardon Sin, at which every sober Christian may grieve, and will readily agree
it not to be within this Act.

Nor will it be denied, but that the Pope practiced here, the granting of
Indulgence to whomsoever he pleased, and in any spiritual matter whatsoever,
and as the Law was then taken and submitted unto, he was held lawfully to
exercise that Jurisdiction.

If it were so, then the same Jurisdiction, and right of Indulgence, so
exercised by the Pope, is now by this Act annexed and united to the Crown, and
the King possessed and re-invested in his ancient Right, and the same may be
accordingly exercised by him.

And the Power by this Act to order Errors, Schisms, etc. will comprehend the
granting of Indulgence, which some hold to be the best and safest way to order
Errors and Schisms; and doubtless, if there ever were a right of Indulgence
exercised in this Realm by any lawful power, the same is by this Act vested in
the King.

But I shall thus briefly pass by others, and come to that Act of Parliament,
which in express terms seems to allow this Right to be in the King, or gives it
to him: And this is the Statute of 25 H. ^5 H. 8. c. ^1.
8. in which there is this clause:

That the Archbishop and his Commissary, shall not grant any other License,
Dispensation, Faculty, etc. in causes unwont, and not accustomed to be had at
Rome, nor by Authority thereof, nor by any Prelate of this Realm, until your
Grace, your Heirs or Successors, or your, or their Council shall first be
advertised thereof, and determine whether such Licenses, Dispensations, etc. in
such Cases unwont, and not accustomed to be dispensed withal or allowed, shall
pass or no. And if it be determined by your Grace, your Heirs or Successors, or
your, or their Council, that Dispensations, Licenses, or other writings in any
such case unwont shall pass, then the Archbishop or his Commissary, having
License of your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, for the same, by your, or
their Bill assigned, shall dispense with them accordingly.

Provided that Dispensations, Licenses, etc. where the Tax for expedition at
Rome extended to 4 l. or above, shall not be put in execution till confirmed by
the King under the Great Seal.

And it enacts, that where the Archbishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties
deny to grant a Dispensation, or License, which ought to be granted; the
Chancellor shall send an Injunction under the Great Seal, commanding it to be
granted under a pain, which not being obeyed, and no just cause certified why
it is not done, the Bishop or Guardian of the Spiritualties shall forfeit such
Penalties. And the King after due Examination, that such Licenses, Faculties or
Dispensations may be granted without offending the Holy Scriytures, and laws of
God, may by Commission under the Great Seal, to two spiritual Prelates or other
Persons to be named by him, authorize them to grant such Licenses.

And it gives power to the King for the ordering, redress and reformation of
Indulgences formerly obtained at Rome, and such of them as shall seem good and
reasonable, for the honor of God and the weal of his People, and such order
shall be observed.

This Statute in plain terms gives the right of granting Indulgence,

1. Where the cause is unwont and unaccustom^d.

2. Where it is a cause of Importance, as all will agree the Indulgence now
desired to be.

3. Upon a Denial of the Bishops, who will hardly take upon them to grant an
Indulgence in the matter.

In all these Cases, by the plain words of this Act, the Power and Right of
granting such Indulgence is clearly in the King, to whom this Statute gives it
in express words, if it were not in him by the former Acts, or (as indeed it
also is) by the Common Law of England.

CHAP. VII. The Answer to Objections against this Right of the King.
1. IT is objected, That if this Right should be in the King,

To which is answered, That the Persecuting of different Opinions, Schism, not
the dissenting in Opinion; for if one be a Nonconformist, he troubles nor
disquiets no others by his Nonconformity; if they let him alone, he is
satisfied. But when he is troubled or punished, because he differs in opinion
from some in Power, this causes the Rent or Schism in the Church, which
otherwise would be whole; the Persecutors cut off the Dissenters from them, and
are most properly to be termed the Schismatics.

But admitting these whom the Persecutors call so, to be Schismatics; yet to
indulge them so, as that they shall not be punished, is no more to encourage
their Opinions, than it is to encourage the wearing of Scarlet, when men are
not punished for wearing of that, or of any other color.

The way to countenance and encourage any thing, except by rewards and
perferments, will hardly be found effectual; the not punishing, is no reward;
and the not punishing of Nonconformity, will not be found such a reward or
bait as to countenance and encourage Schism.

But admit the Prince upon Emergencies of State, should evidently see it
necessary, to countenance or encourage Non-conformists, and that the same would
much tend to the preservation of the Public peace to grant indulgence to them,
without which it might be endangered.

If this Right of Indulgence should be denied him, the duty of common
preservation could not be expected from him, the requisites and powers
necessary thereunto not being allowed to him.

2. Another Objection is, Uniformity.

To which is answered, uniformity; Lord St. Albans Essay of Unity in Religion.
yet as the Chancellor Bacon notes, Unity and Uniformity are Two things.

One of the Fathers observes, That Christ's Coat indeed had no Seam, but the
Churches Vesture was of diverse Colors; there may be an Unity, though not a
strict Uniformity.

It is a good and pleasant thing to dwell together in Unity; Psalm. 133.1. Ephesians.
4.3.13.
and we must endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
which surely is most broken by Persecution.

There is no way but in the unity of the Faith and knowledge of the Son of God
to come unto a perfect man, to the measure of the Stature of the fullness of
Christ.

But, Matt. 18.7.
Christ tells us, That offenses must come, but Woe to that man by whom the
offense comes.

Surely, the offense comes more by him that persecuteth than by him that
pardons; and to differ from another in opinion, is no more justly an offense
than to differ in countenance; notwithstanding which difference in countenance,
yet all are of one unity and uniformity as men.

All Vines, Philip Nigh Beams of former Light.
Cedars, every Plant, and every Herb, every Beast and Bird, are uniform in
their Kind, though there besome difference in each of them. So it is with
gracious and holy men, being a holy Seed, and having this Seed remaining in
them, their conversation for the substance is the same, and so is their
profession of Religion, notwithstanding some Minute differences (as Bishop
Tailor calls them,) and it is so visibly uniform and the same, as the blind
World can distinguish them from other men.

So also in this part of their conversation, their Service of God in his
Ordinances, if the Institutions of Christ, and whatsoever he in his Word has
prescribed as necessary means and circumstances from more general rules be
observed, you will have a natural, free and comely uniformity, and more to the
Glory of God, than to have all by External injunctions cast as it were in an
artificial Mould; such a forced Conformity in all Ages has been the occasion
of greatest differences and disturbances.

The neglect of Scripture Rules which guide and direct an uniformity in matters
of substance and great consequence; and by Canons, and Injunctions, and other
ways to erect an uniformity in matters of doubtful dispute, and not of much
concernment if they were cleared: The pretense of Uniformity, and upon that
account taking liberty to impose doubtful Traditions, has been in all Ages an
Utensil in the hand of Church Governors, by which they have exercised greatest
Tyranny.

One Council decrees, That all Ministers must live single lives for Uniformity.
Bellarmin disputes to have the Service in the same Language in all the Popes
Dominions for Uniformities sake: And what thing, be it never so absurd, but may
be brought into this List?

There is an Uniformity arising from the Virtue of internal Principles, as also
from an external mould or frame; the one is free and natural, the other
compelled and forced.

Uniformity from internal Principles, is an excellency in Nature, and in Grace
also.

No necessary Uniformity for the beauty and good of the Church is hindered, but
advanced by the King's Right to grant Indulgence in Spiritual matters. And
surely, no Person can be so proper and so fit a judge to discern and determine
when this Uniformity is most beautiful and most to be desired, and how far, and
when it is to be pressed or indulged for the Churches good, as the Prince
himself is.

3. Some will also object,

In answer to which may be said,

The Wisdom of the King will more consider the cause of discontent, than the
discontent it self, and would himself have most cause of discontent, to be
denied so great and necessary a Right, and so much conducing to the peace and
welfare both of himself, and also of all sorts of his Subjects, and without
which he can hardly preserve either.

Doubtless the best way will be to discontent as few as may be, especially in a
time when discontents are too rife, and too apt to rise; and that will be found
the way to content them, which allows them their most desired Interest in this
World, their liberty by this Indulgence.

Those who are punished for what they hold their Right, will be too apt and too
much provoked to discontent, and to esteem it an issue of Pride more than of
Piety, and of Domineering more than of Meekness, to impose upon our Christian
Brethren. And may one not be as justly discontented, because a fair hair'd man
is not punished when himself is brown, as because one is not punished for
disliking a Ceremony, with which the imposer is pleased?

It will be found undeniable, that Meekness, and Indulgence to such Dissenters
will remove discontents, unite affections, and be security both to Prince and
People.

4.

The Law is, that every one shall conform to the Ceremonies of the Church;
these Dissenters will not conform, but disobey the Law, and if they be indulged
herein, they are countenanced in their disobedience, and by this Example,
others will be encouraged and expect indulgence in their disobedience in other
cases, which may prove dangerous to Government.

To this is answered,

The Swedes call a Governor Styrer Skib, the stearer of a Ship; the Latin word
Gubernator, (*) Cicero 1 4. de sin. Et si in ipsa gubernatione negligentia
navis est eversa. (...)
and the Greek (...), have the same signification; and if the Steersman be not
permitted to judge what course the Ship shall steer, it will prove dangerous.

The Hebrew word Tachan, to order, prepare, to weigh, number and preponderate,
refers this to the King.

But I cannot admit Nonconformists to be disobeyers of the Law. As to instance
in a particular, The Law says, That every one shall come to Church to hear
Common Prayer, or else shall pay such a penalty: He that pays the Penalty, does
as much obey the Law, as he that hears the Common Prayer; the one is agreeable
to the Law as well as the other; either men must hear, or must pay; those that
hear, and those that pay, do equally obey the Law.

If then the King indulge those who do not hear, that they shall not pay, it is
no countenancing of disobedience, because there is no disobedience in the case.

It is only a dispensing with that punishment which is imposed for an offense
to the King, which he may pardon; or a remitting of that penalty or payment
which is given to him.

Every common person may do the same; if Ten pound be given to a man, he may if
he please remit it; and if one recover Money in an Action, and have judgment
for it; he may if he please forbear to take the Defendant in execution, or to
levy the damages which the Law gives him.

By the same reason the King may pardon the punishment, or remit the penalty
which the Law imposes upon Nonconformists, and yet this is no countenancing of
disobedience.

5. It is further objected, That if this right be allowed in the King,

Several Acts of Parliament ordain conformity; but if the King may indulge
those who do not conform, he does in effect repeal those Acts of Parliament,
and make them to be of no force as to the Nonconformists.

To this somewhat mentioned in the last Section may in part be for an Answer.

The Law enjoins conformity, or else a penalty; he that submits to the penalty,
does conform to the Law. And when the King indulgeth particular persons as to
part of these Laws, he does not thereby repeal the Laws, but remit some of the
Penalties.

To repeal an Act of Parliament is wholly to take it away, and to make it of no
force; which our Law says must be done by the same power that made it, the
concurrent assent of the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament.

But when the King grants Indulgence to some Nonconformists, he does not
thereby repeal the Acts of Conformity, which still continue; but only to some
particular persons he remits some of the penalty.

The Law is, that a Traitor shall suffer death; yet many have experience by his
Majesty's clemency, that it is his right (if he please) to indulge and pardon
the life of the Traitor. Nevertheless none will say that hereby the King
repeals the Law of Treason.

Upon a sentence of one to be an Heretic, the Law heretofore was that a Writ
de Haeretico comburendo be taken out, and the Heretic to be burned.

Yet none of our Kings have been denied the Right, and have frequently
practiced it, to pardon the lives of such sentenced Heretics as they thought
fit to be indulged, and yet thereby the Laws against Heretics were not
repealed.

By the same reason the King may pardon and indulge some Nonconformists, and
remit the Penalties which the Law imposes on them, and yet the Acts for
Conformity are not thereby repealed.

6. But to come nearer to the great point in question, Stat. 14 Car. 2. cap. 14.
yet now by his own consent it is barred and taken away by the late Act of this
present Parliament for Uniformity.

If this be so, our question is determined; the wisdom and judgment of
Parliament ought to bind and conclude all persons in the Kingdom, who are
parties, and involved in their judgments, and ought to acquiesce therein.

And with my particular due submission thereunto, it seems to me that nothing
in this Act does take away or impeach, but rather confirm this Right of
Indulgence in the King.

One Clause in this Act provides, that the Penalties thereof shall not extend
to the Foreigners, or Aliens of the foreign Reformed Churches, allowed, or to
be allowed by the King, his Heirs or Successors in England.

By this Proviso, the Parliament declares their judgment, That this Right was
and is fit to be in the King.

And there occurs to me no reason, but that the same Right is in the King to
grant the like Indulgence to any other of his Subjects, as by this Proviso is
approved to these Foreigners, whose posterity, now become Natives, do enjoy it.

This Right was in the King, either before the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, or
annexed to the Crown by that Act. And either it was in him before the Statute
of 25 H. 8. or is granted to him by that Act, as has been before showed.

If any way this Right was once in the King (as unquestionably it was) then it
cannot be barred, nor taken away from him, without express words in some
subsequent Act of Parliament. But there are no words in the late Act of
Uniformity to bar or to take away this Right from the King; therefore it
remains in him as it was before, and there is nothing in this Act to the
contrary.

It is true, that the King does not dispense with a Law, or any part of it,
whereby particular Interests are concerned, as to those particular Interests.

Therefore that part of this Act which gives a Right of Presentation to
particular Patrons, upon the Nonconformity, is not to be dispensed with. But as
to the Penalties of this Act, and of those other Acts to which it relates, and
which are reformation of manners, and wherein no particular Interest is
concerned, the King may dispense with such Laws and Penalties; as the
resolution is in Halles Case, Coke 5. Rep. Eccles. Case f. 6.51.
That the King may pardon Suites in the Ecclesiastical Courts, because they are
only to correct or punish the party for the offense, or default, which (says
the Book) the King may pardon, and not for the particular interest of the party.

By the same reason, the King has a right to pardon or indulge the Penalties
and execution of these Acts in which no particular Interest is touched, and
which are to correct and punish the party for his offense and default against
these Laws, especially when there are no words in the Act to impeach, but
rather to allow this right to be in the King, and which clearly was in him
before the making of this Statute.

CHAP. VIII. Observations upon Examples of Persecution.
1. PErsecution is a word taken from the Latin, Persequor; which signifies to
follow to the extremity; and denotes the execution of Revenge and slaughter.

That the good of Indulgence, and the evil of Perfecution may the better
appear, some observations upon a few, of very many Examples thereof in the Holy
Story are here inserted; and to begin with these of Persecution.

It is observed, that for the most part ungodly men excited by pride and envy,
have persecuted the godly. So it was in the first Persecution in the World,
when the elder Son of Adam persecuted his Brother Abel.

Cain was an ungodly man, Genesis 4.5.
for unto him and to his offering the Lord had not respect; but Abel was a
godly man, for he brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat
thereof, Genesis 4.4.
and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; because Abel and his
offering had respect from God, therefore was his Brother very wroth, Bishop
Halls Contemplatition upon Cain and Abel.
and persecuted Abel for his Religion; such was the pride and envy of his
heart, upon which the Ingenious Bishop of Exon thus contemplates:

What then was the occasion of this capital malice? Abel's Sacrifice is
accepted, what was this to Cain? Cains is rejected: What could Abel remedy
this? Oh envy! the corrosive of all ill minds, and the root of all desperate
actions! The same cause that moved Satan to tempt the first man to destroy
himself and his posterity, the same moved the second man to destroy the third.

It should have been Cain's joy to see his Brother accepted: It should have
been his sorrow to see that himself had deserved a rejection. His Brother's
example should have excited and directed him. Could Abel have stayed God's fire
from descending? Or should he if he could, reject God's acceptance, and
displease his Maker, to content a Brother? Was Cain ever the further from a
blessing, because his Brother obtained mercy? How proud and foolish is malice?
which grows thus mad for no other cause, but because God or Abel is not less
Good? It has been an old and happy danger to be holy.

This has commonly been the ground of Persecution, men's piety begets envy, and
envy raises persecution from proud and ungodly men, who having the world at
will, because others are more acceptable to God than themselves, therefore they
in pride and envy, persecute them as Cain here did his Brother Abel.

If there be an evil heart, there will be an evil eye; and if both these, there
will be an evil hand.

Cain persecuted and murdered his Brother Abel for his Religion: How early
(says our Bishop) did Martyrdom come into the World? The first man that died,
died for Religion. Who dare measure Gods love by outward events, when he sees
wicked Cain standing over bleeding Abel, whose Sacrifice was first accepted,
and now himself is Sacrificed?

Death was denounced to man as a curse, yet behold it first lights upon a
Saint. How soon was it altered by the mercy of that just hand which inflicted
it?

If death had been evil, and life good, Cain had been slain, and Abel had
survived: Now that it begins with him that God loves, Oh death where is thy
sting?

This may comfort godly men being under Persecution; and though it should reach
to death, yet it would be their happiness.

And for the condition of their Persecutors, it will be like that of Cain, who
because he persecuted his Brother, was cast out from the protection of God. He
that feared not to kill his Brother, fears now that whosoever meets him, will
kill him; the troubled conscience projecteth fearful things, and sin makes even
cruel men cowardly.

God saw it was too much favor for Cain to die, he shall live, but for a
curse, banished from God, carrying his Hell in his bosom, and the brand of Gods
vengeance in his forehead.

God rejected him, the Earth repines at him, men abhor him, himself now wishes
that death which he feared, and no man dares pleasure him with a murder.

How bitter is the end of him, yea without end, still Cain finds that he killed
himself more than his Brother; and in time all Persecutors will find that they
have persecuted themselves more than their dissenting Brethren.

2. The next Persecution which I shall mention, is that of Pharaoh persecuting
the Israelites, and this was upon a Ground of Spiritual matters. Exodus 3.18
The message which God sent by Moses unto Pharaoh was for an Indulgence in
Spiritual matters. Let us go we beseech thee three days journ^y into the
Wilderness, that we may sacrifice unto the Lord our God; Exodus 4.3
and let my son go that he may serve me.

When Moses and Aaron had delivered their Message to Pharaoh, and prayed his
Indulgence to the Israelites to go and sacrifice to the Lord; the Tyrant
persecuteth them the more, and says, Ye are idle, Exodus 5.3.
ye are idle, therefore ye say let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord. Exodus
5.13. Exodus 7.20. Exodus 8.1, 4. Ver. 8.
Go and work, no straw shall be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of
Bricks.

Then is the River turned into Blood, and Moses again demands the Kings
Indulgence, Let my people go that they may serve me. But Pharaoh's heart is
hardened, and Frogs are sent, this made him a little relent, Entreat the Lord
that he may take away the Frogs, and I will let the people go that they may
sacrifice. The Frogs being taken away, the Tyrants heart is again hardened, He
will not let the people serve the Lord. Then Lice are sent; and before every
new Plague, leave is desired for the people to go and serve their God, but
Pharaoh would not grant this Indulgence, as soon as the Plague was removed his
heart was hardened, and he would not let the Israelites serve the Lord their
God.

But upon the death of their firstborn the King and his Servants are willing,
Go and serve the Lord as ye have said. Exodus 12.31.


No sooner are they gone, and the Plagues ceased, but Pharaoh resolves to
recall them, and to continue his Persecution of them; but therein the Judgment
of God appeared against Persecutors, and his zeal for his people to have this
Indulgence by destroying the denyers of it, Pharaoh and all his host perished
in the Red Sea.

3. The next Persecution which was intended only, Esth. 3.5, 6.
was that of Haman against the Jews. Such was his pride, because Mordecai the
Jew did not bow to him, and do him reverence, that he thought scorn to lay
hands on Mordecai alone, but thought to destroy all the Jews. And his pretense
for this Persecution was by suggesting to the King Ahasuerus, That there is a
certain people in all the Provinces, and their Laws (that is the Laws of their
Religion) are diverse from all people; they were Dissenters, neither keep they
the Kings Laws, Esth. 3.8.
they were absolutely Nonconformists, and therefore he concludes and counsels
the King, It is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. The King himself was
contented to indulge them, but this great Favorite out of pride, and his
malice to Mordecai, and for his sake to all the Jews, persuades the King thus.
If it please the King let it be written, that they may be destroyed. The King
hearkens to Haman's advice, and a Decree is sent out to persecute all the Jews
to their utter destruction; but afterward through Divine mercy, by the means
of Queen Esther and Mordecai miraculously prevented. And although here was only a
design and intention of persecuting Gods people, and not put in action, yet
such was the jealousy and wrath of God against the Enemies of his people, Esth
9 25.
that the chief contrivers of this Persecution, Haman and his Sons, were hanged
on the Gallows, and near eighty thousand of the Persecutors slain by those
whose ruin they designed. And the King commanded by his Letters, That Haman's
wicked devise which he devised against the Jews should return upon his own
head, which may terrify all malicious or impious men from persecuting of their
Brethren.

4. The Persecution which Nebuchadnezzar made may likewise afford us an
observation:

The King made an Image of Gold, Dan. 3.1, 4, 5, 6.
and had a solemn Dedication of it, and a Decree was made and proclaimed, That
all people when they heard the Music should fall down and worship the Golden
Image which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up. Then this Decree and Law of
Conformity highly imposes on the Consciences of all his Subjects, and that
upon a most severe and capital punishment: Whosoever falls not down and
worshippeth, Dan. 3.6.
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. All
conformed to this Law, except a few godly Jews, and against them some envious
pick-thank Caldeans complained to the King, and accused Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, that they would not conform, and designed to persecute them to their
destruction.

They informed the King, Dan. 3.12, 13, 14.
These men, O King, have not regarded thee, they serve not thy gods, nor
worship the Golden Image which thou have set up.

Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded them to be brought before
him, and examined them, who stoutly professed their Religion, and confidence in
God.

Then the King commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more
than it was wont to be heat, and these men were cast into the midst of the
burning fiery furnace.

But to the astonishment of the King and all the Persecutors, they were
delivered; and the King blessed the God of Heaven, Blessed be the God of
Shadrach, Dan. 3.28.
Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his servants
that trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies,
that they might not serve nor worship any God, except their own God.

The King and the Persecutors were convinced, and a Decree was made, that none
should speak amiss of the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

Of this King it is said, When his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
pride, he was deposed from his Kingly Throne, Dan. 5.20, 21.
and they took his glory from him, and he was driven from the sons of men, and
his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild asses,
they fed him with grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven, till he knew that the most high God ruled in the Kingdoms of men, and
that he appoints over it whomsoever he will.

5. Dan 6.4, 5, etc.
In the time of King Darius there were envious Persecutors of godly Daniel, who
sought occasion against him concerning the Kingdom, but they could find none
occasion or fault.

They would fain have removed him from his Preferments to have made way for
themselves, and when they could find no default in him as to his Civil
employments, forasmuch as he was faithful (as most Nonconformists are) neither
was there any error or fault found in him; Then the Persecutors said, We shall
not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him
concerning the Law of his God.

Hereupon they sought to entrap him, and acquaint the King, That all the
Presidents, Princes, Governors, Counselors, and Captains, a great public
Council had consulted together to establish a Royal Statute, and to make a firm
Decree, That whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God or man for thirty days,
save of thee, O King, he shall be cast into the den of Lions; and they
prevailed with the King to sign the Decree.

Then Daniel when he knew that the Writing was signed, he went into his house,
and his windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he would avow his
profession and worship, not withstanding the Law to the contrary; he kneeled
upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God,
as he did aforetime.

This provoked the Persecutors, they inform the King of it, who was willing to
save Daniel, but they insisted on the Law of the Medes and Persians which
alters not. Hereupon Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, but his God
preserved him, and he was taken forth again the next day, but the Persecutors,
and their Wives and Children were cast into the Lions Den; and the Lions had
the mastery of them, and broke all their bones in pieces, or ever they came at
the bottom of the Den.

6. We may come to the highest of Persecutions to that of our blessed Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus.

His persecution began betimes, shortly after he was born, and continued till
his Death, and will continue against his Members, till his coming again in
Glory. Matt. 2.13.16.


Herodes Ascalonita sought the young Child to destroy him, and when he saw that
he was mocked of the Wisemen, he was exceeding wrath, and sent forth and slew
all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from
Two years old and under, according the the time be had diligently inquired of
the Wisemen.

This bloody persecutor (as Josephus relates) was severely punished by God for
his barbarous persecution of our Savior, Josephus Antiquit. l. 17. c. 7. and
l. 17.7. De Bello Judaic. c. 21. Mat. 4.1.2. Mat. 12.14. Matt. 22.15. Matt.
26.3.4.59 47.
and of these innocent and young Martyrs.

The grand Persecutor Satan tempted the Lord of Life in the Wilderness, when he
fasted Forty days, and Forty nights.

After the Miracles which he had wrought, it is said, that then the Pharisees
went out and held a Council against him, how they might destroy him.

Then they consulted how they might entangle him.

A public Council of the chief Priests, Scribes and Elders consulted, that
they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill him; and to this end, all the
Council sought false Witness against him, to put him to death.

His own Servant betrays him, the Multitude with Swords and Staves from the
chief Priests and Elders of the People, apprehend him and lead him to the
Council, Matt. 26.66.67.
who pronounce their Sentence against him; He is guilty of death, then they
spit in his Face, buffet him and smite him.

After all this they still take council against him to put him to death, they
bound him and led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor,
who when the Rabble cried out, Crucify him, Matt. 27.28, 29.30, 34.
released Barrabas, and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified; but
of all others, the Soldiers used him most spitefully; they mocked him, put a
Crown of Thorns upon his Head, spit upon him, Jo. 19.34.
smote him, and led him away to crucify him. They gave him Vinegar to drink
mingled with Gall, and pierced his side with a Spear after he was dead.

Thus was our blessed Redeemer rewarded by men, for all the good he did for
them, they persecuted him to death, who brought them Eternal life and glory.

But it were presumption to speak of that glorious Passion, and all the
Persecution of the Lord of Life in this small Treatise, and by so weak a hand,
which the Pen of the Holy Ghost has described. Joseph. Antiq l. 18. Eutropius
L. 7.


We may only Observe of his Persecutors, that Judas hanged himself, Pilate and
most of the Council that condemned him, were (as Eutropeus and others affirm)
afflicted with many and sharp miseries in th^ls life and with violent deaths,
besides their punishment in the life to come.

For the People of the Jews, our persecuted Prince, foretold what should become
of them for their persecutions.

I send unto you Prophets, and Wisemen, and Scribes; Matt. 23.34, 35, 38.
and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall scourge
in your Synagogues and persecute them from City to City.

Then follows the most fearful of all Judgments.

That upon you may come all the Righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the
blood of Righteous Able, to the blood of Zacharias.

Behold your House is left unto you desolate: Josephus, Eusebius, Socrates
Scholast, etc.
The Ecclesiastical story sets forth the full accomplishment of this Prophecy,
the sad calamities which befell the Jews in the Siege of Jerusalem, and the
taking and demolishing of it, and of the stately Temple, whereof nothing was
left but heaps upon heaps, and all buried in Ruin.

The People carried away Captives, lost their Native Country, dispersed over
the face of the Earth, and besides the unexpressible miseries inflicted by
Divine Justice on that Generation; it reaches also to all their Posterity, who
ever since have been wanderers up and down the Earth, and sojourners in strange
Lands, and have had no City or fixed Habitation to dwell in.

7. The example and course of the Master was followed by his Disciples that
knew him in those times, and will be cheerfully submitted unto, (if God shall
require it) by all such who in our time shall be acquainted with the Lord
Jesus, to suffer with patience and joy, the Persecutions which the Enemies of
Christ shall inflict upon them, whereof our Saviors predictions was;

They shall deliver you up to be afflicted and shall kill you, Matt. 24.9, 10,
13.
and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my names sake, and then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another: But he that
shall endure to the end, shall be saved.

That this was fulfilled in the Persecution of the Disciples of Christ, appears
too evidently in the Ecclesiastical story, and the particulars thereof are too
many to be inserted in this short Treatise; they may at large and with sorrow
be perused in their Authors.

John the Baptist for displeasing Herodes Antipas in his Doctrine and Opinion
about his Brother Philips Wife was imprisoned, and afterward in a kind of
frolic beheaded by him. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 4. Jos. Antiq. l. 8. c. 9. Acts 8.1.3.


This Herod (as Eusebius and others testify) was afterward condemned to
perpetual banishment.

Saul was himself a great persecutor of the People of God, he was consenting to
the death of Stephen, and there was a great persecution against the Church: As
for Saul he made havoc of the Church, entering into every House, and haling men
and Women committed them to Prison.

And breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord,
Acts 9.1, 2.
went unto high Priest and desired of him Letters to Damascus to the
Synagogues, that if he found any of this way (Nonconformist) whether they were
men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.

This fierce persecutor was miraculously convinced of his sin (as all
persecutors one day will be) and he became himself a persecuted Disciple of
Christ Jesus.

Nero, 2 Timothy 4.17. Eutrop. l. 8.
whom he calls the Lion, and who was a fierce persecutor of him (as Eutropius
relates) was sentenced by the Senate to whipped to death, which although he
escaped, yet afterward he slew himself.

Herodes Agrippa stretched for his hands to vex certain of the Church, Acts.
12.1, 2.
and he killed James the Brother of John with the Sword; this persecutor also
perished by an horrible death.

Domitian the presecutor of John the Evangelist, Jos. Antiq. l. 10. c. 7.
Suetonius, Eutropius
was slain in his Bed by his own servants, his Wife consenting to it, and his
Carcass thrown into the Street by order of the Senate.

Throughout almost the whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles are stories of
the persecution of Christ's Disciples.

I confine my self to those Examples which occur in the Holy story, nor can I
mention but some of them, and must refer those who desire to look more
particularly into this matter to the Ecclesiastical story, where they will find
stories of that horror and bitterness of persecution against the People of God,
and those who professed the Name of Christ Jesus, that would melt a Pious
heart, and those horrible judgments of God against the persecutors of his
Servants, that may forewarn all persecutors whatsoever from the wicked ways of
persecution, and deter them from imposing upon men any thing contrary to that
freedom of Conscience, which is due to all that profess the Faith of Christ;
and whosoever by persecution shall seek to take it from them, will ensnare
themselves in misery probably here, certainly hereafter.

8. This Chapter may be concluded with some few further Observations upon the
Examples before remembered from the holy Scripture.

By all which it appears evidently, that in all times, and in all places, the
People and Servants of God have been under severe persecutions; but what has
been the end and issue thereof? Eternal joy and comfort.

I know the Objection is obvious, that the Examples before remembered, and
diverse others which may occur, are not applicable to the subject matter of our
present Discourse; they are of persecutions of the People of God, and of
Christians by Heathens, and by the Jews, who believed not that the Messiah was
come: but the matter now in Discourse is of injoyning conformity in Sectaries
and Schismatics, by the lawful Power and Authority of the Rulers of the Church
of Christ, and therefore these Examples come not to this matter.

But if a dissenting Brother do judge or doubt, that what is imposed on his
Conscience, is contrary to the will of God; He holds himself equally obliged
not to conform thereunto, as the Ancient Primitive Christians, or the Jews held
themselves bound not to conform to the Impositions of Heathen Emperors,
Governors, in matters Spiritual.

And they do observe, that if God showed so great displeasure for those
Impositions of the Heathen upon his People; That, surely he will be as much
displeased at the Impositions of Christians upon Christians, and of Protestants
upon Protestants, in Spiritual Matters, and which are not Fundamental, and
where the public Peace is not disturbed.

It may be further observed, that in all Examples of Persecution, the Power and
Authority of the King or Monarch, was made use of; and by the same Reason and
Authority, his Power and Right of Indulgence may be exercised.

The Observation of pouring out of the Wrath and Vengeance of God upon the
Persecutors of his People, has been before in part noted, and may be found
throughout the Stories of those Passages.

And it is a greater breach of Charity and Christian Duty, for a Professor of
Christ, than for an Unbeliever to persecute a Servant of Christ Jesus.

9. This Section and Chapter may be concluded with a Contemplation of the
Comfort of Persecution. It was the condition of the holy Apostle Paul, and will
be the Condition of all faithful Servants of Christ, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 8, 9, 10.
to be in much Patience in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Stripes, in
Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings, by Honor and
Dishonor, by evil Report and good Reports, as Deceivers, and yet True; as
Unknown, and yet Wellknown; as Dying, and behold we Live; as Chastened, and not
Killed; as Sorrowful, and yet always rejoicing; as Poor, yet making many Rich;
as having nothing, and yet possessing all Things.

Our Master Christ Jesus, being Lord of all, yet was pleased to endure the
greatest Persecution for our Sakes; shall not we then be willing to endure
short Persecutions for his Sake, and the Gospels? These Persecutions will be
Comforts and Blessings to all that faint not, but persevere in Righteousness to
the end.

The Discourse of Bishop Hall, Bp. Hall, Decad. 5. Epist. 5.
is heavenly on this Subject.

The Bone that was disjointed, cannot be set right without Pain; no Potion can
cure us, if it work not; it works not, unless it make us Sick; we are contented
with the Sickness, which is the way to Health; we are afflicted, not
overpressed; needy, not desperate; persecuted, not forsaken; cast down, but
perish not.

Fear not, these Stripes are the Tokens of his Love; he is no Son that is not
beaten, yea, till he Smart and Cry, if not till he Bleed. No Parent corrects
another Child, and he is no good Parent that corrects not his own.

What we lost in our height, we recover in our Misery, a conformity to the
Image of the Son of God. He that is not like his elder Brother, shall never be
Coheir with him. Lo, his Side, Temples, Hands, Feet, all bleeding; his Face
blubbered, ghashly, and spit on; his Skin all pearled with a bloody Sweat, his
Head drooping, his Soul heavy to the Death.

No man can follow Christ without his Cross, much less reach him; and if none
shall reign with Christ, but those that suffer with him; what shall become of
those jolly Ones of this World?

Go now, thou dainty Worldling, and please thy self in thy happiness; Laugh
always, and be ever applauded; it is a woeful Felicity that thou shall find in
Opposition to thy Redeemer.

He has said, Blessed are ye that weep; who can believe this, and not rejoice
in his own heart? Why blessed? For ye shall laugh.

Behold we shall weep on Earth, shall laugh in Heaven; we that now weep with
Men, shall laugh with Angels; we that weep for a Time, shall laugh for Ever.

Who would not be content to defer his Joy a little, that it may be Perpetual
and Infinite?

In Heaven you shall see no more Palms than Crosses; you shall see none
crowned, but those that have wrestled with Crosses and Sorrows, to Sweat, yea,
to Blood, and have overcome; and overcoming, ye shall be crowned.

A reward truly great, a Crown for a few Groans; an Eternal Crown of Life and
Glory, for a short and momentary Suffering.

How just is St. Paul's account, That the Afflictions of this present Life, are
not worthy of the Glory which shall be showed unto us.

What say you, Would you not be afflicted? Would you not be persecuted? Whether
had you rather mourn for a while, or for ever? One must be chosen. Whether had
you rather rejoice for one fit, or always? you would do both. Pardon me, it is
a fond Covetousness, and idle Singularity; what, that you alone may fare better
than all Gods Saints! That God should make that way smooth to you, which all
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Confessors, Christ himself, have found
rugged and bloody!

A way with this Self-love, and come down you ambitious Sons of Zebedee, and
ere you think of sitting near the Throne, be content to be called to the Cup.
Now is your trial, let your Savior see how much of his bitter Potion you can
pledge, then shall ye see how much of his Glory he can afford; be content to
drink of his Vinegar and Gall, and ye shall drink new Wine with him in his
Kingdom.

The shortest Persecution thou can undergo for the Satisfaction of thine own
Conscience, for the Truth of Christ, will prove the greatest Blessing and
Comfort to thy Soul.

CHAP. IX. Observations upon Examples of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters.
1. IN this Argument, We may take a rise from before the Flood, and find, that
in all Ages to this day, generally Indulgence has been given in Spiritual
Matters, and the right of giving it, exercised by Monarchs; and we may begin
with the Indulgence which Noah had.

Noah was a just man, Genesis 6.9, 11.
and perfect in his Generations, and Noah walked with God, but the earth was
corrupt before God, and filled with violence.

Noah differed as much from the People of the Earth in his Persuasion, as could
be; yet, even that corrupt Generation indulged Noah and his Family to enjoy the
freedom of their Conscience; and Noah himself was a Preacher of Justice, 2 Pet.
2.5. Rabbi Eliezer, c. 22.
and as a Rabbi says, he preached to the old World, and said, Turn ye from
your ways, and from your evil Works, that the Waters come not upon you, and cut
off the whole Se^d of the Sons of Adam.

But some may object, That Noah was a King, and might give Indulgence to
himself, and he received none from others.

It is acknowledged, that Noah was a King both before and after the Flood; and
of the ten Kings of the Chaldaeans, who reigned before the Flood, the last is
reckoned by Cedren and others, to be Xisuther, who was Noah; and in him some of
the Greek Stories continue that Eastern Kingdom of the Chaldaeans, through the
Flood; and affirm that Noah was King about 180 years before the Flood, and that
his Kingdom continued to his Death, and that then he bequeathed it to his Son
Seth.

But I shall not make much inquiry into this matter; if he were a King, he gave
good Example, by seeking to convert his People by preaching, rather than by
punishing of them.

If he were not a King, then was the Indulgence that he enjoyed the more
considerable, and may be also exemplary.

2. The next Indulgence which we meet with in order of time in the holy Sto^y,
is that which was enjoyed by the holy Patriarchs.

Every Father of a Family, was Prince and Priest in his Family, and ordered
matters of Divine Worship as he thought best; and we read of no Persecutions
among them.

Abraham by the Direction of God, Genesis 12.3, 5, 6, 7, 8.
with his Wife, and his Nephew Lot, and all their Family, went from Haran into
Canaan, and there built an Altar, and called upon the name of the Lord.

And tho the Canaanite was then in the Land; yet Godly Abraham would not
neglect the true Worship of God, even amongst those Unbelievers; neither did
any of them disturb him, tho his Persuasion differed much from theirs in
Spiritual Matters; but he was indulged therein, both while he was there, and
when he was in Egypt, and in his return to Canaan.

After * Genesis 19 1 (...) de (...) 15 Be^eshith. R^^^^a Parash. f. 56. col. 1.
(...)
Lot parted from him, he was not only indulged in wicked Sodom, but preferred
by them to be Chief Justice in the City, as their Rabbis, and other Authors,
and the Original it self in this Signification of the Words used in this
Chapter, do testify.

Abraham was also indulged by the King of Gerar, Genesis 20.11.
tho he thought surely the fear of God is not in this place.

Isaac enjoyed his Freedom with a succeeding Abimelech, King of Gerar, who
says, We have not touched thee, Genesis 26.29, 23.
we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace.
Even Philistines indulged this Servant of God, and amongst them he built an
Altar, and worshipped his God without disturbance.

Jacob paid his Devotions at Bethel, and had his Liberty and Indulgence in
Labans House, from whose persuasion in Spiritual Matters, he much differed.

In his return from thence, in the Land of Canaan, Genesis 33.18, 19, 20.
he purchased a Field, and built an Altar, and was indulged by Hamor the
Hivite, Prince of the Country. He enjoyed the like Freedom at Bethel, Genesis 35.5.
and in Egypt, after he went down thither; both he and all his Family enjoyed
their Liberty in Spiritual Matters, and were not disturbed for many years.

Hereupon it may be observed, That this Indulgence was given by Kings, and
allowed to the Servants of God, even by Philistines; much more may the like be
expected from Protestants, to their Brethren.

The next Indulgence that we meet with in time the holy Story, was that given
by Pharaoh King of Egypt, to the Israelites,

The Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; Genesis 39.2, 4.
and the Egyptian his Master, not only gave him the Liberty of his Conscience,
but preferred him to be Overseer of his House, and his godly Disposition
appeared in his Carriage to his Mistress.

After he had interpretd Pharaohs Dream, tho he much differed in his persuasion
in Spiritual Matters from the Egyptians; yet the King seeing his Wisdom and
Spirit, made him ruler of the Land, Genesis 41.41, 42, 43. (...) Chaldees of
Onkeles and Knathan Hierosol. Targum.
and to ride in the second Chariot, and they cried before him, Bow the Knee.
The Hebrew word, for which Abrech signifies, Father of the tender King, or the
tender Father of the King, which was the highest Title and Honor whereof a
Subject was capable among them, and the highest trust that could be under the
King, was conferred on Joseph, tho he was a Nonconformist.

And the difference of Persuasion in Spiritual Matters, between the Hebrews and
the Egyptians, was such, That they would not eat together, as appears in the
Entertainment which Joseph made for his Brethren. When they set on bread for
him by hemself, Genesis 43.32.
and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians by themselves, because the
Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination to
the Egyptians.

The reason whereof (as Pererius notes) was because the Hebrews killed the
Cattle for their food and sacrifice, Coment. Pererii in Genesis 43.33.
and eat of them, which the Egyptians worshipped as their Gods; therefore the
persuasion of Joseph, and of his Father Jacob, and of his Brethren, was
sufficiently different from that of the Egyptians in Spiritual matters, yet
were they therein indulged by Pharaoh, and his Successors. And we read of no
disturbance of them in those matters until Moses required of Pharaoh an
Indulgence for them to go into the Wilderness to sacrifice to their God, which
the King denied, because God had hardened his heart, and purposed to manifest
his own power, and his mercy to his people, in delivering them from bondage;
and what was the issue of the denial of that Indulgence, is set forth by Moses
in his Story of it.

4. This may lead us to a consideration of what Indulgence was granted by Moses
to the Israelites themselves, being next in order of time.

It is agreed by all Authors, that Moses had Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction in
him, as his judgments in Spiritual Cases given by him do testify.

But in his judgments in Spiritual Cases, we find none against any ones freedom
of Conscience and Opinion, except in case of Idolatry, Breach of some positive
Law of God, or for Blasphemy.

And in that of Blasphemy in the case of the Israelitish Woman's Son whose
Father was an Egyptian, Moses would adjudg no punishment of him till first the
mind of the Lord might be showed, who commanded that he should be put to death.

Many Egyptians and Strangers came out of Egypt with the Israelites, but we
read of no Persecution of any of them for different Opinions, nor any punished
for any Spiritual matter, but in the cases before mentioned.

But it may be objected, That Moses was not a Sovereign King, and could not
Exercise that Jurisdiction as other Kings might in such cases, which perhaps
was the reason that such Dissenters were not punished.

To which is answered, That Moses was a Sovereign King, as Absolute as any
other Prince, and knew as much of the mind of God as ever any King did, which
was revealed to him; and accordingly he Exercised his Kingly Authority both in
this matter of Indulgence, and in all other matters.

That he was King, Deuteronomy. 33.5.
appears in the express terms of the Text, And he was King in Jeshurun.

So the Hebrew reads it, and the Chaldee, Syriac, (...) Yfue en Ysrael Roy.
Deuteronomy. 32.15. Impinguata est gens Judaica. Isa. 44.2.
and Persick Versions, for Jeshurun, do read Israel.

So do the Spaniards, And he was King in Israel.

The Germans agree herewith; and a little before in the Song of Moses, But
Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked. The Mauritanians read it, The Nation of the Jews
waxed fat, and upon that in, I said, the Greek Version has a Note for
Jeshurun, understand Israel.

The Old English Translation under Hen. 8. for Jeshurun, has Israel. Both
Christians and Jews agree that where it is said, He was King in Jeshurun, it is
the same thing as if it had been said, He was King in Israel.

The Hebrew Authors often call him King, Levis Gerson in Perushtera, f. 245.
col. 3. Aben Ezra Maimon. Tract. Beth Habentura, c. 6. Sect. 1.
as Moses our Master was King. And Moses was King. And the like Expressions
often occur in them.

Another calls him, Prince of Princes, and a King over Israel. Philo de vita
Mosis l. 2. c. 3. Jure regio populum Gubernavit. Nazianzen Orat. 6.


Oxtius says, That in Kingly right he governed the people.

Nazianzen affirms that he Exercised the Office of Legislator, of Judge, and of
King.

Seldom holds that he was in truth, Seldom de Synedr. l. 2. p. 62. Regem fuisse
Mosen revera, etc.
King or Prince of the Israelits according to Divine Institution.

But this may be censured of too much curiosity. I have the rather insisted
thereon, to show that he who was the meekest man upon earth, and highly
indulged Gods people, was a King; and it will become all Kings to imitate his
Pattern.

5. Upon the same Ground, I proceed to the Indulgence of Joshua, Moses
Successor, who was also Prince or King in Israel. He had the same authority as
Moses had, delegated to him from God, and consented to by the people, who
promise him, Josh. 1.16.
All that thou command us, we will do; and whithersoever thou sendest us, we
will go; according as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken
unto thee.

We do not find that he was severe against any Dissenters from his Opinion, but
in his admirable Expostulation with the people, he leaves it to them: If it
seem evil unto you this day to serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your Fathers
served that were on the other side of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in
whose land ye dwell. Then he makes and declares his own profession of Religion,
But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

He sought not to convince the people by severe Laws and punishments, but by
meek Exhortations and Admonishments, reasoning the matter with them:

If ye forsake the Lord, Josh. 24.20.
and serve strange Gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, Josh. 24.21, 22,
23, 24, 25.
and consume you after that he has done you good.

And the people said, Nay, but we will serve the Lord. And Joshua said, Ye are
witnesses against your selves that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him; and
they said, We are witnesses. Now therefore, said he, put away the strange Gods
which are among you, and incline your heart unto the Lord God of Israel.

So Joshua made a Covenant with the people, and set them a Statute and an
Ordinance in Shechem.

This way of meekness and Indulgence Joshua held the best way to persuade the
people to Conformity, to put away the strange Gods which were among them, and
to incline their heart unto the Lord God; and it is an excellent precedent to
be followed.

6. The next in order is to consider of the Indulgence which the Judges and
Kings gave to the people of Israel, whereof there is not much to be gathered,
more than what is before remembered in general, in the times of Moses and Joshua.

The times wherein there was no King in Israel, (that is, no Governor nor
Government) when every one did that which seemed right in his own eyes, relate
to Civil as well as Spiritual matters, and were rather times of Anarchy, than
of Indulgence.

But both the Judges, who were Monarchs, and a kind of Kings, and the Kings by
name, did generally indulge all Persons in matters Spiritual, except in cases
of Blasphemy, Idolatry, or breach of the known Law of God.

To write the Particulars of these times, would take up too much of ours; they
are obvious in the Holy Story, which every servant of God will take delight to
read.

And throughout all the passages of them, it will appear that they were
indulgent to different persuasions in matters of their Law, wherein (as to
Expositions, and some weighty points) there were many different opinions,
whereof there will be occasion to make some mention by and by, and that these
Dissenters were not punished.

It will likewise be manifest, that all Indulgence in matters of this nature
proceeded from the Judges and Kings, who by their Exercise thereof showed that
the Right of Indulgence was in them, though the Cases before mentioned were not
to be dispensed with, but by sinning against God, and transgressing the Law
which he had given unto his People, and which will not be done by granting an
Indulgence now desired.

7. Time will be wanting to insist on these, and I must omit many other
examples in the Word of Truth of Indulgence in Spiritual matters, and come to
that which may serve instead of all others: the unerring great Examplar, our
Lord Jesus, whose infinite wonderful indulgence and mercy to his unworthy
Creatures, gives a sharp rebuke to all persecuting earthly powers, and fully
instructs them to give indulgence to those over whom he has set them.

Our blessed Redeemer God Omnipotent, knew the inclinations and opinions of all
men's hearts and ways, who were just and righteous, who were wicked and ungodly,
who were sincere, and who were hypocrites; who were faithful, and who
unbelievers.

Yet was he graciously pleased to make no distinction, 1 Timothy 2.6. Acts. 10.43.
John 3.15.
but indulged all, both Jew and Gentile, just and unjust, righteous and sinful;
he gave himself a Ransom for all, that whosoever believes in him shall have
remission of Sins, shall not perish but have everlasting Life.

Our Jesus who inhabiteth Eternity, lives for ever, and can do whatsoever
pleases him, was pleased in his great humility and mercy to Mankind, to come
down from Heaven upon the Earth, and to take our vile Nature upon him.

How unfit is it for sinful Dust and Ashes, whose Breath is in their Nostrils,
who are but as of yesterday, to ascend the Throne of God, to take his Authority
on them, to sit in Judgment upon the Hearts and Consciences of Men?

The Lord of Life and Glory humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even
the death of the Cross, that he might thereby purchase his Enemies eternal Life.

How unanswerable to this, is it for Powers made of Dirt, and without
Foundations, to condemn their Friends to death, that will not be of the same
judgment with these Rulers?

The searcher of Hearts allows a freedom to all men's Hearts and Consciences to
serve him in such ways as they think most agreeable to his Divine Will.

How unfit it is for any earthly Govornours to attempt an alteration of the
frame of the hearts of men, to compel them to serve God in such ways as are
most agreeable to the will of the Governors, and contrary to the Hearts and
Consciences of those whose good only is concerned.

Christ exhorts all to Kindness and Indulgence, Luke 4.18.
and affirms, That he was sent to heal the broken hearted. How unfit it is for
his Vicegerents to wound yet more the broken hearted! He was sent to preach
deliverance to the Captives; How contrary is it, to proclaim imprisonment or
banishment to those whom Christ has made free?

He was sent to recover sight to the Blind; those who are sent by him, have no
Commission to put out the Eyes of those that see, to torment and punish their
Brethren, because they see not with their Rulers Eyes.

Christ was sent to set at liberty them that are bruised; and surely he has
not sent any of his Officers to bruise his Members, and to take away their
liberty or lives from them.

The Son of God says, If the Son make you free, ye shall be free indeed. How
contrary is it for those in Power to impose upon the Consciences of them under
Authority, whereby they take away that freedom which the Son, has given to all
his Servants?

He says, Ye shall be free. But these imposers say, Ye shall not be free.

Proud Flesh contradicts the Spirit; Man, God; the Creature, his Creator and
Redeemer.

8. The Holy Disciples of our Lord Christ, inspired and instructed by him,
followed the Example of their Master, in giving Indulgence to others, though
differing in some Opinions.

When the dissension arose among the Brethren, touching Circumcision, and the
Apostles and Elders came together to consider of it, Acts 15.
Peter relates to them, God made choice amongst us, that the Gentiles by my
mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. And God which knows
the heart, bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto
us, and put no difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by Faith.
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples,
which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear? But we believe, that
through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even, as they.

Then James declares his Sentence, That we trouble not them, who from among the
Gentiles are turned to God: Then he advises, and accordingly it was agreed by
the whole Church, to send them Messengers, and to write Letters by them.

Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us, have troubled
you with words, subverting your Souls, saying, You must be circumcised, and
keep the Law, to whom we gave no such Commandment: It seemed good to us, to
send chosen men to you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul.

For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden than these necessary things, That ye abstain from meats offered to
Idols, and from Blood, and from things Strangled, and from Fornication; from
which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye well.

Here is a very high Example of Indulgence, warranted by the authority and
judgment of the Apostles and Elders, and of the whole Church, and of the Holy
Ghost likewise, to whom it seemed good not to lay burdens upon the Servants of
Christ, but in necessary things; and it would be found more agreeable to the
mind of the Holy Ghost to give this Indulgence, than to impose unnecessary or
Ceremonious burdens upon our Brethren.

The Holy Apostle Paul declares this Doctrine from the Holy Spirit: One
believes that he may eat all things; another who is weak, eats Herbs: Then he
exhorts to this Indulgence.

Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats. One man esteems one day above another,
another esteems every day alike: let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind.

But, why do thou judge thy Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy
Brother? We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Let us not judge
one another any more, but judge this rather, That no man put a stumbling Block,
or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers way. And he that doubts, is damned if
he eat, because he eats not of Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

We then that are strong, ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, Romans 15.
and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please our Neighbor for his
good to Edification, which is not done by persecuting men's Neighbors for their
Nonconformity.

The same Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 8.12.
When ye sin so against the Brethren, and wound their weak Consciences, ye sin
against Christ.

And surely they do wound Men's weak Consciences, who would force them to a
Conformity.

He says in another place, 1 Cor. 10.29.
Why is my Liberty judged of another Conscience? that is, it ought not to be
so judged, every one ought to have his Liberty, Jer. 34.15.
as the Prophet commends it, Ye had done right in proclaiming Liberty, every
man to his Neighbor.

St. 2 Cor. 3.17
Paul asserteth, That where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty; it
follows, that where a just Liberty is denied, that is by another Spirit.

He exhorts, Ephesians. 4.32.
Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted; which will scarce be thought of
those, who deny a just Indulgence. And let each esteem others better than
themselves; Phil. 2.3.
which they do not, who persecute others, because they are not.

Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 4.26. and 5.13.
is free; and we are exhorted to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free; we have been called unto Liberty.

Very many Admonitions and Expressions of the like Nature of the Disciples of
Christ, are obvious in the Holy Scripture; by which the Example of those holy
and inspired Servants of Christ is left unto us; not only warranting, but in
effect, injoining a just Freedom and Indulgence to be given to our
Fellow Christians.

Upon the whole matter it seems to me (with Submission to better Judgment) very
evident,

That an Indulgence in matters Spiritual, is fit to be granted from the grounds
of Polity and Piety.

To demonstrate which, I have only in the general collected such Grounds as I
met with, and time allowed; whereby it seems to me fit that such Indulgence be
granted.

That the Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction is in Kings and Princes; and in
England, in our Kings.

That as a consequence thereof, the right of granting Indulgence in Spiritual
Matters, is in his present Majesty.

Then, I have offered some Answers to Objections against this Right.

Lastly, I have made some few Observations upon Examples, in the holy Story, of
Persecution, and of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters. From all which, I may
presume to say, That to me (under Correction) it seems manifest, that our King
has this right of Indulgence; and that as it is of Right in our King, so it is
one of the highest and clearest, and most beautiful Flowers of his Crown.

And that, if this right were not in the King, he would thereby be much
disabled from performing his Office as King, in preventing Mischiefs and great
Inconveniences to the Public, in preserving the Trade, Wealth, Strength, and
Peace of his Kingdoms, in providing for his Own, and his Subjects Security; and
in doing that, which will much tend to the Honor of God, to the Happiness and
Welfare of Himself and all his People, and to the general good of Christendom.

The End.

