A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Morning-Exercise At CRIPPLE-GATE: OR, Several more Cases
of Conscience Practically Resolved by sundry Ministers.

The Second Edition.

Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and
Godly sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12.

Conscientia -- est nescio quid divinum and nunquam perit, officium nostrum
nobis semper ad memoriam revocat. Doroth. Bibl. Pat. T. 4. p. 769.

Quaerimus, quomodo animus semper aequalis, secundoque cursu eat, and propitius
sibi sit, and sua laetus adspiciat: and hoc gaudium non interrumpat, sed
placido statu maneat, nec attollens se unquam, nec deprimens. Seneca de Tranq.
anim. p. 678.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Sign of the Atlas in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. MDCLXXVI.

To that part of Christ's Flock to which I am more specially related, Grace,
Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
Beloved Christians,
AS I called in a Contribution of Help for the composing of a Legacy for
others, before my Civil Death; so I now tender you A Supplement to that
Exercise, for your better liveliness of Spiritual Life. I shall say nothing to
commend these Sermons to you; my Brethren are all herein unanimous, to seek the
Church's Profit, not their own Applause; only this I must say, to prevent
mistake, viz. If any curious Reader shall find matter of Exception (besides the
Errors of Printing, which I confess are too many) the blame must be Personal,
because this joynt-work is no otherwise Social, than as single Pearls strung
together make one Neck-lace. I easily grant here is not yet a stating of all
important Cases, yet be this known to you, whoever shall follow these
Directions, shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the work of the Lord, nor
miss of an abundant entrance into his Everlasting Kingdom. Live up to what you
have attained, and you may be confident that what is further wanting, God will,
as you want it, supply it. Be assured of this, that you will get more skill and
strength for all necessary Graces and Duties by an humble, serious, constant
Course of Godliness, than you possibly can do by captious Criticismes, and
wrangling Contentions about lesser things, in which too many spend their Lives.
I herein appeal to your Consciences, should not these Sermons answer
expectation, but according to your judgment, either the Cases are ill chose, or
not well stated; in that the Matter is either defective or redundant, the
Language too curious or too careless, the Directions too common or too
singular: I appeal from your Passions to your Consciences, and downright
charge you in the Name of my Master, who must be your Judge, that you read with
other Spectacles. These are not calculated to humor you, but to better you.
These are not Duties to be cavil'd at, but to be practiced. O that you may be
effectually persuaded, 1. That your Love to God 2. That your Love to Man must
be universal, and spiritual, 3. That your Love to the World must truckle under
both, be subservient to both, and never be otherwise; for if the World master
you, 'twill ^^in you. Oh that your awakened 4. To catch at Salvation while it
is 5. What Knowledge is necessary to Salvation, yet can you satisfy your
Consciences, without diligent Endeavors to proportion your Knowledge to the
Means you enjoy? And to bring forth Fruits every day, as those that in some 6.
What it is to be in the Spirit on the Lord's Day; and 7. Preached, and 8. Read,
may be so impressed upon Heart and Life, that it may be an infallible Evidence
you are taught of God; And when through weakness of the Flesh your Duties may
prove 9. Learn to refresh your selves with the Songs of Zion. But would you
have more particular Directions? They are before you. 10. In the daily
Improvement of 11. How to propagate Religion to Posterity, by riveting Truth
upon your own Hearts, and teaching it to 12. Excuse not your selves upon any
account whatsoever from frequent and hungry feeding upon stronger Meat. Be you
as willing to seal to the Conditions of the Covenant, as you are desirous God
should seal to the Promises of it. But who is sufficient for these things? Pour
out your Hearts therefore, and 13. Let extraordinary 14. Your secret Prayer
speak secret Communion 15. Let your Family prayer bring down Blessings upon
your Family, that you be neither Holy nor Happy alone, but that when your
Family-relations shall cease, they may bless God to Eternity that ever there
were such Relations between you. Now therefore, 16. Let Husbands and Wives be
the liveliest Emblems in the World of 17. Let Parents and Children be the
Evidences and Pledges of God's special presence with this, and the next 18. Let
Masters and Servants adorn the Gospel by their exemplary Faithfulness to their
Heavenly Master. Thus doing, 19. Your Thoughts will be cured, and in them you will
enjoy God. 20. Your Tongues will in some sense be God's glory as well as yours.
But 21. You must cautiously avoid the catching Canker of Detraction: 22. So you
shall by your Conversations convince the World, there is an Excellency in
Christianity. And that all this may be as well acceptable 23. Do all in the
Name of Christ; and 24. He Will steer you safe between Presumption and Despair,
those Rocks upon one of which most perish. Hereby also, 25. You Will make your
Port with the chearing Joys of an 26. And keep above all Vexing Discontents
with your 27. And what Afflictions God's wise Love shall Roman Courage. 28. And
though reproachful Reproofs may bear hard upon you, you will not 29. You cannot but
be restless till it be removed. 30. Then you 31. Grace thus in Exercise,

June 19. 1674. Your worthless Servant, Samuel Annesley.

The CONTENTS.
Dr. Annesley
Sermon. 1 HOw may we attain to love God with all our hearts, souls, and minds?
Mat. 22.37, 38. Mr. Milward
Sermon. 2 How ought we to love our Neighbor as our selves? Mat. 22.39. Mr. Gale
Sermon. 3 Wherein the love of the world is inconsistent with the love of God? 1 John 2.15. Mr. Jenkyn
Sermon. 4 How may we improve the present season of grace? 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. Mr. Veal
Sermon. 5 What spiritual knowledge they ought to seek for, that desire to be
saved. etc. Isa. 27.11. Mr. Case
Sermon. 6 How ought the Sabbath to be sanctified? Isa. 58.13, 14. Mr. Senior
Sermon. 7 How may we hear the Word with profit? James 1.21. Mr. Watson
Sermon. 8 How may we read the Scriptures with most spiritual profit? Deuteronomy.
17.19. Mr. Wells
Sermon. 9 How may we make melody in our hearts with singing of Psalms? Ephesians.
5.19. Dr. Manton
Sermon. 10 How ought we to improve our Baptism? Acts 2.38. Mr. Lie
Sermon. 11 By what spiritual rules may catechizing be best managed? Prove. 22.6.
Mr. Wadsworth
Sermon. 12 How may it appear to be every Christian's indispensable duty to
partake of the Lord's Supper? 1 Cor. 11.24. Mr. Barker
Sermon. 13 A Religious fast. Mark 2.20. Mr. Lee
Sermon. 14 How to manage secret Prayer, that it may be prevalent with God to the
comfort, and satisfaction of our Souls. Mat. 6.6. Mr. Doolitle
Sermon. 15 How may the Duty of Family Prayer be best managed? Josh. 24.15. Mr.
Steel
Sermon. 16 What are the Duties of Husbands, and Wives toward each other? Ephesians.
5.33. Mr. Adams
Sermon. 17 What are the Duties of Parents, and Children, Coloss. 3.20, 21. Mr.
Janeway
Sermon. 18 What are the Duties of Masters and Servants? Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Mr. S. C.
Sermon. 19 The sinfulness and cure of thoughts. Genesis 6.5. Mr. West
Sermon. 20 How must we govern our tongues? Ephesians. 4.29. Mr. Poole
Sermon. 21 How may detraction be best prevented, or cured? Psalm. 15.3. Mr. Baxter
Sermon. 22 What is that light, which must shine before men in the works of
Christ's Disciples? Matthew. 5.16. Dr. Wilkinson
Sermon. 23 How must we do all in the Name of Christ? Col. 3.17. Mr. Cole
Sermon. 24 How may we steer an even course between Presumption, and Despair?
Luke 3.5, 6. Mr. Fowler
Sermon. 25 How Christians may get such a faith, as may not only be saving at
last, but comfortable and joyful at the present. 2 Pet. 1.8. Dr. Jacomb
Sermon. 26 How Christians may learn in every state to be content. Phil. 4.11.
Dr. G.
Sermon. 27 How we may so bear afflictions, as neither to despise them, nor faint
under them. Heb. 12.5. Dr. Owen
Sermon. 28 How may we bring our Hearts to receive Reproofs? Psalm. 141.5. Mr. T.
Vincent
Sermon. 29 Wherein does appear the blessedness of forgiveness, and how it may be
attained? Psalm. 32.1. Mr. Silvester
Sermon. 30 How may we overcome the inordinate love of Life, and fear of Death?
Acts 20.24. Mr. Hook
Sermon. 31 What gifts of Grace are chiefly to be exercised in order to an actual
preparation for the coming of Christ by Death, and Judgment. Mat. 25.10.
Quest. How may we attain to love God with all our Hearts, Souls, and Minds?
Sermon. I.
Matthew. 22.37, 38. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first
and great Commandment.


IT is fit this Exercise should begin with a general Introduction, that may
indifferently serve every Sermon that shall be Preached. I should be much
mistaken, and so would you too, should we think this Text unsuitable: let us
therefore, not only in the fear, but also in the love of God, address our
selves to the management of it.

This Command you have in Deuteronomy. 6.5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. This Command is not
found in Exodus, nor in Leviticus, but only in Deuteronomy, i. e. the second
Law of Moses, which as some express it, bore a Type of the second Law, viz. the
Evangelical, to which this Command is proper; for the Old Law was a Law of fear
tending to bondage, and therefore Moses mentions the incussion of terror in the
giving of it, which when he has dispatched, he begins the following Chapter
with Love, noting, that the Holy Ghost will cause the Law of Love, to succeed
the Law of Fear. And it is observable that the Jews read this place with the
highest observation: and their Scribes write the first and last words of the
Preface to it with greater Letters than ordinary, to amplify the sense, and to
note that this is the beginning and the end of the Divine Law; and they read
this Scripture morning and evening with great Jansen. Harmon. The Occasion
Religion.

The occasion of Christ's pressing this command upon them at this time was
this; when the Pharisees heard how he had baffled the Sadduces, and stopped
their mouths, with so proper and fit an answer, that they had no more to say,
they consult how they may show their acumen and sharpness of wit, to diminish
Christ's credit concerning his Doctrine, and Skill in Scripture; and therefore
they choose out one of their most accomplished Interpreters of the Law,
captiously to propose an excellent question. They call him Master, whose
Disciples they will not be: they enquire after the Great Commandment, who will
not duly observe the least: they thought Christ could not return such an
answer, but that they might very plausibly except against it. Cartw. Harm.
Auth. imperfect. op.
If Christ should have named any one command to be the greatest, their
exception was ready, why not another as great as that? but Christ's wisdom
shames their subtilty; Christ does not call any command Great, with the
lessening of the rest; but he repeats the sum of the whole Law, and
distinguishes it into two Great Commands, according to the subordination of
their Objects. Thou shall love, etc. Though the excellency of the subject calls
for the enlargement of your hearts, yet the copiousness of it requires the
contracting of my discourse. To save time therefore, let me open my Text, and
Case both together. The Case is this.

The Case.
What is it to love God with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all
the mind; and how may we be able to do it? In short, we must love God, as near
as it is possible, infinitely.

For directions in this Case, I shall follow this method, 1. Show you, what it
is to love God with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the
mind. 2. I shall endeavor to demonstrate, that it is our unquestionable, and
indispensable duty so to love God. 3. I shall acquaint you what Abilities are
requisite for the well-discharging of this duty, and how to attain them. 4. I
shall give you directions how to improve and augment all the abilities we can
get, that we may have a growing love to God. 5. I shall close with the best
perswasives I can think of, that you would be graciously ambitious of such
qualifications, and vigorously diligent in such duties.


1. What is it to love God with all the heart, soul, and mind? We must not be
too curious in distinguishing these words: the same thing is meant, when the
words are used singly; as 1 King. 14.8.
David is said to follow God with all his heart: and doubly; 2 King. 23.3.
Josiah made his people (as well as himself) to covenant to walk after the Lord
with all their heart, and all their soul: and where three words are used; as
Deuteronomy. 6 5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind: and when four words are used; as Mark 12.30.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.

Love to God must go through, and possess our whole nature and all the powers
of it. The mind must think of God: the will must delight in God; in short,
Bucer.
our whole strength must be employed to please him. We must love nothing more
than God, nothing equal with God; we must love God above all, and that for
himself; but all other things in God, and for God. We must be willing to lose
all; yea, life it self, rather than to admit any thing contrary to the love of
God. Gerhard Harm.
All these expressions denote the intensness of our affections, the
unexpressibleness of our obligation, and the contemptibleness of every thing
that shall challenge a share in our love. All these expressions admonish us of
our infirmity, provoke us to humility, and set us a longing after a better
life. It Is a notable expression of one Auth. impers. operis.
The love of the heart is not understood, but felt; the love of the soul is not
felt, but understood; because the love of the soul is its judgment: He that
loves God as he is here commanded, believes that all good is in God, and that
God is all that is good; and that without God there is no good: he believes
that God is All Power, and Wisdom; and that without God there is neither Power,
nor Wisdom, etc.

But notwithstanding all that has been spoken, no doubt but there is a
singular emphasis in the words; and the Holy Ghost intends a more full
declaration of the manner of our love, by these several expressions. Though to
be over-critical in the distinguishing of these words, will rather intricate,
than explicate this great command; yet to follow a plain Scriptural
interpretation will give light into the duty.

Let Us enquire therefore, 1. What it is to love. 2. What it is to love God. 3.
What it is to love God in that manner here expressed.

1. What is love? Love is an affection of union, whereby we desire, What love
is.
or enjoy perpetual union with the thing loved Mar. L.


It is not a carnal love I am now to speak of; the Philosopher could observe,
that there can be no true love among wicked men.

It is not a natural love, for that may as well be brutish, as rational; and
divine love is transcendently rational.

It is not a (merely) moral love, for that consists in a mean, but divine love
is always in an extreme.

Divine love is a compound of all the former, but it adds infinitely more to
them, than it borrows of them. Divine love is supernaturally natural; it turns
Moral virtues into Spiritual graces. It engages men to attempt as much for the
glorifying of God, as all the creatures besides, from the highest Angel to the
most insensible Stone.

2. What it is love to God? Methinks a lax description best suits my design.
This Divine love, it is the unspeakable enlargement of the heart toward God:
What it is to love God.
it is the ecstasy and ravishment of the heart in God; it is the Soul's losing
its self in God: it is the continual working of the heart toward God: every
faculty of the Soul is actually engaged: The Mind is musing and plodding how to
please God, and enjoy him; the Will is graciously obstinate, the policy of hell
cannot charm it off it is object; the Affections are all Passions in their eager
motions toward God; the Conscience is a busie-body necessitating the whole man
to a jealous watch. I said this love it is the enlargement of the heart toward
God; when the love of God is shed abroad in the heart, it is as the breaking of
a Ball of lightning, it sets all on a flame immediately. It is the unspeakable
enlargement of the heart toward God; the highest Rhetoric is too flat to
express it, as is obvious in that Song of Songs, that Song of loves. I have no
way to set this out unto you, but by words, the plainest and most intelligible
expressions I can give you, shall be by several similitudes, which I shall
pursue till they leave me to admiration: I shall borrow Metaphors from things
without life, from Plants, from sensitive Creatures, from Man.

1. The Soul's love to God may be a little shadowed forth, Metaphors to
illustrate what it is to love God.
by the love of the Iron to the Loadstone, which arises from a hidden quality
(though to say so, is but the hiding of our ignorance) the motion of the Iron
toward the Loadstone is slow while at a distance; but quick, when near: and
when it but touches it, it clings so fast, that unless forced, 'twill never
part; and when it is parted, 'twill to the farthest part of the World retain
the virtue of its touch: so the soul while at a distance from God it moves
slowly, but as the Father draws, it runs; and when once it comes to be
graciously united, the Apostle asks Romans 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of God? (not only who shall hinder us from
partaking of Gods love, but who can take us off from our loving of God?) Christ
gives the answer John 10.28.29.
, their union with God, their enjoyment of God is inseparable; and though they
may (as sometimes they will in their imperfect state) have some warping on
their parts, and some withdrawing on God's, yet their love to God, (in the
lowest ebb) tremblingly hankers after him, the soul cannot forget its alone
resting place Psalm. 116.7.


2. Our Love to God is like the love of the Flower of the Sun to the Sun. It
springs of a very little seed: it is not only our Faith but our Love, that is
at first like a grain of mustard seed; it grows the fastest of any Flower
whatsoever: It is not only Faith, but Love that grows exceedingly 2 These. 1.3.
. It always turns and bows it self toward the Sun: our Love to God is always
bowing, and admiring; always turning to, and following after God. It opens and
shuts with the Suns rising and setting: our Love (when it is what it should be)
opens it self to God, and closes it self against all other Objects. It brings
forth seed enough for abundance of other Flowers; love to God is the most
fruitful Grace, that when it blossoms and buds, it fills the face of the World
with fruit Isa. 27.6.


3. Our Love to God is like the love of the Turtle to her Mate; God's People
are his Turtle Psalm. 74.19.
. I grant, they most properly resemble Brotherly Love, but why not our Love to
God? they never associate with other Birds; the loving soul keeps fellowship
with God, and (out of choice) with him only, and those that bear his Image. The
Turtle never sings and flies abroad for recreation as other birds, but they
have a peculiar note for each other; the soul that loves God, flutters not
about for worldly vanities; no recreation so sweet as Communion with God; the
Soul's converse with God is peculiar. When one dies, the other droops till it
dies, so that they do (as it were) live and dye in the Embraces of each other:
so the soul that loves God, his loving kindness is better than life Psalm. 63.3.
, and there is nothing makes a Saint more impatient of living, than that he
cannot while he lives have a full Enjoyment of God.

4. Our Love to God should be like (though exceed) Jacobs love to Benjamin Genesis
42.38.
. He Will starve rather than part with Benjamin; and when hunger forced him from
him, and he was like to be by a wile kept from him, Judah offers to purchase
his liberty with his own, because his Fathers life was bound up in the Lads
life Genesis 44.30.
; so the Soul that loves God is not able to bear the thoughts of parting with
him, his life is bound up in enjoying the presence of God. I have been too
long, but oh that I could affect your Hearts as well as inform your Judgments,
What it is to love God with the heart.
what it is to love God.

Now then let us reassume the Enquiry; what it is to love the Lord our God with
all our Heart? some referr this to the thoughts A^g.
, some to the vegetative Soul Creg. Nys.
, some to the Understanding that it may be free from error Anselm.
, others, q.d. Lay up all these things in your hearts Origin.
: but the other words will take in most of these; and therefore according to
Scripture we must understand the Will and Affections, and so the word is taken
Josh. 22.5. Moses the servant of the Lord charged you to love the Lord your God
-- with all your heart. As out of the heart proceeds life, so from the Will
proceeds all Operations, the Will ought to be carried toward God with it is
whole force, all the Affections of a pure and holy heart are directed to the
only Love of God Gerhard. Harm. c. 156.
. Love rises from the Will; now there is a twofold Act of the Elici us and in
peratus.
Will, that which is immediately drawn forth of the Will it self, the Will own
Act, and such an Act the Will exerts in loving God; and then there is the
commanded Act of the Will, which is the Act of some other power moved to that
Act by the Will; where the will is filled with the love of God, it moves the
understanding to meditate of God whom we love, and to enquire after the
excellency of the Object loved.

We must not love God only with the heart, but with the whole heart; What it
is to love God with the whole heart.
pray mark this, perfect Hatred and perfect Love knows no such thing as the
world calls Judicium rerum non c^gnoscit. Aut. imper. operis.
Prudence, if you perfectly hate any one, all things about him displease you;
whatever he says or does, though it be never so good, it seems to you to be
evil; so if you perfectly love any one, all things about him please you. Some
expound this totality by this distinction, we are to love God with the whole
heart Positively and Negatively: Positively, where all Powers of the will are
set to love God, and this we cannot perfectly do while we are travelers, till
we come to our heavenly Country; but Negatively, thou shall so love God, that
nothing contrary to the love of God shall be entertained in thy heart; and this
we may attain to a pretty tolerable perfection of in this life Cajetan.
.

The whole heart is opposed either to a divided and dispersed heart; or to a
remiss and a sluggish heart: God does as much abominate a partnership in our
love, as a husband or wife abhor any such thing in their Conjugal Relation, we
must love nothing but God, or that which may please God: He that loves God with
his heart, and not with his whole heart, loves something else, and not God.

As the whole heart is opposed to a remiss and sluggish heart, the meaning is
this, the care of our heart should be set upon nothing so much, as upon the
loving and pleasing of God; we must prefer God alone before all other Objects
of our love, and there must be an ardency of affection: whatever we do, it
must be for his sake, and according to his will Chemnit. Harm. c. 105. etc.
.

2. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul. I forbear to mention
the different conjectures of those that try the acuteness of their parts to
produce some peculiar Interpretation which others have not. By comparing
Scripture with Scripture, the sensitive life, or the sensitive Appetite is here
meant. Thus Genesis 34.3. Deuteronomy. 12.20.
, his soul clave unto Dinah, and he loved the Damsel; again, thy thy sensual a
fections.
soul longs to eat flesh. And because the Soul is in many places taken for
Life, as Exodus 4.19. all the men are dead that sought thy life, Heb. thy soul;
so Exodus 21.23. Thou shall give life for life, Heb. soul for soul; and so we
may take it here intensively for the sensitive Appetite, and extensively for
the Life. The soul is here taken for the Animal life, which comprehends both
the Vegetative and Sensitive part. To love God with the soul is to subject all
those works that pertain to an Animal life, unto the love of God. Plainly and
in short, it is not enough to love God in our Will, but we must not admit any
thing contrary to the Love of God in our sensual delights. Whatsoever
sensualists do for the gratifying of their lusts and desires, let those things
be drained from the dregs of sin, and consecrate them all unto God. Whatever
use wicked men make of their souls, in a way of hatred of God, we must make the
contrary use in a way of loving of God. And then,

Thou must love God with all thy Soul; What it is to love God with all the soul.
we must be ready to lay down our lives for God Origin.
: if any one should be asked what in all the world was most dear unto him, he
would answer his life; for life-sake tender Mothers have cast off the sense of
Nature, and fed upon their own children. It is Life that affords us being,
sense, motion, understanding, riches, dominions. If a man had the Empire of the
World, he could enjoy it no longer than he has his soul in his body, when that
is gone, he presently becomes a horrid Carcass, or rather a loathsome dunghill.
Now then if a man love his Life so much, why should he not love God more, by
whom he lives, and from whom he expects greater things than this Life? God is
the soul of our soul, and the life of our life, he is nearer to us than our
very souls Acts 17.28.
; in him we live, and move, and have our being. He that does but indifferently
weigh these things, will acknowledge that it is no rashness to call that man a
Monster that loves not God; how then can we think of it without grief, that the
whole world is full of these Monsters; almost all men prefer their Money, or
Pleasures, or their Honors, or their lusts before God. So often as you willingly
break any Law of God to raise your Credit or Estate, you prefer the dirt and
dust of the world before God: Alas! what use does a wicked man make of his
soul, but to serve his body? whereas both soul and body should be wholly taken
up with, not only the service, but the love of God. Then may you be said to
love God with all your souls, when your whole Life is filled with the love of
God, when your worldly business truckles under the love of God; the love of the
dearest Relations should be but hatred, when compared with your love to God.
When you eat and drink to the glory of God, sleep no more than may make you
serviceable unto God; when your solitary musings are about the engaging your
souls to God, when your social Conference is about the things of God; when all
acts of Worship endear God to you; when all your Duties bring you nearer to
God; when the love of God is the sweetness of your Mercies, and your Cordial
under Afflictions, when you can love God under amazing Providence, as well as
under refreshing Deliverances; then you may be said to love God with all your
Souls.

What it is to love God with the mind.
3. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Mind; though Anselm take this
for the Memory, that we should remember nothing whereby we are hindered in our
thinking of God: yet generally this is taken for the understanding, and so the
Evangelist Mark expressly interprets it, when he renders this Command in these
words Mark 12 33. (...).
with all thy understanding; to love God with our Minds, is to have the
understanding moved and commanded by the love of God, to assent unto those
things that are to be believed, and to admit nothing into the understanding
which is contrary to the love of God Cajetan.
Origin. nihil cogitantes, vel proferentes nisi ea que Dei sunt.
. The Mind should let nothing go in or out, but what pays tribute of love to
God; there is one interprets the word by the Etymology of the word Mind from
Measuring Men's dicitur a metiendo, etc. Avendan.
. The Mind must be so full of love to God, that love must measure all our works
1 Cor. 10, 31.
. When we eat, we should think how hateful it is to God that we should indulge
our Palate, and thence shun Gluttony: when we drink, we should think how
abominable Drunkenness is in the sight of God, and thence drink temperately
Romans 14.8.
: so that whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we dye, we dye
unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or dye we are the Lords; our Life and
our Death must be measured by our Love to God.

We must love God with all our Mind; What it is to love God with all our mind.
we must always converse with God in our Minds, and thoughts, our thoughts
must kindle our affections of love. Love to God makes the hardest Commands
easy, while our thoughts are immersed in love to God, love to Enemies wlll be
an easy Command; the keeping under of our Bodies by Mortification will be an
easy work; Persecution for Righteousness will be a welcome Trial; love will
change Death it self into Life.

There Is another word added by Mark, which indeed is in Deuteronomy. 6.5. whence this
is taken, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Strength; now because
this word does not express any other species or power of the Soul, but only
notes the highest and most intense degree of Love that flows from all the
Faculties of the Soul, I will close this Enquiry with a Word of this. We are to
love God with all the Powers of our Soul, with all the members of our Bodies.
Our understandings, wills, inward and outward Senses, appetite, speech,
whatever we have, whatever we are, must be all directed into the Love of God,
and into Obedience flowing from Love, You commonly hear that of Bernard, the
cause of loving God is God himself, and the only measure is to love him without
measure. We must love God strongly, because with all our strength: our love to
God must get above Interruptions; no threatenings, calamities or discommodities
whatsoever, must pull us away from God, but that all the Powers of Soul and
Body must be taken up into his service; that our Eyes beholding the wonderful
works of God, the Sun, Moon and Stars, the clear evidences of his Divinity, we
may be in love with him: that our Ears piously harkening to his Instructions,
may be in love with him: that our Mouth may love to praise him; our Hands to
act for him: that our Feet may be swift to run the way of his Commandments;
that our Affections may be withdrawn from Earthly things and delivered over to
the love of God: that whatever is within us, it may be bound over to the
service of God Idomne Deo obsequio mancip^t^e, Chem. etc.
. He that thus loves God, need not trouble himself how to order and dispose the
several words here used; his Heart, Soul, Mind, Will; whatever he is, has,
knows, understands, obtains, is all due to God: neither is there any thing in
the whole world to be valued before God; and thus I have given you a lame
account, what it is to love God, etc.

The Third thing I undertook was, demonstratively to prove, that it is our
indispensible Duty thus to love God. It is our indispensible duty thus to love
God.
To love God is our great Natural duty. Man would more Naturally love God than
himself, were it not for Sin. Neither Angels nor Men were at first commanded to
love God; Nature wanted no spur to this Duty. The Law of Love was implanted in
Nature. Thou have made me, O Lord, (says Aug.) and my heart is unquiet till it
come to thee. O my heart (says he) every Creature expells thee from them, and
that not without shame, that thou may go to God: they do as it were say, O
miserable wretch why do thou adhere to me, I am not the good which thou
requirest. O my Soul, why do thou go thirsting among the Creatures to beg
some drops that will rather provoke than quench thy thirst? why do thou leave
that everlasting Fountain, where thou may be perfectly satisfied? What can
thou desire that is not fully and perfectly to be had in God Stella de amore
^ei.
.

I shall at present urge no other Demonstration, than Christ's Reason in the
following verse; This is the first and the great Commandment: This is the great
Command.
not that any Command of God is small; the Commands in Scripture are like the
Stars in the Firmament, which though to ignorant Persons they are but like
twinkling Candles, yet are greater than the whole Earth: so these Commands that
careless persons overlook as inconsiderable, are such as without respect unto
them there is no salvation. I grant there is a difference in the Commands, e.
g. Deuteronomy. 21.12. and 5.7.
The Command about paring the Nayls is of lesser moment than that of having no
other God; nay in the same kind Christ threatens the Scribes and Pharisees for
their Hypocrisy Mat. 23.23.
, that they were so exact in tything their Gardens, and so remiss in looking to
their Hearts: but among the Commands and the diversity of them, Christ tells us
this is the greatest. The Jews some of them counted the Command about Sacrifice
to be the greatest, as is hinted in the Scribe's saying Mark 12.33.
; this Command of loving God is more than all whole Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices; others counted that of Circumcision to be the the greatest; others
that of the Sabbath Engl. Annot.
. Origin observes, it is well that Christ decides the controversy; though the
truth is, he that willingly breaks the least Commandment, will not stick to
break the greatest. While only one sin makes us to forbear another (for men's
lusts cross one another) when occasion serves that sin will be ventured upon
that is now forborne. But this upon a manifold account is, The great Command.

Ratione obj^cti.
1. In respect of the Object, it is God, the chiefest Being, the first and
chiefest Good; What am I, Lord, (says Augustine) that thou command me to
love thee, and threatnest me with misery if I do not love thee. This is no
small aggravation of the Devil's torments, that he cannot love God. God may
require many things of us, but he requires nothing like this of our Love,
because this is the only thing wherein we can answer God Et vicem licet non ex
aequo reddere.
, in other things we cannot, or we may not render God like for like. God
created us, and gave us our Being, but we can do nothing like this for God; God
preserves us in safety, and daily confers innumerable Benefits upon us; God
delivers from innumerable dangers both of Soul and Body: there is none of all
this to be done for God; God is infinitely above all such Returns; and there
are other things wherein we may not render God like for like. If God be angry
with us, we may not be angry with him: if he reprove us, we must not quarrel
with him: if God judge us, we must not censure him: But now God loves us, and
through Grace we are able to love him again; and he loves us, and God commands
us to love him again. It Is true, there is no equality between God's loving of
us, and our loving of God. God's Love does infinitely overcome ours Raymundus.
: but yet our love to God speaks Interest and Union, the thing loved gives the
name to the love: Love is but an indifferent Passion, till it be united to the
thing loved, and then it gets a denomination; e. g. If the Object be earthly,
it is an earthly love; if sensual, it is a brutish love; if it be man, it is an
humane love; if God, it is a Divine love; so that by our love we are changed and
transformed into a thing more noble, or more vile; we therefore debase our
selves in loving any thing but God, there is nothing else worthy of our love;
whatsoever we love, we give it a kind of dominion over us, so that the will
loses its dignity and excellency when it loves inferior things: we are as it
were married to that we love. Suppose (says Raymundus) a poor man of mean
stock, and no reputation, have six daughters; they are all equal by birth, as
to reputation and esteem, but they are all differenced by their marriage; the
eldest marries a Farmer, the next a Citizen, the third a Knight, the fourth a
Duke, the fifth a King, the sixth at Emperor; by these marriages there is a
very great inequality: So here, by the Object of your love you are dignified or
debased. But there is more yet in God's being the Object of our Love: thou
shall love the Lord [thy God] thy God, and therefore thou must love him. Give
me leave to enlarge a little on this, and I will be the briefer in the other
Considerations, how this is the great Command, thou shall love the Lord Thy
God. Those things that are ours, though they are not always lovely, yet we
love them; our own Children, whether of our Bodies or our Minds, our own
Estates: we are more troubled at the loss of any thing wherein our own
Propriety is concerned, than in all the World besides; a small thing of our own
is a thousand times more to us, than a thousand times as much of another: we
are more concerned for the cutting off our own Finger, than the cutting off
another man's Head: Propriety does exceedingly heighten Love. But then when
there is a specialty upon the Propriety, that it is impossible to have the want
repaired, e. g. my Child, and mine only Child. Whatever you say of God, you
may put an only to it: God so loves every gracious Soul, as if he had no other
Person to bestow his Love upon, therefore thou must so love God, as if there
were nothing else in the world to bestow thy love upon. Alas! what is thine to
day as to outward things, may be none of thine to morrow: thou can not say so
of God; God once thine, and for ever thine. But perhaps you will say, Were God
mine, you should need to say no more to inflame my heart to love him. Propriety
in God! could I attain this, I had enough. This is it I wait for, I pray for; I
think nothing too much for it; I only fear I shall never attain it; the very
comforts of my Life are embittered for want of it. To this I answer, we cannot
shake off God's Soverainty over us nor Propriety in us, this you will grant:
God is and will be, Thy God, Thy Lord, thy Sovereign, Thy Commander, let thy
carriage be what it will; the vilest wretches in the World, cannot sin
themselves from under God's dominion. But there is no comfort in this: Well
then, I will therefore add, thou that mournest after propriety in God, God is
thy God; thy gracious God, and Father; thy God in Covenant; thy God in mercy;
and loving kindness. Do thou unfeignedly desire to love God? then thou
may be sure God loves thee, for God loves first 1 John 4.19.
. Do thou not out of choice prefer the Service of God before all other
Service, then you shall abide in the love of God Joh. 15.10.
. Brethren, Love God as if he were peculiarly yours, and you will thereby have an
evidence, that he is peculiarly yours. It is reported of one that continued a
whole night in Prayer, and said nothing but this Deus meus and omnia mea.
Avend. p. 382.
; My God, and my All, or God is Mine, and all is Mine; repeating this a
thousand times over. Let this be the constant breathing of thy Soul to God; My
God, my All.

2 Ratione ordinis and dignitatis.
2. This is the first and great command in respect of order and dignity. This is
the great command because we must place this before all others in the very In
intimo cordis. Anselm.
yelk of the heart, as the only foundation of piety; whatsoever is taught in
the Law, and in the Prophets flows from this, as from a fountain; grows upon
this as upon a root ^ use.
. If I forget not, this is somewhere Augustin's Metaphor, this is to the other
commands as the needle to the thread, it draws all after it.

3 Ratione debiti.
3. This is the first and great command, in respect of obligation. To love God
is so indispensable, that let me with Reverence say, God cannot dispense with
it. As God first bestows his love upon us, before any other gift, and then
whatever he gives afterward, he gives it in love; So God requires that we
first give him our hearts, our love, and then do all we do out of love to God.
Sometimes God will have mercy, and not sacrifice; divine duties shall give
place to humane; nay, sometimes duties to God must give way to duties to a
beast Luke 14.5.
; but however duties to God and Men may be justled to and fro; yet there is not
any duty can warrant the intermitting of any love to God so much as one moment.

4 Ratione materiae
4. This is the first and great command, in respect of the matter of it. Love to
God is the most excellent of all graces 1 Cor 13.13.
, love among the graces is like the Sun among the Stars, which not only
inlightens the lower world, but communicates light to all the Stars in the
Firmament: So love to God does not only its own office, but the offices of all
other Graces. The Apostle names four graces that are necessary to government,
which love does all their offices, e. g. bears all 1 Cor. 13.7. (...),
cand^r, lenitas, patientia. Melanc. in loc.
things, i. e. love parts with something of its right, bears the weaknesses
of friends to preserve concord; believes all things, i. e. heartily makes the
best interpretation of all things; is not distrustful or suspicious upon light
and frivolous occasions; hops all things, that is, gently waits for the
amendment of that which is faulty; endures all things, that is, patiently
bears injuries, etc. If you except, this is spoken of love to men, I readily
answer, that surely love to God, for whose Image in men, and command concerning
men, we love them, will do greater things.

5 Ratione amplitudinis.
5. This is the first and great command in respect of the largeness of it. This
requires the whole man, the whole heart, the whole soul, the whole mind, the
whole strength; whatever else we entertain, some other room may be good enough
for it, let the heart be kept for Gods peculiar presence Chamber. God requires
the whole Soul, all the inferior powers of the Soul, our whole life must be
spent in the love of God. This command reaches the whole mind, God expects that
we should in Judgment reason down every thing into contempt that should pretend
a loveliness to justle out God.

6. This is the first and great command in respect of its capacity, 6 Ratione
capacita^^.
because it contains all commands, no man can love his Neighbor, unless he
love God, and no man can love God, but he must observe all his Commandments.
Origin makes enquiry, how the Commands about legal purification may be reduced
to the love of God? every command of God has its peculiar obligation, but this
Law of love has a super-ingagement over them all. e. g. Men may accept and
commend several duties to them, that have not one drop of love in them, e. g.
If I give bread to one that is ready to famish, or Physic to one that is
dangerously sick; these things do good according to their own Natures, and not
according to the good will of the giver: Alas! Man needs relief, and catches
at it, and never examines the heart, or and, whence it comes; but now God is
infinitely above needing any thing from us, it is his gracious condescension to
receive any thing from us, and therefore God never accepts of any thing we do,
but what is done out of love to him.

7. This is the first and great command, in respect of the difficulties of it,
7 Ratione difficultatis.
because through our infirmities (not to mention worse) we cannot presently
love God, the prime difficulty is, the spirituality of it. This wisdom Prove.
24.7.
is too high for foolish Sinners. Though it is most rational, yet it is the
most spiritual; and consequently the most difficult part of Religion. Some
commands may be observed without special grace, as all the outside of Religion.
Yea, some commands may be observed without so much as common grace, as duties
merely moral, but this must have a great measure of the spirit, it speaks much
acquaintance with God through experience of his ways; and much conformity to
Christ in a well composed conversation; in short, it includes the highest
perfection possibly attainable in this life; yet let not this difficulty fright
you, for through Christ our sincere love (though weak) is accepted; and our
imperfect love (because growing) shall not be despised.

8. This is the first and great command, in respect of the End. 8 Ratione finis.
All the commands of God are referred to this as their end and last scope,
which was first in the mind of the Lawgiver.

9. This is the first and great command, in respect of the lastingness of it. 9
Ratione perperuitatis.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, it is not only spoken after the Hebrew
Futurum pro imperativo.
way of commanding, but it notes singular perseverance. Most of the other
commands expire with the world, as all or most of the commands of the second
table; but this remains and flourishes more than ever. When Repentance and
Mortification, which now take up half our life; when Faith which is now (as it
were) Mother and Nurse to most of our Graces; when Hope which now upholds weak
faith in its languors, when all these (shall as it were) dye in travail,
perfection of grace being then in the birth: love to God shall then be more
lively than ever. That love which (as it were) passed between God and the Soul
in letters and tokens; shall then be perfected in a full enjoyment. Our love
was divided among several objects, that cut the banks, and weakened the stream;
henceforth it shall have but one current. Our love is now mixed with fear (fear
of missing, or losing what we love) but that fear shall be banished. There
shall never be any distance, never any thing to provoke jealousy, never any
thing to procure cloying, never any thing more to be desired than is actually
enjoyed. Is not this then the first and great Commandment? is it not our
privilege and happiness to be swallowed up in it? this may suffice to evidence
it to be our duty; But then,

What abilities are requisite for the well performance of this duty, and how we
may obtain those abilities.
3. What Abilities are requisite to the performance of this duty, and how may we
attain those Abilities? This we must be experimentally acquainted with, or all
I can say, will at best seem babbling; and therefore let me at first tell you
plainly, nothing on this side Regeneration can capacitate you to love God: and
it is God alone that gives, works, infuseth, impresseth the gracious habit
of Divine Love in the Souls of his people. Our love to God is nothing else but
the echo of Gods love to us. Through the corruption of our Nature we hate God.
God implanted in our Nature an inclination to love God above all things
amiable, but by the fall, we have an headlong inclination to depart from God,
and run away from him: and there is in every one of us a natural impotency, and
inability of turning unto God. The grace of love is no Flower of Nature's
Garden, but a Foreign Non secundum bona naturalia, sed secundum dona grat^ita.
Aquin.
plant. We may possibly do something for the merely rational inflaming of our
hearts with love to God; e. g. God may be represented as most amiable, we may
be convinced of the unsatisfyingness of the Creature, we may understand
something of the worth of our Souls, and what a folly it is to expect that any
thing but God can fill them; and yet this will be (at the utmost) but like a
solid proof of the truth of the Christian Religion, which may Nonplus our
cavils, but not make us Christians. This may make love to God appear a rational
duty, but it will not of it self beget in us this spiritual Grace. It is the
immediate work of God to make us love him; I do not mean immediate in
opposition to the use of means, but immediate in regard of the necessary
efficacy of his Spirit, beyond what all means in the world, without his
powerful influence can amount unto. It Is the Lord alone that can direct our
hearts into the love of God 2. These. 3.5. Exoplat a Leo quod non ambigit posse
praestari. Ambros.
; God is pleased in a wonderful, and unexpressible manner to draw up the heart
in love to him. God makes use of Exhortations, and Counsels, and Reproofs, but
though he works by them, and with them, he works above them and beyond them
Deuteronomy. 30.6, 19, 20.
. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou
may live. And again, I call heaven and earth to record this day against
thee, that I have set before thee life and death, blessing and cursing;
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live; that thou may
love the Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou
may cleave unto him; for he is thy life, and the length of thy days. He is
thy life, i. e. effectively, and that by love (says Aquinas.) it is reported
Sales of the love of God, p. 63.
that it often happens among Partridges, that one steals away another eggs,
but the young one that is hatched under the wing of a stranger, at her true
Mothers first call, who laid the egg whence she was hatched, she renders her
self to her true Mother, and puts her self into her Covey. It Is thus with our
hearts, though we are born and bred up among terrene and base things, under the
wing of corrupted Nature; yet at (and not before) God's first quickening call,
we receive an inclination to love him; and upon his drawing Cant. 1.4.
we run after him. God works a principle of love in us, and we love God by that
habit of love he has implanted; hence the Act of love is formally and properly
attributed to man as the particular cause Psalm. 18.1. and 116.1, V^^tius.
. I will love thee O Lord my strength, and I love the Lord because he has
heard my voice; the Soul works together with God in his powerful working; the
Will being Acted of God Acts. It is a known saying of Non ideo been currit vt
rotunda sit, sed quia rotunda est.
Augustine, The wheel does not run that it may be round, but because it is
round. The Spirit of God enables us to love God, but it is we that love God with
a created love, it is we that acquiesce in God in a gracious manner. What God
does in the Soul does not hurt the liberty of the will, but strengthens it,
insweetly and powerfully drawing it into conformity with the will of God, which
is the highest liberty; where the 2 Cor. 3.17.
spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. It is a poor liberty that consists in
an indifferency. Do not the Saints in heaven love God freely? yet they cannot
but love him.

As the only Efficient cause of our loving God, is God himself, so the only
procuring cause of our loving God, is Jesus Christ; that Son of the Father's
love, who by his Spirit implants and actuates this grace of love, which he has
merited for us. Christ has Col. 1.20.
made peace through the blood of his Cross. Christ has as well merited this
grace of love for us, as he has merited the reward of glory for us. Plead
therefore (Dear Christians) the merit of Christ for the inflaming your hearts
with the love of God, that when I shall direct to rules and means how you may
come to love God, you may as well address your selves to Christ for the grace
of love, as for the pardon of your want of love hitherto. Bespeak Christ in
some such (but far more) pressing language, Lord thou have purchased the grace
of love for those that want and crave it; my love to God is chill, do thou warm
it; my love is divided, Lord do thou unite it; I cannot love God as he
deserves, O that thou would help me to love him more than I can desire. Lord
make me sick of love, and then cure me; Lord make me in this as comfortable to
thy self, as it is possible for an adopted Son to be like the Natural, that I
may be a Son of God's love, both actively and passively, and both as near as it
is possible infinitely.

Let Us therefore address our selves to the use of all those means and helps,
whereby love to God is Fovetur, augetur, excitatur, and exeritur.
nourished, increased, excited, and exerted. I will begin with removing the
impediments, we must clear away the rubbish, e're we can so much as lay the
Foundation.

Impediment 1. Self-love, Impediments of our love to God.
this the Apostle names as Captain general of the Devil's Army, whereby titular
Christians manage their enmity against God, in the dregs of the last days,
this will make the times dangerous, Men shall be lovers of their own 2 Timothy
3.1* 2.
selves. When men over-esteem themselves, their own endowments of either body
or mind; when they have a secret reserve for self in all they do,
self-applause, or self-profit, this is like an error in the first concoction,
get your hearts discharged of it, or you can never be spiritually healthful;
the best of you are too prone to this; I would therefore commend it to you, to
be jealous of your selves in this particular, for as conjugal-jealousie is the
bane of conjugal love, so self-jealousie will be the bane of self-love. Be
suspicious of every thing that may steal away, or divert your love from God.

Imped. 2. Love of the world, this is so great an obstruction that the most
loving and best beloved Disciple that Christ had, said 1 John 2.15.
love not the world, nor the things that are in the world, if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him; and the Apostle James makes use of
a Metaphor, Jam. 4.4.
calling them Adulterers and Adulteresses that keep not their conjugal love to
God tight from leaking out toward the world, he charge them, as if they knew
nothing in Religion, if they knew not this, that the friendship with the world
is enmity with God, and it is an universal truth, without so much as one
exception, that whosoever will be a friend of the world, must needs upon that
very account be God's enemy; the Apostle Paul adds more weight to those that
are even pressed to Hell already 1 Timothy 6.9, 10, 11.
, They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish, and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition; for
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows; but
thou O man of God, flee these things, etc. when men will be somebody in the
world, they will have Estates, and they will have honors, and they will have
pleasures, what variety of vexatious distractions do unavoidably hinder our
love to God; when our hearts are hurried with hopes and fears about worldly
things, and the world has not wherewithal to satisfy us; how does the heart
fret under its disappointments, and how can it do otherwise? we would have
happiness here; Sirs, I Will offer you fair, name me but one man that ever found
a complete happiness in the world, and I dare promise, you shall be the second;
but if you will flatter your self with dreams of impossibilities, this your way
will be your folly, though it is like your posterity will approve your sayings
Psalm. 49.13.
, and try experiments while they live as you have done, but where is your love
to God all this while? it is excluded; by what Law? by the Law of Sin and Death;
by the love of the world, and destruction; for Christ tells us, all that hate
him love death Prove. 8.36.


Imped. 3. Spiritual sloth, and carelessness of Spirit, when men do not
trouble themselves about Religion, nor any thing that is serious. Love is a
busy passion, a busy grace; love among the passions, is like Fire among the
Elements; Love among the Graces, is like the Heart among the Members; now that
which is most contrary to the nature of love, must needs most obstruct the
highest actings of it; the truth is, a careless frame of Spirit, is fit for
nothing; a sluggish, lazy, slothful, careless person never attains to any
excellency in any kind; what is it you would entrust a lazy person about? let
me say this, and pray think on it twice, e're you censure it once; Spiritual
sloth does Christians more mischief, than scandalous relapses. I grant their
grosser falls may be worse as to others, the grieving of the Godly, and the
hardening of the wicked, and the Reproach to Religion must needs be so great, as
may make a gracious heart tremble at the thought of falling; but yet as to
themselves a sloathful temper is far more prejudicial, e. g. those gracious
persons that fall into any open sin, it is but once, or seldom in their whole
life; and their repentance is ordinarily as notorious as their sin, and they
walk more humbly, and more watchfully ever after; whereas Spiritual sloth runs
through the whole course of our life, to the marring of every duty, to the
strengthening of every sin, and to the weakening of every grace. Sloth (I may
rather call it unspiritual sloth) is a soft moth in our spiritual wardrobe; a
corroding rust in our spiritual Armory; an enfeebling consumption in the very
vitals of Religion. Sloth and carelessness without an Epithete, bare sloth
without any thing to aggravate it, ordinarily does the Soul more hurt, than all
the Devils in hell, yea, than all its other sins. Shake off this, and then you
will be more than Conquerors over all other difficulties; shake off this, and
there is but one sin (that I can think of at present) that you will be in danger
of, and that is spiritual pride. You Will thrive so fast in all grace, you will grow
up into so much communion with God, that unless God sometimes withdraw to keep
you humble, you will have a very Heaven upon Earth.

Imped. 4. The love of any sin whatsoever; the love of God, and the love of any
Sin, can no more mix together than Iron and Clay; every Sin strikes at the
being of God Deicidium.
. The very best of Saints may possibly fall into the very worst of pardonable
Sins, but the least of Saints get above the love of the least of Sins; we are
ready to question Gods love unto us, as Dalilah did Sampson's love to her, if
he do not gratify us in all we have a mind to: but how could Dalilah pretend
love to Sampson, while she complied with his mortal enemy against him? how can
you pretend to love God, while you hide Sin, his enemy in your hearts? as it
was with the grandchild of Athaliah 2 King. 11.1. 2, etc.
stolen from among those that were slain, and hidden, though unable at present
to disturb her, e're long procures her ruin: so any Sin (as it were) stolen
from the other Sins to be preserved from Mortification, will certainly procure
the ruin of that Soul that hides it; can you hide your Sin from the search of
the Word, and forbear your Sin, while under the smart of affliction, and seem
to fall out with Sin, when under gripes of Conscience, and return to Sin as
soon as the storm is over? never pretend to love God, God sees through your
pretenses, and abhors your hypocrisy Job 34.21, 22.
, His eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings; there is no
darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Come Sirs, let me deal plainly with you; you are shameful strangers
to your own heart, if you do not know which is your darling Sin, or Sins; and
you are Traitors to your own Souls, if you do not endeavor a through
Mortification; and you are wilful Rebels against God, if you do in the least
indulge it; never boggle at the Psalmist's counsel Psalm. 97.10.
, ye that love the Lord, hate evil.

Imped. 5. Inordinate love of things lawful, and in some respect here is our
greatest danger; here persons have Scripture to plead for their love to several
persons, and things; that it is a duty to bestow some love upon them, and the
mere stones are not so plainly set, as easily to discern the utmost bounds of
what is lawful, and the first step into what is sinful, and here having some
plausible pretenses for the parcelling out of their love, they plead not
guilty, though they love not God with all their hearts, souls, and minds,
whereas they should consider that the best of the world is not for enjoyment
but use; not our end, but means conducing to our chief end. Here Is our sin, and
our misery, our foolish transplacing of end, and means: Men make it their end
to eat, and drink, and get estates, and enjoy their delights, and what respect
they have to God (I know not whether to call love or Service) they show it but
as means to flatter God, to gratify them in their pitiful ends.

Having warned you of some of the chief Impediments, I shall propose some means
to engage your hearts in love to God, which you may confidently expect to be
effectual through the operation of the Holy Ghost, and you may likewise expect
the operation of the Spirit in the use of such means.

The means are either Directing, Promoting, or Conserving.

Means to attain love to God.
1. Directing, and that is Spiritual Knowledge, this is beyond what can be
spoken in its commendation: A clear and distinct knowledge of the love and
loveliness of God in the amazing, yet ravishing methods of its manifestations,
and the clear understanding of the heavenly privilege of having our hearts
inflamed with love to God, this will do -- (I would fain persuade you to try,)
I am not able to say how much, to direct you in this case; plainly get, and
exercise this twofold knowledge.

1. The knowledge of Spiritual things; did we but perfectly know the Nature of
the most contemptible insect; nay, did we but know the Nature of Atoms, this
would lead us to admire and love God; but then to know those things that no
graceless person in the world cares for the knowledge of, e. g. the inward
workings of Original Sin, and how to undermine it; the powerful workings of the
Spirit of grace, and how to improve it; what are the joys of the Holy Ghost,
and how to obtain them; would not such things insinuate the love of God into
you? add then,

2. The knowledge of ordinary things in a Spiritual manner, so as to make the
knowledge of Natural things serve Heavenly designs. Thus Christ in all the
Metaphors, in all the Parables he used. To value no knowledge any further than
it is reducible to such an use, this would lead us into the loving of God. Thus
I name but one directing means, promoting means are various, not but that
Spiritual knowledge does singularly promote the love of God, but it is proper
work lies in directing. The several things I shall name for inward means, your
way of managing must make them so.

1. Self-denial, this is so necessary, that no other grace can supply the want
of it. It is among the graces of the Soul, as among the members of the Body,
one member may supply the want of another, the defect of the Lungs may be
supplied by other parts. The want of prudence may be supplied with
Gospel-simplicity, which looks like quite another thing; but nothing can supply
our want of love to God; nor can any thing supply our want of Self-denial in
order to our loving of God. We can never have For fotidissimus suo, (...)
horribilissimum stercus, and vermis nequis simus. Bonavent stimul. Amor. p 153.
too low thoughts of ourselves, provided we do not neglect our duty, and let go
our hold of Christ. Those very things that not only we may love, but we must
love, it is our duty to love them, and our sin not to love them; yet all these
must be denied, when they dare to stand in competition with our love to God
Luke 14.26.
. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple:
Christ would have us count what Religion will cost us, before we meddle with it.

2. Contempt of the world. As love of the world is a great impediment, so
contempt of the world is a great promoter of our love to God; may not our
contempt of the world be best expressed by our worldly diffidence? we have no
confidence in it, no expectation of happiness from it. I take both the
understanding and will to be the seat of Faith; now to have both these against
the world, is to have our understanding satisfied, that the world cannot
satisfy us; to look upon the world as an empty Drum, that makes a great noise,
but has nothing in it; and therefore the will does not hanker after it, has
no kindness for it. That person is a good proficient in divine love, that can
make the world serviceable to devotion; by drawing arguments from his worldly
condition, be it what it will, to promote piety, e. g. Have I any thing
considerable in the world? I will manage it as a Steward, blessed be God he
has entrusted me with any thing, whereby I may show my love to him, in my love
to his. Have I nothing in the world? Blessed be God for my freedom from worldly
snares; God knows I need food and raiment, and I am of Jacob's mind Genesis 28.20,
21.
, if God will give me no more, he shall be my God, and I will be content
whatever my condition be in the world, it is better than Christ's was; and Oh
that I could love God as Christ did!

3. Observation of God's benefits to us, it is goodness and beneficence that
draws out love; God is our infinite Benefactor, the very brutes love their
Benefactors Isa. 1.3. Qui beneficia invenit, compedes invenit. Sen.
. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Master's crib, but my people does
not consider. Who can reckon up the benefits he receives from God? the
commonest of our mercy deserves a return of love, how much more our Spiritual
merces? those very mercies that are troublesome to us, deserve our love, e. g.
Trouble for Sin though to a degree of horror; hungring after Christ, though
unto languishing; disappointments in the world, though without satisfaction any
where else; lamenting after God, though with fear we shall never enjoy him:
Such like throws of anguish make way for spiritual joy, and comfort; and the
Soul that goes through such exercises, grows in love to God every day. As for
other kinds of Benefits, I Will say but this, God does more for us every hour of
our lives, than all our dearest Friends, or Relations on Earth, than all the
Saints and Angels in Heaven can do, so much as once, should they do their
utmost: and can you do less than love him?

4. Watchfulness over our own hearts. When we love God, we are to remember that
we love a jealous God. This will restrain the straggling of our affections: we
should keep as careful a watch over our own hearts, as we should over a rich
Heiress, committed to our Guardianship; we reckon she is undone, and we shall
never be able to look God or Man in the face, if she be unworthily matched
through our default. Christians, your hearts through the condesension of God,
and Blood and Spirit of Christ, are a match for the King of Glory: several
inferior objects not worth the naming, are earnest suitors; we are undone if
any but God have our Supreme love; if you be not severely watchful, this heart
of yours will be stolen away: be persuaded therefore to examine every thing that
you have cause to suspect: call your selves often to an account; be jealous of
your hearts, and of every thing whereby you may be endangered.

5. Prayer. All manner of Prayer is singularly useful to inflame the heart with
love to God. Those that pray best, love God best: mistake me not, I do not say
those that can pray with the most florid expressions; or those that can pray
with the most general applause; but they that most feel every word they speak,
and every thought they think in Prayer: they whose apprehensions of God are
most overwhelming; whose affections to God are most Spiritually passionate;
whose Prayers are most wrestling, and graciously impudent, this is the man that
prays best, and loves God best. I grant these are the Prayers of a great
proficient in the love of God, but you may pray for this frame when you cannot
pray with it. The Soul never falls sick of divine love in Prayer, but Christ
presently gives it an extraordinary visit Cant. 2.5, 6.
, so soon as ever Christ's Spouse says, she is sick of love, the next words
she speaks are, that his left hand is under my head, and his right hand does
embrace me. Compare that with those words Cant. 6 5:
, Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: Christ speaks as of
being overcome and conquered. Rouse up your selves therefore, give your selves
unto Prayer, Pray for a more Spiritual discovery of Gods amiableness, did you
know God better, you could not but love him more; and none can discover God to
us, as he discovers himself, so spiritually, so powerfully; take no denial, God
will never be angry with your being importunate for hearts to love him.

Bradward. de causa dei. l. 1. p. 118, 119.
O my God, it is thy self I love above all things; it is for thy self, in thee
my desires are terminated; and therefore what will thou give me? if thou will
not give me thy self, thou will give me nothing. If I find thee not, I find
nothing; thou do not at all reward me, but vehemently torment me: heretofore
when I sought thee finally, for thy self, I hoped that I should quickly find
thee, and keep thee, and with this sweet hope I comforted my self in all my
labors; but now if thou deny me thy self, what will thou give me? shall I be
for ever disappointed of so great a hope? shall I always languish in my love?
shall I mourn in my languishment? shall I grieve in my mourning? shall I weep
and wail in my grief? shall I always be empty? shall I always disconsolately
sorrow? incessantly complain, and be endlesly tormented? O my most good, most
powerful, most merciful, and most loving God, thou do not use so unfriendly
and like an enemy to despise, refuse, wound and torment those that love thee
with all their heart, soul, and strength; that hope for full happiness in thee.
Thou art the God of truth, the beginning and end of those that love thee, thou
do at last give thy self to those that love thee, to be their perfect and
complete happiness. Therefore O my most good God, grant that I may in this
present life love thee for thy self above all things, seek thee in all things,
and in the life to come find thee, and hold thee to eternity.

6. Meditation. A duty as much talked of, and as little practiced as any duty
of Christianity. Did you but once a day [In that time of the day, which upon
experience you find to be fittest for such a work] solemnly place your selves
in Gods presence; beg of him the fixing and the flowing of your thoughts, that
your thoughts might be graciously fixed, yet as graciously enlarged; let the
subject matter of them be something Spiritual, endeavor to fill your heads,
and affect your hearts with holy musings, till you come to some resolution,
which resolution close with Prayer, and follow with endeavors. O how would
this (even e're you are aware) engage your Souls to love God, though you cannot
methodize your Meditations to your mind, yet inure your selves to an holy
thoughtfulness about things above. Endeavor as you are able, to tie your
thoughts together, and so fasten them that they may not be lost, that your
musing time may not be reckoned among your lost time. I distinguish between
Meditation and Study: Study is for knowledge, Meditation is for Grace: Study
leaves every thing as we find it; Meditation leaves a Spiritual impress upon
every thing it meddles with. Though I will not assert, I may enquire, whether
Meditation be not one of those duties of which the very constant performance
speaks the Soul to be gracious, i. e. though I dare not say, they are not
gracious, that do not every day solemnly meditate, yet whether may I not say,
they are gracious that do. Try therefore, whether you may not say with the
Psalmist Psalm. 39.3.
, whilst I was musing, the fire burned; whether while you are musing, your
heart may not be inflamed with love to God.

7. Choice of friends. I dare appeal to all experienced Christians, whether
ever they met with lively Christians, that carried it like Christians without
some warming of their hearts with love to God, and Godliness; the truth is,
Christian-conference has the most speedy and effectual efficacy, of any
Ordinance of God whatsoever. Do therefore in Religion as you do in other
things, e.g. If you meet with a Physician, all your discourse shall be
something about your health. If you meet with a Traveller, you are presently
inquisitive about the places he has seen. Why should not Christians when they
meet, converse like Christians, and presently fall into a Heavenly Dialogue.
Christians, this you know, there must be a forsaking of all wicked company,
e're you can pretend the least love to Christ, (mistake me not) I do not mean
that the bonds of Family-relations must presently be broken, that Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Covenant-servants must presently
separate, if one of them be ungodly; No, where the relation is such, as cannot
be dissolved without sin; then those that are Godly, must converse with the
ungodly, as Physicians with their sick patients. But this is it I say, you must
not willingly and out of choice make Gods Enemies your familiar Friends. Those
that are always speaking well of God, insensibly draw out their hearts in love
to him. When Christ's Spouse Cant 5.9. etc 6.1.
had told the Daughters of Jerusalem what Christ was more than others, they
presently offer themselves to seek him with her; as evil communication 1 Cor.
15.33.
corrupts good manners, so good communication corrects evil manners. In short,
you cannot but observe, that none is able to hear any one spoken against whom
they love; and that every one delights to speak and hear of whom they love; so
that here you have a means to inflame, an employ to exercise, and a touchstone
to try your love to God.

8. Thanksgiving. That person that makes conscience of thanksgiving, will
thereby grow in love to God; that person that takes every thing kindly, and
thankfully from God cannot but love him; and Christians, if we be not basely
wanting to our selves, we may by thankfulness make every thing a help to
promote divine love. e.g. I hear a man swear, and curse, and blaspheme God; O
what cause have I to love God, that he has not left me to do so. I am under
the rebukes of God, I feel his anger in such a providence; O what cause have I
to love God, that he will take any pains with me, and give me medicinal
correction, not giving me up to my own hearts lusts till I perish; Alas! I am
not so spiritual as to make such Inferences: yet blessed be God, I really value
it as a privilege to be able to put a good interpretation on all Gods
dealings. O that I could love God for the very means, and helps, and
encouragements to love him! I shall name no more (though I might many)
promoting means. But,

3. Sustaining and Conserving Means. Here several Graces are singularly useful.
I shall name only three.

1. Faith, whereby we are persuaded that what God has spoken is true, and good
Mark 9.23.
, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes. Now
then, take some Particular Promise, Why not that which has already affected
thy heart? you cannot press a Promise as you squeeze an Orange, to extract all
that is in it; no, it is called drawing water Isa. 12.3.
out of a Fountain, though you draw out never so much, there is no less behind.
Well then, take that promise Prove. 8.17.
, I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me. I may
here by my love to God, make out Gods love to me, and so by these claspings of
love, have my love inflamed and preserved. But Christians be sure to remember
this, whenever you lay one hand on a Promise, lay the other on Christ, you will
thereby get your Objections answered, and your Fears removed; e. g. I am
unworthy of Divine Love, but so is not Christ. I know not how to come to God,
our access is by Christ. Though I come I know not how to believe, Joh. 6.37.
thy coming is believing. Oh, for more acquaintance with the Life of Faith: it
is mostly with us in spirituals, according to our Faith.

2. Hope; whereby we expect a future good. Hope is the daughter of Faith. Many
a time the weak Mother leans upon the Daughter; Hope (at least to our
apprehensions) has not so many Obstructions and hindrances as Faith. I dare
say, I hope, what I dare not say, I believe. Though I must tell you, That which
the over-modest Christian calls a weak Hope, God often calls a strong Faith.
Remember Psalm. 119.49.
the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope: There Is a
prayer of Hope, and here is a Promise-answer to Faith, Thou Isa. 26.3.
wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee, etc. So that in a word, as to the present Case, though I yet
cannot love God as I would, I hope God will help me, that my Love shall be
always growing.

3. Patience Jam. 1.4.
Let patience have her perfect work, that you may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. And do but with Patience go on with your work, and no
necessary Grace shall be wanting unto you. Look that you be patient in waiting,
and patient in bearing. Do not misinterpret God's dealings with you. There are
two passages I would have you take special notice of, that Ground that brought
such Fruit as answered expectation Luke 8.15.
, was an honest and good heart, which kept the Word, and brought forth fruit
with patience. The other is, in your patience possess your souls; patience
contributes much to both Fruitfulness and Comfort. Let Us make an Essay, Thou
would have God manifest his Love to thee in a more ravishing manner; stay a
while, thou want another kind of dispensation first, and most, viz. to feel
more of the evil of sin, that thou may be more watchful and more holy. So
soon as a trial comes, thou would have it removed; stay a while, it has not
done the work for which God sent it. God in kindness binds on the Plaster,
till he has effected the Cure. Thou art at a loss, thou know not what God
will do with thee: be it so, it is not fit thou should, God does not use to
tell his Children beforehand what he will do with them: God expects we should
gather up our Duty from the Precepts of his Word, and from the hints of his
Providence. We read 2 King. 13.17, 18, 19.
, that when the Prophet Elisha had given King Joash a Promise, and a sign of
deliverance from Syria, God expected that his own reason and faith should
prompt him so to improve a second sign, as to pursue the victory to a conquest;
but he understood it not, and so miscarryed. Do you learn to hold on in the use
of all Means for the engaging of your hearts more to God. We Heb. 6.11.12, 13.
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full Assurance
of Hope unto the end: that you be not sloathful, but followers of them who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. Not expecting to obtain the
Promise till you have patiently endured: and the same Apostle in the same
Epistle tells us Heb. 10.36.
, that you have need of patience, that after you have done the will of God, you
might receive the Promise. Thus much for the inward Means of loving God.
Outward Means for engaging our Hearts to love God, are either Directing or
Exemplary.

I. Directing. The only directing Means is the Word of God, but seeing you
shall in the following Sermons have particular directions about both Hearing
and Reading of the Word, I shall only hint these few things.

1. Prize the Word. Though our estimation of it will be exceedingly heightened
by a further acquaintance with it, yet you will find it singularly advantageous
to the enflaming of your hearts, to get your hearts (as it were) graciously
forestalled with the valuation of the Word. When we can count the Word sweeter
than Honey to the taste; better than Gold for a treasure; more necessary than
Food for our sustenance Job 23.12.
: how can the Soul choose but love God, whose love indicted it? Shall filthy
books provoke carnal love, and shall not the Book of God provoke Divine love?
endeavor to get but as spiritual a sense and relish of Divine Truths,
answerable to men's carnal gusts and feeling of other things: do but dwell upon
Truths till they affect you. Only here observe this necessary Caution: Dwell
not so upon difficulties as to hinder your further enquiry into things more
easily understood, but wait in a course of diligence, and you will be able to
master those difficulties, which it is next to impossible suddenly to fathom.
Do but steer an even course between a careless neglect, and an anxious
perplexity, about what you read or hear, and you will certainly attain a deep
knowledge of the things of God, and a high measure of love to God.

2. Set immediately upon the practice of those things which you shall be
convinced to be your Duty. Let not your Affections cool upon any duty pressed
upon you. Do something like that of Dan. 2.8, etc.
Nebuchadnezzar; God revealed to him something of moment; he had lost the
matter, and understood not the meaning; but was (as others thought)
unreasonably importunate to recover both, and that presently, before the
impression wore off, and the heat went over. So my brethren, fix the Word by
speedy practice. Though the seed of the Word is long in growing to perfection,
yet it presently takes root in order to growth. Were I therefore now exhorting
you to Repentance, and could bring you to no nearer a resolution, than to
repent to morrow, my Exhortation were lost; So now, while I press you to love
God, and demonstrate from Scripture, that it is your Duty; offer you
Scripture-helps that may be effectual; provoke you with Scripture
encouragements that may be overcoming; if you now put off all this till a
fitter time; it is a thousand to one, you put it off for ever. Read this over
again, and then think, why should not I now believe this; and how can I say, I
now believe it, if I do not now put it in practice? and how can I say I
practice it, if I omit any one Direction?

II. Exemplary Means. And here I shall give you as short a touch as may be, of
Men, Angels, and Christ himself. We are much drawn by Examples Examples they
are not only Arguments but Wings. They give us a demonstration, that Precepts
are practicable.

1. Men. Why should not we love God as well as ever Abraham did? God gives the
word Genesis 22, 2.3.
, Abraham, take now thy Son, thy only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer
him for a burnt-offering. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, etc. Had he
not loved God, so far as the Creature can love God, infinitely, every word
would have been as a dagger to his heart. q. d. Abraham] I gave thee that Name,
from thy being a Father of many People, but now be thou the death of that seed
which I intended to multiply (God seemed to change his Name to Abraham, as
Solomon named his Son Rehoboam, an Enlarger of the People, who enlarged them
from twelve tribes to two.) Take now] no time to demur upon it. Thy Son] so
many years prayed for, and waited for. Thine only Son] all the rest of thy
children are not worth thy owning. Isaac] the Son of thy Laughter, now the Son
of thy Sorrow. Whom thou lovest] more than ever Father loved a child, and that
upon several justifiable accounts. And get thee into the land of Moriah] though
no time to deliberate before thou resolvest, yet time enough for repentance
before thou executest thy resolutions. And offer him there for a
burnt-offering] it is not enough to give him up to be sacrificed by another, but
thou thy self must be the Priest to kill thy lovely child, and then to burn him
to ashes. And Abraham rose up early, etc.] he quarrels not with God, What does
God mean to give me such a command, as never to any one else in this world? He
consults not his Wife, Oh what will Sarah say? He sticks not at what might
expose Religion, What will the Heathen say? You may well suppose great
struglings between Nature and Grace, but God seemed to press upon him with this
Question; Whether do thou love me or thy child most? Abraham does as it were
answer, Nay Lord, if that be the question, it shall soon be decided, how, and
where thou please. Another instance we have in Moses Exodus 3.13. and 33.15.18.
, if you will compare two or three Scriptures; Moses at first he enquires of
God, as we do of a stranger, what is his Name; upon Gods further discovery he
begs more of his special presence, and upon God's granting of that, his Love
grows bold, and he said, I beseech thee show me thy Glory; upon his finding God
propitious, he begs that God would remove the cloud, and show him as much of
his Glory as he was possibly able to bear the sight of. Take one instance more,
and that is of Paul, who thinking God might have more glory by saving of many
than by saving of him, was willing to quit the happiness of salvation (for not
the least Grace, much less grace in the height of it, could possibly choose a
necessity of hating and blaspheming God, which is the venom of Damnation, but)
his Love to God is greater than his love to himself; and so he will reckon himself
happy without Glory, provided God may be more glorified. And thus I have
produced three Examples, of one before the Law, one under the Law, and one
under the Gospel. How will you receive it, if I shall venture to say, We have
in some respect more cause to love God than any, than all these Persons put
together? What singular gleams of warm Love from God they had more than we, are
in some respects exceeded by the noonday light, and heat of Gospel-love that
we have more than they. What love-visits God was pleased to give them, are
excelled by Christ's (as to them) extraordinary presence among us. What was to
them a Banquet, is to us our daily bread. God opens the windows of heaven to
us. God opens his very heart to us. We may read more of the Love of God to us
in one day, than they could in their whole Life.

2. Angels, that unweariedly behold the face of God Mat. 18.10.
; they refuse nothing that may evidence their love to God. It Is ordinarily the
Devils work to be the Executioners of Gods wrath: it is said Psalm. 78.49.
, he cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath and indignation, and
trouble, by sending evil Angels among them; but the good Angels will not stick
at it when God requires it 2 King. 19.35.
. The Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians
185000. But now we have more cause to love God than the Angels; God has
expressed greater Love to us in Christ than he has to them. He took no hold of
Angels, etc. Heb. 2.16.
not any one of them received so much as the pardon of any one sin. God would
not bear with them in so much as the least tittle. So soon as they ceased to
love God with a perfect love, God hated them with a perfect hatred. And for the
blessed Angels Heb. 1.14:
, are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation? but none of the Saints are to minister to the
Angels in any thing. How should we love such a Master? but I have a Pattern to
commend to you above the Angels.

3. Christ; and oh that the mention of Christ's Love to his Father might
transport us; though Christ did nothing but Joh. 8.29.
what pleased his Father, Christ suffered every thing that might please him
Phil. 2.8.
. Christ obeyed every Command, endured every Threatening that it was possible to
endure, and that to the intensive extent of them, yet God dealt more hardly
with Christ, than ever he does with any of us Isa. 53.10.
. It pleased the Father to bruise him, and to put him to grief; whereas the
Church in the midst of her Lamentations must acknowledge Lam. 3.33.
, he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men, yet Christ
prayed Joh 17.23.
that the world may know that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me.
Should not we then pray, and strive to love God, as near as it is possible, as
Christ loved him? Christ had not one hard thought of Gods severe Justice, no,
not when he endured what was equivalent to the eternal torments of the Damned;
and shall our love shrink at Gods fatherly Chastisements? Christ's love to God
did not abate, while God poured out his Wrath: and shall ours abate under
Medicinal Providence? whatever our outward condition is in this World, it is
better than Christ's.

Thus I have endeavored to acquaint you what Abilities are requisite, and how
to attain them, that you may love God, etc.

How to improve and augment our love to God.
4. How to improve and augment all our possible abilities to love God, with all
our Heart, Soul, Mind, and Strength; and for this I shall give you one general
(yet singular) direction (though I must inform, direct, and press several
things under it,) and that is, set your selves to love God. Set upon it as you
are able; do for the engaging of your love to God, as you would do for engaging
your hearts in love to a person commended to you for marriage. Here Is a person
commended to you which you never saw, nor before heard of. All the report you
can hear, speaks a great suitableness in the person, and consequently happiness
in the match, you thereupon entertain the motion, and a treaty, to see whether
reports be true and affections feasible, though at first you find no affection
on either side; yet if you meet with no discouragements, you continue converse,
till by a more intimate acquaintance, there arises a more endearedness of
affection; at length a non-such love becomes mutual. Do something like this in
spirituals. I now solemnly bespeak your highest love for God. Perhaps God and
thy soul are yet strangers: thou have not yet met with him in his ordinances,
nor savingly heard of him by his spirit: Don't slight the overture, for from
thy first entertainment of it, thou will be infinitely happy. Every thing of
Religion is at first uncouth, the work of mortification is harsh, and the work
of hol^ness difficult, but practice will facilitate them, and make thee in love
with them, so the more thou acquaintest thy self with God, the more thou can
not but love him, especially considering, that God is as importunate with thee
for thy love, as if his own happiness was concerned, whereas he is infinitely
above receiving benefit from us, but seeing he is so earnest with thee for thy
love, Beg it of him, for him; God is more willing to give every grace than thou
can be to receive it. Acquaint Job. 22.21, 26.
thy self therefore with God, -- and thou shall have thy delight in the
Almighty, and shall lift up thy face unto God. Thou shall make thy prayer unto
him, and he shall hear thee. What though thou beginnest at the lowest step of
Divine love, thou may, through grace, mount up to the highest pinnacle. I
willingly wave so much as mentioning the several methods proposed, and shall
from a modern Author commend to you these five steps or degrees of love to God.

Degrees of love to God. Psalm 31.23.
1. Degree, is to love God for those good things, which we do (or hope to)
receive from him, to love God as our Benefactour. O love the Lord, all ye his
saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful. Though I name this as the lowest
degree of our loving of God, yet the highest degree of our loving God is never
separated from the loving of God as our benefactour. It is mentioned in Moses's
Heb. 11.26.
commendation of that he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. To
love God for hopes of heaven is not a mercenary kind of love, it is not only
lawful that we may, but it is our duty that we must, love God for the glory
that is laid up for us. Where is the man that will own the name of Christian,
who dare charge Christ with any defect of love to God, while the Scripture
says expressly Heb. 12.2
, that for the joy set before him he endured the cross, despising the shame,
and is set down on the right hand of the throne of God. Is it not (no question
but it is) an infinite kindness of God to make promises? and is it not grossly
absurd to say it is a sin to believe them? when our love shall be perfected in
heaven, shall we then love God? and shall not we then love God, as well for our
perfect freedom from sin, for our perfection of grace, for the society of
Saints and Angels, as for himself? If you question this, surely you will
startle more at what I shall farther assert, viz. To love God for temporal
benefits, does infallibly evidence us eminently spiritual, nay further yet, I
shall commend to the consideration of the most considerate Christian, Whether
our loving of God for the good things of this life, does not evidence a greater
measure of love to God, than to love God only for the gracious communication
of himself unto the soul? (I speak of truly loving God, not of bare saying you
love him) now I evidence it thus. God's gracious communications of himself
naturally tend to the engaging of the soul to love him, but the things of the
world do not so. God's gracious communications of himself, speak special love
on God's part, and that draws out love again: but alas, common mercies speak no
such thing. Now then, that soul that is so graciously ingenuous, as to love God
for those lower kinds of mercies, that do not of themselves speak any love from
God to us, that love of God looks something like (though it is infinitely short
of it, for it is impossible to prevent God in his loving of us, but it looks
somewhat like) our being beforehand with God in the way of Special love. To
love God spiritually for temporal mercies, how excellent is this love, though
to love a Benefactor may be but the love of a brute, yet to love God Thus, as
our Benefactor, cannot but be the love of a Saint, you see therefore that
though you begin your love to God at below what is rational, it may insensibly
grow up to what is little less than Angelical.

2. The second step of our love to God, is to love God for himself, because he
is the most excellent good; you may abstract the consideration of his
beneficence to us from his excellency in himself, and then when the Soul can
rise thus, Lord though I should never have a smile from thee while I live, and
should be cast off by thee when I dye, yet I love thee. Alas! why is this named
as the second step, surely there are but few can rise so high? Pray Christians
mind this, There Is many a gracious Soul loves God for himself, who dare scarce
own it, that he loves God at all, e. g. when the Soul is in perplexing
darkness, and cannot discern any Covenant Interest in God; but as the Church
bemoans her self, God has Lam. 3.8.15, 18, etc.
filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with wormwood, -- My
strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; when I cry and shout he
shuts out my prayers, etc. In short, it is the case every Soul that is under
sore temptations, or long desertions; yet mark you, while they thus walk in
darkness, and see no light: yet then a discerning Christian may see his love to
God (like Moses's face) shine to others observation, though not their own, as
may be particularly thus evidenced; when God smites them, they love him; for
they are still searching what sin it is, that he contends for, that they may
get rid of it (not hide it, nor excuse it) when they fear God will damn them,
then they love him; for they then keep in the way of holiness (which is the way
of Salvation) yea, they will not be drawn out of it, though carnal Friends like
Job's Wife, bid them curse God, and dye; though Satan tell them they strive in
vain, though their discouragements are multiplied, and their diligence is
disappointed; yet they are resolved like Job, who said Job 27.2, 5, 6, 10.
Though God has taken away my judgment, and the Almighty has vexed my soul --
I will not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live, q. d. I will
delight in the Almighty, or nothing; I will always call upon God, though he
should never regard me. Or though the Soul under trouble will not own so much
goodness in it self, as to say thus, yet the conversation of such Christians
speaks it plainly, and can such a frame proceed from any thing but love to God?
does not grace work in the Soul like Physic in the Body? the Mother gives her
Child Physic, the Physic (in its working) makes the Child Sick, the Child
when sick instead of being angry with the Mother for the Physic, makes all its
moan to the Mother, hangs about her, lays its head in her bosom: Is not this
love to the Mother, though she gave this Sick-physick? So my Brethren, God
deals with his Children; what though some of his dealings makes them
heart-sick, yet they cling to him, fearing nothing but Sin, and can bear any
thing but his displeasure. Is not here love? and do not these love God for
himself? it is true, God's love to them all this while is great, but they
perceive it not.

3. The third step is, to love nothing but for God's sake, in him, and for him,
and to him. It is said to be Teresia's Maxim [All that is not God is nothing]
indeed the very word that Solomon uses for (...) vanitas, quasi (...) n^n Deu^,
Merc. Pagn.
vanity, which he indorseth upon the best of Creature-happiness in the very
notion of it, proclaims it, It is not God, therefore it is vanity; it is a noble
employment to try experiments upon every lovely object, to reduce our love to
them to the love of God. To be still musing upon spiritual cases, still
supplying of spiritual wants, still longing for spiritual enjoyments, that I
may not only love others things in subordination to God, but to love nothing,
but for God, e. g. In all outward enjoyments, have I an estate? I will honor
God with my substance, because I love him. Have I any thing pleasant or
delightful in this world? I Will run it up to the fountain, O how pure and
satisfying are the loving Soul's delights in God? Have I any esteem in the
world? I am no way fond of it, but so far as it may make my attempts for the
honor of God more successful, I Will improve it, and upon all other accounts
decline it. Nearer yet, My Relations are dear unto me; I truly love them, but
yet my love to God shall animate my love to them, e.g. I truly love my friend:
but this shall be my love's exercise, to persuade him to love God. I dearly
love my Parents; but Oh, no Father like God, my Soul is overcome with that
expression of Christ's Mat. 12.50.
, whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother. My conjugal relation is dearest to me, but my
heart is passionately set upon this, that we may both be infallibly espoused
unto Christ; my heart yearns toward my children, but I had rather have them
God's Children than mine. Nearer yet; as to inward qualifications, e. g. for
natural parts, I bless God that I am not an Idiot, that I have any capacity of
understanding; but I am resolved to the utmost of my capacity, to endeavor the
convincing of all I converse with, that to love and enjoy God is most highly
rational, and most eminently our interest. Have I any acquired endowments of
Learning or Wisdom? I bless God for them: but I count all Wisdom, folly; and
all Learning, dotage without the knowledge of God in Christ 1 Cor. 8.2, 3.
, If any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he
ought to know: but if any man love God, the same is known of him. Higher yet,
for gracious qualifications that capacitate me for glory. I love grace the best
of any creature, wherever I see it: but it is for the sake of the God of all
grace, without whom my grace is inconsiderable. Once more, higher yet, and
higher than this I think we cannot go: To love those things that are not
lovely, merely for God's sake, or out of love to God, e.g. How many have you
heard complain for want of afflictions? for fear God does not love them?
(though by the way those betray their weakness who thus complain, for did they
but observe their want of evidence of divine love, and did they more sympathize
with the Church of Christ under the Cross, they would find they need not
complain for want of afflictions) But be it so, complain they do, and that for
want of afflictions; Afflictions are no way lovely, we are no where bid to pray
for them; but it is our duty to pray for preventing and removing them, and yet
the gracious Soul is through love to God, (in some respect) in love with them:
Here Is a notable degree of divine love, that the Soul would upon any terms
experiment the love of God; and engage the heart in love to God again, and to
love nothing but for God.

4. The fourth step of our love to God is, for our highest love of every thing
to be hatred in comparison of our love to God. The truth is, we can never so
plainly know to what a degree we love God, as by weighing it against whatever
stands in competition with it. Why should I so far debase my love to God as to
weigh it in the same balance with love to sin? but alas! why do besotted
Sinners so dote upon sin, as if love to God were not worthy to be compared with
it? Methinks I may a little more than allude to that passage of Isaiah Isa.
46.6.
, they lavish Gold out of the bag, and weigh Silver in the balance, and hire a
Goldsmith, and he makes it a God, etc. they give out their Gold by handfuls,
without weighing, for matter of their Idols, but they will be good Husbands in
their expenses about the workmanship of them. Man cares not at what rate he
loves his Idols, those lusts upon which they bestow their affections due to God
alone; though in all other things they are wary enough. But why should I wast
time in speaking to these? they have not yet gone one step toward the love of
God; and therefore are so far behind, that they are not within learning of what
is spoken to good proficients in the love of God. Let me only leave with them
this parting word, From a person's first sincere and ardent love to God, he can
neither speak, nor think of sin without abhorrency. From the first infusion of
grace, there is a graciously natural antipathy against sin. Sin receives its
death's wound, it is too true, it may struggle for life, and seem to be upon
recovery, but grace will wear it out, and will never leave the conflict till it
has obtained the conquest. But this is not the thing I intended to speak to in
this particular; it is other-guess things than Sin, that the Soul that loves
God is afraid to spill his love upon: he prizeth those Ordinances wherein he
meets with Communion with God, but is afraid his love should terminate there:
he values them but as Windows to let in the light: though something excellent
may be written there, as with the point of a Diamond, yet it is neither
writing, nor window is prized, but the light; when that is gone, shut up the
window as if it were a dead wall, that is no more regarded till the light
returns. It Is the light of God's countenance that is better than life it self.
Perhaps you will say this comes not up to what I asserted; that our highest love
to every thing, is to be hatred in comparison of our love to God. Well, let
this be warily considered: one whose love to God is at this height, is exactly
curious in the management of his graces, and while he is so, he is as curiously
jealous, lest grace should warp to rob God of his glory. He loves inherent
grace heartily, Oh (says he) that my Soul were more enriched with it; but yet
while he is breathing after perfection in grace, he admiringly prefers God's
wise love in saving him by Christ, before Salvation by inherent grace; he
utterly renounceth the best of his graces, when pride would have them justle
with Christ for the procuring of acceptance. In short, a Soul that is overcome
with God's method of Salvation, is unable to bear any thing that darkens it.
Would God have me to be as watchful against sin, as if there were no Christ to
pardon it? 1 John 2.1.
My little Children these things I write unto you, that you sin not. Our first
care must be not to sin. Oh that I could perfectly comply with God in this; but
alas, I cannot! Would God have me to rest as entirely upon Christ after my
utmost seize, as that wretch who pretends to venture his Soul with him
out or an ill-spent life? O Lord! I trust no more to my good works, than he can
to his bad ones for his meriting of Salvation Let not this be mistaken, as if I
made no difference between good works and evil. The Apostle has taught me
better, Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will, that thou
affirm constantly, that they that have believed in God might be careful to
maintain good works: These things are good and profitable unto men, and ver.
14. Let us also learn to maintain good works, for necessary uses, that they be
not unfruitful. Good works they are genuine fruits, though not meritorious
causes of Justification.
; as I would not ungratefully overlook any thing the Spirit has done in me, so
I would not have any thing which I have almost marred in the Spirits doing of
it, to draw a curtain whereby Christ should be less looked on.

5. The most eminent degree of our love to God, is Ecstasy and Ravishment; we
need not go down to the Legends of the Philistines to sharpen our incentives to
the love of God. I could over-match what can be said with truth of Ignatius,
and Xaverius, with several (whom many of you knew) whose unparalled humility
hid them from observation; whose communion with God was often overwhelming; but
I forbear. Take a Scripture instance of this kind of love, compare but these
three passages in the Song of Songs, Cant. 2 5. I am sick of love; This is upon
Christ's first overcoming discovery of himself. Cant. 5.8. I charge you O
daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved, that you tell him that I am
sick of love. This charge is from her spiritual languishment, through earnest
desire of reconciliation, after some negligence and carelessness in duty. Cant.
8.6. This is when she has had the highest communion with God, that an
imperfect state affords, when she was as it were, upon the threshold of glory;
and then she says, love is strong as death, q.d. I shall dye unless thou grant
my desire, or let me dye that my desire may be granted; Jealousy is cruel as
the grave; that as the grave is never satisfied, so neither will my love
without the utmost enjoyments of thy self: The coals thereof are coals of fire,
which have a most vehement heat; my love burns up my corruptions, shines in
holiness, and mounts upwards in heavenly-mindedness; many waters cannot quench
it: the waters of afflictions are but as Oil to the fire. If a man would give
all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned. She
scorns all things that would force, or flatter her, out of her love to Christ.
Now if you except against this as spoken of love to Christ, and not of love to
God essentially, to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I readily answer, we
cannot see God lovely but in Christ. If any will be so curious as to assert
they look upon Christ himself as but a means to bring them to God, it is God
Essentially, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, when Christ shall have given up his
Mediatory Kingdom 1 Cor. 15.28.
, that must be their complete happiness; the means is not to be rested in, in
comparison of the end Rev. 5.2, 3.
. This may well be compared to a Sea of Glass slippery standing. O that I could
but discover what my Soul should long for, viz. how to look beyond Christ to
God, in whom alone is my complete happiness, and then to look (in some respect)
beyond God to Christ, to give the Lamb his peculiar honor, when I shall be
with the Almighty, and with the Lamb as in a Temple Rev 21.22, 23.
; when the glory of God, and of the Lamb shall be the light, whereby I shall
see that God 1 Timothy 6.16.
who dwells in such light, as no mortal eye can behold; That will be a
blessed vision indeed 1 Cor. 13.10, etc.
, when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away. We have yet but childish apprehensions of these things, to what we shall
have when Ep. 4.13.
we come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Now we see darkly, through the glass of ordinances, but then we shall
see face to face. Now we know but in part, but then we shall know God
(according to our measure) as God knows us; and then the greatest grace will be
love, perfect love, that will cast out all fear; fear of not-attaining, and
fear of losing that Joy of our Lord into which we are taken. But alas all I can
say in this matter is rather the restless fluttering of the soul toward God,
than the quiet resting of the Soul in God. Bradward. de causa Dei, l. z. c. 24.
^. 627, 628, 629, siarsim.
Let me close the Paragraph with that (I call a) rapture of profound
Bradwardine. O Lord my God, thou art the Good of every good, Good above all
good things, a Good most infinitely infinite; How therefore should I love thee?
How shall I proportionably love thee infinitely? O that I could! But how can I
that am so very little and finite, love thee infinitely? and how otherwise will
there be any proportion between thy loveliness and my loves? my God thou art
super-amiable, thou infinitely exceedest all other things that are lovely.
Perhaps Lord, I should love thee infinitely as to the Manner, when I cannot as
to the Act. It pertains to the manner of loving, to love thee finally for thy
self; and no other good finally for it self, but for thee, who art the chiefest
good, and the beginning and end of all good things. But perhaps I may in some
sort, love thee infinitely, as to the Act both intensively, and extensively:
intensively, in loving thee more intensly, more firmly, more strongly than any
finite good, and when I love nothing but for thy sake: extensively, when I
compare thee Lord, with all other great and good things, and had rather they,
and my self also had no being, than once to offend my good God. But yet most
loving Lord when I consider a proportion of love, I am greatly troubled. If
love should be according to the worth of the Object; by how much thou art
better than I am, and more profitable to me, than I am to my self; I should
love thee more than thou love me: but that I never can. O Lord I beseech
thee, how much do thou love me? is it weakly, and remisly according to my
goodness? that be far from thee Lord. Thou love thine incomparably more, than
thou art loved of them; as thou art incomparably greater, and better than they.
But O great, and good God, that fillest heaven and earth, yea the heaven of
heavens cannot contain thee. Why do thou not fill my poor little soul? O my
soul, why do thou not open all thy little doors? why do not thou extend
thy utmost capacity, that thou may be wholly possessed, wholly satiated, wholly
de-ebriated with the sweetness of so great love; especially when though thou
art so little, yet thou can not be satisfied with the love of any lesser
good. Many questions might be proposed to expostulate my soul into a flame of
love. But I see Lord, it is easy to speak and write these things, but it is hard
to do, and perfect them in effect. Thou therefore most good and Almighty Lord
to whom nothing is difficult, grant I pray thee, that I may more easily do
these things with my heart, than profess them with my mouth, etc.

And thus having after my poor manner put you upon practice, and pointed you
the way from the lowest to the highest step of divine love, I am sensible that
both good and bad have their exceptions ready against what I have delivered.
The humble trembling Christian, he fears that if the lowest degree of love to
God, has such heights in it, he shall never be able to reach it; and he is
grieved whom God would not have made sad. On the other hand, those that call
themselves Christians (though there is no reason for their usurping that title)
without any consideration of either the duty, or themselves, will bear you
down, that they love God with all their hearts, souls, and minds; and that they
have always done so; and they are unworthy to live that do not love God; and
if you enquire into any particulars whatsoever about their love to God, they will
rather quarrel with you than give you any satisfying answer. If I could
therefore propose any thing that would apply it self, i. e. by its own evidence
work it self into the conscience, I might hope to dissolve their
self-flatteries, I cannot at present think of a more compendious way of
undeceiving both these, and of further perswasively urging the love of God,
than by plainly naming the infallible Properties, and constant Effects of this
love hereby those that despondingly fear they want it, will find they have it;
and those that groundlesly boast of it, will find they want it, and both be
instructed what must be done to evidence and exert it.

I shall begin with the properties of our love to God. Properties of love to
God.
And here (as in all the rest) I must study contraction, and therefore dare not
particularly mention Gerson's fifty properties of Divine Love. I shall rather
follow Voetius's method, who ranks the properties of Divine Love thus. They are
partly Negative and Privative: partly Positive and Absolute: partly Comparative
and Transcendent. I shall speak briefly of each of these (your Consciences may
manage it as if it were a Use of Examination.)

Negative Properties or Adjuncts are such as these, and these may prevent the
mistakes of drooping Christians; and alas! a great part of Christ's Family are
such upon one account or other.

1. This Divine Love is not at all in the unregenerate, unless only in show
and imitation; that Soul that is solicitous about loving of God, that Soul
loves him. This is proper and peculiar to all those, and only those that are
born of God, that are the adopted Children of God. Let it be considered,
whether the Devil can counterfeit Love to God, as he can other Graces: their
Faith works by Fear, not by Love Jam. 2.19.
. The Devils believe and tremble. It Is true, he does not only suffer but (...)
promote an hypocritical Divine Love in some, and he may appear in a Love-mask
Luva amoris.
to others, as to Adam in Paradise Genesis 3.5.
, God does know that in the day you eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as Gods. He pretends he has more kindness for them,
than God himself, and the like to Christ Mat. 4.3, etc.
, but did he himself ever pretend so much as to love God? I grant, wicked men
pretend to love God, but the ridiculousness of their Discourse plainly
evidences, they neither understand what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

And whereas thou complainest that thou fear thy Love is not sincere,
because it is selfish; be not discouraged, while thou studyest to please God,
fear to offend him, prizest his presence, mournest for his absence; thy love
to God is infallibly sincere, though there be an ingredient of self in it: nay,
let me say more, it could not be sincere, if thou did not mind thy self: as
in the very quintessence of Conjugal Love, it is impossible to abstract it from
self-love; so the more we love God, the more we cannot but love our selves, yea
even then when we most deny our selves out of love to God.

2. This Divine Love is far from perfection, it is subject to more sensible
languishments and infirmities than any other grace; though it can never be
totally and finally extinguished. What though sometimes to thy own Apprehension,
thou can not tell whether thou love God at all? and what though at all
times thou complainest of fickleness and inconstancy? what though the time of
thy Fear be longer than the time of thy Love, yet while thine heart can say,
it is unquiet in this temper, and it is thy restless desire to love God more
perfectly. These very complaints speak Love; we never complain of want of Love
to those persons whom we do not already love. This as well as other graces is
here but in part 1 Cor. 13.10.
, while we are in this lower World, our very Graces will have their Nepe as
well as their Spring-Tides. We cannot yet be so wise as to foresee all our
hindrances, nor so watchful as to avoid all Satan's Ambushes, nor so perfect
as to maintain a spiritual frame of heart. Though this Grace is always in
motion, yet it does not always nor equally go forward.

3. Our love to God shall never be abolished Non quoad formam, nec quoad modum
tend^nd in objectam. 1 Cor. 13.8. Voet. ibid.
: Love never fails; the same kind of love, the same Numerical love that was
in gracious Persons on Earth, shall be continued in Heaven, and receive it is
perfection presently after its delivery from the Body of Death. There will be a
greater change in all our Graces than in our Love: A great part of our Life is
taken up in the Exercise of those Graces, that (I may in some respect say) dye
with us. The one half of our Life is (or should be) spent in Mortification: The
whole of our time needs the exercise of our Patience: Our Life at best, is but
a Life of Faith: much of our sweet Communion with God is fetched in by secret
Prayer: But now in Heaven there shall be no sin to be mortified; nothing
grievous to be endured; Faith shall be swallowed up in Enjoyment; and your
Petitions shall be all answered. So that now Christians set your selves to love
God, and you shall no way lose your labor. Other Graces are but as Physic to
the Soul, desirable for something else, which when obtained they are useless;
but Love to God is the healthful Constitution of the Soul, there is never any
thing of it in any sense useless. Most of the Graces of the Spirit do by our
Souls as our Friends by our Bodies, who accompany them to the Grave, and there
leave them: But now love to God is the alone Grace, that is to our Souls the
same that a good Conscience, our best Friend in both Worlds.

4. This Divine Love is so unknown to the World, that when they behold the
Effects and flames of it, in those that love God in an extraordinary manner,
they are ready to explode it as mere Vanity, Folly, Madness, Ostentation and
Hypocrisy. When Paul managed his Audience more like a Sermon than a Defense,
Festus cries out upon him as mad Acts 26.24.
. Yea when Christ himself in love to God and Souls, is more hungry after
Converts than Food; his nearest Relations think him crazed: and the multitude
comes together again, Mark 3.20, 21, 32.
so that they could not so much as eat bread: and when his Friends heard of it,
they went out to lay hold on him; for they said he is beside himself. But were
they any other but his carnal and graceless Relations that did this? See,
behold, thy Mother and thy Brethren without seek for thee 1 John 3.13.
. No marvel then, that Enemies reproach you, Friend forsake you, Relations
slight you, and the World hate you. Christ tells us Joh. 15.18, 23.
, if the World hate you, ye know that it hated me, before it hated you. But how
can the World hate Christ, who in love to it came to dye for it? Christ tells
his Hearers the true Reason Joh. 5.40, 42.
: I know you (this is no groundless surmise, nor censorious rashness, but I
know you) that you have not the love of God in you. Let what will appear at the
top, this lies at the bottom. And therefore judge I pray you, who more
phanatick, those that hate God, when they pretend to love him; or those that
are counted phrantick for their serious Love to God? I shall neither name more,
nor enlarge further on this first rank of Characters, but be brief also in the
second.

The Absolute Properties of Love to God are among many, some of them such as
these.

1. It is the most ingenious of all Graces. In poor inconsiderable Loves, not
worth the mentioning, how do persons contrive ways for the expressing and
exciting of Love; and there is no way to prevent it: Oh how much more, when the
Soul loves God? there is nothing meliorates the parts like Grace; Divine Love
makes the best improvement of Wit, Parts, Time; when a Person loves to pray,
though he can scarce speak sense to men, he can strenuously plead with God; a
person that loves to meditate, though he knows not how to make his thoughts
hang together in other things, they multiply on his hand with a spiritual and
profitable consistency. In short, to do any thing that may engage the Heart to
God, what gracious stratagems does Love abound with? That Nieremberg. de art.
Vol. p. 114.
as he that beholds his Face in a Glass, makes the Face which he sees; his very
look is the Pensil, the Color, the Art; so he that loves God, sees such a
Reflection of God's love to him, that a proud person does not more please her
self in her own fancyed beauty, than this gracious Soul is graciously delighted
in the mutual dartings of Divine Love. Keep from Will Worship and humane
Inventions in the things of God, especially from imposing upon others your
Prudentials of Devotion: and then I will commend it to you, to try all the
Experiments which the Scripture will warrant, to increase the flame of your
Divine love.

2. Love to God is the most bold, strong, constant, and daring Grace, of all
the Graces of the Spirit of God Cant. 8.6.
. Love is strong as Death: every one knows what work Death makes in the World.
It is not the Power of Potentates, nor the Reverence of Age, nor the usefulness
of Grace, can prevent its stroke, it conquers all. So does love to God. Nothing
can stand before it: what dare not love to God attempt? It designs
impossibilities, viz. Perfection, and is restless for the want of it. I may in
some sense say, it would fain have contradictions true, viz. to be without the
Body, while in it; (the Body's being a clog is so wearisome.) Love to God not
only baffles Satan, but through God's gracious condescension, it even prevails
with God himself, that God will deny nothing to the Soul that loves him.

3. Love to God is the only self-emptying, and satisfying Grace Nieremb. p.
322, etc. spa^si^.
Love, it is self's egress, it is a kind of Pilgrimage from self: he that loves
is absent from himself, thinks not of himself, provides not for himself. But oh
how great is the gain of renouncing our selves, and thereby receiving God and
our selves! we are as it were dead to our selves, and live to God; nay more, by
love we live in God 1 John 4.16.
; God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
By Faith we live upon God; by Obedience we live to God; but by Love we live in
God. It is herein alone that we can give something like a carnal (though it is
indeed an highly spiritual) answer to Nicodemus his question Joh. 3.4.
, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his
mothers Womb, and be born? We have our Soul^ immediately from the Father of
Spirits; by Regeneration we return to God again, from whom by Sin we are
estranged; and by love we live in him in some little resemblance to the Child's
living in the Mother's womb: what the mother loves, the child loves; what the
mother longs for, the child longs for; in the mothers health, the child is
well; the child lives there in a far different manner, from how it lives in the
world; though it cannot stir out of its enclosure, yet it never cries nor
complains of it is Imprisonment: So the Soul that entirely loves God, hates what
God hates, and loves what God loves; its life is far above the life of others,
and it desires no greater liberty than to be (as it were) imprisoned in God; to
have no will of its own, no one motion but what God graciously concurs in; yet
it is so far from esteeming this a restraint, that it counts it the highest
happiness of its imperfect state; he feels a sweetness in that, beyond what the
Heathen that spoke it, ever thought of, in God we live, move, and have our
being.

4. The love of God makes us anxiously weary of Life it self: in this love
there is one Death and two Resurrections Gal. 2.20.
. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me. Christ lives, and the Soul lives, and both by Love. I must acknowledge,
all manner of love is apt to be extravagant and irregular; our very love to God
is in this blind, when it comes to any considerable height; it is apt to
overlook (not in a way of Neglect, but Ecstasy) what is to be done and
suffered, and would fain be at the enjoyment of God in Heaven. By the way, let
not doubting Christians be discouraged, because it is not thus with them.
Though these Properties be but in the bud, they may in time be full blown;
therefore believe and wait: heights of grace are ordinarily as well the work of
time, as of the Spirit of God; Besides, you know there is nothing more common
than for Lovers to dissemble their love; so here, it is too common for gracious
persons rather to belly the Spirit of God, than thankfully to own their love to
God: because they are afraid of being mistaken, and they are afraid of boasting
of a false Gift; and here, though Love when it is perfect, it casts out Fear,
yet while it is imperfect Fear proves our Love. Thus much of the Positive
Properties, I Will be very brief in the transcendent properties of our love to
God.

1. Love to God is the great General directing Grace, containing all other
particular Graces in it, and most intimately goes through the Acts of all of
them V^et. ibid. 1 Cor. 13.
. Love in the Soul is as the Pilot in the Ship, who steers the Ship and all its
Passengers. Love steers the Soul and all its Operations. Love is the Needle in
the Compass that is still trembling toward its Divine Loadstone. Eusebius.
Nieremb. compares other Graces to Bullion uncoyn'd, which though it have an
intrinsic value, yet it is not that Money that answers all things: what shall I
say, find out a thousand transcendent Metaphors, love will answer them all?

2. It is in a singular manner infinite. Among all the Faculties of the Soul,
there is none but the Will that can in any sound sense be said to be infinite;
all the other Faculties are more bounded than the Will; now love is the natural
Act of the will, and love to God is the supernaturally natural Act of the
renewed Will. Its desires (which is the love of desires) are to be united unto
God, the Fountain of all Blessedness. And here, those that love God least, (so
it be sincerely) their desires are infinite, e. g. Desires are the feet of the
Soul, their love will creep when it cannot go; Desires are the wings of the
Soul, love will flutter when it cannot fly; Desires are the breathings of the
Soul, love will pant, and groan, and gasp, where it can do no more. Again, the
contentment and satisfaction of the Will (which is the love of complacency) is
infinite (in as large a sense as that word can be ascribed to Creatures,)
desires are the motion and exercise of love; delight is the quiet and repose of
it. My beloved, to have the heart to delight in God, or to ache and tingle with
the discourse of the love of God, through reflection upon the want of it, as
unable to stand under his own thoughts, this infallibly shows great love; and
this Soul's satisfaction in God is in some sort infinite.

Effects of love to God, they relate either to God himself, or to our selves,
or they are mutual; I Will speak briefly of each. Effects that relate to God,
Effects of love to God.
are such as these; I do not only say these, but these, and such as these.

1. Hatred of, and flight from all that is evil. Joseph may be our instance,
his mistress would have inveigled him into sin, but though Genesis 39.10.
she spoke to him day by day, yet he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or
to be with her; he that fears sin will get as far as he can out of the reach of
a temptation. Hatred of sin always holds proportion with our love to God: our
inward hatred of sin with our inward love of God; our return to sin with the
decay of our love to God. The renewing of our repentance answers the reviving
of our love to God. Every one that does not love God, loves sin, plain
downright sin, sin without any excuse, e.g. either some moral wickedness, or a
resting in their own righteousness.

2. The fear of God. A reverential tenderness of Conscience, lest we sin
against God. It is not only fear of hell, but fear of God's goodness Hos. 3 5.
, they shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. The soul that
loves God, is troubled that he either does, or omits any thing for fear of
hell, and that he is no more affected with love-arguments. Though, pray, take
notice by the way, That all fear of hell does not presently argue a spirit of
bondage; Hopes and Fears poyse the Soul while in this World. I would therefore
leave this charge upon you, viz. Be sure that you love God better than the
blessed Apostle loved him, before you censure any for want of love, who are
diligent in duty upon this motive, lest they be at last cast-aways 1 Cor. 9.27.
. But to return, Though Gods gracious condescension be so great as to allow
those that love him a non such familiarity, yet that never breeds the least
contempt. Sense of distance between God and the Soul, between the holy God, and
a sinful Soul, between the faithful God, and the fickle Soul: O this causes
holy tremblings, and humble Apologies in our most familiar pleadings with God.
The Father of the faithful, whom God honored with the title of his friend, (of
whose love to God you have already heard) when he pleaded with Christ face to
face in so familiar a way, never any like him; see how he then prefaceth his
prayer Genesis 18.27.30,
, Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and
ashes. Again, O let not the Lord be angry and I will speak Psalm. 89.7.
, God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him. Methinks that passage of Christ to
his Disciples, with the circumstance of time, when he spoke it, just upon the
most servile action of his life, may for ever keep an awe upon our hearts Joh.
13, 12, 13.
, Know ye what I have done unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am. When God deals most familiarly with us as with friends, let
us carry it reverently as becomes servants.

3. Obedience to the commands of God, and to those commands which would never
be obeyed but out of love to God 1 John 5.3.
. For this is the love of God that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous, e. g. to obey those commands that are unpleasing
and troublesome. Those commands that thwart our carnal reason, and so part with
things present for the hopes of that we never saw, 1 John 2.5.
nor any man living that told us of them. Whosoever keeps his word, in him verily
is the love of God perfected; hereby we know that we are in him. Once more hear
what Christ says, He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is
that loves me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self unto him. Joh. 14.21, 23
And again, if any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

4. Resignation of our selves to God; whereby we devote our selves wholly to
God, to be wholly his quoad (...) and quoad (...).
, to be every way disposed of as he pleases. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge; that if one dyed
for all, then were all dead. And that he dyed for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them,
etc. This resignation is like that in the conjugal relation, it debars so much
as treating with any other; it (as it were) proclaims an irreconcilable hatred
to any that would partake of any such love. God does not deal with us as with
slaves, but takes us into that relation, which speaks most delight and
happiness; and we are never more our own, than when we are most absolutely his.

5. Adhesion and cleaving unto God, in every case, and in every condition;
Psalm. 63.7, 8.
in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice, my soul follows hard after thee.
Methinks we may say of the law concerning Deuteronomy. 22.6.
birds, what the Apostle says of the law concerning oxen, does God take care
of birds? for our sakes no doubt it is written to instruct us against cruelty;
but may we not learn a further lesson, the bird was safe while on her nest; our
only safety is with God. Now to cleave to God in all conditions, not only
when we fly to him as our only refuge in our pressures, but in our highest
prosperity, and outward happiness, when we have many things to take to, whence
the world expects happiness, this is a fruit of great and humble love, this
demonstrates an undervaluing of the world, and a voluntary choosing of God;
this is somewhat like heavenly love.

6. Tears and sighs through desires and joys; when the spiritual lovesick
soul, would in some such, but an unexpressable manner, breath out it is sorrows
and joys into the bosom of God. Lord, why thus loving to me, and why is my
heart no more overcome with divine love? those that never received so much from
thee, love thee more. O I am weary of my want of love! O I am weary of my
distance from God! O I am weary of my unspiritual frame! we that are in this
tabernacle do groan being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life (i). Here when the
heart is ready to dye away through excess of love, 2 Cor, 5.4.
it is passionately complaining of defects. Dear Lord what shall I say? what
shall I do? what shall I render? O for more endearing communications of Divine
love! O for more answerable returns of love to God! Thus much of effects as to
God.

The only effect I shall name as to us, is, a seeking of heaven and things
above, with contempt of the world, and all worldly excellencies. One that loves
God thinks he can never do enough in heavenly employments. A person that
abounds in love to God is too apt to neglect secondary duties, which are in
their places necessary: they are apt to justle out one duty with another, e.g.
those duties wherein they have most sensible communion with God, bear down
lesser duties before them: whereas could we keep within Scripture-bounds, and
mind every duty according to it is moment, then this is an excellent effect of
divine love, e. g. to be afraid of worldly enjoyments, lest they should steal
the heart from God; yet at the same time not to dare to omit any worldly duty,
lest I should prove partial in the work of Christianity. To make conscience of
the least duties, because no sin is little, but to be proportionably careful of
the greatest duties, lest I should prove an hypocrite: such a carriage is an
excellent effect of divine love, this is fruit that none who are not planted
near the tree of life can bear.

Mutual effects are these, and such like as these.

1. Union with God. Union is the foundation of communion, and communion is the
exercise of union. The Spirit of God is the immediate efficient cause of this
union, and faith is the internal instrument on our part, but love is the
internal instrument both on God's part, and ours Ephesians. 3.17.
, Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, we being rooted and grounded in love.
This union is most immediately with Christ, and through him with the Father,
and Holy Ghost. It is an amazing and comfortable truth, that our union with
Christ does much resemble the personal union of the two natures in Christ. (I
grant it is unlike it in more considerations, because of the transcendency of
the mystery, but yet there is some resemblance) e. g. the Humane Nature in
Christ is destitute of it is subsistence and personality, by it is union with,
and it is assumption to the divine: so the gracious soul has no kind of
denomination, but what it has from its union with Christ: It Is gracious being
is bound up in its union with Christ. Other men can live without Christ, but so
cannot the gracious soul. Again, in Christ there is a communication of
properties, that is, that which is proper to the divine nature is attributed to
the humane; and contrarily, that which is proper to the humane nature, is
attributed to the divine: so here in the soul's union with Christ; Christ is
made sin for us, and dealt with, as if he were a sinner; we are made the
righteousness of God in him, and privileged as righteous persons. Christ's
riches are ours, and our poverty his: yea more, the offices of Christ, are
attributed to Believers; 1 Pet. 2.5,
they are an holy and a royal priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; and Christ has made Rev. 1.6.
us Kings and Priests unto his father, Christ has a stock of created grace,
'twas for us Joh. 1.16. 2 Timothy 2.1.
of his fullness have we all received and grace for grace. The Apostle bids us
be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. What shall I say? is Christ the
natural Son of God: they are the adopted. Is Christ the beloved Son of God?
Believers (in their measure) are so too. They are dead with Christ, buried with
Christ, risen with Christ, sit together in heavenly places with Christ,
fellow-heirs with Christ. In short, as there never was such another union in
the world, as the union of the two natures in Christ, So there never was, nor
ever can be, such another union in the world, as between Christ and the
believer. It is beyond what any metaphors from art or nature can fully express.
That of a Foundation and Building; of a Vine and Branches; of Head and Members;
of Soul and Body; are but dark shadows of this union. But I must not enlarge.

2. Communion with God; Communion consists in communication, Cum res unius sit
alterius.
when there is a kind of community of propriety. I might run over the former
particulars, and enlarge them, but the subject is not so barren, that I need
name one thing twice. Christians I beg of you that you would be careful of
receiving, because I can be but brief in delivering a few hints of the
communication of divine love between God and us, e. g. 2 Pet. 1.4.
God communicates the divine Nature to us through his fulfilling exceeding
great and precious promises: We make returns as those that are born of God in
obeying his commands. Because God loves us, he communicates unto us his
communicable properties, of holiness, wisdom, goodness. Seeing we have nothing
to return, we prostrate our selves at his feet, ingenuously acknowledge our
unholiness, folly, and badness. God and the Soul holds communication in all
gracious actions: God communicates strength to the doing of those things which
he cannot do Through his perfection, not defect.
, but we must; to repent, believe, obey God; these are our actions through his
strength. Again, we exercise our graces upon God for those his actions which we
cannot do, but (we may through his covenant engagement, with humble
thankfulness say) he must, e. g. for the pardon of sin, speaking peace to the
Conscience, giving out of gracious influences, etc. for these we admire God, we
praise him, rejoice in him. Once more, in those things wherein we can make no
return to God, but may to others for God's sake; our love to God necessitates
us to do it, e. g. God pities us, is merciful and kind to us; God is infinitely
above all such returns: Ay, but so are not the Members of Christ, who are the
best visible Image of God in the world: I Will give them not only my alms, but my
very bowels, etc. In short, in this communication, God and the gracious Soul
have the same interest, drive on the same design (the advancement of Christ and
the Gospel) have the same friends, and the same enemies. They communicate
secrets to each other; none but the loving Soul knows the secrets of divine
love, and none but God hears all the secrets of the Soul without a reserve.
Among the dearest friends in the world, there is some reserve: Some things we'll
rather speak to a stranger, than to our dearest bosome-friend; we think them
not fit to mention, or we are loath to trouble them; but there is none of this
between God and the Soul: God tells us all that may benefit, not overcharge us:
we tell God all the very worst of our own hearts, which we are ashamed to
mention to those that most love us. God deals with us according to our
capacities, our bottles would break should God over-fill them; but we deal with
God according to the utmost of our active graces: God is both compassionate to
pity and pardon what is no way acceptable, and even incredibly condescending to
accept of what none but his infinite grace would accept.

3. Familiar love-visits. When God makes sad visits to the disquieting of
Conscience, and the breaking of our peace; yet even then the Soul, under
trouble of Conscience, would not change its spiritual trouble for the best of
the worlds peace, no not for its former peace, with which 'twas so well pleased
before conversion; the Soul that loves God cannot construe that to be a visit
which others count so. The Soul never goes to God as we go to visit those we
care not for, that we are glad at their being from home, so the visit be but
paid, we care not. Pray compare some passages in that Song of loves; one while
you have the Spouse enquiring of Christ Cant. 1.7.
; Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flocks to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that turns aside by
the flocks of thy Companions, q. d. Tell me, O Lord, my love and life, where I
may have both instruction, and protection in an hour of trouble; lest through
thy absence I be seduced by those that only pretend to love thee. Christ gives
a present answer, and quickly after returns an invitation. O my dove Cant. 2.14.
that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me
see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely, q. d. O my mourning dove, that dare not stir out of
thy secret place, stir up thy faith, hold up thy face with comfort, let me hear
thy prayers and praises; though others censure them, I esteem them; though
others count thee deformed, thou art in my eyes beautiful. Here Is something of
affection, but see more Cant. 4.16.
, Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits, q. d. O my
Lord, what I have from thee, I return to thee; accept I beseech thee the fruits
of obedience, and praise. Christ presently accepts the invitation Cant. 5.1.
, I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh,
with my Spices, I have eaten my Honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk up my
Wine with my Milk: eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved. q. d.
Thou shall no sooner ask, than be answered; I accept thy graces, and duties,
thy bitter repentance, and thy fragrant holiness, they are most sweet to me,
notwithstanding their imperfections; and ye, O my Friends, whether blessed
Angels, or gracious Souls, do you cheer your selves with the same spiritual
dainties, wherewith I am refreshed. This is much, but there is more in the next
expression I shall name Cant. 6.5.
. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, q. d. I am ravished
and vanquished by thy fixed eye of faith; in short, see the Spouse's closing
request Cant. 8.14.
: Make have my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or a young Heart upon the
mountains of Spices; q. d. as I began this Song my dearest Savior, with
passionate desires of thy first coming by the Preaching of the Gospel; so
though I thankfully praise thee for all the communion I have had with thee, yet
I cannot (my Lord) but more passionately long for thy glorious coming, to take
me with thee from these bottoms of death, and valleys of tears, to those
eternal heights where nothing springs but life and glory; that instead of this
Song I may sing a new one to the Lamb, and to him that sits upon the Throne
unto all eternity. Thus (but in a far more Seraphick manner than I am able to
express) the Soul-loving God, as the God-loving Soul Zeph. 3.17.
are rejoicing in each other with joy, till they rest in each other's love. In
short, the Soul that loves God is never so well, as when most immediately with
him, and while there is any distance, many a love-glance passes between God and
the Soul, even in the greatest crowd of business and diversions.

4. A putting a love-interpretation upon all things. God looks upon the very
miscarriages of those whom he loves as their infirmities, and puts a better
interpretation upon them, than they dare do themselves Mark 14 37, ^8, 40.
. The Disciples slept when Christ bade them watch, they wist not what to answer
him: Christ himself excuses it better than they could, in saying, the spirit
truly is ready, but the flesh is weak. And the loving Soul is as loath to take
any thing ill at the hands of God; when it is never so bad with the Soul, he
blesses God that it is no worse. God and the loving Soul do those things
toward each other, which nothing but love can put a good interpretation upon;
the truth is, without love 'twere intolerable, e. g. God requires that Service
of the gracious Soul, that he requires of no other; viz. to bless God when
persecuted, to rejoice in tribulations, to hope against hope, etc. God puts the
Soul that loves him, upon those trials that he puts upon no other, viz. Those
chastisements from himself, those reproaches from men, those buffetings from
Satan, which are peculiar to Saints; but the Soul heartily loves God under all
these. Again, the Soul grows upon God in prayer, and the more it receives from
God, the more insatiable it is, and God loves the Soul the better for it. When
afflictions are extreme, those that love God put the affliction upon the
account of God's faithfulness: On the other hand, when the poor Soul is foil d,
and Satan runs with the tidings of it to set God against him; God pities the
Soul, Zech. 3.1, 2. etc.
and rates the Accuser. And he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before
the Angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him; and
the Lord said to Satan, the Lord rebuke thee, O Satan, even the Lord that has
chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee, Joshua was clothed with filthy garments -- take
away the filthy garments from him, etc. Here Is Joshua the High Priest, while
executing his Office in offering Sacrifices and Prayers for the people, Satan
arraigns him as a Prisoner at the Bar, and the accusation being true and
vehement, Satan takes the upper hand; but now, Jesus Christ, as well the Patron
as the Judge of Saints, cuts him short with a vehement reproof, and tells him,
those sins could not make void that choice, which they could not at first
hinder; and farther Christ as it were tells him they had been severely
punished, half burnt and wasted by the heat of Gods displeasure; and would he
now re-kindle that fire? No Satan, thy charge is, as it were, thrown out of the
Court, his sins shall be pardoned, his graces multiplied, and upon the
well-discharging of his office, he shall have places to walk among them that
stand by; Alluding to the walks and galleries about the Temple, q. d. Thou
shall walk with these glorious Angels, they shall be thy Companions and
Guardians, where Satan has no place. So that Christ loves a Soul the more, not
the less, for Satan's accusations.

To all these effects add these Concomitants, or those things that have
agreement with, or are near of kin to Divine Love; which do not really differ
from it, only express some part, or manner of it. In short, it is love under
some other form or notion. I shall only mention two Concomitants.

1. Devotion, which is an absolute delivering up of our selves to Gods Worship
and Service, so as by no flatteries or dangers to be diverted 1 Timothy 4.15.
. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear to all. Herein lies the strength of Religion, and the spiritual
pleasure of it, herein the Soul can say with some kind of triumph Isa. 12.2, 3.
, Behold God is my Salvation; I will trust and not be afraid; for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength, and Song, he also is become my Salvation. Therefore
with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of Salvation. Christians, we must
not only be barely frequent in religious actions; but we must act as those that
are given up to God, we must mind the fervor of Religion. We must be exceeding
watchful over out thoughts to keep them from vanity, and over our affections to
keep them from entanglement. I would therefore commend it to you, to single out
every morning some short passages of Scripture, or some encouraging promise
that has affected you, to roll in your minds, or to lie upon your hearts all
day to maintain this holy fervor; nothing works and keeps such an impression
upon the heart as Scripture.

2. The other concomitant is Zeal, which is the most intense degree of desire
and endeavor to please, and honor God. It Is the boiling up of the affections
to the greatest heat; this must be the companion of every grace; now Zeal is
expressed against sin, or in duty. In the exercise of Zeal against sin, I beg of
you to observe this Rule, viz. Whatever act of Zeal you express toward others,
double it first upon your selves: whatever evil you reprove, or would reform in
others, be doubly strict against it in your selves. This is Christ's counsel,
Cast out the beam out of thine own eye, then shall thou see clearly to pull out
the mote out of thy Brother's eye; Math. 7.5.
Mine eye is not capable of having a beam in it, but a mote in mine own eye,
should be to me as a beam, in comparison of what it is in another. Take a few
Scripture instances (for this had need to be inculcated in the present age) in
case of dishonor done to God and your selves, compare Moses his carriage Numb.
12.2.
, Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, Has the Lord indeed spoken only by
Moses? has he not spoken also by us? and the Lord heard it, but Moses was as
if he heard it not, for he was very meek above all men that were upon the face
of the earth: He was so indeed, but it was only in his own cause; when the
glory of God is concerned, you will find him of another temper. As soon as he saw
the Calf, and the Dancing, Moses's anger waxed hot -- and he took the calf
which they had made, and burned it in the fire, and ground it to powder, Exodus
32.19, 20, 22, 27.
and strewed it upon the water, and made the Children of Israel drink of it --
And Moses stood up in the gate of the Camp, and said, who is on the Lord's s
de, let him come unto me -- and he said, put every man his Sword by his side,
and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor, etc. Here is
one ice-cold in his own cause, fire-hot in God's. Take another instance of Paul
Gal. 4.12.
, Brethren I beseech you be as I am, for I am as ye are; you have not injured
me at all, q, d. the wrong you have done me, I count as nothing: but to Elimas
that would hinder the entertainment of the Gospel, he says, thou Child of the
Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness, Acts 13.10.
etc. and he strikes him blind. I instance in these now, because I mentioned
them before, as singularly eminent for their love to God.

For Zeal about duties I commend unto you this rule, In every duty you take in
hand, endeavor to do it above your strength, not only to the uttermost of your
strength, but above it. I bottom this rule upon the commendation given to the
Churches of Macedonia 2 Cor. 8.3.
. For to their power (I bear record) yea, and beyond their power, they were
willing of themselves. My Brethren, It becomes us in every thing of Piety to
pant after the utmost perfection attainable Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.
. Not as though I were already perfect: but I labor after, forgetting those
things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before,
etc. And David says Psalm. 69.9.
, The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. In a word, we must not only be
sometimes zealous under pangs of Conscience, but always in the whole frame of
our conversation Gal. 4.18.
. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, and not only when
a Minister or some other is present who may commend you.

The last thing I first proposed was, to urge some perswasives to be graciously
ambitious of such qualifications, and as graciously diligent in such exercises.
And here I must pass by more arguments, than I can so much as mention. For the
truth is, you can name nothing in the world, but it may be an Argument to
promote our love to God.

1. Consider, God is our great Benefactour. I mention this twice, that it may
be often in your thoughts: Who can reckon up the benefits we receive from God?
If love be to be recompensed with love, greater love was never shown than this,
that God has given his Son to dye for his Enemies? If love be to be purchased
at any rate, who can give more for it than eternal life? If love be to be
bestowed gratis, who more worthy of it than God? and can thou then do less
than love him? It is commended as an expedient to overcome the worst of our
enemies Romans 12.20.
: If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink, for in so doing,
thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Oh what hearts have we, that mercies
will not melt them? Reflect a little upon your selves, we use to indent with
little Children for their love; if we give them but an apple, or a plumb, we
presently ask, will you love me? and if they promise to love us, we then
enquire, where will you love me? Oh dear Christians, turn in upon your own
hearts a little: O how many, how great mercies do you receive from God Prove. 17
8.
? Solomon tells us, that a gift whithersoever it turns, it prospers, shall
God's gifts be the only exception to that Proverbial Maxim? For shame
Christians let us strive who shall be first in crying, O come let us worship,
and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker Psalm. 95.6.
; Know ye that the Lord is God Psalm. 100.3.
. It is he that made us, and not we our selves; we are his People, and the
sheep of his pasture. Psalm. 31.23.
O love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Lord preserves the faithful. God
is pleased to give us in actual possession of what his wise love thinks fittest
for us: and God is pleased to give us promises suitable to every condition we
can be in, in this world, e. g. In case of want Mat. 6.31, 32, 33.
, Take no thought, saying what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewith shall we be clothed; surely, if we may be sollicitous about any
worldly concern, it is about food and raiment; but Christ charge us upon our
Christianity, not to be thoughtful about them. For after all these things do
the Gentiles seek. But if we do not take care for food and raiment, we may
starve. Christ does as it were say, nay; there is no danger of that, for your
heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things. Were this
believed, men would lay aside their Callings: No warrant for that, Christ
lays down a rule for our practice, as the condition of the promise, Seek ye
first (not only, but first) the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and
then (in a way of diligence, not negligence) all these things shall be added to
you; This in respect of want. Take another in case of danger. The name of the
Lord is a Prove. 18.10.
strong Tower; the Righteous runs into it, and is safe. O how safe is that
person that is as it were garrisoned in the divine Attributes! in case of
suffering Mark 10.29, 30.
, Verily I say unto you, there is no man that has left house, or brethren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and
the Gospel; but that he shall receive an hundred fold; Now in this time, an
hundred fold more comfort in parting with all for Christ, than he could have
had in keeping all, and denying of him. But why should I name particulars?
there is enough in one Scripture, whence to form many incentives to love God:
Romans 8.28.
We know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
that are called according to his purpose. Pray mark this place, We] It Is not
only the Apostle, but all Believers. Know] it is not we only Think, or Hope, but
we Know, that all things] all those afflicting providence which are most
grievous to be born, all those dark providence which we know not what to make
of, work together] though we cannot presently anatomize every particular
providence, yet in their contexture we cannot but say they are gracious, and for
good] for the spiritual and eternal good of all them that love God.] O but here
I stick, I cannot say I love God. Read on, the next clause is the best
Interpreter of this, To them that are the called according to his purpose] that
is plainly, to those that obey Christ's call in his Word, to all that are
converted, to all that are willing to be taught, and ruled by Jesus Christ. And
though thou dare not own thy conversion, yet thou dare not deny this
evidence of it, viz. That thou would fain comply with Christ in every thing.

2. Love to God enobles all other graces. I will not meddle with the
controversy about faith's being informed by love, or love being as it were the
Soul of faith. The Scripture tells that faith works by love Gal 5.6.
, and it is by loving nothing so much as God. Love is the most ingenuous grace,
the most heavenly grace, the most God-like grace; all other graces are more or
less excellent, as they are enlivened with love to God. Sales Sales of the love
of God p 670, etc. Spa^sim.
illustrates it thus, The General of an Army having gained some renowned
victory, will have all the glory of it, for he ordered the Battle, and led them
on; we name the Services of the several parts of the Army, both the Vanguard,
the Body, the Wings, the Rear. So here, some Christians are singular for Faith,
others for Alms deeds; some for Prayer, others for Humility; but Love to God
commands all these: Love commands Patience to bear, and Hope to wait, and Faith
to believe. Elsewhere he compares love to Scarlet, which is a Royal cloth, not
for the wool, but for the dye; so a Soul, (as it were) double dipped in love to
God, is the most excellent Christian.

3. Love to God rectifieth all other loves, and keeps them in due bounds. The
same Author has this other illustration, viz. I may love my servant, but if I
do not love my child better than I love my Servant, I am defective in my love.
Well then, I must love my child, but if I do not love my wife better than I
love my child, I am defective in my love. Well then, I must love my wife, but
if I do not love God infinitely more than I love my wife, I am defective in my
love. You shall see (says he) a Mother so busy about her child, as if she had
no love for any one else, as if her Eyes were for nothing else but to look upon
it, and her Mouth for nothing else but to kiss it: But now if she must lose her
child or her husband, her love to her Husband is so great, as if she had no
love for her child at all. So when God and those we most dearly love, stand in
competition; you may soon see the subordination of our love. Though let me add
this for your encouragement, God never calls for the hating of other things for
love to himself, but he does most singularly make up in himself whatever any
one parts with for him; when God requires the banishment of other Objects, it
is to communicate himself more fully, more clearly, more sweetly. Look over
what Martyrology you please, I think you will scarce find so much as One, dying
for Christ any other way than Triumphing; whereas many of as eminent Graces as
they, dye in their Beds, little less than despairing. What encouragement may
this be for the worst of times?

4. Our love to God does more sensibly quiet our hearts, than God's love to us;
for though God's love to us be infinitely greater than our love to God, yet
till his love to us have drawn out our love to him, we do more abuse his
kindness than other persons do whom he does not so love. This is most evident
in a person just upon the borders of conversion, but yet unconverted; God is
abundant in his love of Benevolence, he is now engaged upon the making of means
effectual for his through-regeneration; but now in this work there are several
things to be done, which though they speak greater love on Gods part, than ever
he before showed him; yet while God is at work, the person quarrels with God
more than about any former providence of his Life. God to tame him, brings him
under great Afflictions, upon which he either flies in his face, or lies sullen
at his feet, and thinks he may well do so; well, but God will not thus leave
him, God follows him with terrors of Conscience, the arrows of God stick fast
in him, and the poison thereof drinks up his spirits, but he will not yet
yield, he holds fast his iniquity, which he is as loath to part with as his life,
and rather hates than loves God for all this kindness: so that till he is
brought to love God, God's love to him does no way quiet him; by which you may
plainly see, that let Gods love to us be never so great, we misinterpret all,
till we love God again, and then let God do what he will, Da mihi Domine
Sanctum amorem tuum, and mitte me si vis in ignem inferni, Stell. de amore dei,
p. 314, etc.
he is quiet, let his sufferings be next to Hell torments, he will not allow one
hard thought of God. Therefore be persuaded to get, increase, and exercise this
Love to God with all your hearts, souls and minds. I have been too long
already, and therefore will be as brief as may be in answering these two
Complaints.

1. Complaint. All that has been said, makes me fear I have no true love to
God at all; I cannot say I love God more than the Creature, I feel my heart
more sensibly warping toward the World in the Service of God, than springing
toward God in my worldly affairs.

To this I answer by these Distinctions.

Distinction 1. We must distinguish between the Estimation of our love, and the
Commotion of it; the Commotion may be greater, where the Estimation is less:
One whose love is fixed upon God, though he is so far from forsaking God, that
he will forsake all things for God, yet he may till he recollect himself, be
more moved with some petty loss. In short, he may have some violent Gust of
Affection after other things, but the constant breathings of his Soul is after
God.

2. We must distinguish between the solidity of our Love, and the flashiness of
it, between a superficial, and a lasting Joy; e. g. A Covetous man may laugh
more when he is tickled, than when you give him a thousand pound, but he is a
thousand times more joyful of his thousand pound than of his being tickled. The
Souls love to God is Well rooted Ephesians. 3.18
. As a sick man is pleased with one that will sit with him, and alleviate his
pains by diversion; but he is more pleased with that man that shall cure him.
While our Souls are in a sickly frame, we are pleased a little with variety of
Diversions, but we soon see their emptiness, and charge our Souls to return
unto God for a perfect cure.

3. We must distinguish between our spiritual love and our sensible love: while
we live in this world, such is our weakness through the remainders of Sin, and
imperfection of Grace, that our Animal and Vital spirits are more affected with
sensible things, than with spiritual. The things of the World are near to us,
and we cannot live without them; but yet he that loves God, never says upon
the Enjoyment of them Luke 12.i9.
, Soul take thine ease; Oh no, he is angry, and grieved that he is at all
pleased about such things.

2. Complaint. I hope I am not wholly destitute of this excellent Grace, yet I
am afraid to own that I have it. Is it impossible to get my Heart above this
uncomfortable uncertainty? O that my heart were more raised and fixed above
this anxious temper!

I Will close all with an Essay to answer this Complaint; only premise, Let not
any thing that shall or can be spoken, be wrested to give the least
encouragement imaginable to any thing of Sin; take heed you do not upon any
account gratify your sloth, or indifferency of spirit, or any sins of
Omission; keep off this Rock, and then thy solicitude about thy fickleness,
gives thee grounds of hope to get above it. Take therefore these short
Directions, how to get and keep the most certain, constant, comfortable,
spiritual frame of Divine love that is to be had upon Earth.

1. Keep a severe Watch against all sins: yet give not way to drooping Fears,
because of unavoidable infirmities Psalm. 130, 3, 4.
. If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? But there is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared.

2. Observe your own temper, what it is that most draws out your love to any
person or thing in this world, and improve that very inducement to love God
Cant. 5.16.
. He is altogether lovely; that is, Imagine or name any thing that is most
desirable, most worthy to be loved and admired, and that is he.

3. Endeavor to love God out of Duty, when (to your own apprehension) you
cannot love him out of Grace: I would commend this to you for all your gracious
carriage toward God, and for all the kindness you would receive from God; e.
g. Repent as it is a duty, even while you fear you want the Grace of Repentance.
Believe as it is a duty, while you think you cannot act Faith as a Grace. So
justify God (i. e. acknowledge God to be Righteous, though he condemn you,)
when you fear God will not justify you. Sanctify God, ( i. e. celebrate God's
Holiness) when you fear he will not sanctify you, i. e. not make you holy. So set
your selves to love God, i. e. take heed you do not offend him, do all you can
to please him, take up with nothing on this side himself. In short, Let God
find you in a way of Duty, and you will find God in a way of Grace.

4. Study Christ. What Divine love we either receive or return, it is through
Christ. You may look for encouragement from Christ for every thing but Sin. In
every thing have recourse to Christ Col. 2.10.
, for the performance of every Duty, for the attaining of every Grace; when you
fear Grace is withering, Christ will revive it Cant. 3.10.
. In a word, pray and strive that you may feel what it is for Christ to be all
in all. Christians, practically mind these four Directions, and they will be as
the Wheels of Christ's Chariot that is paved with Love, to bring his Beloved to
Glory.

How ought we to love our Neighbors as our selves? Sermon. II.
Math. 22.39. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.
THE Apostle bids us consider Christ, Heb. 12 3.
who endured (...) Emphati (...) posuit: declarans magnitudinem (...). Aretius.
such (that is, so great) contradiction of sinners against himself: It was from
a great spirit of this kind, that his adversaries used to propose so many
captious questions to him. We find him no less than three times opposed in this
one chapter: First, by the disciples of the Pharisees, and the Forsitan in
populo tunc qui dicebant oportere dare tributum Caesari, vocabantur Herodiani,
ab his qui hoc facere recusabant. Vide Drus. com. ad voces N. T. L. De Dieu.
Herodians, about the lawfulness of giving tribute unto Caesar: again, the same
day by the Sadduces, with a question about the resurrection, which they denied.
When he had so well acquitted himself of both these, that the first marvelled
and left him, and the last were put to silence; behold he is again set upon by
the Pharisees, who seem to have chosen out one of their number to oppose him
with a question: Then one of them, which was a Lawyer, asked him a question,
tempting him, ver. 35. The same person is by another Evangelist called a
Scribe, Mark 12.28. One of the Scribes came, etc.

There were two sorts of Scribes among the Jews, viz. Scribes of the People,
who were Actuaries in and about matters of public concernment; and Scribes of
the Law, whose business was to read, and interpret the Law of God unto them:
such a one was Ezra, who is said to be a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, Ezra
7.6. and upon this account they are said to sit in Moses's seat: of this last
sort was the person in the Text, Math. 23.2.
as plainly appears by joining both Evangelists together: Mark says he was
(...), one of the Scribes; Matthew says he was (...), a Lawyer; if we put them
both together, they say he was a Scribe of the Law. And the question that he
tempted Christ with, is concerning the Law: Master, Luke 2.46.47.
which is the great Commandment in the Law? v. 36. He who was able at twelve
years of age to dispute with the Doctors, in such a manner as that all that
heard him marvelled at his understanding, and answers; was not like, at this
time, to go far to seek for an answer to such a question: we have him therefore
speaking roundly and directly to it, ver. 37.38.39. Jesus said unto him, thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind; this is the first and great Commandment; and the second is
like unto it: Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The latter part of
this answer falls under our present consideration: thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. This is said to be like unto the first, i. e. a great
commandment; because as that comprehends all the duty we owe to God
immediately, so this includes all that duty we owe to man.

The Hillel Senex. Lex nostra uno pede continetur; Diliges proximum tuum
tanquam teipsum. Uno pede, hoc est, uno Capite, quod vocant universale magnum.
Drus. Apophtheg. Ebrae. lib. 1. John 15.14. Phil. 4.8.
Jewish Doctors were wont to call it, the Universal great precept: sometimes
again the Head: sometimes the foot of the Law; alluding possibly to the total
sum in accounts. For as in adding many particulars together, if you begin
below, and go upward, the total sum is set above, and called the Head of the
account: if above, and proceed downward, it is set below, and called the Foot
of the account, containing in it as much as all the rest: so if you begin at
Moses, and go down to the Prophets; or at the Prophets, and go up to Moses; of
all that is spoken by any, or all of them, about our duty to man, this is the
sum; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

When Christ commanded his Disciples to love one another, he charged them with
many things in that one thing: These things I command you, that you love one
another: and who can tell how many things are required of us in this one thing?
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; all
these whatsoevers are required in it; yea, whatsoever else that is good and
virtuous; if there be any virtue, any praise, it is Decalogus continet
doctrinam tam copiosam and sublimem, ut nunquam satis perspici, nunquam
exhauri^i postit. Melancthon. Isa. 40.12. Ephesians. 3.18.19. Psalm. 119.96.
comprehended in this one command; love one another, and also in this saying,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

It cannot be expected, that, in so short a time as is allotted to this
exercise, we should speak of all things contained in these words; we can but
take up a few drops out of the Ocean, or a handful of sand from the shore.

It is only he, that measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
comprehends the dust of the Earth in a measure, that is able to give us the
true dimensions of them: as there is height and depth, a length and a breadth
in the Love, so also in the Law of God, which passes knowledge. This David
acknowledged when he said; I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy
commandment is exceeding broad.

Neither is it our scope to speak of the words in the way of a treatise: we
shall therefore give ye the Doctrine, and proceed with as much speed as well we
may to the Query, the resolution of which is our main business at this time.

Doct. It is the duty of every man to love his Neighbor as himself.

When God says, Thou shall; he intends thee and me, and every man else of what
rank, state, or condition soever he be.

Before we propound the Quaery it will be requisite, 1. That we show who is our
Neighbor. 2. That we speak something of the lawfulness of a man's loving
himself. 3. That we lay down some conclusions, which are to be taken along with
us, as a thread that must run through the whole contexture of our ensuing
discourse.


1. Who is our Neighbor? Our Neighbor is, not only he who lives near to our
habitation, in the same street, or City; nor he only that is of the same
Country, or nation that we are of; but every man, of what place, or nation
soever he be; whether he be one of our acquaintance, or a stranger; a friend,
or an enemy. Luke 10.29, 30.
You find this question put somewhere to Christ himself, by a certain Lawyer,
(whether he were the same we have here in this Chapter, it matters not) and
there you have Christ answering him by a parable, to this effect. A certain man
went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among theives, which stripped him,
and wounded him, and left him half dead: there came a Priest that way, and saw
him, and passed by on the other side; after him, a Levite in like manner: but a
Samaritan, seeing him, had compassion on him, bound up his wounds, and brought
him to his Inn, etc. Now which of these three was Neighbor to him? he
answers: he that showed mercy on him. What says Christ? go thou, and do
likewise. As if he should have said; Thou art a Jew, and as such, have little
or no dealing with a Samaritan, or indeed with any man of another nation; there
is a partition wall between you and them; so that you look on them as
strangers, if not enemies, and none of your Neighbors; Ipse enim est proximus,
quem non solum conformis natura conjunxerit, sed etiam misericordia
copulaverit. Amb^os. de poenit. lib 1. cap. 5. Levit. 19.33, and 34. Math. 5.43.
but I tell thee, a Samaritan, or a man of any other nation, whatever he be, is
one of thy Neighbors; and therefore if he be in misery, and come within thy
reach, be sure thou show mercy to him.

This God required of the Jewish nation of old: If a stranger sojourn with you
in your land, ye shall not vex him; but the stranger that dwells with you,
shall be as one born among you, and thou shall love him as thy self. Yea;
although he be an enemy, the case is the same, for so Christ resolves it: ye
have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and hate
thine enemy; but I say unto you, love your enemies. Ye have heard: the Scribes
and Pharisees might have taught them thus, blotting the text with their false
interpretation; but Christ better informs them, and wiping away their blots
with his sponge, restores the Law to its primitive beauty and perfection: I say
unto you, love your enemies. And does not the Law say the same also? we find a
very fair text in the Law to this purpose; If thou meet thine enemies Ox, or
his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again: Exodus
23.4, 5.
If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and
would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him. Does God take
care for Oxen? for man's sake doubtless this is written; and so it appears
plainly in the text, Thou shall surely help with him: thou shall bring it back
again to him; it was to be done, not only in mercy to the beast; but in love to
the man.

Besides, how can we think that God would require us to bring back a straying
Ox, and to relieve an Ass oppressed with his burden, and lay no duty on us to
a Man in such a condition? doubtless if we are bound to bring back an Ox that
goes astray, we are much more obliged to bring back a Man, when we find him
going astray from God: and if we are to help an Ass, that lies under his
burden, much more a Man, when we see him oppressed with His.

We see then whom we are to account our Neighbor, any man whomsoever; Friend,
or Enemy; that lives nigh to us, or at a greater distance from us.

2. We come now to speak of the second thing propounded, and that is, the
lawfulness of a man's loving himself. Every man may; yea, it is a Duty lying on
every man to love himself.

This may seem strange, when we see self-love every where branded in the
Scripture; so that there is hardly any sin described in so black a character as
this. It is a sin indeed, that includes many others in the bowels of it; we may
say of it, James 3.6.8.
as the Apostle James does of the tongue, It is a fire, a world of iniquity, it
is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.

Unbelief and self-love are the immediate parents of all the mischiefs and
abominations that are in the world; and therefore we have this set in the front
of all the evils that make the last times perilous: 2 Timothy 3.1.2.3.
In the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false-accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God, etc. And if you can
find a larger catalogue of abominations than you have here set down to your
hand, self-love is the mother of them all: it is this, that makes all the stir
that is in the world: It is this, that disturbs Families, Churches, Cities,
Kingdoms: in a word, this is the grand Idol, that is set up to be worshipped
all the world over, greater by far than Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19.27.
whom yet all Asia and the world were said to worship. It is that Idol, which
every man must endeavor to take down, for until that be done, we shall find
little peace within our selves, or quietness among men.

Notwithstanding this; we must say, that it is lawful, and a duty incumbent on
every man to love himself.

There is a twofold self, 1. A natural Self. 2. A sinful Self.


This is to be hated, the other loved. We cannot hate sinful self too much
though it be to the destruction of it; this is that which we are bound to kill,
mortify, and utterly destroy: Christ came into the world, purposely to help
and assist us in the destruction of it; 1 John 3.8.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the devil. But we may lawfully love natural self, soul and body;
because these are the works of God, and therefore good.

He that came to destroy the works of the Devil, came to save the soul and
body, Luke 19.10.
the works of God. The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was
lost.

1. A man may love his own body, and is bound to preserve the life of it; no
man ever yet hated his own flesh. Ephesians. 5.29. Mark 5.5. 1 Kings 18.28.
We read indeed of one out of the tombs, who was day and night in the
Mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones: and of
the Idolatrous Baalites, (who sacrificed to the Devil, and not to God,) that
they cut themselves, after their manner, with knives, and launcers, till the
blood gushed out upon them: but who in his right wits ever did such a thing? or
where did God require it at any man's hands? The Lord forbids the Israelites to
make such barbarous cuttings and manglings of their flesh (after the manner of
the heathen) because they were his servants. Lev. 19.28.
A man may sin against his own body many ways; as by excessive labor,
neglecting to take necessary food, or physic; intemperance, and the like: He
that commits fornication, sins against his own body.

2. A man may and ought chiefly to love his own Soul. Every man's care should be
that it may be well with his better part, both here and hereafter. And to this
purpose it is every ones great concern (1). To get into Christ, who is that ark
in which only Souls can be safe. They who after all the calls, invitations and
beseechings of God in the Gospel, will persist and go on in impenitency and
unbelief, are murderers of their own Souls, and their blood will be upon their
own heads: He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; Prove. 8.36.
all they that hate me, love death. (2. John 15.4. Prove. 19.8.
) He that has closed with Christ must endeavor to abide in him, by putting
forth fresh and renewed acts of Faith: He must feed daily on the promises,
which are the food of his Soul; and look to it, that he keep alive the grace
which is wrought in his heart.

The new nature, or spiritual self, is the best self we have; and should be
most of all loved by us. They that have the charge of others Souls, are a Part
of their own charge: Take heed to your selves and to all the flock. Act. 20.28.
They who are under the inspection of others, must look to themselves also; so
John charge that Elect Lady and her Children, Romans 14.12.
to whom he wrote his second epistle, ver. 8. look to your selves. As Pastors
must give an account of their flock, so every sheep of the flock must give an
account of himself: Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God.

Quest. If love to our selves be not only lawful, but a duty; why is there no
direct and express command for it it in the Scripture?

1. Answ. Nunquid est ullus hominum, qui non omnia quae facit, vel salutis suae
vel certe militatis gratia^ fac^at? Omnes enim ad affectum a que apperitum
utilitatis suae, naturae ipsius magisterio atque impulsione ducuntur. S^lvi^nus
contra Avar. lib. 2. Prove. 22.3. Heb. 11.7. Mar. 3.6.7. Joh. 8.59.
There is no such need of an express command for this. Though the Law of
Nature, since the fall, be very much defaced and obscured, that much of that
which is our duty, is hardly discerned by us; yet there is no man whom the
light of nature does not move to love himself: we find a Law of self
Preservation stamped upon the whole creation of God: it is plainly to be seen in
all the Creatures, whether animate or inanimate; and in man in a special
manner. To this end God has placed affections in man's Soul, that he might use
them as feet, to carry him forth readily to that which is good, and from that
which is evil or hurtful to him. Hence it is that when any thing is represented
as good, there is not only an inclination to it, but (...) a pursuing of it:
when evil and destructive, there is not only an aversation, but (...), a flight
from it. It is said of the prudent man, that he foreseeth the evil and hides
himself, and of Noah, that being moved with fear, he prepared an ark; And even
Christ himself, who was altogether void of sin, when they sought to destroy
him, withdrew himself; as he did hide himself at another time, when they took
up stones to cast at him; thus he did, till the hour was come, John 10.18.
when he was to lay down his life, according to a command that he had received
from the Father.

2. Although there be no direct and express command saying, Thou shall love thy
self; yet all the Commands of God do vertually, and implicitly enjoin it. No
man can comply with that first and great command, of loving God with all his
heart Diligere De^m est diligere se ergo cum precipitur ut Deum dilig^mus
praecipitur eidem opera ut no metipsos dil^^^mus, Davenantius. Psalm. 19.11.
, but in so doing he loves himself; because in the fruition of God is a man's
greatest happiness. The like may be said of every other commandment in
proportion; for as it is good in it self, so it will be found to be good for
us: David had experience of it, when he said, that in the keeping of them,
there was great reward; And when he prayed, that as God was good, and did good,
he would teach him his statutes.

Yea, all the promises and threatenings in the book of God do suppose, that man
May, and Should love himself: in the Promises God shows us something that is
good for us, and so draws us to himself, by the cords of a man: when he
Threatens, he shows us something that is evil, and bids us fly from present
wrath, or wrath to come: whether he threatens, or promises, it is, that we
choose the good, and refuse the evil. I have set before you life and death,
Deuteronomy. 30.19.
blessing and Cursing; therefore choose life. It is the will of God, that every
man should make the Non tam Lex tibi o homo, q^am tu Legi ad^ersaris; ^^o (...)
p o (...) est, tu con^ra illam, ^ec contra illam tantum, ^ed e^iam cont a re.
Salv. de Guber Dei lib. 4. Luk 18.19.
best choice for himself, and every man does so, when he is regulated in it by
the will of God; the sum which is this, that we love him above all, and our
neighbor as our selves.

3. We come now, in the third place, to lay down four short conclusions about
our love to God, our Neighbor, and our selves.

1. Conclu. The first is this; that as God is to be loved above all things
else, so he is to be loved for himself. There is none good but one, that is,
God: None originally, independently, essentially and immutably good but he; and
therefore he only is to be loved for himself. It was well said by one of the
Ancients Bernardus.
, Causa diligendi Deum, Deus est: modus, sine modo diligere. The cause of
loving God, is God himself: The measure, is to love him without measure.

2. Conclu. That Creatures may be loved according to that degree of goodness
which God has communicated to them, not for themselves, but for God, Prove.
16.4.
who made all things for himself.

As all waters come from the Sea, and go through many places and countries, not
resting any where till they return to the Sea again: So our love, if it be
right, has its rise in God, acts toward several Creatures, in due manner and
measure, but rests in God at last, bringing into him all the Glory of that
goodness, which he has derived to the Creatures, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever you
do, do all to the glory of God. We may neither love our selves, nor our
neighbors, for our, or themselves Amor fruendi quibuscunque crea uris, sine
amore C^eatoris, non est a Deo. August. contra. Jul. lib. 4.
, but for God; that God in all things may be glorified. I do not say, that in
every act of love we put forth, it is necessary that we actually mind the glory
of God; but that our hearts be habitually disposed and framed to glorify God
in all.

3. Conclu. No man can love himself, or his neighbor aright, while he remains
in a state of sin: until a man come to himself, he cannot love himself, or any
other man as he ought: the reason is manifest from what was said before Amor
Dei, quo pervenitur ad Deum, non est nisi a Deo Patre, per Jesum Christum, eum
Spiritu Sancto. August. contr. Jul. lib. 4. Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 6.23.
; He does not, he cannot love either, in God and for God: when the Prodigal
came to himself, and not till then, he said, I will return to my Father.

Love is a fruit of the Spirit, and therefore is never found in any who are
destitute of the Spirit. The grace of Love flows from Faith, and therefore the
Apostle prayed for the Ephesians, that they might have faith and love, from God
the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Conclu. The most gracious souls on earth, though they may, and do love God,
themselves, and their Neighbors truly and sincerely; yet, by reason of the
relicts of corruption in their hearts, there are many Qualis est fidei habitus,
talis est and charitatis; si fideihabitus esset perfectus, Charitatis habitus
esset etiam perfectus. Camero. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
defects in their love to God, and much inordinacy in their love to themselves,
and to their Neighbor. As there is always something lacking in our Faith, so
also in our love.

We come now to the Question.

How ought we to love our Neighbor as our selves?

For the resolution of this question, we shall, (first) lay down these two
general propositions.

1. In the same things, wherein we show love to our selves, we ought to show
love to our Neighbor.

2. After the same manner that we love our selves, we ought to love our
Neighbor.

First, In and by the things that we do, and may show love to our selves, we
ought to show love to others: It is not possible to enumerate all the
particular instances, wherein we show love to our selves; It shall suffice
therefore that we speak of such things as are inducive of many more: We shall
reduce them to these Four heads.

1. Our thoughts of, and the judgment we pass upon our selves. 2. Our speeches
concerning our selves. 3. Our desires after that which is good for our selves.
4. Our Actual endeavors, that it may be well with us.
1. Let us consider what thoughts we have of, and what judgments we pass upon
our selves. We do not ordinarily, nor ought we at any time to censure our
selves with too much rigor, and severity: We are indeed required, 1 Cor. 11.31.
again and again, to judge our selves, and it is our duty to do it strictly and
severely: yet we ought not, without cause, Luke 6.41 42.
to judge or condemn our Selves for any thing, nor are we very forward so to
do. Our love to our neighbor should be exercised in this matter; if he does,
or speaks any thing, that is De sactis mediis, quae possunt bono, vel malo
animo fieri, temerati^m est judica^e, maxim ut condem^emus. August. 1 Cor.
13.5. Heb. 4.13. 1 Cor. 2.11.
capable of a double sense and interpretation, let us take it as done or spoken
in the best sense it is capable of, unless the contrary does manifestly appear,
by some very convincing circumstances; for it is the property of Charity to
think no evil. We may be much more bold to judge our selves than others; we are
privy to our own principles, from whence our words and actions flow, and to our
own intentions in all we speak or do: But the case is otherwise, when we take
upon us to judge others; their principles and intentions are known only to
themselves, until they some way or other declare them: the heart, being the
hidden Man, is known only to God, before whom all things are naked and open,
and to a man's self: What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man, which is in him? Moreover, inordinate self-love has often too great an
influence on the judgment we pass upon our selves; and the corruption of our
wills and affections, on the judgment we pass upon other men, that we seldom
judge aright. As he that has the jaundise, be the object never so white,
judges it yellow, his eye being ill disposed: so the eye of the mind, being
affected with the corruption of the heart, puts another color upon that, which
is most heartily spoken or done. Were our hearts principled with true love to
others, we should be as cautious about the judgment which we pass on them, as
about that we pass upon our selves: and there is great reason we should be
more, from the (...) mentioned considerations.

2. We show our love to our selves, in and by our speeches concerning our
selves, and it is our duty so to do. As we ought not to pass too severe a
judgment on our selves, in our own minds; so we may not speak that which is
false, of our selves: and it is seldom known, that any man's tongue falls foul
upon himself. Yea, our love to our selves, is, and ought to be such, as not to
suffer our tongue to blab, and send abroad all the evil we certainly know by
our selves.

It is our duty then in the same matter to show our love to others: Our tongue,
which is apt to speak the best of our selves, should not frame it self to speak
the worst we can of our Brethren. The Apostle charge Titus Titus. 3.2
to put Christians in mind of this, among other duties; to speak evil of no man.

There are several ways and degrees of evil speaking:

1. The first, and most notorious, is, when men are spoken against as evil
doers, for doing that which is their duty to do; When they are condemned for
that, for which they ought to be commended: Thus was Jeremiah dealt with in his
time, when he faithfully declared the mind of God to the people; Jer. 18.18.
Come (say they) and let us smite him with the tongue: The same lot had John
from Diotrephes, who prated against him with Malicious words, because he had
wrote to have the brethren received, a work of Christian love and Charity,
which he had no heart unto. To speak evil of others for that which is their
duty, is a common thing among men; and too ordinary among some professors; If
they be told of a truth, or exhorted to a duty, that does not agree with their
private opinion, and Comport with their carnal interest, how do their hearts
rise, and their mouths begin to open against such as declare it to them! We may
well conceive, that the Apostle Paul observed some such thing in his days, when
we find him beseeching Christians to suffer the word of exhortation: Heb.
13.22. 1 Pet. 2.1.
and the Apostle Peter also, by his charging them (in hearing) to lay aside,
all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil-speakings.

2. A second way of evil speaking, and a great sin against love and Charity,
is, when men raise up false reports of others, or set them forward when others
have maliciously raised them.

To offend in this kind is a great breach of a Christians good behavior, as
the Apostle intimates, Titus 2.3.
when he says; That they be in behavior as becomes Holiness (...).
; not false accusers. It does not at all become the profession of a Christian,
whose master is the God of truth, to speak that which is false of any man
whatsoever: And therefore these false accusers are called [(...)] by a name
which is usually given to the father of lies. Joh. 8.44.


3. There may be evil speaking, in speaking of such evils as others are really
guilty of, as,

1. First, when a man does industriously Facilius est unicuique nostrum, aliena
curiose inquirere, quam propria nostra inspicere.
search out such things as are evil in others, for this very purpose, that he
may have something to say against them. Of this David complains, Psalm. 64. ver.
6. They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search. It is a sign
that Malice boils up to a great height in men's hearts, when they are so active,
to find matter against their neighbors. Love would rather Qui been vult vitam
peragere, neque videre multa, neque audire studear. Just. Martyr. De vita
Christ. ad Zenam Ep. Luke 11.53.
not seen or hear of others failings; or, if it does and must, busieth it self
in healing and reforming them to it is power.

2. They also are Guilty, and more guilty of evil speaking than the former, who
endeavor to bring others into sin, rather than they will want matter against
them: Thus the malicious Pharisees did their utmost to cause Christ himself
(had it been possible) to offend, urging him vehemently, and provoking him to
speak of many things, seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they
might accuse him.

3. A man may be guilty of evil speaking, and offend against the law of love,
when he makes a fault greater than it is; when he represents a molehill as big
as a mountain Vix centesimus reperietur, qui aliorum famae ita clementer pa^eat
ut S by cup at, etiam in manife^tis vitiis, ignosci. Calvinus in Deuteronomy 5.10.
, thinking that he can never aggravate another fault too much.

You may have seen how Boys, by continual blowing with a reed in their
nutshels, have raised a little bubble to the bigness of a small globe, which
yet was but a drop of water stuffed with a vapor; even so do some men blow up
others faults, till they seem very great; but if you examine them, you will
find, that, that which made them so, was only this, that they were filled up
with the others malice.

Some may think themselves excusable in this, as if they Obtrectario zeli ac
Severitatis praetextu saepe la^da^ur; H nc sit ut sanctis q^oque se iasin^et
hoe vi ium atque obrepat, virtutis nomine. Calvinus.
showed thereby their zeal against sin; but let them look more narrowly into
themselves, and possibly they may find more malice, than true zeal lying in the
bottom.

4. We may offend in speaking of the faults of others, if we be not duly
affected in speaking of them: It is too Equidem permul os novi, qui propter
conscientiae and animor^m impuri^arem p^oximor^m delectis gaude^ Jest. Mart. de
vi^. Christ.
common a thing to speak of others sins in mirth, and with some kind of
rejoicing, as if we were tickled with it: all such rejoicing is evil.

If Christ should step into your company, as Luke 24.^7. 1 Co. 5 2.
he did into the disciples, while they were walking sadly one with another; and
say unto you, while you are speaking of other men's sins, to make your selves
merry; What manner of communication have you here? Could you approve your
selves to him in this matter? It was a fault among some of the Corinthians,
that when they heard of the great sin of the incestuous person, they were
pussed up, when they should have rather mourned.

5. A man may be guilty of evil speaking, when he speaks of others faults, if
his end be not good; as when he does it to please another humor, or satisfy
his own Observamus p oximo^um pecca^a, non ut lugeamus, ^ed ut exprob^emus: non
ut cu^emu^, sed ut perculiamus. Naz^anz.
, or to lay the person spoken of open to contempt, or the like. Our end in
speaking of others faults, if it be not the reforming of the persons
themselves, nor the securing, and safe-guarding others from being hurt by them,
or ensnared in them, is not like to be good.

3. The third thing, by which we show our love to our selves, is, by our
desires, which are always after something that is good, or conceived to be
good for us: Every man wishes himself well: Should we go through the
congregation, and ask every man severally what he would have; every ones desire
would be after something that is good, or thought to be so (...). Arist.
. Then, this is that by which we should manifest our love to others, even by
desiring their good in all things as our own; that all things temporal and
spiritual may prosper and succeed well with them, as with our selves, to the
glory of God, and their eternal happiness: That they may thrive in their
estates, bodies, souls, as well as we in ours. Mat. 5.44.
Thus it ought to be with us, even in reference to such as do not bear the same
good will to us: It is Qu s p^o ini^^ ici suis ista quae Deu^ jussi^, non dico
vo^is, sed verbis saltem, agere dignetur? A^t etiam siqu^s se cogit ut facia^,
facit tamen ore non mente. Salvian. de gub. dei lib. 3. Luke 23.31. Act. 7.60.
our Lords Command, that we should pray for them that despitefully use us, and
persecute us; And herein he has left us an excellent example: When his enemies
were about that black piece of work, busying themselves in taking away his
life, some piercing him, others blaspheming him, he breathes out this request
for them; Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.

The like copy is set before us in Stephen the Protomartyr, while his
adversaries were throwing stones thick about his ears, he kneeled down and
prayed for them; Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

How contrary is the spirit of In omni animo ^m iud^gnantium mo^u. vo^s mali^
pro a^mi utim^r; unde unu^quiq^e eviden^^sli ^e proba^, quicq od sie^i
adversariis suis op tat, totum le sace^e velle, si possit. Salvian. de
Guberna^. Dei li^. 3. Act. 26.29.
many that profess Christianity, to the spirit that appeared in Christ, and the
primitive Christians; who upon every provocation can be ready to desire the
utmost evil to such as do offend them! Were not the Jews Paul's greatest enemies
wherever he came? Who so cruel to him as his own Countrymen? Yet see what
desires were in his heart for them; Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to
God for Israel is, that they might be saved: So when he stood at the Bar,
before a heathen judge, surrounded with many enemies; what are his wishes for
them? He desires that they might all participate in the good he enjoyed, but
not in the evil he endured: I would to God that not only thou, but also all
that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except
these bonds.

4. Our love to our selves does appear by our endeavors; we do not content our
selves with wishings and wouldings, but we do actually and industriously
endeavor, that it may be well with us: If a man be hungry, and his stomach
calls for meat; or if he be pinched with cold, and his back calls for
clothing, his hand is ready in all good ways to procure it; and so it is in
all things else. By this therefore ought we to manifest our love to others,
even by our Habuit Christus in co^de c^^ itatem, quam nobis oper e^h buit. ut
exhi^itionis for^a nos ad diligendum instrueret. Lombardus. l. 3. did. 17.
endeavors, in our capacity, and according to our ability, to do them good,
supplying their wants spiritual and bodily. God has disposed men into several
ranks, He has set some to move in a higher, some in a lower Orb; He has
dispensed his talents, to some more, to some fewer: They that are in a higher
place and have More talents, may and ought to do More than others; They that
stand in a lower place, and have fewer talents, may and ought to do Something
for the good of others. Every man as he has received the gift (in what kind or
degree soever it be) so he must minister the same to the souls and bodies of
others. 1 Pet. 4.10. Jam. 2.15.16. 1 John ^.13.
If a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you
say unto them, Go in peace, he you warmed and filled: notwithstanding you give
them not the things that are needful to the body, what does it profit? A man
would find little profit in it himself, if he should feed himself only with
good words and wishes. True love is not in Word and Tongue only, but in Deed
and in Truth. Contrary to this endeavoring others good, is to stand up in the
way and stop the passage wherein good should flow in upon them, and to be
Invidentia est aeg i^udo, iuscepta p opter alterius res secundas, quae nihil
nocent invidenti. Cic. Tu^t. qu. l. 4.
envious at the prosperity of others, if they be able, without our help to
attain it. Many men think themselves not well, unless it be ill with others
Novum ac inaestimabile nunc in plutimis malum est: parum alicui est, si ipse
sit felix. nisi alter sec in infelix. Salvianus de Gub. Dei.
: it is not enough for them to be happy, unless they see their brethren
miserable.

2. We have seen now in what things we do and may show love to our selves: we
come now to speak of the manner of loving our selves, and to show that after
the same manner we ought to love others also. 1. We do, or should love our
selves holily, i. e. in and for God: we may not have a divided interest from
God; though God allows us to love our selves, it must be in order to him, and
to his Glory. Our love to our selves, as it must be regulated by the will of
God, and extended or restrained according to that; So God must be our utmost
end in it, whether it be exercised about the obtaining things temporal or
spiritual, for body or soul: Salvation it self, although it be our end, must
not be our last or utmost end: but that God by it, as by all things else may be
glorified. Therefore in this manner we must love others, as God has an
interest in them, and is, or may be glorified by them: and there is no man in
the world, but God is or may be glorified by him. Every man is a creature, upon
whose Soul there is, in a sort, the Image of God, and does him some service in
the place wherein he stands. Isa. 44.28. and 45.1.
God calls Cyrus a heathen, his Shepherd, and his Anointed, and he did him
eminent service in his generation. The same may be said of every other man, in
some degree and proportion: God has given him some gifts, whereby he is and
may be serviceable to him, at least in the affairs of his providential kingdom.
Besides; all men, having immortal souls within them, are capable of blessedness
with God for ever in the kingdom of Glory: they who are at present enemies to
God may be reconciled and made friends: what was the most glorious Saint now in
heaven, but an enemy to God once, when here on earth? We our selves (says the
Apostle) were sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, Tit. 33.4.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another: but after that the kindness and love of God our Savior
toward man appeared; not by works of righteousness which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. How could David then say, do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and
am I not grieved with these that rise up against thee? Psalm. 139.21.22.
I hate them with a perfect hatred. He says, that he hated them perfectly, and
approves himself to God in the thing; Do not I hate them, O Lord?

Ans. There is a twofold hatred, Odium simplex, and Odium redundans in
personam, as the Schools speak; a simple hatred, and a hatred redounding to
the person: A simple hatred, which is of the Sin of any man, is our duty; Psalm.
97.10.
ye that love the Lord hate evil; but to hate the Person of the sinner would be
our sin: as we are to abhor that which is evil, Romans 12.9.
so we must cleave to that which is good.

David, who was a man after Gods own heart, knew how to distinguish between the
sin, and the person; See how he expresses himself elsewhere: I hate the work
of them that turn aside; not them, but the work of them; Psalm. 101.3.
he hated their sin; saying, it shall not cleave to me.

Hear him again; I hate every false way; this shows us plainly, Psalm. 119.104.
that he hated sin perfectly: he hated sin so, as that it should not cleave to
him: he hated it where ever he found it; Every false way. For what is perfect
hatred? Austin describes it very well: He est perfecto odio odisse, ut nec
homines propter vitia oderis, nec vitia propter homines diligas: This is to
hate with perfect hatred, not to hate men for their Sins sake, nor to love the
sin for the men's sake. This is one manner how we ought to love our Neighbor as
our selves; it must be holily.

2. Our love to our selves is, or should be orderly: we must first and chiefly
love our souls, and then our bodies. The Soul is of far greater worth than the
body. A world of things for the body will stand a man in no stead if his soul
be lost; and where the soul goes, either to a place of bliss, or torment, the
body must follow after: and therefore when we are charged to take heed to our
selves, we are charged to keep our souls diligently; only take heed to thy
self, Deuteronomy. 4 9.
and keep thy soul diligently: if the soul be safe, all is safe; if the soul be
lost, all is lost.

In like manner we ought to love our Neighbor, we must desire and endeavor
that it may be well with him in every respect, both as to his body and outward
estate, but chiefly that his Soul may prosper; and his outward concerns, as
they may be consistent with that third Epistle John, ver. 2. I wish above all
things that thou may prosper, and be in health, as thy soul prospers.

1. We must seek the conversion of those that are unconverted, lest their souls
be lost for ever. If we can be instrumental in this, we show the greatest love
imaginable: to give a man bread when he is hungry, or clothing when he is
naked, is something; but to convert a soul to God, is a greater kindness by
much. Brethren, Jam. 5, 19.20.
if any of you do err from the truth and one convert him, let him know, that he
which converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from
death: He speaks of it as a great thing, when he says, Let him know, that he
shall save a soul from death.

2. We should show our love to the souls of others, by seeking and endeavoring
the increase of their Faith, Holiness and comfort: as we should not be content
to go to heaven alone, but carry along with us as many as we can, so we should
not satisfy our selves to see them creep lamely thither, but gird up the loins
of their minds for them, that they may more strenuously, and with the more
cheerfulness and comfort walk thither. Thus John endeavored to bring the
Saints to higher degrees of fellowship with God: 1 John 1.3.
That which we have seen (said he) and heard, declare we unto you, that you
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father
and with his son Jesus Christ: they had this fellowship before, in measure, and
degree; but he would bring them to higher degrees of it, as does appear by what
follows: These things I write unto you, that your joy might be full.

3. Our love to our selves goes out freely: what we have at hand, we are ready
to take, Eccle. 3.13. Eccl. 5.19.
when we stand in need of it. The wise man observed it to be a Gift which God
ordinarily gives the Children of men, to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the
fruit of all his labor, that he takes under the Sun, all the days of his
life. In the like manner, we should go forth to others: Quomodo in quotidiana
prece unquii diximus: dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimittimus
debitoribus nostris: animo discrepante cum verbis, o^atione dissiden^e cum
sactis? Hieron. ad Castorinam.
If our Neighbor stands in need of forgiveness, we should forgive freely, as
we expect that God or man should forgive us: if he need a gift from us, we
should give freely, and open our hearts readily to supply his wants according
to the ability God has given us, as we expect that God or man should give to
us, if we were in the like necessity. The Apostle commends the Macedonians for
this, that when their brethren stood in need of their Charity, to their power,
yea and beyond their power, 2 Cor. 8 3.
they were willing of themselves. To Multum detrahit beneficio, qui nolentem
tribuisse se ipsa Cunctatione testatus est; ac non tam dedisse quam non
retinuiste. Sen. de Ben. 1 Timothy 6.18. Psalm. 5.6.
give freely, and readily, adds much to the goodness of a good work: the way to
be rich in good works, is to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate.

4. We love our selves unfeignedly, no man uses to dissemble with himself, or
endeavors to feed himself with good words only, but is very real and cordial
to himself in all things. And thus it is required we should be to others: God
desires truth in the inward parts; he would have us true to him, and true to
one another, 1 John 3.18. My little children, let us not love in word, neither
in tongue, but in deed and in truth, Romans 12.9. Let love be without
dissimulation. Outward and dissembled love is little better than inward and
real hatred: If blessing be only in the mouth, cursing is not like to be far
from the heart; Psalm. 2.4. They bless with their mouth, but they curse
inwardly. Such a blessing with the mouth had Christ from the Pharisees in this
chapter, Master we know thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
ver. 16.
neither carest thou for any man; for thou regardest not the person of men:
very well said; but Jesus perceived their wickedness. ver. 18.
They came with words of love and respect to cover the wickedness of their
hearts, and wanted that inward affection, that Titus is commended for toward
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.15.

5. We do not only love our selves truly and sincerely, but with some
fervency: there is always some heat, as well as heart, in love to our selves:
you may observe it ordinarily, that when self is concerned in any thing, that
affection which is moved about it, has some heat in it; if it be anger, there
is heat in anger; if it be love, there is heat in love. Indeed all men are very
apt to exceed, and go much beyond their bounds when self is concerned, as if
they were to love themselves with all their hearts, with all their soul, 1 Samuel
18.1.
and with all their mind: however, it is allowable that a man be warm in love
to himself, especially to his soul which is the best part of himself. Well
then, our love to others must not be cold; when the matter of love is good, it
is good to be zealously affected in it. 2 Cor. 7.7. Gal. 4.18.
When Paul understood the fervent mind of the Corinthians toward him, as he
was a servant of Christ for the good of their souls, it did affect him with
great joy. Let our love to others be first pure, and then it is not like to be
too fervent, 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the
truth, see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.

6. We love our selves very tenderly. No man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians.
4.29.
but nourishes it and cherishes it. If the body be wounded, or pained, how
tender are we of it? the eye will look to it very carefully, and it may be weep
over it; the hand will diligently keep off any thing that might hurt or offend
it, and is ready to apply any thing to it, for the cure of it, with the
greatest tenderness that may be. After the same manner we ought to express our
love to others; it is required of us, that we be kind one to another, Ephesians. 4 32.
tenderhearted.

(1). When others are under sufferings, we should be so tender as to have a
quick sense of them in our selves. Romans 12.15. Heb. 13.3.
Others sufferings should work compassion, and cause a fellow-feeling in us, so
as to make us weep with them that weep, and to be bound with them that are in
bonds. When Nehemiah heard of the affliction of his people, though he himself
was in a better condition, he sat down and wept, Neh. 1.4.
and mourned certain days. We see that Beasts themselves are touched with the
sufferings of any of their kind; if one of the herd make an outcry, or declare
his sufferings by his moaning, how sensible are the rest of it! How do they
come about him, and show their readiness to yield him help if it were in their
power! How much more should humanity cause men to show what a tender regard
they have of the sufferings and afflictions of other men!

(2) We should be tenderly affected toward others when they are overtaken in a
fault, and not be too Solemus propriorum clementes esse judices, alienorum vero
stricti inquisitores. Greg. Nezianz. Gal. 6.1.
rigid and severe in dealing with them; and the more tender we ought to be, the
more afflicted they are with it themselves; We should consider, how we would
desire to be dealt with our selves, if we should be found in the same, or the
like fault, and accordingly behave our selves toward them: If any man be
overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual (...) i. e. nitimini eum quasi
luxatum it embrum suo loco reponere. Beza. Job 30.25. Isa. 58.10.
restore such an one in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self.

(3) We should show our selves tenderly affected toward others in their wants
and necessities, and yield them relief with a feeling of their wants our
selves. Job, when he was in a full and plentiful condition and estate himself,
was deeply affected with the necessitous condition of other men; Did not I weep
for him that was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved for the poor? The way to
get this tenderness toward others is, to put our selves in this or that man's
case, (hungry, thirsty, naked) until we find our hearts to grow soft and tender
toward them, and we are able to draw out our own (...). Septuag.
souls to them, in giving them bread, or what else they need. But the greatest
tenderness is to be exercised toward such persons as labor under soul troubles
and necessities, because the soul is of a quick sense, and more capable of
feeling than the body. Christ's greatest sufferings were in his Soul; so all men
spiritually distressed, as under some temptation, or soul-affliction, are
deeply distressed: Therefore as they stand in need of counsel, or comfort, our
souls should go forth in administering it to them; 1 These. 2.8.
As Paul was ready to have imparted, not only the Gospel of God, but his own
Soul to them who were dear unto him.

You have seen in what things, and after what manner, we may, and ought to love
our selves; and that it is our duty to show our love to others in the same
things, and in like manner. It may be requisite that we speak something also
about the degrees of love; which we shall do in answering two questions.

Qu. 1. Whether it be our duty to love our Neighbor as much as our selves?

Ans. The command to love our Neighbor as our selves, does not require that
our love should be every way as much to our Neighbor as our selves: The word,
As, in the Commandment, does not denote a Parity, but a Similitude; It is not
as much as, but like as Prius and intensius unusquisque Dei fruitionem sibi
oprat quam alteri; ita ut si non possit pluribus dari, malit unus quisque sibi
quam quilibet alii, illam a deo communicari. Davenantius.
. It is indeed our duty to desire and endeavor that others may be blessed in
the full enjoyment of God to all eternity, which is as much as we can desire
for our selves; but every man more intensely desires this happiness to himself
than to another. If that grace which any man has received of God would save
another man; and he could communicate it to him, he were not bound to part with
it to that end and purpose. When the foolish Virgins said to the wise, Give us
of your oil; they answered, Mat. 25 9.
Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you; but go ye rather, to them
that sell, and buy for your selves: So it is in reference to temporal things.
We are charged with this as a duty, to communicate to others in need Ordo
Charitatis postulat ut primum necessitati propriae, deinde, de non necessariis,
etiam necessitati provideatur alienae. Estius. lib. 3. did. 29. Sect. 2. Luke
3.11.
, but if our own necessities be, (really and not in pretense,) so great, that
we should not have enough for our own subsistence, if we did impart to them, we
are not bound, in that case, to yield it to them. When the multitude asked John
the Baptist, what they should do; He answered, He that has two coats let him
impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let him do likewise: By
which he gave them to understand, that it was their duty to impart to others in
extreme necessity, if they had any more than was necessary for themselves.

Notwithstanding what has been said, there are several cases in which a man is
bound to exercise his love to another, more than to himself.

1. A man is bound to hazard his own Life, 1 Samuel 19.1.2. chap. 20.30.33.
to save the Life of another who would certainly perish, if he did not hazard
himself in his behalf.

2. Upon the same reason that a man is bound to prefer the Consulet aurem pro
se quisque utilitati communiter omnium. Justin Martyr. de vita Christ. Omnis
Praesidentiae ille debet esse finis, ubique prae aliorum utilitate commodum
suum despicere, Greg. 2 Samuel 18.3. 2 Cor. 11.28. Romans 16.4. Romans 5.7.
public advantage of a community before his own private, he is bound to seek
the safety of a public person, in whom the welfare of the Community is bound
up, more than his own safety. One man of public capacity may be of more value
than thousands of other men: So said the people of David, Thou art worth ten
thousand of us. Priscilla and Aquila thought the life of such an Apostle as
Paul was, upon whom lay the care of all the Churches, to be of greater
concernment than theirs; and therefore for his life, they laid down their own
necks; for which they had the thanks of all the Gentile Churches. A man also
that is of a public spirit, and lays out himself in doing much good, in the
place and Country where he lives; although he be of a private capacity, is
worth many other men, For a good man one would even dare to die. We might
instance in many other cases; but let it suffice that we say in General, That
when the glory of God is more concerned in another than in our selves, we ought
to show a greater love to him than our selves; upon the principle laid down
above, that we ought to love our selves and our neighbor, in and for God: And
when there is a competition, between an incomparably greater good to our
neighbor, (especially if many be concerned in it,) and a less to our selves;
it is evident, that our love to our selves must yield to the love of our
neighbor.

Qu. 2. Whether ought we to love every other man with the same degree of love?

Ans. 1. All men, good and bad, should thus far be loved equally by us, in that
we should desire Diligit Christianus inimicum, ut hoc ei velit perverire quod
sibi; hoc est, ut ad regnum coelorum correctus renovatusque perveniat Aug. lib.
1. de Sermon. Dom. in monte.
, that both the one and the other, might come to perfect blessedness in the
enjoyment of God for ever: the first, by persevering in faith and holiness to
the end; the last, by being brought through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
repontance from dead works to the same blessed communion.

(2). Goodness, which is the object of love, being more or less, in this or
that subject; we may and ought to love Ille just and sancte vivit qui idoneus
rerum aestimator est August. Jam. 1.17.
, more or less, according to the degrees wherein every one excells another. God
is the giver of every good and perfect gift; as there are diverse kinds of good
gifts, so diverse degrees of them.

1. There are natural gifts and abilities, as Wisdom and Understanding in
several matters, which are very beneficial to mankind; and therefore God
threatens it as a judgment, that he will take away the Honorable Man, and the
Councellor, Isa. 3.3.
and the Cunning Artificer, and the Eloquent Orator. Such persons as are
qualified with gifts of this kind, are to be loved according to the degree in
which they excel.

2. There are also moral endowments, by which men do become more fit for humane
Society, and nigher to the kingdom of God than other men: these virtuous
dispositions are very lovely things in any man; and the more he excells in
them, Mar. 10.21.
the more we are to love him: Christ himself, who never misplaced his
affections, looking on such a person, is said to have loved him.

3. There are gracious and holy qualifications of the soul, from a more than
common work of the spirit upon the hearts of men: These are the best gifts, and
for these we ought more especially to love men; and that, according to the
degree wherein they excel: as David was wont to let out his love to the Saints
that are in the earth, and to the excellent. Psalm. 16.3. Ego dico me neque esse
Zuinglianum, neque Lutheranum, neque Calvinianum, neque Bucerianum; sed
Christianum: Lutherum quidem atque Zuinglium, Bucerum and Calvinum,
Bullingerum, and Martyrem, tanquam egregia Spiritus Sancti organa veneror,
atque suspicio, etc. Zanchius. Tom. 7. page (mihi) 262.
Although a man be not so like us, in this or that point of opinion, or
practice, yet if he be more like God than such as are, we should give him the
pre-eminence in our love.

(3). As to the signs and effects of our love, in bestowing temporal good
things, although the general rule must be observed by us In omnibus communiter
naturam diligamus, quam Deus fecit. Lombardus. Gal. 6.10. Mat. 25 34, 35, 36. 1 Timothy 5.8.
to do good to all; yet there are some specialties in the case, which must also
be observed by us.

(1). They that are oppressed with the greatest and extremest necessity, are to
be considered by us before such as are not so deeply distressed: if one man be
so poor, that he cannot subsist unless he be relieved by us, we ought to extend
our charity to him before another, who, although he be poor, is not in that
degree of poverty.

(2). Though we ought to do good to all, yet the poor members of Jesus Christ
ought in a special manner to be regarded by us. As Christ expects this at the
hands of all that bear his name; so he takes particular notice of what is done
to them, as done to himself; and will greatly reward the kindness that is shown
to the least of his Brethren, with a Come ye blessed, another day.

(3). They Vult cognatos viduarumad monendos officii, ut illas ad Ecclesiam non
amandent, Bez*
of our own house, and such as are near to us in blood, are, caeteris paribus,
to taste the effects of our love in this kind before others: and in proportion
to these, they that are our near Neighbors, and our own Countrymen.

(4). Although they who are enemies to God and us, cannot well expect that we
should, and though we be not bound to show our love to them, in doing good to
them Equally with others, who are God's friends and servants; yet there is more
due to them, by the will of God, than we are ordinarily willing to allow, or
some think we are bound to bestow upon them: for I cannot assent to them, who
would restrain the duty of doing good to our enemies, to cases of In articulo
necessitatis Aquin. 2.2. Quest. 25. Art. 8. Luke 6.35. Act. 14.17. Romans 2.4.
Romans 12.21. Prove. 25.21.
extreme necessity; as if we were bound only to keep them from perishing.
Christ proposes God's example to us, who is kind to the unthankful and the
evil: so kind, as not only to give them rain, hut fruitful seasons thereby,
filling their hearts with food and gladness; and therefore his goodness to them
is called, the riches of his goodness. And we may be well assured, that when
the Apostle charged the Romans, not to be overcome of evil; but to overcome
evil with good Per panem and aquam intellige omne victus genus, ut alias
inscriptura, and omne beneficii genus quo eum juvare poteris. Mercerus. in
locum. 1 John. 2.3. 1 John 3.14. 1 John 4.20. Isa. 58.3, 4, 5. Mar. 12.33. Hos.
11.4.
; he intended that they should spend greater store of that kind of ammunition
in order thereunto, than some of them then, I fear, than most of us now, are
willing to allow. We have now seen a little, and but a little, of the duty that
is required of us in this great commandment; yet enough to convince us, that in
many things we offend all. Let us humble our selves that we have been so little
in observing of it, and endeavor to come up to a more full and exact
performance of the duties therein required: this will be a good evidence of our
love to God, which we cannot so well make out to our selves or others to be
sincere, by any other way or means, as by this; If we love not our brethren,
whom we have seen, how shall we think we can love God, whom we have not seen?
without this all our external performances in Religion will signify nothing
with God. All our hearing, praying, fasting, and whatever else it be, will be
of little or no account with him.

The Apostle calls the way of love, an excellent way; it is an excellent way to
overcome enemies, and make them friends. This was the way God took to overcome
us; he drew us with the cords of a man, with bonds of love: and he prescribes
the same way to us. O let us try and see, whether more may not be done in this,
than any other way Vincit malos pertinax bonitas, nec quisquam tam duri
infestique adversus diligenda animi est, ut etiam vi tractus bonos non amet.
Sen. de Benef. lib 7. Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.2.
! This has been an approved way; the primitive Christians tried it, and found
it a good way. What made way for the Gospel through the world? how came
Christians to make such large conquests in the first times? look, and you will
find, that it was Faciendo bonum, and patiendo malum; by doing well, and
suffering evil. What made for the restoring the Gospel to England, but the
patience of the Saints of God under their sufferings, and their fervent
Charity, whereby they prayed ardently for their enemies, in the midst of the
fire? this convinced many, and turned them to the profession of the truth. The
way of Love is an excellent way to edify the Church, which edifies it self in
love: there is nothing to be done without it: this is the (...) est res art
compingere ut nexu in dissolubili colaereant. Arctius.
cement and mortar that holds the stones of the building together.

To conclude, It is an excellent way, to unite all that is good in the world,
to promote the interest of God in the world: if we did but observe, what good
is to be found in any sort of men, and not only acknowledge it, but make use of
it for God as we ought; we should quickly see another face of things in the
world. Love (says one) is that which reconciles the jarring principles of the
world, and makes them all chime together: How pleasing would this be to God?
and how delightful to all good men? I shall say no more, 1 Thessalonians. 3 12.
but desire that God would make us to increase and abound in love to one
another, and toward all men.

Wherein the love of the world is inconsistent with the love of God. Sermon. III.
1 John 2.15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.


^ct. 1. The explica^ion of the ^^xt.
NOt to detain you with the Connection of these words which are in themselves
complete and entire. The better to understand their Theologick sense, it will
be necessary, that we a little inquire into their Gramatick and Logic sense.
As for the Gramatick sense of the words, we may take notice in the general,
that John the Divine, who is generally reputed to be the Author of this
Epistle, has a p^culiar Phraseology, Idiom, or manner of writing, as it will
appear to any that diligently considers his writings, and particularly this
text. The first term, that occurs, and ought to be more diligently inquired
into, is the Affection and Act prohibited, Love not, The Greek (...) admits of
a double sense. (1). It is taken in a more large and general notion, for a
simple Act of Love, without regard to the measure or degree thereof; and so it
is of the same import with (...) (2). It is taken in a more strict and confined
sense, for such an Act of Love as proceeds from a plenitude of will, or full
Bent of heart, and so carries the whole soul with it, either in the Prosecution
of some chief good, when absent; or in the fruition of, and satisfaction in the
same when present. For love, in this strict notion, has two main acts: (1). An
active vigorous prosecution of its chiefest good, when absent. In which regard
(...) (and so (...)) is derived, by the Greek Etymologist, and Phavorinus out
of him, from (...), or (...) which implies the Force and Activity of love, in
the pursuit after its chiefest good. (2). Love in this strict notion implies
also an Acquiescence, repose and satisfaction in its chiefest Good, when
present, and enjoyed. In which regard (...), is made to be the same with,
(...), greatly to acquiesce, or rest satisfied in its best beloved, when
enjoyed, which they explicate by, (...), to rest contented, and satisfied in
any object, so as not to seek out for any thing more, in point of happiness. In
this strict and peculiar notion, considered as to both its branches, we must
understand Love here, both as to the world and the Father. And so the love of
the world, and the love of the Father are perfectly opposite, and therefore
inconsistent each with other, in this strict notion, wherein John takes them.

This is farther evident from that great Aphorism of our Lord, Mat. 6.24. No
man can serve two masters: For either he will hate the one and Love the other,
etc. Where we find (...) used in the same strict notion, and confined either to
God, or the world, so as both cannot share therein. Thence our Lord instructs
us, that love, in this proper limited sense, belongs to God alone, Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, etc. Where (...) thou
shall love, is taken, by our Lord in this strict notion, and explicated by what
follows, with all thine heart, etc. i. e. with the plenitude or Bent of thy
will; which in moral estimation passes for the whole Heart. So that when John
says, love not the world, it must be understood in this proper notion of love,
as it includes a predominant and prevalent degree; and carries with it the Bent
and force of the will, either in a way of active prosecution of the world if
absent, or delightful complacential Acquiescence therein if enjoyed. Such a
love to the world is no other than Concupiscence, or lust, and so altogether
inconsistent with the love of the Father, as John argues. All this will be
more evident, when we come to explicate the things contained under these terms,
namely Love to God, and the World.

The next thing to be explicated by us, is the Object of this prohibition;
which is the World, and the things therein. The Greek name (...) was as it is
said, first given to the World, by Pythagoras, from (...), to adorn: it being,
as it were, an house, hung with all manner of rich and beautiful ornaments, of
Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, Romans 1.20. and in this regard the World is,
in its kind and measure, amiable and love-worthy, But John seems to take the
World here in a more limited and narrow sense, as it is the fuel of Lust, and
repugnant to, and incoherent with the Father. For as I before premised, it is
usual with John to make use of notions, which are of a lax and general import,
in a more strict and confined sense. Thus 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God
does not commit sin. Which must be understood in a strict confined sense, i. e.
with a plenitude of will, as wicked men do. So in our text, love not, i. e. in
a strict sense, with a plenitude, and Bent of heart. The world, i. e. for it
self, as the fuel of lust, and contrary to God. There is a regular and lawful
love of the world, when it is in an inferior degree, and in subordination to
God; but that which John here prohibits, is an irregular and inordinate love to
the world for it self, in competition with, or opposition to the love of the
Father, as v. 16.

Hence it follows: neither the things that are in the World. (1). Here we are
again to take notice of another peculiar Idiom frequent with John, both in his
Gospel and Epistles, namely, to reiterate the same thing under different
expressions, partly by way of Exegesis, and partly to give an Emphatick
plenitude. It might have sufficed, that he had said, love not the world: But
the more fully to explicate his mind, as also to give an Emphase, and Accent to
what he had said, he adds, neither the things that are in the world. He
contents not himself with Generals, but descends to Particulars; which he more
fully specifies, v. 16. (2). By things that are in the world, we may, in a more
strict and confined notion, understand those things, which worldly men do most
magnify and Idolize: Mundane Grandeur, Pomp, Glory, Riches, Pleasures,
Honors, Friends, whatever else may Captivate the hearts of degenerate men. In
sum, by the world, and the things that are in the world, must be understood,
all sensible, natural, civil, yea mental Goods, or whatever is inferior to God,
so far as it may stand in Opposition to, or Competition with him; and so prove
matter of abuse, and fuel for Lust, as ver. 16.

It follows: If any man love the world. (...), If, here is causal and rational,
signifying as much as, For, or Because if: and so it points out, and ushers in
the main Cause or Reason, why we are not to love the world, namely, because he
that Loves the world has not the love of the Father in him. As if he had said:
Alas! are not the World, and the Father perfectly opposite? Do they not both
require the whole Heart, yea, the whole man, as Mat. 6.24? Is it possible then,
that he who loves the world at such a rate, can love the Father? Or we may take
the words thus: If any man Love the world, etc. i. e. so far as any man loves
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And in this sense it will
reach all, both Saints and Sinners. Though I take the words chiefly to be
understood of predominant love to the world, which is altogether inconsistent
with love to God.

Lastly, there lies something peculiar in that phrase, The Love of the Father
is not in him. (1) Here we find another Idiom, or manner of speech proper to
John, who frequently makes use of Antitheses, and that both of Things, Words,
and Sentences, for Illustration, and Confirmation; whereof many Instances might
be given, as John 1.5, 13, 17, 20, etc. So here he opposes the Father to the
World: And then the Love of the Father, to the Love of the world; which gives
great Illustration and Demonstration to his discourse: For opposites illustrate
and demonstrate each other. (2) Another thing to be considered herein is the
object, (...), of the Father. Where the Article THE, deserves a peculiar
regard: and so in deed do the various Articles in this text, The world, the
Things, etc. For albeit these Articles sometimes, in other parts of Scripture,
are not significative or emphatick, yet here they seem to give some emphase. So
that The Father is here mentioned to specify both the proper Object, and
Formal Reason of Evangelick Love, as distinct from that Natural Love, which
Adam in Paradise had toward God, as Creator. First by the Father here is
specified the proper object of Evangelick love, namely that it must terminate
on God, as a gracious Father in and through Christ; whereas Adam's natural love
in Innocence terminated on God only as Creator. Secondly by the Father also the
formal Reason of Evangelick Love is specified, namely that God's love toward
us in Christ ought to be the formal reason, or proper motive of our love to him.

(3) As for the Act, the love, it may be taken either passively and
Octjectively, for the Father's Love shed abroad in the heart, as Romans 5.5. or
else subjectively, and actively, for our Love to the Father. This latter I take
to be primarily intended.

The words thus explicated admit this Logic Division. We find in them first a
prohibition; and then the reason thereof annexed. In the prohibition we have.
(1). The Act Love not. (2). The Object, and this. (1). In the General, the
World. (2). In its Particularities. neither the things that are in the world.
The chief whereof are specified, v. 16. As for the reason of the prohibition,
it is wrapped up in an Hypothetick proposition, which is easily reduced to a
Catagorick Syllogism thus: two loves perfectly opposite cannot consist together
in one and the same heart: but love to the world, and love to the Father are
perfectly opposite: therefore he that loves the world has not the love of the
Father in him.

What love in its general Idea imports? Sect. 2. A general Character of Love.


The words thus explicated, contain in them this great Truth, That a prevalent
predominant Love to the World is altogether inconsistent with the Love of God.
Hence also there is offered to us this practick case of Conscience, wherein the
love of the World is inconsisent with the love of God?

The resolution of this so weighty a case, depends much on the explication of
its parts; which we shall endeavor to examine, and open under these three
Questions.

1. What Love in its general Idea, or nature does import? 2. What it is to Love
the world? 3. What it is to love God? these questions being explicated the
resolution of our case will be facile and obvious.

1. Quest. What Love in its general Idea or Nature does import? this question
being more Philosophic than Theologick, we shall not much insist thereon. But
to clear up our way to the following questions, we may take up this concise
Character, or Idea of Love, as abstracted from this or that subject. Love is
the most vigorous, potent, imperious and sovereign affection of the humane
soul; which has its Royal seat in the Will, or rather in the soul as willing
what is Good. For albeit I cannot conceive how the Will and Understanding may
be really distinguished, more than by their formal Objects and Acts; yet I can
easily grant, the soul, as willing what is good, to be the proper Subject and
seat of Love. Not but that there is also passion of Love, or something
analogous to Love, in the sensitive soul, or Animal part. But this is more
Passionate, that in the humane soul more Rational: this more rash; that more
deliberate: this more superficial and transient; that more rooted and fixed:
this more confused and difform; that more uniform and equal: this more carnal;
that more spiritual: in its objects and motions: this more brutish and servile;
that more humane and voluntary, specially if regular.

Now love thus seated in the will, or soul, as willing, governs the whole soul,
with all the faculties, or rather Acts, thereof. As the will governs all
inferior faculties, so is she governed by her love; which renders her what she
is, as to good or evil. What the Love is, that the man is: and where the love
is, there the man is. If thy love be in Heaven, there thou art; and if thy love
be in Hell, thou art there. For where the Treasure is, there the love, heart,
and man is, Math. 6.21. And as Love governs the whole soul in general, so has
she a more particular influence or the Affections, both rational and
passionate. Love indeed is not only the prime, but also the original source and
spring of all humane affections; which owe their Being, Life, and Motion
thereto. What are all Affections but the several forms and shape of Love?
whence have they their tincture and color but from it? for look a-the object
beloved is affected with this or that circumstance; so is Love proportionably
invested with this or that form. If the object beloved be absent, love goes
forth to meet it by Desire; if present, love solaceth it self therein by
Fruition and Delight; if it be under hazards, love waxes pale with Fear; if
the enjoyment thereof be impeded or obstructed by others, Love grows angry; if
it be lost, Love clotheth her self with black sorrow; if there be a probability
or but possibility sometimes of enjoying it, love moves toward it by Hope.
Thus love puts on sundry forms, and Aspects, which we call affections,
according to the sundry postures of its beloved. In short, look as the wife
changes her condition into that of her husband, and becomes noble or ignoble,
according to his condition; so love changes her condition according to that of
the object she does espouse: if love espouse God for her husband, then does she
become spiritual, Noble, and Divine, according to the quality of God; but if
she Elect and adhere to the world, then does she become carnal, base, and
worldly. So much for the general Idea of Love, of which more in what follows.

Sect. 3. What it is to love the World.
2. Quest. What it is to love the World?

Love to the world may be considered as Predominant, and so altogether
inconsistent with the very being and existence of love to God; or else as
infirm and in part subdued. We shall here treat of it in the former respect
only, which seems chiefly intended by John. And so love to the world may be
described. A certain habitual pondus or weight of concupiscence, and Lust,
whereby the soul is strongly impelled and inclined toward the fruition of, and
satisfaction in the world, as its last end, and chiefest Good. In this
description of love to the world, we find its Object, subject, end, principle,
Act and measure; which will all fall under a more particular consideration in
the following propositions.

The Object of predominant love to the world.
1. Prop. To love the world is to affect some private, particular inferior.
Good, for it self, as the chiefest Good, and last end. This proposition states
and specifies the proper formal Object of worldly love; which is some private,
particular inferior good, loved for it self, as the chiefest supreme good, and
last end. Now the world may be constituted the chiefest good, and last end two
ways. (1). Positively, when it is loved for it self as a total supreme good,
unto which all things are referred. (2). Negatively, when, though it be loved
only as a partial good, yet it is loved for it self, and not referred to God,
either actually or habitually, as the supreme good. Such is the cursed love of
many worldly professors, who love the world only as a partial good, yet so, as
they refer it not to God the supreme good; and therefore may be said to love it
for it self, as their last end and chiefest good, negatively, though not
positively. This love to the world for it self, as the last end, and chiefest
good, is fully described by John in the verse following our text, 1 John 2.16.
For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but it is of the world. These words
give much light and evidence to our text and present subject; wherefore we
shall a little insist on the explication of them.

And (1) We are to consider their rational connection with the words precedent,
included in the particle For: which gives us the genuine reason and cause, why
the love of the world is inconsistent with the Love of God; namely, because all
that is in the world, whether sensible, Civil, or Mental Goods, so far as they
are the fuel of Lusts, are not of the Father, but of the world.

(2) We are to observe here, that John discoursing of worldly goods, as the
fuel of our Lust, expresses the things themselves by the lust in us. He says
not Pleasures, Riches, Honors, though these be the things he means; but the
Lust of these things; because the poison and evil of these things comes not
from the things themselves, but from our lusts, that run into, and live upon
them, as our last end and choicest good. And in this sense, says John, they
are not of the Father, but of the World. i. e. God never made or appointed
these inferior goods to be our last end, chiefest Good, or matter of fruition
and satisfaction; no, it is the Lusts of worldly men that have put this Crown
upon the Heads of Pleasures, profits, preferments, etc. Hence it naturally
follows that all love to these lower goods, for themselves, as our Last end and
chiefest Good, is but Concupiscence or inordinate Lust. For indeed what is
Lust, but desire to, or fruition of the Creature for it self? (3) We are to
consider likewise the Distribution, which John here makes, of all that is in
the world, into the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the eyes, and the pride of
Life. This, as they say, is the worldly man's Trinity which he does so much
Idolize and Adore. (...), Philo in Decalog.
Philo the Jew, who was greatly versed as well in the Grecian as Judaick
learning, makes all evil to consist, in the Lust of Pleasures, Riches, or
Glory, which seems to answer to John's Distribution here. For by the Lust of
the flesh is usually understood Pleasures, By the Lust of the Eyes, Riches; and
by the Pride of Life, Vain Glory, or Honors. We shall treat concisely of each,
as the Fuel of Worldly Love.

(1) To love the world, is to Lust after the pleasures of the flesh, as our
last end, or sovereign Good, and so amiable for themselves. And, O! wh^t a
brutish piece of Lust is this? And yet, Lo! how common, even among those, who
would be accounted generous and noble? Yea, how many great Professors come
under this condemnation? For by the Lusts of the flesh we must understand all
inordinate love to, and delight in sensual pleasures of any kind, be it in
eating, drinking, recreations, or unclean objects. What La^rtius in Empedoc.
Empedocles said of the Agragantines, holds too true of many now adays: They
give themselves to Luxury, as though they would die tomorrow; and yet they
build houses, as if they were to live for ever. O! how happy would it be for
England, if those Sumptuary Laws, commended by Plato Plato Repub. 3.
in his Commonwealth, were established amongst us, for regulating our excesses
in feasts, Habits, Houses, and other sensual pleasures? O! what seeds and
causes of sorrow are there in sensual pleasures? How is the Love of sensual
Sinners inveigled with the worlds Golden Pleasures! Such there were in the
Apostles times, even in the Churches. So Jam. 5.5. Ye have lived in Pleasures,
i. e. as the Fish lives in the water: Pleasures have been your Element, the
food of your sensual life: your hearts have been steeped, immersed, drowned in
them, as the spring of your life, and happiness. Thence it follows. Ye have
nourished your hearts, as in the day of slaughter. Or we may by a metonomie
read it, as in the day of Feasting. So the Syriack, (...), which answers to the
Hebrew (...), may be rendered. And so it alludes to the Solemn Feasts after
Sacrifices, so common among the Sea court of the Gent. part 1. Book 2. c. 9.
Sect. 10.
Gentiles as well as Jews. Their great days both of slaughter, and Feasting:
For when the sacrifice was slain and offered, they Feasted on part, thereby to
denote their communion with the God, they sacrificed unto. And so the sense is
this: you nourish your sensual Appetites daily with Feasting, as those that
feast on part of the Sacrifice, in the day of slaughter. O! how much does this
pampering of the flesh tend to the starving of the soul? And what is this but
to make pleasures our God? So Phil. 3.19. whose belly is their God, and 2 Timothy
3.4. lovers of pleasures more than of God. Which refers to sensual professors
in these last perilous days. Unto which also our Lord seems to refer, Matthew.
24.38, 39.

(2) To love the world is to lust after Riches for themselves, as our Last end
and choicest Good. This John includes under the Lust of the Eyes, which is well
interpreted by that Character which Solomon gives of the avaricious man Eccle.
4.8. neither is his eye satisfied with Riches. O! how greedy is the covetous
man's eye after gold and silver, and other Riches? and what Complacence does he
take in the view thereof? It Is true, Riches do not immediately affect or pamper
the flesh, yet are they the Caterers of the flesh; they lay in provision for
it. For money is the measure of all things. And albeit Riches are remote as to
the flesh, yet are they the proper object of the eyes lusting, which takes in
things remote.

(3) To love the World, is to lust after, or pride our selves in any worldly
Grandeur, or Finite Excellencc, as our Last end and best good. So much the
pride of life denotes. Aristoteles Rhet. l. 2. describes (...) When any boast
what they have, and rashly promise great things of themselves, arrogating to
themselves the deeds of others.
For (...) primarily signifies a vain gloriation or boasting of having or doing
great things; from (...), a Boaster; which Grammarians derive from (...) a
wandering, and (...) liver. Such as your Mountebanks and Vagabonds are, who go
from place to place, boasting what great things they can do. It here signifies
a vainglorious affecting or assuming to our selves some created excellence, as
the chief matter of our happiness. This is the great lust of more elevated,
refined, generous Spirits; who peradventure scorn to defile themselves with
sensual pleasures or Riches, yet are not without violent, and impetuous
lustings after some worldly Grandeur, or humane Excellence. Under this pride of
life we may comprehend also the mind's lusting after Knowledge or any other
Mental perfection, for it self as our last end; Jans. August. Tom. 2. l. 2. c.
8. fol. 132.
which is the grand lust of Philosophers, Schoolmen, and other great wits of
the world. This Jansenius rangeth under the former particular, the lust of the
eye.

2. Prop. Predominant Love to the world, in regard of its subject, consists in
an habitual pondus, weight, or violent Bent of heart toward some inferior good,
for it self. Look as in nature there is a Center of Gravity, unto which all
ponderous weighty bodies, by their Gravity and weight, naturally tend; So in
corrupt Nature, Love to the world, or Concupiscence is that lustful Pondus, or
weight whereby the heart is violently impelled and inclined toward the world,
as its center of Gravity. This seems lively expressed Hebr. 12.1. Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us. This verse, with
the three following, are wholly agonistick, alluding to the Grecian games, as
it appears by the several terms. They, who ran in the race, were to lay aside
every thing, that might burden or hinder them therein. Thence says the
Apostle, let us lay aside every weight: (...) properly signifies a ponderous,
weighty, gross, heavy, body; and it is here applied, as Grotius and Hammond out
of him.
the learned conceive, to the love of the world; which, as a great pondus or
weight, presses down the heart toward the earth, as its center of gravity;
and so hinders its Christian race heavenward. O! what an infinite weight is
love to this dirty world? with what an impetuous and violent force does it
press the heart downward, even unto Hell? this also is well expressed by a
Bent, Hos. 11.7. And my people are bent to back-bsliding from me. i. e. Their
heart stands strongly bent toward their beloved Idols, and worldly allies.
Their hearts were in suspense, as to God, (so the word signifies) but strongly
bent toward the world. How does the voluptuous man's heart stand bent toward
his pleasures; the avaricious man's heart toward his riches; the ambitious
man's heart toward his honors, as his God? this bent of the heart toward the
world discovers it self, in an insatiable infinite thirst after worldly good,
for it self. This we find greatly exemplified in profane Esau, Hebr. 12.16. Or
profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. What
birthright was it that Esau sold? why, it was his birthright to the promised
land, Canaan in the type, but Heaven in the Antitype. And for what did he sell
Canaan and Heaven? for a morsel of meat, or a poor sensible pleasure, which his
greedy lust thirsted after. You find the story at large, Genesis 25.30.34. v. 30.
And Esau said unto Jacob, feed me, I pray thee, with that same red potage. It
is in the original, (...) of that red, that red, namely potage: note here, that
the repetition of the adjective signifies Esau's insatiable and greedy appetite
after Jacob's red potage. The like also is implied in his omitting the word
potage; which notes the have and greediness of his lust, increased by the red
color; whence he was called Edom. And what was it that Esau's insatiable lust
thus longs for? that follows, v. 34. potage of Lentiles: Which were a kind of
pulse, much like to Vetches, or small Pease, very course food, such as men in
their sorrow and mourning were wont to eat. O! what a vile profane wretch was
Esau, to part with his celestial birthright and dignity, for a mess of such
course potage? well might Moses conclude: thus Esau despised his birthright.
An insatiable greedy thirst after any inferior good argues a predominant love
to the world.

3. Prop. To love the World is to have the heart bound up in, and made one with
the world. All love tends to Union: and to have the Heart planted in, and
incorporated with the World argues a predominant love thereto. Thus in our
text, (...), love not the world, i. e. Let not your hearts be implanted, glued,
or nailed to the world: let not your thoughts and affections run so deep into
the world, as to become one with it. The more any love the world, the more
their hearts are united to, and incorporated with it. The Alligation and
adherence of the heart to the Creature is the natural effect of predominant
love thereto. Love to the world is the nail or glue, whereby the heart is
fastened to it. Thus Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols. (...) is fastened
or glued, so as to become one therewith. Whereby the prophet teaches us that
Israel's heart was bound fast by indissoluble bonds to his Idols, so that it
could not be plucked thence.

4. Prop. To have the heart under the Dominion of the World argues predominant
love thereto. Such is the nature of Love, that it subjects the Lover to the
thing beloved; specially if it be loved for it self. Its true, love to God
gives us a Dominion over all things beneath us; but love to the world brings
the heart into subjection to it. O! what an imperious tyrannick Sovereignty has
the world over those that love it? what slaves are worldlings to the world
through love to it? whatever the heart inordinately cleaves unto, it is under
the dominion of, so Hos. 4.11. whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the
heart. There is a great emphase in the Hebrew (...), will take away; which
notes first a contest or conflict, and then the conquest, which these sensual
objects make over the heart, that adheres to them.

5. Prop. To spend the best of our time, thoughts, studies, care, and
endeavors for the procuring, or conserving worldly goods, denotes predominant
love to the world. This seems to be the case of some carnal Jews, after the
return from Babylon, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your
sieled houses, and this house lie wast? In your sieled houses, or houses
curiously wainscotted, and adorned, not only for use, but luxury and pleasure.
Whence it is aptly rendered, by the LXX. (...). As if he had said: is this time
a time for you, O ye sensualists, to spend so much time, study, care, cost and
other expenses, in trimming and adorning your stately houses, not only for use,
but delight and luxury; whiles the house of the Lord lies wast? this piece of
Love to the world our Lord cautions professors of these last days against, Luke
21.34. And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life; and so
that day come upon you unawares. (...) to overcharge, answers to (...) to
harden, as it appears by the LXX on Exodus 8.15.32. which is also rendered by,
(...), Exodus 10.1. so that (...) here signifies such an overcharging of the
heart, with complacential thoughts and amusements about worldly things, as
takes away all sense of Divine concerns: thence it follows, with surfeiting and
drunkenness. These two denote all sensual pleasures. Then follows, and cares of
this life: hereby is signified all distracting, distrustful, anxious cares,
about provision for this life; which are elsewhere styled the cares of this
world, as Mat. 13.22. this part of predominant Love to the world is termed,
Romans 8.5. minding the things of the flesh; (...) to mind, according to Paul's
Phrascologie, does not so much regard the simple act of the mind, as the
complacential thoughts, studious contrivements and sollicitous cares of the
heart; such as naturally follow a carnal constitution or frame of heart, and
bespeak the man to be under the Dominion of predominant love to the world. For
when all a man's thoughts, inclinations, affections, studies, and cares pay
tribute to the flesh, what is he but a slave to the flesh? thence it follows,
ver. 6. (...), the complacential amusement, contrivement, study, and care of
the flesh. (...) here is the same with (...), Genesis 6.5. the figment or
contrivement of the heart. These carnal world-minders, are well described by
Paul, Phil. 3.19. who mind earthly things, (...), i. e. They amuse themselves
in the the complacential thoughts, and study of terrene things: they have no
gust, savor or relish, but of such; they are under the serpent's curse, to
lick the dust.

6. Prop. Another branch of predominant love to the world, is to make the
Creature the object or matter, not only of our use, but also of our supreme
fruition, complacence, and satisfaction. So much is implied in our text, (...),
make not the world the object of your entire contentment, acquiescence, and
sati^faction, draw not your choicest comforts and delights from terrene goods.
There is some kind of contentment and complacence in worldly goods, which may
consist with the love of God; but when the heart makes any worldly good the
entire, or main object of its fruition and satisfaction, this denotes
predominant love to the world. For Divine Wisdom has put this Law or Order
into things; that all Creatures are to be the object of our Use; but God
himself the supreme object of our fruition and satisfaction, whence, to make
any Creature the chief matter of our fruition and satisfaction, what is it, but
to violate and pervert the order of the Creation, and set up the Creature in
the place of the Creator? and does not this bespeak predominant love to the
Creatures? This our Lord elegantly describes in that parable of the rich
glutton, Luke 12.15.19. you have the scope of the parable, v. 15. beware of
Covetousness. (...) here, as elsewhere, signifies an avaricious greedy humor,
or desire of having abundance, not only for use, but to pamper lust. The
Metaphor being taken from the plethora or excess of any humor in the body. And
our Lord adds the reason of this caution, for a man's life consists not in
the abundance of the things which he possesses. The sense seems this: all
these lower things, which man's covetous heart does so much lust after, are not
the matter of our fruition and satisfaction, but Use only; therefore our life
does not consist in the abundance of them; but in an ordinate love to, and
moderate use of them: to use them in that measure, and with that mediocrity as
becomes them: whence they who make them the chief matter of their fruition and
satisfaction, are possessed with a predominant love unto them. This is
exemplified in the following parable of the rich man, specially v. 18. all my
fruit and my goods. He calls them his goods, as they were the main object of
his complacence and delight, so v. 19. I will say to my soul, i. e. I will then
recreate and satiate mine heart, with mine acquired goods: whence it follows:
take thine ease, (...), recreate, refresh thine heart acquiesce in them. Poor
man! he had felt sufficient anxiety, solicitude and vexation in the
acquirement of his Goods, but now he hopes the fruition will crown all with
sweet repose, rest, and satisfaction. Thence he adds: eat, drink, and be merry.
The last term (...), be merry seems to refer to all manner of sensual
pleasures, in which voluptuous luxurious persons take so much complacence and
delight; this fruition of, and complacence in worldly goods, our Lord does
express in plain naked terms, in the reddition of the Parable, v. 21. so is he
that lays up treasure for himself, [i. e. in worldly goods, which he makes
the main object of his satisfaction] and is not rich toward God, i. e. and
does not make God his treasure, and chief matter of fruition, Complacence, and
satisfaction. And what is this, but rank predominant love to the world?

7. Prop. To be afflicted and troubled for the loss of any Creature-comfort
more than for the loss of God, and things spiritual, denotes predominant love
to the world. As our love is, such is our sorrow for the loss of what we love:
Immoderate Affliction for the loss of any worldly thing argues Inordinate
Affection to it, when enjoyed: and if the heart be more afflicted and troubled
for the loss of the creature than for the loss of God, it is a sure sign, that
the enjoyment of it did more affect and please the heart, than the enjoyment of
God. This was Israel's case Isa. 17.10, 11. Where the prophet compares the
state of Israel, in her Apostasy, to a curious Lady, that delights in
beautiful flowers, choice fruits, and pleasant plants. But he concludes, the
harvest should be an heap, in the day of grief, and of desperate sorrow. Now
this desperate sorrow, or deadly pain, [as (...) importeth] for the loss of her
pleasant Idols, argues predominant love to them. This also was the case of the
young man, Luke 18.23. And when he heard this [i. e. v. 22, that he must part
with all his riches for a treasure in heaven] he was very sorrowful. (...), he
was sorrowful in a superlative degree; for so (...) here in Composition
signifies, which is not (as some conceive) a preposition, but Adverb intending
the sense. And what filled him with this extreme desperate sorrow? Why surely
thoughts of parting with his goodly treasure, which he valued and loved, more
than treasures in Heaven. They that cannot support themselves under the
privation of any temporal good God calls for, but choose rather to part with
Heaven, than with their beloved Idol, are under predominant love to the world.

But here, to obviate mistakes, we must distinguish, (1) between a predominant
Principle or Habit, and a prevalent Act of love to the world; as (2) between a
Rational and Passionate love or Sorrow. 1. One that loves God may, under a fit
of Temptation, be under a prevalent Act, though not under a predominant
Principle or Habit of love to the world. 2. Hence his passionate love to, and
sorrow for the loss of some temporal good, may be greater, under some distemper
of heart, when his rational love to, and sorrow for the loss of God, and things
spiritual is greater, at least in the root and habit, if not in the Act.

3. Qu. What it is to love God? Sect. 4. What it is to love God?
This Question receives much Evidence and Light from what precedes, touching
Love to the world: For Contraries illustrate each other: and love to God moves
in the same manner as love to the world moves. So that to love God, is to
transfer the Actions and Passions of our Love from the world to God, as our
last end and chiefest Good. In short, the love of God implies a superlative
preference of God above all lower Goods, Luke 14.26. A Divine Weight or Bent of
heart toward God, as our Center, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Its proper Acts are chiefly two
(1) An amorous vehement direct motion toward God, (2) a complacential fruition
of and Repose in God as its Best Beloved, Psalm. 116.7. As for the Adjuncts of
this Divine Love, it must be 1. Sincere and Cordial, Ephesians. 6.24. 2. Judicious
and Rational, Psalm. 16.7. 3. Intimate and Passionate. 4. Pure and Virgin, Cant.
5.3. 5. Regular and Uniform. 6. Generous and noble. 7. Permanent and Abiding.
8. Vigorous and Active. 9. Infinite and Boundless. Divine Love thus qualified
brings the soul into (1) An inviolable Adherence unto, and amorous union with
God, Ephesians. 5, 31, 32. (2) It works the heart to an amorous Resignation of all
concerns unto God. (3) It commands the whole Soul into the Obedience of God,
John 14.21.23. (4) It is exceeding submissive unto God's Providential
afflictive will, Lev. 10, 3. (5) It is extreme vigilant, cheerful and diligent
in the service of God, Luke 7.37, 47. O how officious is love to God! (6) It
uses all things in subordination to God, Mat. 6.33.34. (7) It winds up the
soul to a Divine life: It transforms the lover into the Image, and imitation of
God, whom he loves. Ephesians. 5.1. These particulars I intended to have handled more
fully, but understanding that this case, touching the Love of God, is the
proper task of another, I shall refer thee to the Resolution of that Reverend
Divine's Case.

4. Qu. Wherein the love of the world is inconsistent with the Love of God?
Sect. 5. Wherein the love of the world is inconsistent with the love of God.
Having explicated the sundry Parts of our Case, we now come to the Connection
of the whole, namely, to demonstrate the Inconsistence of Love to the world,
with the Love of God. What love it is, that is inconsistent with the Love of
God, we have already fully opened, in the second Question, touching predominant
love to the world: Wherefore the only thing at present incumbent on us is to
show, wherein predominant Love to the world is inconsistent with the Love of
God.

1. Prop. Predominant love to the world is contrary to, and therefore
inconsistent with the love of God. This seems evidently implied in our text: If
any man love the world, etc. John brings this as a reason of his prohibition,
namely, that predominant love to the world, and love to God are perfectly
opposite, and therefore, by the rule of contraries, incoherent, and
inconsistent. The like Mat. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters: For either he
will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other: Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. These words are a good
Comment on our text, and clearly demonstrate the Inconsistence of Love to the
world with the Love of God: I shall therefore a little insist on them. The
design of our Lord here is the same with that of John in our text, namely, to
take off professors from inordinate predominant love to the world, and bring
them to a Divine Affection unto, and living on God, as their portion, and
treasure, as v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And v. 24. he shows the inconsistence of
love to the world with love to God, in that the world and God are contrary
Lords, who require each the whole heart and man. This will more fully appear if
we examine the particulars. He says, No man can serve. It is not (...), have,
but (...), serve. Intelligendum est hoc prove^bium de D^minis Solidum; quomodo
and Juris cons^lri dicunt non posse duos esse Dominos ejusdem rei. Grot.
Now to serve another, according to the laws and customs of those times and
Nations, was to have no power or right to dispose of himself, or any thing that
belonged to him; but to live and depend merely on the Pleasure of his Master.
Such a service could not be given to God and the world. Why? (1) Because they
are two Masters; i. e. in Solidum, each of which require the whole heart and
man. (1) Because they are two (...). Chrysostom.
contrary Masters, which commands us to esteem, love, and endeavor after
worldly treasures, more than heavenly: God commands us to esteem, love, and
endeavor after heavenly treasures, more than earthly. The world commands you
to engage no farther in matters of Religion, than may consist with its
Interest: But Christ commands you to part with all worldly Interest for
himself. The world commands you to take your fill of the creature; to suck out
the sweets thereof, and feed your hearts therewith: But Christ commands you to
use this world as if you used it not; 1 Cor. 7.31. to affect an universal
privation of these lower goods, even whilst you enjoy them; to give perishing
things, perishing thoughts, esteem, and desires; to bid farewell to all things,
so far as they are a snare to you, or a sacrifice that God calls for. Again,
the world commands you to endeavor the greatning of your names and reputation:
But Christ commands you to glory in nothing but his Cross; to account abasement
for Christ your greatest Honor. Lastly the world commands you not to be
scrupulous about small sins; but to take your liberry, and latitude: But Christ
commands you to dread the least sin more than the greatest suffering. Now,
how contrary and Inconsistent are these Masters in their Commands? Is it
possible then, that we should be Masters of such contrary Loves? O! how does
love to the world eat out love to God?

(2) Predominant Love to the world is inconsistent with the Love of God, in
that it robs God of that Love and Honor, which is due to him as the Sovereign
Chiefest Good. according to what measure the heart turns to the world and its
concerns, in the same measure it turns from God and his concerns. When the
heart is full of the world, how soon is all sense of, and love to God choked?
how is the Mind bemisted, an Will charmed with the painted heart-bewitching
shadows of the World? This was Israel's Case, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty
vine, (...). Expositors have variety of Conceptions on these words; but the
most simple sense seems this Israel: is vitis evacuans.
an evacuant luxuriant Vine, which seems to bring forth such abundance of
fruit, as if she would empty her self of all her juice and fruits at once; so
richly laden with fruit does she seem to be. Ay, but what fruit is it? Surely
fruit unto her self, rotten corrupt fruit: her heart and love is not bestowed
on God, but on her Idols. So it follows, v. 2. Their heart is divided. i. e.
This beloved Idol has one part, that another: and thus God is robbed of that
esteem and love which is due to him.

(3) Love to the World breeds Confidence in the World, whereby the heart is
turned off from its Dependence on God, as its first cause. And O! how
inconsistent is this with the love of God? God, as he is our Last End in point
of Fruition, so also our first principle, or Cause in point of Dependence. Now
love to the world turns the heart from God to the World, not only as the last
end, but also as the First Cause. They that love the world cast the weight of
their souls, and chiefest concerns on the World; and so bid Adieu to God. This
Confidence in worldly things is inconsistent with Salvation, and so with the
Love of God; as Mark 10.24. How hard is it for them that trust in riches to
enter into the Kingdom of God? This Rhetoric Interrogation implies a Logic
negation, namely, that it is impossible for one, that in a prevalent degree
trusts in his riches, to enter into the Kingdom of God. So Psalm. 52.7. Lo
this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of
his riches, and strengthened, (or fortified) himself in his wickedness (or
substance.) The like Prove. 11.28. Ezekiel. 16.15. 1 Timothy 6.17.

(4). Love to the world is flat idolatry, and herein also inconsistent with the
Love of God. So Ephesians. 5.5. nor Covetous man, who is an Idolater. The same Col.
3.5. and covetousness, which is idolatry. Covetousness is, in a peculiar
manner, branded with this black mark of Idolatry, in that it does expressly
proclaim a love to the world as its last end, and confidence in it as its first
cause. So Paul says of voluptuous persons, that they make their belly their
God, Phil. 3.19. because they love pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy 3.4. And
indeed every lover of the world is a God-maker: so many lusts as men have, so
many Gods. The lust of the flesh makes pleasures its God; the lust of the eye
worships Riches as its God; and the lust of pride exalts some created
excellence in the place of God. O! how do worldlings lose the true God in the
crowd of false Gods?

(5). Love to the world is spiritual Adultery; and thence incoherent with the
Love of God. The jealousy of God will not admit of any corrival in the bent of
the heart: but Oh! how does love to this world run a whoring after other
Lovers,? so Ezekiel. 16.17, 18, 38. and 23.5, 11. and Aholah played the harlot
when she mas mine, etc. The like James 4.4. Ye adulterers, and adulteresses,
know ye not, that the friendsh;p of the world is enmity with God? Which
implies, that love to, and friendship with this whorish world, is spiritual
Adultery, and so hatred against God. O! how soon are those that love the world
killed by its adulterous embraces? hence,

(6). Love to the world is a deliberate contrived lust, and so habitual enmity
and rebellion against God. Acts of lust, which arise from sudden passions,
though violent, may consist with the love of God; but a deliberate Bent of
heart toward the world, as our supreme interest, cannot. The single act of a
gross sin, arising from some prevalent Temptation, speaks not such an
inveterate bitter root of enmity against God, as predominant love to the world,
James 4.4. whosoever therefore will be the friend of the world, is the enemy of
God. Oh! how much of contempt, rebellion, and enmity against God, is there in
friendship and love to the world?

(7) Love to the world forms our profession into a subservience unto our
worldly interest, and so makes Religion to stoop unto, yea truckle under lust.
Now what can be more inconsistent with the Love of God, than this? This was the
case of the carnal Jews, Ezech. 33.31. With their mouth they show much love,
but their heart goes after their covetousness. They show much love in
profession; but O; how little have they of sincere affection? and why? because
their avaricious hearts made the whole of their profession to conform to their
worldly interest? Thus also it was with unbelieving Jews in our Lords time,
John 5.42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. I know you.
There lies a great emphase in that, you; you, who profess so much, and yet have
so little love in you. They had much love to God in their mouth, but none in
their heart: this appears by v. 43, 44. where our Lord tells them in plain
terms, that their worldly honor, and interest was the only measure of their
profession. This also was the measure of Judas's Religion, John 12.5, 6. where
he pretends much love to the poor, but really intends nothing, but the
gratifying his avaricious humor. The like, Hos. 10.11. Ephraim loves to tread
out the Corn, etc. because there was profit, liberty, and pleasure in that, but
Ephaim loved not plowing work; because that brought her under a yoke, and
brought in no advantage to her.

Love to the world brings us under subjection to it, and so takes us off from
the service of God. What we inordinately love and cleave unto, we are soon
overcome by. Now subjection to the world, and subjection to God are
inconsistent, Mat. 6.24.

(8). Love to the world is the root of all sin; and therefore what more
inconsistent with the love of God? To love God is to hate evil, Psalm. 97.10.
therefore to love evil, either in the cause or effect, is to hate God. Now love
to the world has not only a love for, but also a causal influence on all sin.
And that, (1) As it exposes men to the violent incursion and assaults of every
tentation, so 1 Timothy 6.9. But they that will be rich. (...), they that have
their wills biassed with a violent bent, or vehement weight of carnal love
toward riches. This Solomon expresses, Prove. 28.22. By hasting to be rich.
What befalls such? why, says Paul, such fall into tentation, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction: and then he gives the reason and cause of it, v. 10. For the love
of money is the root of all evil, etc. i. e. There is no sin, but may call the
love of money Father: whence Philo calls it (...), the Metropolis of evil. (2).
Love to the world is the cause of all sin, in that it blinds and darkens the
mind, which opens the door to all sin. It is an observation of the prudent
moralist (...). Plutarch.
, that every lover is blind about that he loves, which he himself interprets,
of love to lower goods. And oh! how true is this of those that love the world?
what a black veil of darkness is there on their minds, as to what they love?
hence Paul calls such men's love, 1 Timothy 6.9. foolish lusts. They are indeed
foolish, not only eventually, but causally, as they make men fools and sots.
(3). Love to the world stifles all convictions, breaks all chains and bars of
restraining grace, and so opens a more effectual door to all sin. We find a
prodigious example hereof in Balaam, Numb. 22.22, 40. where you see at large,
how his predominant love to the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. stifled
all those powerful convictions of, and resolutions against sin he lay under.
(4). Love to the world is the disease and death of the soul, and therefore the
life of sin, 1 Timothy 5.6. she that lives in pleasure is dead, while she lives,
(5). Love to the world Amor est quidam ingressus animi in rem amatam, quae, si
fuerit ipso amante ignobilior, polluit Dignitatem ejus Jansen. August.
pollutes our whole Being. Animal passions defile the soul: inordinate lustings
after things lawful pollute the most of professors, more or less. (6). Love to
the world puts the whole soul, yea world, into Wars, Confusion, and Disorders,
so James 4.1. From whence come wars, and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your lusts, that war in your Members? (...), of your pleasures,
i. e. by a Metonymie, from your lusts after pleasures and superfluous things,
that war in your members. Hence note, that all extern wars and confusions come
from the wars and confusions of intern lust in the heart. Now all intern wars
and disorders are inconsistent with the love of God, which is peaceable and
orderly. In these regards love to the world impedes and hinders the love of God.

(9). Love to the world is inconsistent with the love of God, in that it
causes Apostasy from God. The Conversion of the heart to the Creature, always
implies its Aversion from God: He that cannot part with the World, will soon
part with God. The world draws Men from God at Pleasure; because it does
engross your best Time, Thoughts, Affections and Strength in its service. How
many professors, by being bewitched with love to the World, have lost many
hopeful blossoms and beginnings of love to God? How little do Spiritual
Suavities savor with Carnal Hearts? Yea, do not the Flesh-pleasing sweets of
this World make all the Delices of Heaven seem bitter to a Sensual Worldling?
What makes the heart poorer, as to things Divine, than the love of worldly
Riches? How is the Honor of Christ and Religion degraded in that heart, which
affects worldly Honors? what more powerfully stains the Glory of a Christian
Profession, than an ambitious affectation of Mundane Glory? Where is that
professor, who has his heart engaged in the world without being defiled by it,
if not drowned in it? The world is filled with such a contagious air, as that
our love is soon poisoned and infected by it. Love to the world is the Devil's
Throne, where he lords it; the Helm of the Ship, where he sits and steers the
Soul Helwards. This was the bitter root of Lot's wife her Apostasy from God.
So Genesis 19.26. But his wife looked back from behind him. She had left her heart
in Sodom; and thence she looks back after it, contrary to God's Command, v. 17.
And what was the Issue of her Apostasy? She became a pillar of Salt. i. e. She
partaked of Sodom's Plague, which was brimstone and and salt, Deuteronomy. 29.23. the
storm which fell on Sodom overtook her, and turned her into a Pillar of Salt,
as a standing Monument of God's Justice on Apostates, who love the world more
than God. Whence says our Lord, Luke 17.32. Remember Lot's wife. What made
Judas and Demas Apostatize, but love to the world? As man at first fell from
God, by loving the world more than God: so he is more and more engaged in this
Apostasy by love to the world.

(10) Love to the world transforms a man into the spirit and humor of the
world, which is inconsistent with the love of God. Love makes us like to, and
so one with what we love. For all love aims at Unity; and if it Comes short
thereof, yet it leaves Similitude which is imperfect Unity: Whence by love to
the World men become like to, and one with it si terram amas, terra es, Aug.
. He that loves the earth is earthly. A worldly Man is called, Romans 8.8, 9, a
fleshly man; because his very soul becomes fleshly: His heart is drowned in,
and incorporated with the world: his Spirit becomes incarnate with the flesh.

(11). Yea Love to the world transforms a Man into a Beast, and so makes him
altogether incapable of Love to God. So Psalm. 49.20. Man that is in honor, and
understands not, is like the Beasts that perish. This verse is an Epiphonema
to the Psalm, with which he concludes, that a man, though never so great in the
world, yet, if his heart cleave unto it, he is no better than a Beast; albeit
he be a man by Nature, yet he is a Beast by Affection and Operation Yea, what
shall I say? Love to the world transforms a man into worse than a Beast. For it
is better to be a Beast, than like to a Beast. As love to God, the Best Good,
makes us better than the best on other men; so Love to the world, which is the
worst evil, makes men worse than the worst of Beasts. Love to the world is
extatick, as well as love to God: and the more the heart cleaves to the the
world, the less power has it to return to God, or it self.

The Application.
Sect. 6. The Application of the Subject.
Having Stated and explicated the Case before us, we now descend to the several
Improvements, that may be made thereof, both by Doctrinal Corollaries; and
practick Uses.

I. As for the Doctrinal Corollaries 1. Doctrinal Corollaries.
or Inferences, that may be deduced from the precedent Discourse, they are
various and weighty: I shall only mention such as more immediately and
naturally flow there from.

1. By Comparing the Love of God with the Love of the World in their Universal
Ideas and Characters, we learn, How much the love of God does Excel and
transcend the Love of the world. Our love is by so much the more perfect, by
how much the more noble and spiritual its Object is; and by how much the more
eminent degree it obtains in the subject. The greatness of the Object intends
the Affection; And oh! how much does this raise the value of Love to God above
worldly Love?

Is not God, the most absolutely necessary Simple Being, very Being, yea Being
it self; and therefore most perfect? whence is he not also our Last End, our
Choicest Good, every way desirable for himself? Then O! what an excellent
thing is love to God, who is so amiable? But as for this world what a dirty
whore, what an heart-ensnaring thing is it? and thence, how much is our Love
abased by terminating thereon? The Love of God is pure and unspotted, But O!
how filthy and polluted is love to the World? What more cordial and sincere
than love to God? But alas! how artificial, painted and hypocritick is love to
this deceitful world? O! how judicious, wise and discreet, is love to God? what
abundance of solid, deep, and spiritual reason has it in its bowels? But oh!
what a brutish, sottish passion is love to the world? How foolish are all its
lusts? 1 Timothy 6.9. What a generous and noble Affection is love to God? But what
more sordid and base than love to this vile world? Love to God is Regular and
Uniform: But O! what Irregularities and Confusions attend love to the World?
How Masculine, puissant and potent, is love to God? But alas! how Effeminate,
impotent, and feeble, is love to the World? What more solid and Substantial,
than love to God? and what more vain and empty, than love to the World? It
deserves not the name of Love but Lust: Worldly-minded men have a world of
Lusts; but what have they to fill them, save a bag of empty wind, and vexatious
vanities? Love to God is most temperate, natural, and so beautiful: But ah!
what preternatural, excessive, and prodigious heats are there in Love to the
World? How is the Mind clarified and brightned by Love to God? But oh! how is
it bemisted, and darkened by Love to the World? Divine love is the Best
Philosopher, and master of Wisdom. The love of God amplifies and widens the
Heart: But the Love of the world does confine and narrow it. By Love to God we
become Lords over all things beneath our selves: But love to the world brings
us into subjection to the most base of persons and things. Worldly minded men
can neither obey nor command their Lusts: they cannot obey them, because they
are infinite, and often contrary: they cannot command them by reason of their own
feebleness. Love to God is tranquil, and serene: but love to the world,
tempestuous and turbulent. Love to God gives repose and quiet to the soul: but
love to the world fills it with perpetual agitations, inquietude, and restless
motions, without end. Worldly love is a laesive passion, but Divine love
perfective of him that loves. In sum, love to God is of the same nature with
God, and therefore the most express Character of the Image of God; the
firstborn of Faith, the soul of other graces; the Rule of our actions, a
summary of the Law; an Angelick life; a prelibation of Heaven; a lively mark of
a child of God: for we may read God's Love to us in our love to him. But O! how
opposite and black are the characters of Love to the world? nothing deserves
the name of Love, but that to God.

2. Hence also infer, that Love to God, and Love to the world, divide all
mankind. There is no middle state between these two opposites; neither can they
ever consist together in their perfect degrees. If thou art a lover of the
world, in John's sense, thou art a hater of God: and if thou love God thou
art an hater of the world. Hereby then thou may make a judgment of thy
state, whether thou art a Saint or a sinner; a Godly, or worldly man. And
remember this, that to love any worldly good more than God, is in the
Scripture's sense, to hate God, Mat. 6.24.

3. This also instructs us, that all natural irregenerate men's Love, is but
concupiscence or Lust. Do not all men in their natural state prefer the
creature before the Creator? are not the pleasures, profits, and Honors of
this world, the worldly man's Trinity, which he adoreth, and sacrifices unto?
Have not all men by nature a violent impetuous bent of heart toward some one
or other worldly Idol? are not their souls bound up in something below God? Do
not all men naturally esteem, love, use, and enjoy the creature for it self,
without referring it to God? and what is this but Lust?

4. We are hence likewise taught, that a regular and ordinate love to, and use
of this world's goods, is very difficult and rare; Alas! how soon does our love
to creatures grow inordinate, either as to its Substance, Quantity, Quality, or
Mode? yea, how often, and how soon does our love to things lawful grow irregular
and unlawful? what an excess are most men guilty of in their love to, and use
of things indifferent? how few are there, who in using this world do not abuse
it, as 1 Cor. 7.31? where is that person that can say with Paul, Phil. 4.12.
Every where, and in all things I am instructed both to abound and suffer want?

5. This also informs us, that where predominant Love to the world is
notorious, visible, and manifest, we cannot, by any rule of judicious Charity,
count such a Godly man. It was a Canon, common among the Jews, mentioned by
Rabbi Salome, that Populus terrae non vocatur (...) Hasid.
the people of the earth are not called Godly, i. e. the Lovers of the world
may not be called Saints. And, Oh! how many worldly professors are cut off from
the number of visible Saints, hereby? It is to me a dismal contemplation, to
consider, how many follow Christ in profession, and yet have the black mark of
worldlings on there foreheads. O! how much love to the world lies hid under the
mask and vizard of professed love to God? It is not the having or possessing of
the world's goods, but the over-loving of them, that bespeaks you worldlings.
It Is true, a Saint may fall under many preternatural heats, yea fevers of Love
to the world; yet in time love to God, as a sttonger fire, expels such violent
heats, and noxious humors.

6. Hence in like manner we may collect, That worldly minded professors are
composed of a world of Contradictions and Inconsistences. Such Love God in
profession, but hate him in truth and Affection: Their tongues are tipped with
Heaven, but their hearts are drencht in the Earth: They pretend to serve God,
but they intend nothing, but to serve their Lusts: They make a show of
confidence in God, but place their real confidence in the world. They make
mention of God in Name, but exalt the world in Heart: They Conform to the Laws
of God in outward show, but Conform to, yea are transformed into the world in
Spirit: Finally, they hate sin and love God in appearance; but they hate God
and love sin in reality, Ezech. 33.31.

7. This also instructs thus, That for professors of love to God to be deeply
engaged in the love of this world is a sin of deep Aggravation. O! what a
peculiar Malignity is there in this sin? How much Light and Love do such sin
against? What a reproach and disparagement is cast on God hereby? Are not
profane worldlings justified in their earthly-mindedness by the worldly love of
Professors? Yea, do they not hereby take occasion to blaspheme the holy Name of
God? Lo! say they, these are your professors, who are as covetous, as
overreaching in their dealings, as much buried in the Earth, as any other. And
is not God hereby greatly dishonored? Do not such worldly professors live
below their principles, profession, convictions, covenant-Obligations, and the
practice of former Professors?

8. This gives us the genuine Reason, and Cause, Why the word of God, and all
the good things contained therein, find so little room in the Hearts of many
great Professors. It is to me a prodigious thing to consider, among the crowd
of notional Professors, and Hearers of God's Word, how few entertain the same
in an honest heart. And where lies the main bitter root of this cursed
Infidelity, but in love to the world? So Mark 4.18, 19. And these are they,
which are sown among thorns: Such as hear the Word; and the cares of this
world, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts of other things entering
in, choke the word and it becomes unfruitful. It deserves a particular remark,
that the Thorny-ground hearers here characterised are ranked in the highest
form of notional Hearers, as much surpassing the Highway-ground, or
Stony-ground Hearers: For in these thorny-ground Hearers the word takes some
root, yea with some depth; and so springs up into a blade, and green ears; and
so endures a cold winter, yea a scorching summer's heat: and yet after all it
is choked. How so? why, by the cares of this world. (...), the amorous,
distracting, anxious cares, and the deceitfulness of Riches. O! what Deceitful
things are Riches! how soon do they choke the word? and the Lusts of other
things: Namely Pleasures, which deserve not to be named: Solenne fuit Hebraeis
uti voce (...) alius, quoties cunque rem abominandam tacit innuunt. Horting.
Thesaur. Philolog. p. 51.
For so the Hebrews were wont to express vile abominable things, by other
things. Thence they termed Swine, (...) other things.

9. Hence also conclude, That such as love the world hate God and their own
souls. That predominant Love to the world, in its proper notion, includes the
hatred of God, is evident, from the whole of our discourse: That it implies
also hatred of our selves, is manifest, because the hatred of God includes love
to death, and so by Consequence the hatred of our own souls, as Prove. 8.36. All
they that hate me, Love death, i. e. in its Causes. Oh! how cursed are such as
cry up the world, and cry down Christ?

10. Lastly, this Case, as before stated, is a good Key to open some dark and
hard sayings in Scripture: As that, Mat. 19.24. It is easier for a camel to go
through an eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God. Which is a proverbial speech, denoting how difficult a thing it is for any
rich man, but how impossible it is for him that has a predominant love to his
riches, and so confidence in them, to enter into the Kingdom of God, as Mark
10.24.

2. But to close up this discourse with a few Practick Improvements and Uses.
Practick Uses.


1. This Case, as before stated, serves for the Conviction and Condemnation of
such, who profess love to God, and yet love the world more than God. Our
Apostle says Love not the world: and yet what do these love but the world?
where is the Love which these owe to God? And what hopes can such have of God's
Love to them? Alas! how poor and narrow is the love of most Professors to God?
If they have some good liking to him, yet how far short do they come of fervent
love to him? perhaps their Light and Profession is broad; but O! how narrow is
their Love to Christ? And do not such as want love for Christ fall under the
most dreadful curse that ever was, even an Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22.
which was the formule of the highest Excommunication among the Jews, mentioned
in Enoch's prophecy, Jud. 14. and imports a binding over to the great day of
Judgment at the coming of our Lord. And Oh! how soon will Christ meet such in a
way of Judgment, who will not now meet him in a way of love? Alas! what an
hungry paradise have they whose love feeds not on Christ but the things of
time? Is there not a sting in every creature our love dotes on? O! what
abundance of Ingratitude and Injustice lies wrapped up in this Love to the
world? Can there be greater ingratitude than this, to spend our choicest love
on love tokens, conferred on us by God to wind up our hearts to the love of
himself? Is it not also the greatest Injustice to give that measure of
Affection to the creature, which is due to none but the creator?

Having so fair an opportunity I cannot but enter this solemn Protestation
against all such, as under a Profession of Love to God, concele an adulterous
Affection to this world. O! think how soon this world will hugg you to death in
its arms, if your hearts attend to its bewitching charms. Alas! why should sick
dreams run away with your hearts? What are all those things your hearts lust
after, but the Scum, Froth, Dross, and Refuse of the Creation? Ah, poor fools!
why are your hearts so much bewitched with the night-visions, whorish Idols, or
Cursed nothings of time? Remember how dear you pay for your Beloved Idols, how
much they are salted with the curse of God.

2. Here is matter of doleful Lamentation, that in days of so much Light, and
Profession of love to God, Men should so much abuse themselves and the world,
by over loving of it. O that painted shadows, and dirty clay should run a way
with our love! is it not a deplorable case, that the golden pleasures of this
Idol world should find so much room in our hearts? yea, what matter of
humiliation is this, that professors of Love to God should lavish away so much
time, study, care and affection on this perishing world? Would it not make any
serious heart to bleed, when it considers, how much the professors of this age
are conformable to the fashions, humors, and lusts of this world? O! what an
abominable thing is it, that professors should fall down and worship this great
Idol the world? that the sons of God should commit folly with this old Whore,
which the sons of men have lusted after so many thousand years? alas! what
chains and fetters are there in the world's blandishments? what real miseries?
in all her seeming felicities? what do all her allurements serve for, but to
hide Satan's baits? who are they that are most in love with the world, but
those that least know it? Alas! how little can this world add to, or take from
out happiness? what has this world to feed our Love, but smoke and wind?

3. Here is also a word of caution for professors, to take heed how they make
Religion and the concerns thereof subservient to worldly interest. O! what a
curse and plague is this, to make the highest excellence subserve the vilest
lusts? and yet how common is it? I tremble to think how far many professors
will be found guilty hereof at the last day.

4. But that which I mostly design as the close of this Discourse, is some few
words of Exhortation and Direction unto Christians.

(1). To labor after an holy contempt of this dirty soul-polluting world. O!
what an essential obligation do we all lie under, to contemn the Grandeur and
sunburned glory of this fading world? What is there in this world you can call
yours? can you be content to have your Heaven made of such base metal as mire
and clay? O what a transient thing is all the glory of this perishing world!
consider the argument which our Apostle uses in the words following our text,
1 John 2.17. and the world. (i. e. all the splendour, pomp, beauty, pleasures,
and grandeur of the world) passes away, (...), as a scene, whereon men acted
their parts, and then passed away, as 1 Cor. 7.31. alas! were the world guilty
of no other defect but this, that it passes away, what a strong argument is
this for the contempt thereof? again, remember this world is but your prison
and place of pilgrimage: and oh! how scornful and disdainful is the pilgrims
eye? with how much scorn does he behold other Countries? and ought not
Christians with a more generous disdain cry out fie, fie, this dirty world is
not like my celestial Canaan? Alas! what have we here to rejoice in but fetters
and chains? how soon does the fashion of this world pass away, 1 Cor. 7.31. i.
e. the pageant or scene of worldly glory?

(2). As for you, who are rich in this world, consider seriously the
exhortation of Paul, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. where having closed his Epistle he
has this Divine Inspiration injected by the Spirit. Charge them that are rich
in this world, that they he not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain tiches, but
in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy. That they do good,
that they be rich in good works, etc. There were many rich Merchants at
Ephesus, where Timothy was, who needed this exhortation, as I think many among
us.

(3). Here is a more particular word for Merchants, Tradesmen, and all such as
are much engaged in the affairs of this world, That they would take diligent
heed that the world do not insinuate and wind it self into their hearts. O! I
beseech you, keep your hearts far from the walls of this pesthouse, this
love-polluting world: keep your love in Heaven while your persons are engaged
in the world. Let not your hearts smell of the smoke of this lower house, but
of Heaven: beware that your love do not make its nest in this world, but let it
take wing, and rest no where short of Heaven, where its Treasure is. Follow not
the guises of this soul-polluting world: Let this Idol world be nothing to you;
but God be all in all. Take heed that the multiplicity of worldly affairs choke
not the sense of God: remember your best riches consist in the poverty of your
desires. Make use of prosperity to prepare you for afflictions: know the
dearest things must be parted with when God calls for them; and therefore keep
your hearts loose from them: bring your natural desires into a narrow compass,
but let your hearts be enlarged toward God: amuse not your hearts as children
at the glistering outside of things; but fear a snare in every comfort: feed
much on Spiritual delights, and that will kill carnal pleasures.

Let your hearts be as the Mother-pearl; which, they say, receives no water but
what comes from Heaven: let your hearts be open toward Heaven, but shut
against the world: let not this great Idol enter into God's Temple.

(4). Lastly, let us all be exhorted, to be in nothing more curious, than about
the right placing of our Love; that it be fixed on its right Object, and in a
right Manner. Let us get a stamp of Grace on all our love, and then it will
become Divine. Let us love nothing greatly, but what we shall love for ever. It
was the saying of a serious Jansenist: I would never begin to love that, which
one day I must cease to love. Let us labor after the highest strain of love to
God, which is, to love God for himself, and to love our selves in God. Our best
Being lies in God, and therefore our best love, is to love our selves in God.
As one extreme heat burns out another; so let our love to God burn out our love
to the World.

Now is the time. OR, Instructions for the present improving the season of
Grace. Sermon. IV.
2 Cor. 6.1, 2. We then, as workers together with him, beseech you also, that
you receive not the Grace of God in vain; for he says, I have heard thee in a
time accepted, and in the day of Salvation have I succored thee: behold now is
the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation.


PAul's Epistles excel both in matter and in method. Their matter is
principally reconciliation through Christ. What subject so sweet, so
profitable? Their method is by way of Doctrine and use: a method, which if it
be despised, Paul's writings cannot be duly valued. In the foregoing verse,
the last words of it, he positively asserted the great doctrine of
Reconciliation through Christ, and doctrinally propounded it in these words; He
has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: This was his Doctrine. In these two verses
immediately following he applies the doctrine, We then, as workers together
with him, beseech you, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: for he
says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, etc. In which two verses, there
are contained these three parts.

1. The first is an exhortation, that they would not receive the Grace of God
in vain, or a caution against their receiving it in vain.

2. Secondly, the reasons that the Apostle produces to back the exhortation.
Those reasons are two,

The first is the reason of his propounding this exhortation, that is, because,
he was a worker together with God.

The second is the reason of their embracing this exhortation, and that is in
the 2 verse, For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day
of Salvation have I succored thee, as it is in Isa. 49.8.

3. Thirdly, you have here the accommodation, or the application of this second
reason unto the present state of the Corinthians; behold now (says the
Apostle) is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation, that God of old
promised unto Christ. Ye enjoy it, ye live under it; and therefore you must now
improve it to the best advantage of your souls. Now we shall go over these
three parts in the way of explication, that so we may the more profitably
handle that part, which I principally design to insist upon.

1. We shall explain the exhortation, or the caution that he lays down, which
is, Not to receive the Grace of God in vain. Here we shall explain two hings.

1. We shall show you, what is meant by the grace of God.

2. What is meant by receiving, or not receiving the grace of God in vain.

First, what is meant by the Grace of God.

You are here to understand by grace the Doctrine of the Gospel, frequently
grace, as in Ephesians. 3.2, Col. 1.6. Act. 20.32. Tit. 2.11. and in sundry other
Scriptures the doctrine of the Gospel is called grace. And it is called by that
name, for these three reasons.

1. Because it is graciously and out of the free favor of God bestowed. Why it
is bestowed at all, it is from grace: why it is bestowed upon one age or place
rather than other, it is only from God's free grace and favor, Romans 16.25, 26.
It is there said to be a mystery kept secret since the world began, but now
made manifest. And that in Isa. 65.1. I said, Behold me, to a nation that was
not called by my name. To these God was pleased by the gospel to say, Behold
me. He was found of those that sought him not. God 's argument to bestow the
gospel of life upon a person, or a family, or a place, is merely from his own
free good will.

2. The gospel is called grace, because the subject matter of the gospel is
grace. Whatever it is the gospel promises, whatever privilege or saving
benefit is contained in the gospel, is all from grace, we are justified freely
by his grace, Romans 3.24. Forgiveness of sin, it is said to be from his rich
grace, Ephesians. 1.7. Eternal life, it is the free gift of God. Effectual vocation,
saving conversion is merely from grace. We are called according to his purpose,
and grace; not according to our works, 2 Timothy 1.9. To you it is given to
believe, Phil. 1.29. God gives repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. he called me by his
grace, Gal. 3.15. 1 Pet. 3.7. the Saints are heirs of grace. Christ himself,
that obtained all the privileges of the gospel for us, was sent as a token of
free grace, free favor, through the tender mercy of God, Luk 1.7.8. Joh 3.16.
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us. So God loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son. Christ's whole work was to love, and his
whole love was free. We purchase nothing without leaving of our money behind
us. All his saved ones have nothing of their own but impotency and antipathy,
nothing of their own to move God to save them. The Law discovers God's will,
and the gospel discovers his good will.

3. The gospel is called grace; because it is the instrument under the Spirit
of God of bestowing the benefits of free grace upon us. It is an invitation to
the benefits of free grace: and it is our warrant of receiving those benefits,
and of applying them. The Gospel is not only a story to tell us what is done,
and what is obtained for believers; but it is a Testament to cause and to show
unto us our interest in them by Faith. We shall lay hold upon it, when he who
Ordained the Gospel does accompany it. The Gospel brings Salvation, Tit. 2.11.
Therefore the Gospel is called the Ministration of Righteousness, and the
Ministration of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 3.8, 9. The Instrument made use of by the
Spirit of God for enabling us to apply the Righteousness of Christ, and all the
benefits of Free Grace contained in it. And so I have opened the first thing in
the Exhortation, and shown what we are to understand by the Grace of God,
even the Doctrine of the Gospel.

receiving thereof in vain.

How is the Doctrine of the Gospel said to be received in vain? In the Greek it
is [(...).] The word signifies to receive it emptily, unfruitfully,
unprofitably; and indeed so it is too often received. It is true the Gospel is
to be received, and it cannot save us unless it be received; and therefore you
read several times in the Scripture of receiving it, Mat. 13.23. The receiving
of the seed into good ground: Act. 22.41. They received the word of God gladly:
And in Act. 11.1. The Gentiles received the word: And in Act. 17.11. They
received the word with all cheerfulness. So in 1 These. 1.6. They received the
word in much affliction.

But as the Gospel must be received, so it may be received unprofitably,
ineffectually, and in vain. And for the opening of this, the Gospel may be said
to be received in vain in two respects,

I. In regard of the manner of receiving.

II. In regard of the Event, or the Issue of receiving it.

First, It is received in vain in regard of the manner of receiving it.

And that is, When we receive the Gospel; but not with an Empty hand. When the
grace of the Gospel is not so received, as to be empty of the the opinion of
our own works and righteousness: This is a vain empty reception; for the Rich
are sent Empty away.

2. It is received in vain when it is not received with the highest Estimation
and Valuation; ^ Tim. 1.15.
When it is not looked upon to be worthy of all acceptance as the Apostle
expresses it; When it is not received as a Pearl, as a Jewel of greatest
price; If all be not sold for it, soon will it be left fot any thing.

3. When it is not received with the greatest ardency of desire, with hungring
and thirsting after the benefits contained in it. All the inclinations of our
souls toward all Earthly objects we owe to the benefits of the Gospel; which
if we pursue not ardently, we shall never procure succesfully.

4. When we do not receive it with a particular fiducial application of Jesus
Christ upon the warrant of the Infallible Gospel; but only by a general assent.
When we receive in into our Heads by Light; but do not receive it into our
Hearts by Faith. When we do not believe with the Heart; but only assent with
the head. When we receive it only into our Ears, and into our lips, and into
our Professions; but dot receive it as the good seed, which is to be laid up
in the furrows and the soil of the soul. Thus the Gospel is received in vain in
regard of the manner of receiving it.

Secondly, It is received in vain in regard of the Issue, the Event of
receiving it, and that several ways.

1. When it is not received so as to purify the heart, as to kill corruption:
when this grace of God does not teach us effectually to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts: when men will have an Angelical Gospel, but will live Diabolical
lives: when they are not thrown into the mould of the Gospel, and have not
Hearts and practices suitable to it.

2. When it does not quicken us to new obedience: when there is a receiving
without returning, without any activity for God in holy walking: where there is
no Delight in the Law of God: when his commandments are grievous: when the law
does only compel, but the Spirit of the Gospel does not incline our wills to
the obedience of the Gospel: when by the receiving of the Gospel we are not
made a willing people, to give up our selves to God in the ways of duty: when
faith is not made incarnate (as Luther speaks) by maintaining good works, Tit.
3.8.

3. When we so receive grace, as that it does not sustain us in our troubles,
nor bear us up in our sufferings, when it is not a word of patience, as it is
called, Rev. 3.10. Thou have kept the word of my patience. The Gospel duly
received, as to the Issue of its reception, makes us patient to bear whatever
is displeasing and ungrateful unto sense. When we see that the Justice of God
is satisfied, we can easily bear the injustice of men. When we see that God's
wrath is appeased toward us, we shall look upon the wrath of man, yea all
outward troubles, to be cold and feeble.

4. When we so receive grace as not to impart it, and communicate it unto
others. If we be living we shall be lively Christians; If we have the life of
Grace in us, we shall warm others. If we do no good, it is a sign we have got
no good. If there be a Spiritual Life bestowed upon us by the Gospel, there is
always a Seminal virtue, an inclination to disseminate and to scatter Grace
among others.

5. And lastly, grace is received in vain as to the Issue of our receiving of
it; when it is so received, as that thereby we do not obtain salvation. It is
the Gospel of Salvation; but a mere visible owning of the Gospel saves none.
The receiving of it into your houses, into your heads, into your mouths, brings
not any to Heaven. Christ will profess to those that are empty Professors, and
only have externally, and as to the outward privileges of Grace received the
Gospel, I never knew you, depart from me, Mat. 7.23. We are not only to
received the privileges of Grace, but Grace by the privilege, if we expect
Glory.

Thus I have shown what is meant by the Grace of God, and whar by the receiving
of it in vain. And this shall serve for explaining the Exhortation (the first
part) Receive not the Grace of God in vain.

The second part to be opened, is that which contains the reasons of this
Exhortation:

1. The First is the reason of the Apostles giving this Exhortation or caution
against the receiving of the Grace of God in vain: namely, because we are
(says he) workers together. We read it workers together with him: but in the
greek it is only workers together, not with him. And there are several
expositions given of this expression (workers together) Calvin thinks that this
(working together) does intend the working together with the doctrine delivered
by the Apostle: As if the Apostle intended, that it was his duty, not only to
deliver the Truths and the Doctrines of the gospel; but to work together with
those Truths and Doctrines, by way of urging, and exhorting, or by urging those
Doctrines with Exhortations to make them effectual, and therefore, says he,
Non satis est docere nisi urgeas: It is not enough Doctrinally to inform people
what is the Truth; but we must Urge it upon them with motives, inducements, and
persuasions, that may make the Doctrine embraced. And the Syriack seems to
favor this Exposition, which renders the word (...) (working together)
promoventes hoc negotium; as if the work of Doctrinal information were to be
promoted by arguments and incitements to the embracing of the Truth. Others
conceive that this (working together) is to be referred to the common mutual
endeavors of Ministers, who are to be fellow-helpers one with another; as if
the Apostle had said, All we Ministers, working together to further our
Master's work in the conversion and Salvation of your Souls, beseech you, etc.
Chrysostom refers this (working together) to the mutual endeavors of
Ministers and People, as if Paul had said, We Apostles work together with you,
to whom we preach, in this work of your receiving the grace of God, by our
exhortations to incite you to comply with the duties propounded in the gospel.
Our English interpreters by putting in these words (with him) understand the
Apostle to intend a working together with God; and indeed Ministers are called
Laborers with God. 1 Cor. 3.9. I see no reason why we should reject this
exposition, if we take it with these two cautions,

1. First, Ministers in this working with God must be looked upon so to use
their abilities, as not implanted in them hy nature, but bestowed on them by
grace, that so they may be made apt and fit instruments by the grace of God to
work. Therefore the Apostle says, 2 Cor 3.6. Who also has made us able
Ministers of the New Testament. And so in 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God
(says he) I am what I am, and I labored more abundantly than they all; yet
not I; but the gace of God which was in me. His power and ability to work he
attributes merely to the grace of God. And all our sufficiency is of God.

2. Secondly, If you take this to be the meaning of it, that we are
fellow-workers with God; you must understand, that what is the main and
principal in this work, which is the bestowing of spiritual life and growth,
must be looked upon as only the work of God, and to come from him; and that
therein man had no share at all, nor is a co-worker with God in it. And as Beza
well notes on 1 Cor. 3.9. we must always observe carefully a difference
between causes Subordinate, and causes Coordinate. Ministers are to be
considered as purely in subordination to God, and as those whom God is pleased
to make use of in the way of his appointment: not in the way of effectual
concurrence with God, as if they could communicate any power or strength to the
working of Grace by the preaching of the word. Subordinate causes Ministers are
to, not Coordinate causes with, God in the great work of producing of our
Salvation, which God only has in his own hand, both as to the internal working
of grace in the Soul, and the Eternal bestowing of glory upon us in the life to
come. There is the first reason opened; that is, the reason why the Apostle
does here give them his exhortation, namely, We are workers together with God.

The second is, the reason why the Apostle does put them upon this great the
Grace of God in vain, And that is taken from that text in Isa. 49.8. where
there is this promise made unto Christ, I have heard thee in a time accepted,
and in the day of salvation have I succored thee. These are the words of the
promise that God the Father makes unto Christ as Mediator; which is, that in
his discharging of the great work of saving his Church God the Father will
answer and succor him, as the Head of the Church, and show it by granting him
a day and a time for the bestowing of efficacious Grace upon his Members, by
making the means of Grace effectual for their Salvation; which time is here
called an accepted time, and a Day of Salvation: because this time, and this
day, is the time, and the day of God's free favor, in which he will so accept
of sinners, as to show his Gracious good will unto them in accepting of them to
life, and in working by his Son Jesus Christ Salvation and deliverance for
them. Now this is a very forcible Argument and reason against the receiving of
the Grace of God in vain; namely, because there was such a rich treasure and
measure of saving and efficacious Grace in the time of the Gospel to be
dispensed to the Church; therefore they should labor to have their share in
it, and not receive the Gospel of Grace vainly and unprofitably, as they would
approve themselves to be the Members of Christ, and those for whom Christ has
prayed unto the Father that they might have saving Grace bestowed upon them.
And this shall serve for opening the second part of this text; namely, the
reason of the Apostle's laying down this exhortation, both in regard of
himself, because he was a worker with God, and in regard of the Corinthians, it
was because God the Father had made a promise to Christ the Head of the Church,
that Grace should be bestowed, saving effectual Grace; not Grace in vain, but
Grace bringing Salvation should be afforded in an accepted time, and in a day
of Salvation by the Administration of the Gospel.

The third part (which is that which I intend to insist upon) is the Apostle's
accommodation, or his application of the foregoing reason, taken out of Isa.
49.8. unto the present state and time of the Corinthians, by giving them this
qui^kning Counsel; that since the present season of Grace which they enjoyed
now was the accepted time and the day of Salvation promised unto Christ for his
people, they should therefore now regard, and for the present improve it
profitably. The sum of the Apostle's application is this; since God has in the
foregoing reason assigned a certain time and day for the exhibition and the
bestowment of his Grace, it follows, that all times and all days are not
fitted for that purpose, but only the time and the day foretold by the Prophet,
in which God would freely accept of sinners and bring them to Salvation; and
therefore Paul puts the Corinthians upon the present improvement of the
season of Grace, because God had now bestowed upon them that accepted time and
the day of Salvation foretold in the foregoing reason, which they could not
neglect without hazarding the loss of Divine acceptance, and their own eternal
Salvation.

All that I have further to do is to handle this third part, which is the
Apostle's accommodation, or application of the former reason taken out of the
Prophet Isaiah, unto the present state of the Corinthians, by giving them this
quickening counsel; namely, to improve this present season of Grace, which the
Prophet foretold of old should be bestowed upon the Church in the days of the
Gospel, Behold now is the accepted time: Behold now is the day of Salvation.
Now this quickening counsel has two parts.

1. An awakening incitement to improve the present season of Grace. This
awakening incitement is contained in the repeated note thereof, Behold, Behold.
The present season of Grace is intended in the repeated note thereof, Now, now.

2. A double Argument to convince us of the fitness and necessity of this duty,
Now, for the present, to improve the season of Grace. The first Argument is
taken from the fitness of the season for working in it, and so it is called the
time, the day. The second Argument is taken from the advantageousness of the
present season to the worker, and so it is called the time accepted and the day
of Salvation.

Now all that I shall further do, shall be to handle these two Arguments: and
in the handling of them I shall only endeavor these two things.

1. To open the sense and meaning of these two Arguments.

2. To show the force and strength of both these Arguments to engage us to
improve the present season of Grace.

1. I shall explain the sense of these first two Arguments in their order: and
first, the sense of the first Argument taken from the fitness of the season for
working, as it is called the time and the day. And herein first, I shall explain
the word Time, secondly, the word Day.

[Time] is not here meant the flux, succession, or continuation of Time by
minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years, which we call the space of Time;
but by Time according to the signification of the word in the greek, I
understand the tempestivity, or opportunity of time: For in the greek it is
(...), which signifies season or opportunity, a time accommodated and fitted to
employment; in which we may undertake our Heavenly business with hope of
success. When time and means meet together in conjunction, then they produce
opportunity. This seasonableness, or tempestivity of time, is therefore not
unfitly called by some the Grace of time, the flower of time, and that to time
which the flower is to the stalk, ((...).) which cream is to the milk, which
luster is to the metal. In civil undertakings, as trading, plowing, and
sowing, opportunity is (as one says) the Grace of time; but in Spiritual
undertakings, Opportunity is the time of Grace, the time fitted and suited by
God for the benefiting of our Souls by the means of Grace. It is as the Angel's
stirring in the water, into which he that stepped first was healed. It is as
the day of a Prince his audience for the answering of petitions. It is as the
opening of Heaven-gates unto them that strive for entrance. It is as the
Spiritual market day for the procuring of saving provisions for our Souls, upon
which we are to live for ever.

Day. For the opening of this, the word [Day] in Scripture is sometimes taken
for the Natural Day, consisting of 24 hours, including also the night; and so
it is taken in Christ's Directory for prayer, which we commonly call the Lord's
prayer, (Directory (I say) for I conceive (with learned Grotius) Christ does
not command verba recitari, the words thereof to be repeated, but he commands
us only to draw all the matter of our prayers out of it, materiam precum hinc
promi praecipit:) wherein when we pray for our daily bread day by day,
doubtless we pray for what is needful for the night too as well as the day;
(for sleep is the bread of the night.) therefore by day there must be meant the
whole natural day, consisting of 24 hours. Sometimes the word day is taken for
an Artificial day distinguished from the night, Genesis 41.40. In the day the
drought, and in the night the frost consumed me. Sometimes the word day is
taken improperly and figuratively in the Scriptures; and so sometimes it is
taken for an age, and for a year. Sometimes for a fit occasion or season of
doing any thing; as in John 9.4. I must do the work of him that sent me while
it is day. And so the season of receiving good, as well as doing good, is
called a day; Luke 19.41, 42. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this
thy day, the things that concern thy peace: that is, in the season, wherein
they have been manifested unto thee by me. So here by day I understand the fit
season of procuring Salvation by improving the means for obtaining thereof.
This briefly for the opening of the first Argument, which is the fitness of the
present season of Grace for our working: it is called the time, the day.

2. Secondly, To open the second Argument, and that is the advantageousness
worker, and it is called the accepted time first, and secondly the day of
Salvation. I shall open both these in their order, and,

1. First, This time is called accepted. The word for [accepted,] in the greek
(...), in this its composition imports a well-pleasing: Yea, a very much
accepted time. The Hebrew word Ratson, from whence it is taken, signifies the
time of free Grace, free favor, or free good will: it is taken out of Isa.
49.8. and the seventy Interpreters they render it in Psalm. 69.13. (...). a time
of free favor, free good will; and Symmachus renders it (...), a time of
reconciliation, that is, a time wherein God will graciously accept sinners out
of free Grace to be reconciled unto them. For when time is said here to be
accepted, and an accepted time, it is to be understood figuratively, as
intending the time wherein God will by free Grace accept of man, or wherein God
is pleased out of his free good will to show himself benevolentem hominibus (as
Grotius expresses it) gracious and favorable to man, in that way of accepting
him through Christ.

2. The season of Grace is called the day of Salvation, further to show the any
evil, or danger, or the preservation from any trouble or distress; nor must we
take Salvation here so strictly and narrowly as to import only eternal
Salvation in Heaven; as it is taken, Romans 13.11. Now is your Salvation nearer,
than when you believed; and heirs of Salvation, Heb. 11.14. Nor must you take
it so strictly as to import only the means of Salvation, as it does often in
the Scripture, Act. 28.28. Salvation is of the Gentiles: but Salvation in this
place comprehends both that happiness which is perfect and complete in Heaven,
and also the entrance into it, and the beginning of it in this life; fitness
for Salvation here, and the fullness of Salvation hereafter; in which sense the
Gospel is called the Gospel of Salvation, in Ephesians. 1.13. and the word of
Salvation, in Act. 13.29. and the Long-suffering of God is to be accounted
Salvation, in 2 Pet. by Salvation in these places being meant a fitness for
Eternal Salvation by receiving the Gospel and improving the Long-suffering of
God and the means of Grace, and our being brought to the full Fruition of it in
Glory. So in this place the day of Salvation is that season wherein God bestows
an entrance into Salvation here, followed with a full perfection of it
hereafter. And so I have opened the sense of these two arguments, whereby the
Apostle urges us to the present improvement of the season Grace, both as this
is a season of fitness for working, and so called a Time, a Day, and as it is a
Season of advantageousness to the worker, and so called an accepted time,
wherein God accepts of sinners to be reconciled to them, and a day of
Salvation, by the improving whereof God will certainly bring his People to the
Fruition and the perfect Participation of Life and Salvation in Heaven. Now
having thus explained and opened the Sense of these two Arguments, I shall only
in the second place,

2. Show you the force and strength of them both distinctly, to engage us to a
present improvement of the season of Grace.

1. And First I shall show you the force of the first Argument, and that is the
fitness of this present season of Grace for our working and employment. It is
(says the Apostle) 1. The Time, 2. The Day.

Time. I showed you in the explaining, of the sense of the first Argument the
meaning of the word Time. I told you it did clearly import tempestivity,
opportunity, the flower, the cream, the luster, the beauty of time. But how
does this consideration, that the present Season of Grace is the time of
opportunity, urge and enforce the duty of a present improving of the season of
Grace? In answer whereunto I offer these following considerations.

1. The First is this: The time of opportunity is that which we may easily let
slip. It is tempus labile, a time that may easily slip between our fingers,
especially in Spiritual concernments. It is needful therefore now, instantly,
to lay hold upon it. Opportunity is hardly embraced. The learned Pharisees
could not discern their opportunity by discerning the signs of Christ's coming,
as you have it in Mat. 16. and the beginning. Nor could the Jews know their
opportunity; it was hidden from their eyes, Luke 19.42. Who is as the wise man?
(says Solomon in Eccl. 8.) that is, how rarely is the wise man to be found?
Where is he to be found? But why so? The wise man (says he) discerns time
and judgment, that is, he is able to judge when things are to be done; and
therefore it is rare to find such a wise man. Embracing of opportunity is a
wisdom that God alone must teach us, by considering the shortness of our time,
to be so wise as to improve it, Psalm. 90.12. And God concealeth the season, the
nick, the juncture of time, wherein he will bestow Grace upon us; because he
would have us always watchful, and dependent upon him, humble and serious in
regarding every season. It is easy to know seasons for civil affairs, easy to
know the season of a trade, to sow, to reap, to buy, to sell; But in those
affairs that concern our Souls it is hard to find out when they are to he
performed. Opportunity is so very short and sudden, and men are so blinded with
avocations, pleasures, prejudices and vain hopes, that sometimes these make the
season of regarding their Souls appear too soon; sometimes they are so blinded
with fear and discouragements, by dangers and difficulties, and seeming
impossibilities, that they think it too late: So that indeed between sinful
hope and fear it is hard to pitch upon the right season and nick of time for
the saving of our Souls. In every business, but especially saving business, the
most difficult part of the work is the due limiting of it. In our voyage to
Heaven it is hard to save our tide: not one of a thousand, but lets it slip.

2. Secondly, Opportunity must be presently embraced and improved; because the
improving of it is a man's greatest wisdom. They are called wise, who so
consider their latter end, as that they pursue the present season of duty Deuteronomy.
32.29. They are the wise that discern time and judgment, Eccl. 8.5. that is,
that discern the opportunity so as to have judgment for the embracing of it.
Therefore in Eccl. 10.2. The wise man's heart is said to be in his right hand,
that is, the wisdom of his heart teaches him to dispatch his affairs
judiciously and dexterously both for manner and season. The want of this wisdom
discerning the season makes a man like unto a beast, Psalm. 49.20. It is worse
to be like a beast than to be a beast. To be a beast is no sin, and
comparatively no punishment: But to be like a beast is both in a high degree.
Yea, the very brute Creatures, they are far wiser than is he that neglects his
opportunity of Grace. The Stork, the Turtle, the Crane, the Swallow observe
their seasons of coming into several Countries, Jer. 8.7, 8. They know their
appointed season; but my people know not the judgment of the Lord; not discern
the course, or manner of God's dealings, so as to embrace duty and avoid
danger. It is called a fool's property to want a heart, when he has a price,
that is, an opportunity put into his hand to get wisdom, Prove. 17.16. And
therefore the 5 Virgins even for this piece of folly are called foolish even to
a Proverb; because they were not so wise as to know their opportunity. And let
a man be never so prudent for the world, if he knows not the season of Grace,
he is a mere Scripture-fool, and will appear so to himself and others too to
all eternity. And when he comes to die he shall be compelled to say, Never was
I wise, who was wise for every thing, but to save my Soul.

3. Thirdly, Opportunity urges us to the present improvement of it; because it
facilitates and makes easy every action and employment, making a work come off
sweetly, smoothly, and with facility. It is as the laying of the knife upon the
joint, when we would divide the bone. It is wind and tide to the Oars of
industry. It is as when blowing and rowing go together. God in an opportunity
offers to work with us. That which is done with another's help is easily
done; when both parties join in the doing of it. Two men lifting at a burden
make the lifting more easy. The less of opportunity in our transactions, always
the more of difficulty. The top of time is flowr; but the deeper you go, the
further you depart from opportunity, there is the more of bran, the more of
dregs. 'Twas observed by Seneca in this very case, Non tantum minimum in imo,
sed pessimum. There is not only the Least, but the Worst in the bottom of
opportunity; And the best of opportunity is at the top.

4. Opportunity must presently be embraced, because it makes every action look
beautiful. It makes all our performances look with a lovely aspect, and with a
grace. God has made every thing beautiful in its time, or in his time, Eccl.
3.11. Fruit brought forth in Season is the pleasantest fruit. The wine of
grapes gathered in their vintage and Season, how grateful and generous is it to
the taste! but if the grapes be rotten, and hang beyond their Season, their
liquor loses its gratefulness and delightfulness. Esau's tears after the
season of giving the blessing was past, were nothing worth: They were as the
juice of grapes that were rotten. A word spoken in season is a word upon the
wheel, it comes readily and acceptably unto the ear. To seek after God and the
good of our Souls in the Season of Grace, Oh how lovely is it! When Season is
gone, our endeavors are unpleasant to God, as well as unprofitable unto us,

5. Opportunity must be presently improved; because we are deeply accountable
for every opportunity: Not only for the actions we do are we countable, but for
the time which he had to do them in. Jezabel was plagued for her neglecting the
time of repenting, in Rev. 2.21. I gave her space of Repentance, and she
repented not. For the neglecting youthful seasons the young man must be brought
to judgment, Eccl. 11.9. If you must give an account for every idle word,
surely for every idle Sermon, for every idle Sabbath, for every idle ordinance,
I mean under which you have been idle. If for every idle word you speak, much
more for every unprofitable Sermon you make the Minister preach.

6. Opportunity must be presently improved; For the neglecting of opportunity
destroys the most. All our Salvation depends upon Christ, as to the meriting
of it; but it depends upon opportunity as to the obtaining of it. The
neglecting of opportunity is the greatest destroyer in the world. It is not so
much the being bad, as the delaying to be good, that undoeth the most. It was
not riotousness, but sleepiness, that excluded the foolish Virgins. The misery
of man is therefore great upon the earth; because he does not understand
judiciously his time required to every purpose. Eccl. 8.6. It is not flat
denial, but foolish delayings that ruin Christians. All that the Devil
pretends to desire is your now, your present opportunity; he will offer God thy
to morrow. He seems to be mannerly and modest in bringing men to damnation,
Da mihi quod nunc, and Deo futurum, Let me have but the present time, and give
God all the future. We miss of Heaven by saying to God (as Felix did to Paul)
Go thy way for this time, Act. 24.25. Few deny, but most delay to be saved; And
hereby Satan does his work both plausibly and effectually. Delays put the
likelyest and the handsomest cheat in the world upon a Sinner. Most are damned
by delaying to be saved. And because every age hopes to live that which is to
come, it lives not that which is now present.

7. Opportunity must be presently improved for the Soul, because it is embraced
by all in Lowest concernments for the body. The Husbandman, the Merchant, the
Lawyer, the Seaman, they all mind their opportunity, their season. Yea for the
very cutting of Trees we observe our times. Yea the fittest seasons are
embraced for sinful undertakings: the Thief observes the removal of the Watch,
the sleepiness of the inhabitant: the harlot like the Owl flies abroad in the
twilight: yea the Devil makes use of the shortness of his time to increase his
rage. And shall opportunities for our Salvation be only neglected? what
Christians only fools for our Souls? I have read a story in an old Author
concerning a devout man, who, after the sun was some hours up, went to the
Chamber door of an old Bishop, and the Bishop being asleep in his bed, the good
man knocked at his door using these words, the Sparrows are awaked and a
chirping, and is it fit for Bishops to be sleeping? and may not I rather say,
the men of the world, persons of all employments, and trades, yea the sons of
violence, they embrace their season, they are up betimes, and shall the people
of God, shall Professors then be asleep, when these are awake and active?

2. The season of Grace is called a day; and as it is here so called, it
eminently

1. In regard of the nature of the season, it is here called a day.

2. In regard of those who are or should be workers in that day.

1. In the regard of the nature of the season, it is called a day. And this
urges us to the present improving of it: For,

1. It is a day, and it is but a day; and that is but a short time. It is not
called a Year, a Month. It does not last long. It is but for a while. Had Jonah
prophesied to the Ninevite^, that within forty years Nineveh should be
destroyed; if the Ninevites had not derided him, yet it is very probable, they
would have delayed their repentance: but when he told them yet 40 days, and
Nineveh shall be destroyed, this startled and quickened them unto a present
repentance. Our season is here expressed by the term of a day, one day: Yea,
our day is but a short one. We have indeed a smmer's day for clearness; but it
is a winter's day for shortness. While it is called to day, says the Apostle,
Heb. 3.13. exhort one another. We have not so much time that you should be
prodigal of it. He that is profuse of a minute in this day (poor prodigal!)
spends above his estate. Time in the whole compass of it is but short, 1 Cor.
7.29. The time of particular persons is shorter, and the time of season and
present opportunity is the shortest of all. Our present season, our day it is
but like the few sands in the little middle hole of the hourglass. The sand in
the upper glass is uncertain whether ever to run one sand more, or no, that is
the time to come: That in the lower glass is as the time spent and past: but
the few sands in the narrow middle hole are as the present season, and only
ours. Non tam liberale nobis dedit tempus Natura, ut aliquid ex eo liceat
perdere, says Seneca: Nature has not dealt so liberally with us, as that it
does allow us to mispend any of the little time it has given us. We are
prodigal of time, though covetous of a penny. We are more profuse of our time,
cujus unius honesta est avaritia, of which alone there is an honest
covetousness. You may have many pieces of gold together in your hand, but you
can have but one day of Grace at once, it is but one day.

2. It is a day; and therefore that which cannot be recalled when it is spent
and done. The loss of a day is an irrecoverable loss. Who can restore the loss
of a day? nec cursum supprimit, nec revocat, tempus: Time does neither suppress
it is course, nor recall it; neither does it slack it, nor revoke it. As time
stops not, so time returns not. If thy House be burnt, or thy goods stolen, or
thy Lands forfeited, Friends can make a supply of those losses: but if all thy
Friends, nay Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, should conspire to make thee
happy, they cannot with all their combined industry and united forces restore
thee to one of those good hours in the day of Grace that thou have foolishly
misspent. Esau lost his day and he could not recall it with tears. The knocking
of the foolish Virgins could not break open the shut door of Heaven. When thy
sun is set and thy day completely ended, thy sun will never rise more. I have
heard of one that wantonly threw a Jewel into the Sea; and they say the Jewel
was brought to him in the belly of a fish that was served up to his table. I
know not how true this is; but who, or what shall ever bring back to thee the
Jewel of thy lost day? none shall ever bring back this Jewel to thy table, if
thou will throw it away by wantonness and negligence. God will not turn thy
glass when it is once out. What the fall was to Angels, that is death to man.

3. It is a day: and this should put us upon the present improving of it; for
it is a clear day, a lightsome day. The sun of Righteousness is risen. The
day-sping from on high has visited our Horizon with the light of the Gospel.
Now a lightsome, a sun-shiny day, is to be regarded, improved, for the present.
It Is a dark day indeed compared with Heaven; but it is light compared with the
shadows of Judaism, or the fogs of Popery. Work, work; work apace, you that
have the sunshine of the Gospel. I wish I could not say, I see a Cloud far
bigger than a man's hand, and I hear a noise of much rain. Now you have
sunshine: cock your Hay; shock your Corn a pace; wanton not away your Summer,
least you beg in Winter. God by giving of you so fair a day, shows not that
your Sun will always shine: but that now thou should work. Slumber not away
a sun-shiny day in harvest. The day, and such a day is surely intended for
working. Man goes forth to his work till the evening: the night is for sleep,
but the day, especially a sun-shiny day, a clear day for working.

4. It is a day: and therefore puts us upon the present improving of it;
because it is a wasting day, a day that passes and runs apace. We usually
say the day is far spent. The day goes, whether you sit still or no: the sun
runs, yea like a Giant, like a strong man, though thou creepest like a cripple.
Though the passenger sleeps in the Ship, the Ship carries him apace toward
his Haven: thou art idle, but time hurrieth thee to the grave. Time is winged:
thy hourglass needs no jogging: there is no stopping the stream of time. It
was a notable speech of one once to a person that was in a fit of anger; Sir
(says he) Domine, sol ad occasum: the sun is going down: this is my caution to
every lazy Christian, if the sun must not go down upon your wrath, surely it
must much less go down upon your loitering. If the sun in the Heavens must not
go down upon your Wrath, the sun of your life should not be suffered to go down
upon your Laziness. Cum celeritate temporis utendi velocitate certandum est,
says Seneca: Our swiftness in work must contend with the swiftness of the time
in which we work. Thou do not see thy time going; but shortly thou will see
it gone: like the insensible moving hand of a dial, which, though thou do not
see it moving, yet thou see it has moved.

5. It is a day: and therefore puts us upon the present improving of it; For it
is possible yet, that in this thy day, thy work may be done, before sun set, if
thou be speedy. Despair not; for then industry will be frozen. The bridge of
mercy is not yet drawn: there is yet a possibility for thee to get over to a
blessed eternity. It Is bad to say It is too soon, though most have said so too
often: but it is worse to say It is too late. I confess thy morning was thy
golden hour, and had been far the fittest for thy employment; but the evening
time is better than no time. I dare not write despair upon any man's forehead.
If God will help us, much work may be done in a little time; but yet God must
step in with a Miracle almost, if thou should run back the misspent age of 40
or 50 years in an hour or two; surely, you must fly rather than run.

6. It is a day, and for ought you know, It may be your last day: and therefore
improve that present day. You have no assurance of another: from the upper
glass of the hourglass, thou can not be assured of one sand more. Often say
thou therefore to the day wherein thou live, art thou my last, or may I look
for another? Though thou art young, it may prove thy last day: Death takes us
not by Seniority. The new pitcher may be as easily broken as the old. And
(which is a more severe consideration) the Spirit of God possibly may never
knock at the door of thy heart again, never strive in thee, never strive with
thee. Death may knock next, and remember, he will easily break into thy body,
though thy Minister could not get into thy Soul. Death never comes without a
warrant; yet it often comes without a warning. We do not live by patent, but we
live at pleasure. How know thou that the candle of the Ministry shall shine
one Sabbath longer? The message shall always live, but the messenger is
always dying. The clods of the Earth may soon stop that mouth, that so
frequently and unfruitfully has given thee the word of life. He, the light now
of his place and of his people, may be blown out by violence as well as burnt
out by death. Thou can not say, but God may soon make that ear of thine deaf,
that now thou stoppest: God may soon blind those eyes, which now thou shuttest.
It is a peradventure whether God will ever give repentance or no. God has made
many promises to repentance; but he has made none of repentance. If to day
thou say thou will not, to morrow thou may say thou can not pray. It is
just with God, that he who while he lives forgets God, when he dies should
forget himself. I have heard of a profane miscreant, that being put upon speedy
repentance and turning to God, scoffingly answered; if I do but say three words
when I come to dye, (Miserere mei Domine: Lord have mercy upon me,) I am sure
to be happy. This miserable wretch shortly after, falling from his horse, and
receiving thereby a deadly wound, had indeed time to speak three words (as the
relation informed me,) but those three words were these, Diabolus capiat omnia,
Let the Devil take all. Thou do not know what thy last words shall be: the
very motions of thy tongue and of thy heart are all in the hands of that God,
whose grace thou have despised.

7. It is a day: That requires present improvement; because it is followed
with a night, a night that is dark as pitch. The night comes wherein no man
can work. (So says our Lord Joh. 9.4.) There is neither work nor invention in
the grave. In the dark thou may see to bewail thy not working in the light;
but in the dark there is no working. Sorrow then will not help thee, could
thou make hell to swim with thy tears. Thy tears are only of worth in time. Put
not off your working, till the time wherein you must leave work. It is perfect
madness, not to think of beginning to work till the time of working is at an
end. Nemo finitis nundin^s exercet mercaturam. What man after the fair will go
then to buy and sell? There is no negotiation, but in the time of the fair, the
season of grace. The spiritual manna of grace is only to be gathered in the six
days of thy life. The time after this is a time of rest, wherein there is no
more work to be done to procure Salvation. If this be the day of thy death,
tomorrow cannot be the day of thy repentance. It is miserable to have that to
do for lack of time, which is to do for loss of time. Thus I have shown you,
how we are put upon present improving the season of Grace, As it is here termed
a day or in respect of the nature of the Season.

workers in this day, we are urged from hence to a present improving of the
season of grace.

1. How little have we wrought in this day of grace? What a pitiful account
(and yet an account must be given) of this Day can we give unto God, of
thousands of Sabbaths, and repetitions of ordinances, and opportunities of
life, that we have enjoyed? You have been perhaps long in the world and under
the means of grace; but can you say, you have lived long? It Is one thing for
passengers in a ship to be a great while tossed in the Sea, and another thing for
them to sail a great way. You have been long in the world tossed up and down
with many temptations, and impetuous corruptions, and violent affections; but
which of you have sailed much, or gone forward in your course to Heaven with
any considerable progress? Little is to be seen in the copies of your lives,
besides blots and empty spaces. Much paper has been spent with wide lines. Had
you not need now toward the end of the side to write the closer, to redeem the
time, as the Apostle expresses it? Ephesians. 5.16. We should redeem our time out of
the hands of those that have taken it captive, out of the clutches of those
vain employments, that have so often taken it captive. Now in all redemptions
there is the laying down a price for the party that is redeemed: But what is
that price you are to lay down for your time, when it is to be redeemed? I will
tell you, Id quod perdis pretium est, (says Augustine) That which you lose in
your worldly employments, in your idle recreations, in your vain visits, in
your exorbitant eatings and drinkings, that time that you take from these to
give to God and your Souls, that is the price that you lay down for the
redeeming of seasons for your Souls. It is miserable for our work to be undone
for want of time when we are dying, when it is undone for the loss of time
while we are living.

2. How great is the woe of those, whose Day is done, and yet their work is not
done, but still to do? You have seen their end upon Earth; but you have not
heard their cries, and their self-bewailings in hell. How many have been cut
off before your eyes, who ceased to be, before they began to live? Improve
examples lest you become examples. Your Schooling is cheap, when it is at the
cost of another. Let the lashes of Divine severity that have fallen upon
others, quicken thee in thy Spiritual pace and traveling toward Heaven. Why
should God stay for you rather than for them? Thou can not mispend thy time
at so cheap a rate as they did, by whom God has warned thee. Hell is not so
full of Souls, as it is of delayed purposes. What would not lost Souls give for
a crum of that time of which now in this world they make Orts? If the foresight
of their tears for neglecting the Day of grace fetched tears from Christ, Luke
19.41.42. How great shall the feeling be of the Eternal effects of their
inexcusable folly? How Exuberant, but unfruitful, shall be the flood of their
own tears for their former slothfulness, never enough to be bewailed, because
never at all to be repaired? Surely a small loss could not draw tears from so
great a Person, as the Son of God.

3. Many by beginning betimes in the morning of their day have done more work
than thou a delayer can now accomplish. They should provoke thee to a holy
jealousy. They setting forth for Heaven in the morning, have traveled further
in that morning, than thou have done in that long Summer's day wherein thou
have been slothful. What a shame is it that some should be green-headed Saints,
and thou a gray headed Sinner? Julius Caesar (as Suetonius reports) reading
that Alexander had conquered the world in his youthful age, professed his shame,
that he, who was so much older than Alexander, should come so far behind him in
obtaining victorious glory: This fired Caesar with noble Emulation to exceed
him. Envy is ever bad; but Emulation may be holy. Envy is a trouble for
another's Eminency, but Emulation is a troubling of our selves for not ariving
to another's commendable excellency.

4. In this thy day of working, and in thy working, thou art but a slow worker.
Thou have a great journey, and art a slow sluggish passenger. Thou have a load
of Corruption that presses thee down. Thou Sailest against the tide of corrupt
nature. Thou have an encumbring body of death that will hinder thee from doing
even what thou art a doing; a long garment that hinders and hampereth thee,
when thou endeavourest to be speediest in thy course for Heaven. The flesh
lusts against the Spirit, so that thou can not do the thing that thou
would. There are many Thieves in thy Candle of time, which daily wast it;
Sleeping, Eating, Drinking, Visiting, being visited, and a great many other
worldly avocations, employments, enjoyments, that must be regarded together
with thy Soul: These are as so many places, at which we must call in, as we
are in our journey; and the dispatching of every errand in every one of these
places will take us up much time. Hard it is for our hearts to be preserved
from too deep en engagement in them; the world more frequently bewitching from
God, than admonishing us of God; too often proving as birdlime to the vvings of
our affections to hinder their slight Heavenvvard. And many also are the
retarding discouragements that all the people of God must meet with all in
their course to Heaven: As they have the tide of nature against them, so they
have the vvind of opposition from men and devils against them. Earliness and
eagerness in the ways of God are the two things principally opposed by the
god, and men of this world. It Is the galloping passenger at whom the dogs of
the town most bark, and whom they most pursue. All that travel Heavenward have
the wind in their faces, though the happiness of their journey's end infinitely
more than countervails for the greatest both industry and opposition.

5. The longer thou delayest thy working in this day, the harder it will be for
thee to begin. Sin is as deceitful to detain, as it is to draw. Every moment
thou delayest to leave it, it tyeth a knot on the cord wherewith it holds
thee, making thereby thy freedom from it the more difficult. Lust and delay
know no measure: and delay knows no measure, because lust knows none. The
further you go on, the harder it is, and the more unwilling will you be to go
back. The deeper the engagement, the more difficult is the retreat. By delay
sin is the more strengthened, the Devil the more emboldened, and God the more
provoked. That which in thee to day is Regardlesness, tomorrow may be
Unwillingness, and the next day Obstinateness. Dum consuetudini non resistitur
sit necessitas: Custom in sin will at length turn into necessity of sinning.
Venenata non patiuntur inducias: Antidotes against poisons must not be delayed.
The longer a bad Tenant forbears payment of his Rent, the harder it will be for
him te get it up. A nail driven into wood is with more difficulty drawn out,
when it is driven up to the head, than when with a few blows it is weakly
fastened. The longer the wood lies soaking in the water, with the greater
difficulty does it burn. The longer Satan's possession has been, the more
difficult will his ejection be. Every delay makes thy return to God look more
like to an impossibility. Goliath must be smitten in the forehead, and Satan
opposed betimes. Old age is aetas indisciplinabilis, an indisciplinable age.
Childhood is the age of Learning. Old age is the time, wherein men desire more
to teach than be taught.

6. As to thy working in this day; the sooner thou beginnest and the faster
thou workest in this day of Grace, the sweeter will thy sleep be in the
evening, when thy day is consummate. After thou viewest thy early, and thy
earnest working for God, in the end of thy life, thou will have a Sabbath in
thy thoughts. None ever repented them, either of early beginnings, or constant
proceedings in the ways of holiness. It was an humbling to Paul, that Christ
appeared last of all to him 1. Cor. 15. and that Andronicus and Junia were in
Christ before him; that they were his Seniors in the faith, Romans 16.7. How
sweet is it in age to feed upon the comforts of a well spent youth and manhood!
Never put that off to the last, that cannot be done too soon. Early beginnings
in Godliness make an easy deathbed: And acquaintance with God betimes makes
thee the more confident to go to him. God will never forget thee in the end,
who remembrest him in the beginning of thy life. Should you at length look
Heavenward, yet how will it grieve you that you did not make a more early
beginning? The better thou art when thou dyest, the more it will trouble thee
thou were holy so late. Early Holiness spares abundance of deathbed trouble.
That man, who puts off his repentance to his end, dies at the best with little
comfort. Incertus moritur, qui in fine paenitet: If he should repent at last,
yet he dies uncertainly, as to future happiness. He rarely knows whither he is
going. It Is comfortable for a man to be able to say to God when he dies, as one
did, Paenitentiam egi quando peccare potui: Lord, thou know, I then repented
of Sin, when I had strength and time and ability and opportunities to sin. Thus
I have shown you the strength and the force of the first Argument, whereby the
Apostle engages us to a present improvement of the season of Grace; as it is,
for its fitness for working, the Time, the Day.

2. Briefly now, in the second place to show you the force of the second
Argument, Advantageousness of improving the present season of Grace to the
Worker and improver of it, it being here called

1. The time of acceptance:

2. The day of Salvation. The first shows the freeness; The second the fullness.
The first shows how cheap the commodity is, that we get by working, and the
second how rich it is. The First shows how costless it is, the second how
costly it is: Both contained in this golden expression, the accepted time, and
the day of Salvation.

1. It is the accepted time; that is, the time of God's free Grace and good
will in accepting of sinners: not so much the accepting of time, as the
accepting of sinners in such a time. This expression of God's free good will in
accepting sinners in the season of Grace does notably instruct us to a present
improvement of it; and that especially for these two reasons,

1. Because, it being the accepted time, or time of free grace and good will,
we must for the present improve it upon the account of gratitude and ingenuity.

2. Because, it being the accepted time, and the day of God's free grace in
accepting of sinners, we must presently improve it upon the account of real
self-interest.

1. Upon the account of ingenuous gratitude. The terms upon which
reconciliation is bestowed are all free; it is free not only in respect of the
persons upon whom it is bestowed, who are weak and unworthy and polluted and
opposite to God; but in respect of the terms on which it is bestowed. The terms
are free terms. The old friendship between God and man was kept up by Doing;
but restoring to friendship, or reconciliation, is bestowed in the way of
believing. We do not buy the favor of God. It Is not afforded Secundum pretium,
but Secundum pactum. It is not by laying down any valuable consideration for
the meriting and purchasing of it; but it is in the way of doing that which God
appoints, and by his free grace is pleased to condescend unto, and that is
humble and thankful acceptance. If we buy it, it is with another's purse.
Jesus Christ only bought it. We part with nothing for the favor of God, but
what is our bane, if we keep it. We may keep all, but what will kill and damn
us. Nor does our obedience to God, when we accept of reconciliation with him
through Christ, make our reconciliation less free; For the pardon of a Traitor
may be free, though it be under the condition of future Loyalty. Now then what
is more suitable to ingenuous gratitude, than to embrace the season of God's
bestowing so free a favor? Surely, the least we can do is, to accept of that
God that accepts of us, to accept of him that is so full of loveliness and
rewards, we having nothing to bring him but deformity and beggary. Not to
accept his favor presently argues the height of proud ingratitude; concerning
which God may say, have I this for my good will? for my free grace? what not so
much as accept of my favor that shall cost thee nothing? surely the least
spark of holy ingenuity would prompt us to say with him in a case of infinitely
lower concernment, Lord, we accept it always, with all thankfulness; what thou
offerest freely I accept it readily. What beggar does not accept of a free alms
without delay, or disputation?

2. As the season of Grace is the accepted time, or the time of God's free
acceptance of sinners, it engages us to a present improvement of this season
of grace upon the account of self-interest: for the neglecting of free grace
makes the divine vengeance,

1. Unavoidable: and secondly, Insupportable.

1. Neglecting of free of grace makes vengeance unavoidable: If grace be
neglected, what shall save you? if grace shall not save thee, works cannot save
thee. The neglecter of grace concludes himself under a necessity of damnation:
He rendeth the book of mercy: He throws away the remedy, the cordial that
serves for his reviving. He that accepts not of life and Salvation by free
gift, must have it by earning, must have it by working; and earn it we cannot.
Thou can not obtain reconciliation with God upon easier terms for thy self,
than Christ obtained it for believers; and what terms were those, but even
perfect, and to thee impossible obedience? You cannot dig: perfect doing is
impossible: you are lost, if ashamed to beg at the door of free grace for the
dole of mercy.

2. The neglecting of free grace makes Divine vengeance insupportable. It
discovers the malignity of the heart against that which by free grace is
bestowed; for if we cannot dislike the price, which is to bring neither money
nor price, you must then dislike the wares, which are Heaven with holiness. And
how great a scorn do we then put upon the Lord Jesus, the purchaser of free
grace? It was Christ's payment that made all free to us. Who can excuse the
contempt of such both love and cost at once? there is no liquor that scalds so
tormentingly in hell, as the Oil of mercy. Grace turned into fury is the most
killing Enemy. Freeness invites all worldly customers. Who loves not costly
things that cost him nothing? who shunneth an interest in a thousand pounds a
year to be had for taking up at the Court? and why alone, my Brethren, should
Jesus Christ want customers? are there any commodities so rich as his? are
there any commodities to us so cheap as his? Why should they alone be slow that
go to take the favor and love of God through him? especially considering, that
they have paid so dear for that which is not bread, yea for that which is their
bane? Free grace tendered and neglected is condemnation heightened. You cannot
have the favor of God by doing: what will you not have it for receiving
neither? you will not then have it at all. It is that hell of hells that free
grace is despised, has been neglected. Thus much for the first branch of the
second Argument: the season of grace is a time of acceptance, and therefore in
respect of that advantage it requires our present improving thereof.

For the second branch of this second Argument: The season of grace is also
called Salvation. But why does this second branch put us upon the present
improving of the season of grace? For answer, take these considerations.

1. It is a day of Salvation; and Salvation is a work that must be regarded:
it is a matter of absolute necessity. Other things are may-be s, at the best
matters of mere convenience; but Salvation is a business of peremptory and
indispedsible necessity. A fair day is convenient to ride in; but the journey
it self being of life and death is absolutely necessary. You may be excused at
the day of judgment for leaving any thing in the world undone besides the
getting of Salvation. You may be excused, if you never had time to get the
riches or honors of the world, or great endowments, or employments: but what
shall excuse you, if you have not looked after Eternal life? Can you say we had
another employment more, or as necessary? can you say we were taken up about
something more needful, more useful? no you cannot. Now remember, that which
must be done, should be most done and first done. First attend necessaries, and
then look after circumstantials, first seek the Kingdom of God. Here it is no
measuring cast whether you should obtain Salvation: it is a must-be, Tempus
perdimus dum aeternitatem non ^quaerimus: You lose all that time that is not
spent in looking after a happy Eternity: First get bread for thy starving
Children, and then, if thou have time, look after rattles for them. A work of
necessity must not be put off to a time of uncertainty. If thou delayest, delay
in looking after riches and honor, and the vanities of the World; Oh! but now,
now, now pursue Salvation. It is a must-be, and if the present time be gone,
you may be undone for ever.

2. Salvation is that which imports rest and satisfaction. Salvation, it is the
Soul's quietation and ease. Heaven is that center of the Soul: you are never at
rest till you come there. Now the object of rest is speedily to be pursued. How
does every thing hasten to its rest, its center? how does the stone with
eagerness hasten to the Earth, when thrown from the top of an high steeple? how
swiftly does the fire fly upwards to its rest, to its center? with what a rapid
motion, with what a fierce career, do the Rivers run into the Sea? they are
going to their place, the place of waters. Is Heaven thy rest? is Heaven thy
center? why is thy tendency to it so sluggish? You owe unto life Eternal all
those propensions and all those inclinations, wherewith all the things of the
World are carried to the centers. The speed that the wicked make in getting to
Hell, proclaims that Hell is their proper place and center; though not for
rest, but restlessness. Shall every thing hasten to rest, but thy Soul? it was
the speech of Naomi to her Daughter: my Daughter, shall I not seek rest for
thee? Oh that every one would say unto his Soul, my Soul, shall I not look
after rest for thee in the bosom of God and the eternal fruition of himself?
the little Infant that cries for sleep will rise up in judgment against a
sinner that does not look after the rest of his Soul. That little Infant that
cries for sleep out-goeth thee in wisdom.

3. It is a day of Salvation; and the pursuing of Salvation is Opus grande, a
great work, a vast employment: many things are required to accomplish it, many
lusts to be subdued, many duties to be discharged, many temptations to be
resisted, many relations to be filled. Now a great work must be begun betimes.
If you had but a little to do in the day, you might lie in bed a great while in
the morning: but you have a vast work to do; and therefore get up early. Some
poor Creatures will rise up early to washing; a pitiful work to the cleansing
of thy Soul: a far greater work surely than to wash clothes. If you had a
thousand Souls, they might all be employed for the obtaining of Salvation. If
every singer were a hand, they might all be employed in getting of Salvation.
He that has many Children to look after and a small Estate, many to feed and
cloth, he says, I must rise early and sit up late. None have so much business
as a Christian. The work of Christianity is never at an end. The art of
Religion is never learned. There is still an etc. still something remaining to
be done. Blessed Paul thought himself far from perfection: I do not look upon
my self as having attained: the best have much more to be done, than they have
already done. I have read of a famous Limner, who when he had wrought his
picture in the best and most curious manner, would never write at the bottom
feci, but faciebam, I did it, not I have done it; because he judged he had
never wrought any picture so well, but he might work it better, and add
something more of art to it. A Christian's art is never complete while he
lives in this world, nor ever did a Saint think himself a complete Artist. How
exceeding large are the commands of God! how little is our most, and how bad is
our best, compared with the rule!

4. This delaying in the pursuit of Salvation is a delaying to be freed from
the greatest evil. What is that? the wrath of God, guilt, damnation, hell.
Delaying to be freed from extreme miseries is confuted by constant experience:
what condemned Malefactor will delay to get free from his chains, from his
dungeon, from the sentence of death? what tormented person upon the rack will
say, I must consider before I accept of ease? and when ease and riddance from
the rack are offered, if instantly he will accept thereof, will say; I will
consider of it, I will give answer of it hereafter? if a dust fly into the eye,
thou hastest to get it out, and will thou not have to ease thy soul? who ever
deliberated, whether he would come out of the fire or no? it is more mad to
deliberate whether thou will be saved or no, and get out of the state of
damnation. Here is no place for deliberation; it is no measuring cast.

5. Salvation it is our Own concern, it is Opus proprium, our own business it
is not another's. It may be a slothful apprentice will be backward to rise in
the morning, when he is to do his Master's business: but when he sets up for
himself, and is to gather an Estate for himself, he will go about his business
speedily. Salvation is a work for your selves, the gain thereof is your own
gain. Whatever you get here goes into your own purse. Here if you are wise, you
are wise for your selves, Prove. 9.12. Oh that we had more true self-love! the
common self-love in the world is employed about our bodily self, the shell, the
sheath of the true self, which is the body. Few men truly love their true self:
it is a common proverb, interest will not lie; yet the Soul that delays
Salvation, his interest lies. He walks contrary to it, and neglects that
wherein all his blessedness does consist, make sorts of his own Salvation.

6. It is a day of Salvation: and Salvation recompenses for all earliness and
earnestness. Salvation makes amends for all the sufferings and services of
time. How poor, how short and slight is our work compared with our wages? If
there could be any trouble in Heaven, it would be this, that we have labored
for it no more and no sooner upon Earth. Thou have no more to live on to
Eternity, than what thou layest up here. As our obedience is small compared
with our rule prescribed; so it is very small compared with our recompense
promised. Though nothing can recompense for the neglect of Salvation; yet
Salvation can recompense for the neglecting of all other things. Nor only does
it recompense for our neglecting of all things, but for our being neglected of
all persons, and for all our reproaches for our early pursuing it: all which
will easily be confuted with this answer, it is better to be reproached and
derided for being too speedy, than damned for being too slow in entering into
Heaven's way: it is more easy to bear the scorns of the World, than the scourges
of Conscience. I conclude, We can never regard Salvation too soon; for we can
never either enjoy it, or think we can enjoy it too long.

What Spiritual knowledge they ought to seek for that desire to be saved, and
by what means they may attain it. Sermon. V.
Isaiah 27.11. For it is a People of no understanding, therefore he that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor.


IN this and the precedent verse we have a dreadful denunciation of judgment
upon either the oppressors and Enemies of God's People, or upon obstinate and
incorrigible sinners among God's People; together with the reason of that
denunciation, or cause of that judgment threatened.

1. The judgment denounced is,

1. Great desolation, as to their outward state; verse 10. and former part of
the 11. v.

2. Utter destruction, final ruin; v. 11. He that made them will not have
mercy on them. James 2.13.
It is the highest severity, where no Savior is to be found, where judgment is
executed without mercy: And this is amplified by the consideration,

1. Partly of the Inflicter of the judgment; it is God himself, He that made
them. They were not to fall into the hands merely of men like themselves, their
fellow Creatures; but into the hands of the living God.

Heb. 10.13.
2. Partly of kindness formerly received from him: He that made them, He that
formed them, i. e. He that created them, gave them their being, (if we
understand it of the Enemies of God's People.) or he that not only made them as
his Creatures, but formed them to be his Servants, formed them into a state,
and into a Church, (if we understand the words as spoken of God's People
themselves.) and so had given them their being, not only a natural one, but a
civil and Ecclesiastical one: he that had formerly done so much for them,
vouchsafed them such choice mercies, yet now would renounce all kindness to
them, have no mercy on them, show them no favor.

II. The cause of the judgment to be inflicted: it is a People of no
understanding, (...) it is not a People of Understanding; as much as to say, It
is not a people of any understanding, or as we read it, It is a people of no
understanding; It is a sottish, ignorant people, such as take no notice of any
thing, know not God, observe not his works, understand not their duty. Other
sins, no doubt, they were chargeable with; but the Lord takes notice especially
of their ignorance, and it is for that they are here threatened. Hence we take
notice, that,

Obs. 1. Ignorance of God, his truths or ways is no security against his
judgments. Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not,
etc.

Obs. 2. The knowledge of the will and ways of God is necessary for them, that
expect to find favor with God. They that desire God would save them, must
labor to know him. That some knowledge of the will of God is needful to all
those that expect to be saved, (for we set aside the case of Infants.) I
suppose is clear in it self. But when you hear this Doctrine, you may be ready
to ask, What is that knowledge, which they who would be saved should seek
after? And when that is answered, you may again enquire, What means you are to
use for the obtaining of it. And so the case to be spoken to is this, What
Spiritual knowledge, or knowledge of the things of God, (for other knowledge at
present we take no notice of, however commendable in it self, or secondarily
useful to higher ends.) they ought to seek for, who desire to be saved; and how
such knowledge may be attained. Of this Case Case.
there be two parts. I shall speak distinctly to each: and so first show, what
is that knowledge we are to seek after; and then give directions for the
attaining of it.

I. What knowledge they are to labor after, who expect to be saved. In answer
to which I must promise something by way of distinction, something by way of
Concession, and then add other things by way of proposition for the fuller
determining the case in hand.

Distinct. 1. We must distinguish between that knowledge which is simply and
absolutely necessary to the Salvation of all men, so that no man can be saved
without it, but whosoever falls short of it must certainly perish for lack of
it; such knowledge the want of which is always actually damning, and that even
in them that have not the means of obtaining it, as Heathens who have no
revealed light; for in them it is the occasion of their perishing: as a man's
not knowing the only Medicine in the World that could cure him when sick, would
be the occasion of his death, and so would be his undoing, though not his fault.

2. And that knowledge, which though it be not simply necessary to Salvation,
necessitate medii, yet is Secondarily necessary to be in those that would be
Saved, or necessary in some respects, and upon some suppositions, as,

1. On the account of the circumstances wherein men are, and the capacity they
are in for the gaining of knowledge, whereby they are brought under the
obligation of a command to labor after it, and so they have the necessity of
Duty to seek that knowledge, though that knowledge it self have not the
necessity of a Mean.

2. Necessary, though not absolutely to the very Esse or Being of a Christian,
and his Salvation, yet to his been esse, his well being, as a Christian, his
better and more comfortable management of the affairs of his Salvation. The
want of this knowledge, if it be not always actually damning, as when God
gives men repentance; yet proceeding in those that are in condition to obtain
it not from want of means or capacity, but from gross negligence, or contempt
of the truth, it must needs be in it self damnable.

2. By way of Concession. It is a difficult thing to determine just how much
knowledge is absolutely necessary to Salvation, to define the Minimum quod sic
(so to speak) of Divine knowledge, so as to say that whoever falls one degree
short of it cannot be saved. That there be certain prime fundamental Doctrines
of Religion, which are so necessary to Salvation, that men cannot in an
ordinary way be saved without the knowledge of them, is, I think, confessed by
the generality of those that pretend to Christian Religion, or to any hopes of
Salvation: But which in particular those fundamentals are, and how many, is not
alike clear. A controversy it is, which I shall not need to touch upon, not
only as being a tender point, but as not being concerned in my present design,
as will further appear in the following Propositions: It will little avail us
in our present circumstances, amidst such plentiful means of knowledge, and so
much truth as is revealed to us, to know just how much knowledge is absolutely
needful to Salvation; as suppose, how much would have been sufficient for the
Salvation of a believing Jew before our Savior's coming in the flesh, or what
knowledge might be sufficient for the Salvation of, and consistent with truth
of Grace in, some poor Christian in the darker corners of the Earth, as among
the Indians, or Abyssines. But our business is to see what knowledge we our
selves, considering our condition, (dismissing others in differing
circumstances) are to labor after in obedience to God's command, and for our
more holy and comfortable walking with God, and carrying on the affairs of our
Salvation. And therefore though my text lead me directly enough to the former,
yet I shall confine my self to the latter, making it my business rather to
press men to labor after much knowledge, than trouble my self or others with
unedifying distinctions about, or uncertain catalogues of fundamentals, or
truths absolutely needful to be known; which I suppose few in the World be so
Magisterial as Peremptorily to define. And for my part, if I could certainly
determine which those truths are, I should take heed to whom I told them, least
I should encourage men, slothful enough of themselves, to rest satisfied in a
lesser measure of Spiritual knowledge, when a greater might be gotten.

3. These things premised, I come to answer the case in some propositions; of
which the first shall be this,

Prop. 1. That supposing it were certainly defined, how much knowledge, and the
knowledge of what truths, were sufficient to Salvation; Yet no man, that is in
a capacity of getting more knowledge, ought to acquiesce in just so much. Luke
12.48. To whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required. For the more
full understanding of this proposition, take these following rules.

Rule.
1. By how much the better means men have for the getting of knowledge, so much
the more they ought to know. There is more knowledge required in them that have
more means, than in them that have less. Every servant's improvement is to be
according to his talent; and the gain of one is not sufficient for him that
has received five, nor the gain of five for him that has received ten.
According to the means men have, so their duty is to be judged of, and their
accounts will be expected. I suppose it can scarce be doubted but that,

1. They that live under the Gospel since Christ's coming in the flesh, ought
to abound more in Spiritual knowledge, than they that lived before his coming,
and that for this very reason, because the means of knowledge have been greater
since his coming, than before it, not only as to the extensiveness of them in
the publication of the truth in those places, where it was not heard before,
but as to the efficacy of the means themselves, and the more clear revelation
of the will of God in some things, which were formerly, but less clearly,
revealed. The pouring out of the Spirit was not only for the further spreading
of the truth, but for the more plain and full manifestation of it. The great
mysteries of Religion, which under the Old Testament dispensation were more
obscure, (as being wrapped up in types and figures, which were, though a
shadowing of them out, yet a kind of covering to them) are now under the Gospel
more clearly set forth without those veils in their native luster and
brightness. What was then future, is now come to pass; What then was Prophecy,
is now become History: So that there being, as to the means, more advantages
for our knowledge, than there was for theirs who lived in those ages, we are
engaged to labor after more. And excepting Prophecies and immediate
Revelations, I see no reason, why vulgar Saints may not now know more than
Patriarchs did then; And if they may, I dare say they should.

2. They that live in the Reformed World in this age of Light, should abound
more in knowledge, than they that lived before the Reformation in the darkness
of Popery. A little knowledge might have gone further then, than a great deal
more now: The means of knowledge are now much greater, than 3 or 4 hundred
years ago they were. There is not only more humane learning abroad in the
World, than then there was; but the Original Languages in which the Scriptures
were written, are better known. The Word is more soundly and powerfully
preached, Controversies in Religion are more thoroughly discussed, more good
books are written, more cases stated, more errors detected, and in a word, many
truths, (which though always to be found in Scripture, yet were almost lost in
the World in the Ignorance of those ages) are anew discovered.

3. They who live under better means of Instruction now, should ordinarily be
more knowing than such as have not the like means. They that have the word
preached to them more plainly, powerfully, frequently, should know more, than
they who sit under an idle ignorant Ministry. They that may hear a Sermon every
day, if they will, than they that can scarce hear one Sermon in many months.
And so should they likewise, who live in Religious Families, where God is daily
worshipped, Children and Servants daily instructed, know more than they who
live under profane, or ignorant Masters or Parents.

Rule.
2: They that have more time for the gaining of knowledge, are concerned to know
more than they that have less time. Not only by how much the longer men enjoy
such means, the more they should know, (and more than such as have lived a less
season under them: Upon which account the Apostle blames the Hebrews, Chapter 5.12.
because, when for the time they ought to be Teachers, they had need that one
should again teach them, which were the first Principles of the Oracles of God;
And 2 Timothy 3.7. He speaks of some that were ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth.) But likewise, by how much more leisure men
have for studying the Scriptures, and attending on the means of Grace, while
they do enjoy them, so much the more proportionably they should know. They that
have plentiful Estates, easy employments, few avocations, may, and therefore
ought to seek after a greater measure of knowledge, than they, who by reason of
more burdensome callings, a lower condition in the World, and the necessity of
providing for themselves and their Families, are not in a capacity of spending
so much time in attending on those means, whereby a greater proportion of
knowledge might be gained. They that have their time lying on their hands, and
know not how to fill it up, but with enquiring after News and Fashions,
studying Pleasures and diversions, how much knowledge might they arrive unto,
if they spent but half that time in studying the truth, and enquiring after the
things of God?

Rule.
3. By how much the better capacities men have for the receiving of knowledge,
so much the more (caeteris paribus) they are to know. They that have riper
parts, quicker apprehensions, stronger memories, a deeper reach, should know
more, than they that are naturally more weak, and less capable of learning.
Although I suppose there be none that have the use of their reason, but they
are capable of understanding so much of the things of God, as is absolutely
needful to Salvation, and may be sufficient for the Salvation of them, in their
circumstances; yet there is a vast difference between the abilities of several
persons: and therefore men are not to take their measures for their enquiries
after Spiritual things merely by the necessariness of the things themselves,
but likewise by the abilities God has given them. So that upon the whole, the
better means and advantages in any kind men have for the gaining of knowledge,
so much the more knowledge is required to be in them.

Rule.
4. By how much the more use men have for their knowledge, and by how much the
more good they may do with it, so much the more knowledge will be expected of
them. That knowledge which might do well in a private Christian, yet is not
ordinarily sufficient for a Minister. That which would be much in the one,
might be but little in the other. And that which might do well in a Child,
would not be sufficient in a Parent or Master of a Family. They, that are to
instruct others in the knowledge of God, ought themselves to be more abounding
in it.

Prop. 2. Men should in their seeking knowledge first study those truths, which
are most confessedly necessary to Salvation, and before those which are
apparently less necessary; and so Principles before Controversies; things
essential before such as are only Circumstantial. And indeed by how much the
nearer any truth is to the foundation, so much the more they should labor
after the knowledge of it: as for instance, men should acquaint themselves,

1. With the Being and Attributes of God, as the foundation of all service
yielded to him, and expectations of rewards from him. Psalm. 14.4. Heb. 11.6.
He that knows not God to be holy, how can he know that God requires holiness?
and then how can he himself be holy? how can a man trust God, if he know him
not to be wise, powerful, faithful; or love him, if he know him not to be good;
or fear him, if he know him not to be just? and it will easily follow, that he
who knows not God, as he can never worship him while he lives, so he can never
expect that he should save him when he dies.

2. With the Doctrine of the Trinity; three Persons in the Godhead, the Father,
Son, and Spirit, John 1.5 7. John 14.16. John 15.26.
each Person having his proper part in the Salvation of sinners. The Father as
the Original and Fountain of it; the Son as the Manager; and the Holy Ghost as
the Applier.

3. With their own natural state, and condition, their being by nature in a
state of sin and misery; as having sinned against this Holy, Righteous, Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3. John 16.8.
Powerful God, and thereby exposed themselves to his wrath and curse. They that
would be delivered from the curse, must know themselves to be obnoxious to it.
They that would not perish, must know themselves to be in danger of it. Men are
not like to enjoy God's favor, unless they know that they have lost it.

4. With the Doctrine of a Redeemer; and that both,

1. As to the Person, Who he is: That the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of
God, the Second Person of the Trinity is the Redeemer of sinners, Math. 20.28.
and the only one, Act. 4.12. That God has not left all mankind to perish in
their sin and misery; but has out of his abundant Mercy, and free Grace, found
out a ransom for them, a Savior to deliver them; and that the Lord Jesus
Christ is he, and none besides him: so that it is in vain to seek for Salvation
in any else, seeing he alone has the words of Eternal life, John 6.6.8. He
that knows nothing of a Savior, knows nothing savingly; nor can any man
partake of Redemption without some knowledge of the Redeemer. They can never
come to God, that know not by whom to come.

2. And as to the way of his working that Redemption.

1. That he did, in order to the Salvation of sinners, John 1.14. and 3.13.
take the nature of man upon him, was both God and Man in one person, and still
continues so to be. He had those natures united in himself, which he was to
reconcile to each other.

2. That not only he was able as being God, fit as being man, Romans 3.24, 25,
26. Romans 5.10. 1 Timothy 2.6.
to satisfy Divine justice for the injury sin had done it; but that by his
obedience and death he did it to the full. He that knows God to be infinitely
just, and himself to be a sinner, had need know something of a Sacrifice for
sin, or he can never have any well-grounded hopes of escaping the hands of such
a God.

3. That Christ being raised from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, sits at
the Father's right hand, Romans 8.34. Mark 16.19.
and by his intercession there is now making application of the redemption he
wrought on Earth. He ever lives to make intercession, Heb. 7.25. Men would be
in an ill condition if redemption were wrought, and there were none to apply
it; if Christ had died for them and left them to intercede for themselves.

5. Men should acquaint themselves with the Doctrine of Justification by
Christ: that sinners must be justified by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
imputed to them, if ever they be justified at all. He is the Lord their
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. They are accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Found in
Christ, not having their own Righteousness, etc. but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. All
their own Righteousness inherent in them, and wrought by them, even after
regeneration, and by the help of the Spirit of grace, being finite imperfect,
short of the Law, and due to it.

6. With the way of their being made partakers of this Righteousness: that it
should be received by Faith alone, as the means God has appointed for their
being interested in it. God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation through
faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. and therefore they that are justified, must be
justified by Faith, Romans 5.1. All the holiness any Saint could ever arrive unto
in this life, would never entitle him to Christ's Righteousness, if faith were
wanting.

7. With the nature, properties, and fruit of that faith: that it must be an
effectual lively Faith, not only an assent of their minds to the truth of the
Scripture, Jam. 2.17. John 1.12.
but the consent of their hearts to the terms of the Covenant; a receiving
whole Christ, with an eye to all the good things he offers there, and for all
those holy ends and purposes for which he is propounded to them.

In a word, they are to look upon Faith as the Principle of their Obedience and
walking with God, according to that rule of Righteousness God has given them.

8. With the Doctrine of sanctification: that God is wont to fit and frame men's
hearts at first to the duties of Obedience he requires of them by the work of
the Spirit upon their hearts, changing them, regenerating them, and causing old
things to pass away, and all things in them to become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. and
further to increase that fitness for, and readiness to Spiritual things, by his
guiding, assisting and quickening them, in those holy ways into which he has
brought them, and by those ordinary means (the Word and Ordinances) which he
has appointed for the working and improving of their Graces.

9. With the reward God promises to their Faith and Obedience in the
blessedness of their Souls at the end of this life, and of their whole man
after the Resurrection in their being for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17.
when the unbelief and disobedience of others, will be punished with everlasting
torments inflicted by him. In a word, whoever comes to God, Heb. 11.6. must
believe not only that he is, but that he is the rewarder of those that
diligently seek him. Men ought in the beginning of Religion to look to the end
of it; have some sight of the goal, when they enter upon their race; know their
wages, when they set about their work. The Doctrine of rewards furnishes men
with the greatest incentives to holiness; ignorance or unbelief of future
recompense must needs make men negligent of present service; take away the
knowledge of Heaven and Hell, and ye take away all ^are and thoughts of
Religion.

These things I lay not down as an enumeration o^ Fundamentals, or complete
scheme of Religion; it is sufficient for (...) that they are some of the most
necessary and substantial truths, wherein the generality of Christians are
concerned; which they are therefore especially and in the first place to
acquaint themselves with, and before those things which are less necessary to
Salvation, as being further from the Foundation. And indeed, this is the very
method of Nature; Men usually seek those things first, which are most
necessary; and other things afterward: they first lay their Foundation, and
then set up their Superstructures: Principles must be known, before Conclusions
can be drawn from them. Those Doctrines of Religion must be first known from
whence others are to be deduced, and without the knowledge of which others can
be but confusedly and darkly known. This seems to have been the Apostle's
Method, Heb. 6.1. where he speaks of some Truths (which they are in paticular,
I stand not to dispute;) which were Principles, and first learned; (...)
Chrysostom.
others as conducing to the perfection of the Saints, unto the knowledge of
which he would therefore have them go on. He that knows not those things which
must be known, knows nothing yet to any purpose.

Prop. 3. Men should Labor after such a knowledge of the Truth, as that they
may be able to give a Reason of the hope that is in them, 1 Pet. 3.15. To show
on what Ground they stand, what is the Foundation of their Faith, and Hope;
that the Religion they profess, is indeed the true Religion, and that the
Doctrines they own, are really Founded upon the Scripture of Truth; Dan. 16.2.
and in a word, they should be able to give a Reason why they believe rather
thus, than otherwise, and hold such Doctrines rather than the contrary. They
should Labor after such a Grounded knowledge of the Truths of the Gospel, as
that they may be able to say of them, as well as of the Duties of it, that they
are fully persuaded in their own Minds, and do not take up things upon trust,
Romans 14.15.
or believe the Truth upon the Credit of others. It is a shame for Professors
to be merely Believers upon Tradition, to see with other Men's Eyes, or be like
the Heathen Idols, that have Eyes and see not. They are Men and have reasonable
Powers, and ought to make use of them, even in the things of God, so far as
they are Revealed and Subjected to their Judgment. The Spiritual Man Judges
all things, even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.15. Though they are to
submit their understandings to God, yet they are not to resign them to Men.
They that will judge for themselves in the things of this life, should no less
do in the things of the other. That Man that will not trust another with his
Estate, or Purse, should much less do it with his Conscience, and Salvation.

Prop. 4. Men should especially give themselves to the study, and labor after
the knowledge of the present truths, 2 Pet. 1.12. I mean those truths which are
the special truths of the Times and Ages and Places in which Men live. We shall
find, if we observe it, that God, who delivers hls Mind and Will to Men (...),
by several parts and degrees, does in some Ages make more clear discoveries of
some truths, in others of other truths; and though the whole will of God, and
all those truths, which we are any way concerned to know in order to our
Salvation, be sufficiently laid down in the Scripture, yet there is sometimes
more knowledge of one truth stirring in the World, sometimes of some other.
Sometimes God calls his Servants more especially to Preach up, and bear Witness
to such or such a particular Truth, which either was less known and understood
before, or is more opposed at present. Immediately after Christ's resurrection,
the great truth of that time, the then present truth was, that Jesus was the
Christ, that very Messiah, whom God had promised to the Fathers, and the Jews
themselves did expect. This the Apostles did first of all Preach, confirming it
especially by his Resurrection from the dead. Thus Act. 2.36. God has made the
same Jesus both Lord and Christ, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince
and a Savior. So Philip to the Eunuch, Act. 8.35. And Paul, so soon as he was
converted, and sent to Preach, presently declares that Jesus was the Christ,
Acts 9.22. And Peter to Cornelius, Acts 10.42.43. And Apollos in Achaia, chapter
18.28. And afterward we find that the Jews, and Judaizing Christians
pertinaciously adhering to the Law of Moses, gave occasion to the more full
Preaching of the Doctrine of free Grace and Justification by Christ alone, and
the abolishing of the legal Ceremonies, as we may see in the Epistle to the
Romans, Galatians, Colossians and Hebrews. And after toward the end of the
Apostles times, the Heresy of Cerinthus gave occasion to the more full
vindicating the Doctrines of Christ's Godhead, Hieronym. in Catal. Script.
Ecclesiast.
as we see in the Gospel of John. And some hundreds of years after that, the
Pelagian Heresy gave occasion for the renewed publication of the Doctrine of
free Grace by Austin, Prosper and others. And in the beginning of the
reformation of Religion, in the last age, the first truths God called those
Worthies that then lived to the Preaching of, were those especially which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ in his Prophetical and Priestly offices, such as
the Authority, Perfection, etc. of the Scripture, and the Sufficiency of
Christ's satisfaction and intercession. And to come nearer to our selves, one
great truth which has been more clearly known and published in our age is, the
Doctrine of Chist's Kingly office and legislative power in relation to his
Church, in opposition to the usurpations and impositions of Men. Now then we
say, that Men are called at such times especially to study such truths; because
God does then give them the best means and advantages for the knowing of them,
or they may then do him best service in maintaining them and bearing testimony
to them, when the Devil and his instruments do most oppose them It is a shame
for Professors not to see, when the World is so full of light, not to have the
knowledge of those truths in the minds, the talk of which is in every Man's
mouth.

Prop. 5. Men should labor for such knowledge as may defend them from the
errors of the times, and places in which they live. This I add to second the
former Proposition, from whence it follows. Thus Paul labors to establish the
Saints, to whom he writes, chiefly the Churches before mentioned, against the
then prevailing errors of those, whether Jews, or false Brethren among
themselves, who endeavored to bring in the Ceremonial Law upon the Professors
of the Gospel; and therefore bids the Galatians, chapter 5.1. stand fast in their
liberty, etc. Doctrinal error tends to the corruption of worship. And the
Apostle John in his Epistles gives caution against those seducing Spirits, and
Antichrists, that were even then among the Churches, 1 John 4. beginning. We
find by experience, that as there be some Doctrines more especially known, and
published in their respective times, and ages: so likewise several ages (and
many times places) have their peculiar errors, either new ones first forged, or
old ones new burnished. The Devil makes it his business, and even sets his wits
upon the tenters to furnish the World with variety of lies, suitable to the
various humors and Interests of Men; and when one error is detected, begins to
smell rank, and go out of date, through the power and prevalency of the truth,
he carefully provides another to succeed it; and if a new one be not at hand,
as if his invention failed him, he many times conjures up some old dead one,
and makes it walk about in a new dress, and pass for some new or newly revived
truth, when indeed it is but the Apparition of a long since buried error. As
Merchants are wont to observe what commodities please most in such and such
places, and at such and such times, and accordingly take care to supply the
markets: So the Devil looks what wares will vend best in such a Country, at
such a season, what will be most grateful to the lusts and interests of Men,
and then will be sure to supply them with those most, which he sees take most.
Diseases have their times and seasons, and are then most dangerous when they
prevail most, and spread farthest. Errors have their times and seasons too,
Rev. 3.10.
(there is an hour of these as well as other temptations) when they are most
infectious and dangerous; and therefore, as when diseases are epedemical every
one almost will be taking Antidotes: So when Errors are Epidemical, it is the
wisdom of every Christian to fence himself against them. And though we do not
say, that every private Believer is bound to be a School-divine, to be exact in
all the niceties and Controversies which may arise about matters of Religion;
(a Man may be saved that never read Aquinas, nor Scotus) yet sure every one
that is capable of it should labor so to understand the Doctrine of Religion,
as to be able to know what is Truth, and what is Error; and to be so
established in the belief of the truth, as that, though he cannot answer all
the Quirks, and Captions of a wrangling Sophister, yet he may see a reason (as
before) for what he believes, and for his firmly adhering to it. As if a
subtle disputer should bring an Argument to prove that the Sun is not up at
noon day, though a Man were not able presently to discover the fallacy, yet he
would not lightly believe a thing so contrary to his very sense. It is good (I
am sure) for Christians to be so established against reigning errors, as that
though an Angel from Heaven should labor to propagate them, yet to be
pertinacious, and graciously obstinate in rejecting them.

Prop. 6. Men should seek especially for such knowledge, and study such truths,
as have the greatest influence upon practice, and so may make them most useful
in their places, and may further them most in the universal exercise of
powerful Godliness. Indeed the whole Doctrine of the Gospel is called the truth
which is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. There is no one truth revealed by
God to us, but may have it is use in our conversations, and influence on our
practice; (...) Th^^d.
But yet some truths more directly and immediately than others; and such as
those we should especially study. We should labor to know not only what we
must believe, but what we must do; not only what thoughts we are to have of
God, but what affections toward him, that so not only our minds may be
established, but our conversations rightly ordered. We must not rest in the
bare knowledge even of the greatest truths; nor labor to know merely that we
may know, or that we may talk, but that we may act suitably to our knowledge.
Discamus non opinioni sed vitae. We should learn, not merely that we may be
able to maintain an Opinion, but that we may know how to guide our Lives and
Govern our Actions. The knowledge of the most excellent Truths may be
unprofitable to us, if we know not our duty too. It is best for us to know
those things which may make us best: Such as may further our Graces rather than
heighten our Reputation, make us rather useful than Famous, and serviceable to
God, rather than admired by Men. It is a vain thing to know what to hold, and
not know what to do; to understand Controversy and be Ignorant of Duties. Ne
quaere (says one) in scientia oblectamentum animae, sed remedium: We should
not Labor to know these things merely which may delight our Minds, but such as
may heal our Souls; to know our distemper and our Medicines, our Wanderings and
our Way, our Defects and our Duties: And not only those things neither which
concern us as Christians in the General, but in such Ranks Orders and Relations
as God has set us in; and so that which is every Man's special duty, should be
every Man's special study. As Ministers should know how to behave themselves in
the House of God 1 Timothy 3.15. So should Magistrates, how they are to behave
themselves in the Commonwealth, Masters in their Families, Husbands toward
their Wives, Wives toward their Husbands, both toward their Children, and they
again toward their Parents. In a word, Men are to study those things which are
most profitable; such as will better their condition, and not only improve
their understanding. You know a sick Man had rather have a good Medicine than
fine Clothes, he minds more the easing of his Pain, than the dressing up of his
Body; That which will make you spruce, will not always make you well; Fine
trappings will not Cure a lame Horse, nor the Painting of the Face heal the
Diseases of the Spleen or Liver; That knowledge, which adorns your Mind, yet
may not always mend your Heart; To conclude this, Men must labor to know the
truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21. So to know it as to feel it, and be under
the influence of it; or to know the truth to that end, for which Christ
teaches it; that is, that Men may be better, as well as wiser, more ready to
do their Master's will, as well as know it. Men know the truth as they should,
and as Christ would have them, when their knowledge puts them upon the great
duties of Mortification, and Sanctification; v. 22. That ye put off as to your
former Conversation the Old man; and v. 23, 24. Be renewed in the Spirit of
your Mind; and put on the New man.

Prop. 7. Every Man should labor to get as much Spiritual knowledge as he can,
by the means of the knowledge he has, and as he can get, without the neglect
of other necessary duties. It is not for nothing that the Apostle prays for the
Collossians Chapter 1.9. that they might be filled with the knowledge of God's will
in all Wisdom and Spiritual understanding: and exhorts the Corinthians Epist.
1.14.20. though in Malice they were Children, yet in understanding to be Men.
If Christians ought to grow in every Grace, why not in knowledge, which is it
self a Grace, and helpful to all other Graces? We are to be accomptable for the
means we have of getting our knowledge increased, and therefore sure are to
labor that we may get it increased. And though a less measure of knowledge
might serve turn to bring a Man to Heaven, yet 1. It is contrary to that Spirit
of Ingenuity, that largeness of Heart toward the things of God, which is
supposed to be in Believers, to stint themselves in the knowledge of the truth,
and to be content to know only just so much as may carry them to Heaven. That
were to study Spiritual truths, not so much because they love them, as because
they cannot want them; and so not of choice but necessity. 2. Even where a less
measure of knowledge might save a Man, yet a greater should be endeavored
after; because it might be otherwise so useful: For,

1. It might make his work more easy; Clearness of knowledge takes off much
from the Difficulty of Duty: The better a Man sees his work, the more easily he
may do it. The most skilful Artist may sumble when he works by a dim light.
That Man is like to go on most readily in his way, who not only knows the right
one, but the wrong ones too, those turnings and bypath which might mislead
him, and seeing the Monuments of others mistakes may be warned by their
wanderings.

2. More knowledge might make his way more pleasant. The more delectable
Objects a Man has to entertain his Eyes, the more delight he may take in
Traveling; When Night-journeys, as they have more of Danger, so have less of
Pleasure. A clear sight of Spiritual things may help a Christian in his way,
not only as a Direction, but as a Delight.

3, It might make himself more useful, more helpful to others. Nec in hoc
tantum te accerso ut proficias, sed ut prosis, Sen. Epist.
Though less knowledge might suffice us for our selves, as to our general
Duties; yet more will make us helpful to others, and enable us better for the
performance of relative Duties. The more knowledge we have, the more we may
communicate. Those that understand most themselves, may best instruct and
direct others. They that are well skilled in their own duties, are most sit to
teach others theirs; Romans 15.14. Filled with knowledge, able also to admonish
one another.

And thus we see in these propositions, what knowledge we are to labor after
in order to Salvation. Only I add two Cautions against two ordinary vices,
which Men are very liable to in their enquiring after knowledge. Nihil igitur
certius est quam alteru^ Angelicae cognitionis genus, quo post Deum, and quae
in Deo sunt, reliqua intelligunt, non ita perfectum esse, quin in hoc
cognitionis genere quotidie proficere possint, novi Semper aliquid discendo ac
novo modo cognoscendo. Zanch. de dei open. ib.


Caut. 1. Take heed of curiosity, which is the itch of the mind: It is not a
kindly appetite, but a fond longing, or an ambitious vain affectation of
knowing those things which we are least concerned, or not at all concerned to
know; and which, if known, would do us little good. It is a lust, and therefore
not to be indulged in our selves, but mortified. It appears,

1. In making inquiries into these things which God has not revealed; Deuteronomy.
29.29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God; but things that are revealed;
unto us and to our Children, etc. This curiosity our Savior checks in his
Disciples, Act. 1.6. Will thou (say they) at this time restore the Kingdom to
Israel? Our Savior replies, It is not for you to know the times and the
seasons, which the Father has put in his own power. God has revealed enough
to us in his Word for our use and furtherance in Faith and Holiness, and to
desire to know more, is to desire to be wiser than God would have us. We must
not pry into those things which it is only God's Prerogative to know. The
Angels themselves know not some things, and we should be content, as well as
they, not to be omniscient. It is dangerous peeping into God's Ark: you know
who smarted for it, 1 Samuel 6.19. If knowing what God has revealed do not save
us, I am sure searching into what he has not revealed, will not. God has told
us so much of his mind in the word, as may take up our whole Man in the study
of it; and we cannot busy our selves in inquiring into his secrets without
neglecting the study of those things, which are revealed, and are most useful
for us.

2. Curiosity appears in enquiring into the reason of God's will. If Rulers in
the World will not have their Laws disputed: If volumus and jubemus be their
style, and though they do not give the reason of their Commands, yet they count
their Commands reason enough for their Subjects obedience; Sure we should allow
God as much, as we do his Creatures. We should reckon God's will is never
unreasonable. His Commands are as wise, as holy; and if he has not revealed to
us the reason of his will, it is because he would exercise our humility, and
have us own his Sovereignty in our obedience, and acknowledge him to be the
supreme Judge, as well as Author of our duty.

3. The same we may say of Men's enquiring into those things which concern
others rather than themselves: When Men are Learned in other Men's duties, but
ignorant of their own; can spy motes in other Men's eyes, and not see beams in
their own; Mat. 7 3. Can criticize upon little faults in their Neighbors, and
yet overlook much greater in themselves.

4. Men are curious, when they study things rather difficult and nice, than
useful and edifying; such as are more fine than substantial, new or rare,
instead of great and weighty: Such seem to have been those (...), vain
bablings, (...) apud Theophyl.
against which the Apostle cautions Timothy, Ephesians. 1.6.20. great words of little
signification, a noise of something worth just nothing: And such those
questions and strifes of words about which some doted, v. 4. The vainest
emptiest persons amongst us, are not more fantastical in their garb or diet,
than some others are in their studies and enquiries: They are for that
knowledge which is most fashionable; Their very minds must be in the mode;
Their notions must be the neatest and newest; They disdain what is common,
though never so profitable; What they like must have newness and variety, or
else abstruseness and difficulty to commend it; something be sure besides
usefulness: They have sick Queasie stomachs, distempered palats; cannot eat
their Spiritual food; unless it be minced, nor relish the most wholesome truths,
unless set off with a Philosophical gust: In a word, they are rather for odd
things than good; such as may gratify their wanton fancies, rather than bring
any saving benefit to their Souls.

Caut. 2. Take heed of Pride, which, we may say, is a worm very apt to breed
out of the Tree of Knowledge; 1 Cor. 8.1. Knowledge puffs up. It is a hard
thing for Men to know much, and not know that they do so. Many that have great
knowledge of other things, yet know too little of themselves of their own
infirmites, of their own follies; and those things in themselves, which might
keep them humble. This brings me to the second part of the case propounded, viz.

II. What means we should use for the obtaining such knowledge as is needful
for us.

1. Here the first thing we should direct to is Humility. He that would be
truly wise must labor to be humble: Homo Sapiens est quamdiu quaerit
sapientiam, ubi autem se putat ad ejus culmen pervenisse, desipit, Sap. Arab.
apud Drusium. (...). Theodor. de curand. Graec. affest. (...) Theod^ret. (...)
Just. Mart. in Exp. sid. Tu disputa, ego credo. Job 22.2^.
He that would ever arrive at any height of knowledge, let him get low thoughts
of himself. Pride, and a conceit of a Man's own knowledge is one of the greatest
hindrances of his knowing, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any Man think he knows any thing,
he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know, Prove. 26.12. There is more hope of
a fool than a Man that is wise in his own conceit. Humility makes Men
teachable, sense of ignorance makes them willing to learn, and God promises to
teach them, Psalm. 25.9. The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he
teach his way.

2. We must deny our selves in our carnal reasonings, Subject our
understandings to the Authority of God, leave something for faith to do, and
not think to be such absolute Masters of all divine mysteries, as to receive no
more of them than our own reason can comprehend, when it is the highest reason
in the World to believe what ever God speaks, though our reason cannot reach
it; Our wisdom in Spiritual things must begin in our being fools in the World's
account, 1 Cor. 3.18. If any Man among you seems to be wise in this World,
let him become a fool that he may be wise. Though we must use our reason in the
search of Spiritual truths, yet not reason only: many things purely are the
objects of our faith, and of them reason is no competent judge.

3. We must be diligent in the reading and studying of the Scriptures, as the
repository, the fountain of Spiritual knowledge: Search the Scripture, says
our Savior Christ, John 5.39. O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all
the day, says David, Ps. 119.97. Give attendance to reading, says Paul, 1 Timothy 4.13. I have heard of a Cardinal, that either acknowledged or boasted that
he never read the Bible but once in his life. Reading other Books,
Sententiaries, and Canonists, might make him wise enough to be a Cardinal, but
not wise enough to be a Christian. Where should we seek for knowledge but in
the Fountain of knowledge? how should we better understand God's Law, than by
receiving it at his mouth?

4. Yet we are not so confined to the Scripture alone, as that we may not make
use of other good books, the labors of such faithful servants of God as have
best studied his word, and best understood his mind. How does this age and
place abound with good and sound* and profitable books? and well it were, that
it abounded with none else; however we have our choice, and that too in our own
Tongue. Private Christians need not the learned Languages to make them learned
in the Scriptures. Expositors we have to help us to understand the meaning of
the word; Practical writers and casuists to quicken our affections, and apply
truths to our Consciences; Controversial ones to discover errors, and arm us
against them; and Systematical, and Catechetical ones to methodize our
knowledge, and order what we know, and show the connection of Spiritual truths
among themselves, and their dependence upon each other, that so we may have a
map of the way to Heaven before us, a full prospect of our whole Religion at
one view. And were it not well if some would spare a little time from their
shop-books for such books as these? if when they cannot be getting money, they
would get knowledge? when they cannot be dealing with good Customers, they
would deal with good Authors, such as might make them more wise, when not more
rich?

5. We should be diligent and regular in attending on the word preached. As it
is the duty of Ministers to be instant, and Preach the word in season, and out
of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. So it is duty of people to hear it. Reading the
Scriptures and good Books is not sufficient for those that are in a capacity to
hear: The Preaching of the Word is the great Ordinance appointed by God, for
the Instruction, Edification, and Conversion of those that are to be saved; and
it is that which God does usually accompany with most life and power. As it is
in other cases, so it is for the most part here; you are commonly more affected
with what you hear Men speak, than with what they write. Ministers may write or
print their Sermons, but not their Affections, not that Power and Spirit of the
word, which themselves feel, and you perceive in them. You are most like to be
warmed by the word, when you hear it coming out of a hot heart. When you see
your Teachers affected with the truths they deliver, and speaking like those
that feel what they speak, you are most like to be affected too. Though indeed
the great reason of hearing is, because it is God's Ordinance, and he has not
only taken care that the word should be written, that so all may read it; but
has appointed Officers too purposely to Preach it, that so all may hear it.

But withal be sure to be regular in your hearing. Take heed how you hear, Luke
8.18. and take heed what you hear, Mark 4.28. and from both will follow, that
you must take heed who you hear too. Hear those that are most knowing, and best
able to instruct you, those that are most sound and least like to mislead you.
Do not choose to put your Souls under the conduct of blind-guides. Seek for the
Law at their mouths, whose lips do best preserve knowledge. And when you have
found such, keep close to them. Settle your selves under the guidance of some
faithful Pastor, upon whose Ministry you may ordinarily attend. That running to
and from, which is usual among us, is quite another than what Daniel speaks of,
chapter 12.4. and I am sure is not the way to increase knowledge. Rolling stones
gather no moss. Such rovers seldom hit upon the right way. Such wandering Stars
may be soonest bemisted. They that thus run from one Minister to another, may
soon run from one opinion to another, and from one error to another. I dare
safely say, you may get more sound knowledge of the things of God by constant
attendance upon the Ministry of one of less abilities, than by rambling up and
down to hear many, though of the greatest gifts. It is a great advantage to
your gaining knowledge to hear a Minister's whole discourse, and be able to
take up the full design of his work, and not merely to hear in transitu, by
snatches, to pick up here a notion, and there a notion, or hear one Man's
Doctrine in the Morning, and another's Application in the Afternoon. It is no
wonder if Men that run to and fro, Ephesians. 4.
be tossed to and fro: They that are so light of hearing may easily be carried
about with every wind of Doctrine; the word of Christ seldom dwells in such
vagabond hearers.

1. Pray earnestly for knowledge. We are to cry after wisdom, and lift up our
voice for understanding, Prove. 2.3. Ask it of God, Jam. 1.5. Especially address
we our selves to the Lord Jesus Christ as the Apostle of our profession, Heb.
3.1. The great Prophet and Doctor of the Church, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
1 Cor. 1.30. Who lives in the bosom of the Father and declares him to us, John
1.18. He that was his Father's Counselor in making his Laws, and his Messenger
in publishing them, is best able to make us understand them. As it is our duty
to Hear him, so it is his business to instruct us: Only beside the use of all
other means, we must look to him for his teaching. He only can make all means
effectual, and none learn as they should, but they that learn of him. There is
no learning like that we get upon our knees; that is the only saving knowledge,
which we fetch from Heaven. If you put your Children to a Trade, you will have
them learn it of such as are most skilful in it. If you would your selves
understand any art well, you seek for the best Artist you can to instruct you.
Who can teach you all things like him that knows all things? who can enlighten
you like him who is the true light? John 1.9. Men when they teach their
Scholars oftentimes complain of their dullness, they can but propound their
notions to them, not beget an understanding in them. And Ministers complain of
their hearers, as the Apostle did of the Hebrews chapter 5.11., that they are dull
of hearing. Quod ^aev a in part mamillae Nil a lit Arcadico juveni. Juven.
They spend their strength upon them, but cannot work the truth into them. But
the Lord Jesus Christ is such a Teacher, as is beyond all Teachers: He can give
the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, as it is called, Ephesians. 1.17. and promises
to do it, John 14.26. He can give inward light as well as outward, eyes as well
as objects, understandings to receive the truth, as well as truths to employ
your understandings.

7. Take sit time for the getting knowledge. You have a great deal to learn,
you had need be early up, that you may have the most time, and the best time.
Begin young, before your minds be corrupted with errors, or possessed with
prejudices; before you have learned too much of those things which must be
unlearned, if ever you would learn the things of God. It is a great advantage
in this case, when Men are instructed in the Scriptures from their childhood, 2 Timothy 3.15
when the first thing they learn is to know God and Christ and themselves,
their own condition, their duty, their hopes. The time of youth is the best
time for getting knowledge, as of other things, so of Spiritual things. Qui
legem discit in puerit a similis est ei qui scribit in char^a nova, qui in
senecture, similis est ei qui scribit in charta vetere. R. Eliaz. apud Dr^^.
There is then least within to keep knowledge out, and what is then received,
usually enters most deeply, and proves to be most durable, The more pliable the
wax is, the deeper the impression, and the deeper the impression is, the more
like it is to last. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is
old he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. It is I am sure a preposterous
course, to learn other things before you learn what is most necessary: to get a
Trade, before you have a Religion: to learn to know the World, before you know
God.

8. If you say this concerns your Children, rather than your selves, I add, be
much in teaching others the things of God: that is the way to learn them more
fully your selves. The communicating your knowledge is the way to increase it.
You will get more than you give, and while you impart it, you will best retain
it. While you instruct others, God will instruct you, and you may come to see
more in his truths when you teach them others, than ever you did when you
learned them first your selves: not that every professor of the Gospel is to be
a public Preacher of the Gospel; Private persons are not to invade an office
to which God never called them: but yet private Christians may be a kind of
private teachers, they may read the Scriptures in their houses, who yet may not
take upon them to explain it in the public; they may catechize, and as
Abraham, Genesis 18.19. teach their Children and their households to know the way
of the Lord, who yet are not to instruct congregations; they may exhort one
another and admonish one another, and teach one another, in Godly discourse and
conference, communicating each others experiences, and solving each others
doubts, who yet are not to usurp a work into their hands, for which Christ has
appointed a particular Office in his Church.

9. Be sure to practice what you know, and live up to what you have learned.
Doing duty is the way to gain knowledge. Ordinarily the more holy you are, the
more really wise you are, or are like to be. The better your hearts are, the
clearer your heads will be, as to the knowledge of those Spiritual things you
are most concerned to know. You will most easily learn to know, what you love
most to do. Though the receiving the truths of God be the immediate office of
the understanding, yet the affections, where they are right, Cupiditas hostis
intelli^ ^^ae.
will help the understanding in its work. The purifying of the heart will rid
it of those lusts, which are wont to steam and vapor up into the head, and
darken the eyes o^ the mind, and hinder it from a right receiving of Spiritual
truths. Where sanctification is promoted in heart and life, knowledge will
certainly be increased too. They that exercise themselves unto Godlyness, and
thereby show their love to God's Law, shall not want for the knowledge of it.
They that love his ways shall not want for a guide. The secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him, and he will teach them his covenant, Psalm. 25.9. If
any Man do his will he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, etc.
John 1.17.

Use. 1. This doctrine informs us, 1. How miserable they are that are without
knowlede, poor ignorant blind sinners, that know nothing of God and Christ and
the mysteries of the Gospel, and the way of duty: but especially they that
enjoy the means of knowledge, and are in a capacity of obtaining it. Woe be to
them that are ignorant in an Age of knowledge, blind in a land of light, see so
little even in a valley of vision; that are ignorant in England, ignorant in
London; that are ignorant because they will be ignorant, are in the dark
because they love darkness. We may even wonder at many, what shift they make to
maintain their ignorance, when so much knowledge is abroad, but that they draw
the curtains and close their eyes, and wink away the light, and instead of
looking for saving knowledge, they hope to be excused by their ignorance. What
though such as are under an invincible ignorance of revealed truths, may not be
damned for not believing what they have not heard, or for not doing what they
have not known? they are miserable enough in not knowing what might save them,
as well as in their not practicing the little they do know, which though it be
not sufficient to make them happy, yet is sufficient to make them inexcusable.
And what is this to those that are so deeply ignorant under the means of
knowledge? who is there among us, but might come to know so much as is needful
to his Salvation? who is there but might hear good Ministers, or has some good
Relations, or might converse with some good people, or read some good book? Who
is there but has, or may have a Bible, and a Catechism? and so long as Men
have the Bible in their hands, they can never be excused, if they perish in
their ignorance. So long as Christ is the Prophet of his Church, and promises
his Spirit to them that ask him, and offers so freely to instruct them; the
case of those that are among, and converse with God's people, and yet remain
ignorant, must needs be desperate. Is it so great a matter to hear the word, to
read the Scriptures, and to pray to God for an understanding of them? who will
pity a man that perishes for thirst, and yet sits by a fountain? or that
starves for hunger, and yet may come every day to a full granary?

2. How foolish are they that cry down knowledge, and consequently cry up
ignorance? Make that the mother of devotion, which is indeed the Parent of
irreligion? as if they were like to do most, who know least, as if they were
the best servants, who were least acquainted with their Master's will; or might
be wise to Salvation and yet ignorant of the truth. Others there are too, who
under the name of Head-knowledg do upon the matter cry down all knowledge, at
least which themselves have not reached, and care not for seeking after.
Because some men have only a notional knowledge, floating in their heads, these
persons are ready to condemn all knowledge under that notion. They have got a
fine word by the end, and are resolved to make much of it. A form of speech
they have taken up, as a way of excusing their own sloth and ignorance, by
declaiming against those that are better taught. Heart-knowledg without
Head-knowledg is nonsense in divinity as well as reason: it is but fire without
light, and so at the best but that which the Apostle ascribes to the Jews, Romans
10.2. A zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.

3. How wicked are they? how great is their sin, that keep others from
knowledge? Some there be that would persuade men from laboring after it; tell
them private persons need not be so knowing; they may be saved with less
learning, and less teaching; a little knowledge will carry them to Heaven, if
they do but live honestly and do their duty. And is it possible for a man to
live honestly without knowledge, or do his duty without understanding his duty,
(I add) to believe as he should, without knowing what to believe? can you be
religious by instinct? or do the will of God by guess, though you never inquire
after it? why do they not as well tell men, that they may be rich enough, if
they do but keep to their shops, and sell their goods, though they do not
understand their trade? or that they may maintain their health, if they do but
eat and drink, though they cannot distinguish between meat and poison? others
there be, who, if they cannot persuade men against knowledge, will do their
best to hinder them from the means of obtaining it. Such are the Popish Clergy,
that keep the people from reading the Scriptures; would have God's revealed
will kept secret; or known to none but themselves, who never intend to do it;
at least, no more of it known, than pleases Holy Church, i. e. no more than is
for the interest of the Pope's pride, and the Priest's panches. Knowledge has
already done them no small mischief, and how can that choose but be too much
light, which endangers the ruin of the kingdom of darkness? thus those Scribes,
or Jewish Lawyers, Luke 11.52. Took away the key of knowledge; they entered not
in themselves into the Kingdom of Heaven, and them that were entering they
hindered, and 1 These. 2.16. The Jews forbad the Apostles to preach to the
Gentiles that they might be saved. And how great a sin is it to grudg others
the grace of Christ, and the Kingdom of God? to drive a design for the
damnation of Souls? It is a wretched thing for Men to build their greatness
upon the ruin of others, and rather to let thousands of Souls be damned, than
their stakes should not be saved. Doubtless if they considered how little
comfort they are like to have in Hell in the society of those they have brought
thither, they would at least be content to perish alone.

Use 2. What a Reproof is here for ignorant Souls? They that are ignorant, not
because they want the means of knowledge; but either because they hate it, or
because they are too busy, or too lazy, or too proud to learn? I would
be-speak such but even in their own Language, Why should you be wiser than your
forefathers, and wiser than your teachers? They that lived before you or I were
born, were fond of the truth, studied the Scriptures, inquired into God's will,
made his Law their meditation, their delight, their counselor: So did David,
Psalm. 119.24, 97. Such a one was Daniel, chapter 9.2. And such were other Prophets,
1 Pet. 1.11, 12. And such were the Apostles; it was their glory to have the
mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. And such were the primitive Christians. The
Beraeans were commended for searching the Scriptures, Act. 17.11. And such the
Martyrs: They would have made much of any single leaf of the Bible. And why
then should you be wiser than they? Why should you think to be saved without
knowledge, when they could not? Have you found out any newer, or nearer, or
better way to Heaven, than they knew of? Will God be more favorable to you
than to them? Will he dispense with your ignorance, and would not with theirs?
And so, Why must you needs be wiser than your teachers? They are fain to study
the Scriptures, and labor to know the will of God, and spend their time and
strength in the search of truth, and count it their wisdom so to do, both that
they may save themselves and them that hear them; And what need they go so far
about, if there were a shorter cut to Heaven? What need they seek so much
knowledge, if less would serve their turn? What need they weaken their bodies,
and wast their Spirits, and shorten their days that they may teach you the good
knowledge of the Lord, and instruct you in the things that concern your peace,
if you may be saved without knowing them? If ignorance were so innocent a thing
as many think it, Ministers might save their breath and strength for better
purposes, than the teaching of those that have no need of it. Is it not a great
shame that there is so much ignorance among those that profess to be
enlightened? Alas! How few be there that can give any tolerable account of the
Principles they own? How few have any faith, but an implicit one? any Religion
but a Traditional one? How many are themselves guilty of what they blame in
Papists? Papists believe as the Church (suppose a Council or Pope) believes,
and how many Protestants believe as their Parents, or as their Ministers
believe; And so their faith stands not in the power of God, but the wisdom, or
gifts, or parts, or Authority of Man, 1 Cor. 2.5.

Use 3. For Exhortation. Let every one that desires to be saved labor after
such knowledge in Spiritual things, as is most conducing to so high an end.
Labor for the knowledge of the best things, and for as much of it as you can
get. Do not be afraid of too much wisdom, of being overcharged with Spiritual
knowledge. There is no danger that this learning should make you mad. To enforce
force the duty, Consider,

1. How useful this knowledge is, Prove. 15.2. That the Soul be without knowledge
is not good. Knowledge in the mind is as necessary and useful, as eyes in a
guide. What a Leader is to his followers, The mind is commonly called (...). So
Hierocles:.
or a Driver to a Chariot, that the mind is to the Man. He had need of eyes
that is to be an Inspector or leader of others. As the eye is the overseer of
the body, so the understanding is of the whole, and therefore knowledge is as
useful in the one, as light in the other. And as the knowledge of natural
things is useful to a Man, as a Man, so is the knowledge of Spiritual things
most useful to him as a Christian; and that,

1. In the exercise of holiness, the guidance of his will and affections, and
ordering of his actions in relation to his highest end. The Will is of it self
caeca facultas, a blind faculty, and the affections are no better. The will can
command, but cannot judge. It has authority over the inferior powers; but such
as must be regulated by the discretion of the understanding. And the affections
are as it were the legs of the Soul: They can go this way and that way, but
they must have the eye of the mind to superintend their motion, like a blind
Man carrying a lame one on his shoulder, who lends his own legs, -- (...).
Anthel. Graec.
and borrows the other's eyes. So that though the understanding's work be only
to discern, consider, judge; yet without its performing that work, the will and
affections can never rightly do theirs. You can never love or hate, choose or
refuse as you should, such objects as are presented to you, unless you first
pass a right judgment upon those objects, and the understanding determine of
their being good or evil; And the understanding cannot judge aright, if it be
not informed aright. It cannot lead you, if it be not it self enlightened. You
can never love God supremely, if your understandings do not judge him to be
supremely lovely. If ever you would duly prosecute your true interest, you must
be first acquainted with it, and have it rightly stated. If you would do your
duty, you must first know it. You must of necessity either neglect or
mis-perform it, if you know not the rule of your doing it. Where holiness is
your work, knowledge must be your director. And the more knowledge you have,
the more fit you will be for the practice of holiness. The clearer your light
and the better your eyes, the more circumspectly you will walk. The more you
see the nature, the beauty, the benefit of holiness, the more holy you may be.

2. Knowledge will be most useful for the Avoiding of sin. The more knowledge
you have of the nature of sin, the abundance of it in your selves, its
offensiveness to God: The more knowledge you have of the rule, the exactness,
the purity, the Spirituality and extent of the Law: and so the better able you
are to judge what sin is, and what its consequences are: the better you may
escape it. The clearer your knowledge, and the stronger your convictions are of
the evil of sin, the more Arguments you are furnished with to persuade your
hearts against it. A good treasure of Spiritual knowledge will best help you to
maintain your Spiritual warfare. When you know not only your Leader and your
weapons, and your reward; but your Enemies too, and their stratagems and way of
lighting: you are like then to be most courageous in your combat

3. Knowledge will be greatly useful to you for your Profiting by ordinances.
The better you understand the nature and use and ends of them, the more good
you are like to get by them. The more you know of the word, the more you will
still learn by it. If the foundation of Spiritual knowledge be well laid,
Ordinances will more easily build you up. Not only the work of Ministers would
be more easy; if their hearers were better Catechized, there would not be such
danger of missing the mark, by shooting over peoples heads, they would not lose
so much labor nor spend so much strength in vain, they should not need so much
to study plainness, and be inculcating principles, and lisping out the first
rudiments of Religion as to those that are but babes in knowledge: But hearers
likewise would receive the word with more profit; they would more easily be
brought down under convictions, feel the power of Exhortations, be quickened to
duties, yield to reproofs, entertain admonitions, and taste the sweetness of
God's consolations, and so more easily obtain the end of their hearing. To
conclude, if your understandings were more enlightened, your affections would
either be sooner warmed, or their heat be more regular; if more truth were
known, more duty would be done; if our doctrine were better understood, our
application would be more effectual.

2. Spiritual knowledge is most delightful, Prove. 24.13, 14. The knowledge of
wisdom is said to be to the soul, as the honey and honeycomb to the taste. The
knowledge of truth which is the proper object of the understanding does usually
carry something of pleasure in it, and the more excellency there appears in any
truth, the more delectable a thing it is to know it. But there be no truths so
excellent as Spiritual ones, such as concern God and Christ and the mysteries
of Salvation, and therefore the knowledge of none is so delightful. What high
and refined delights does the contemplation of God in all his holy attributes
and excellencies afford to glorious Angels, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect? How do those Heavenly creatures despise the gross and faeculent
pleasures of the sensual World? And though Saints here upon Earth cannot rise
so high in their delights, because not so high in their knowledge, yet they may
find incomparably more pleasure in knowing the things of God, even according to
their present capacity, than the greatest voluptuaries can in the enjoyment of
the creature. If a Philosopher can take more pleasure in the study of nature,
or a Mathematician in his demonstrations than a sensualist can in his feasts
and treatments; if lines and angles can do more for the mind of the one, than
meats and drinks for the palate of the other, How far then do the delights a
gracious soul finds in the study and search of Divine truths transcend both?
And this pleasure is yet more heightened by the Interest Saints have in the
truths they know; when they are not only excellent in themselves, but of the
greatest consequence to them. To know God, and that as their God, to know
Christ, and that he is a Christ for them, to know the Saints privileges, and
that they belong to them, to know the promises, and that they have a share in
them, to know there is a Heaven, a state of future glory and blessedness, and
that themselves are concerned in it, this must needs be a delightful knowledge.
You can take some pleasure in seeing a rich country, and pleasant seat, and
fine houses, but much more if you see them as they that are to inherit them. If
a natural man may take some pleasure in the mere notion of divine truths; how
much more may he do it that is concerned in them?

3. This knowledge does greatly adorn and beautify the Soul. It is a
considerable part of the soul's perfection, Col. 3.10. The Image of God is said
to consist as in righteousness and true holiness, so likewise in knowledge. How
full of it was Adam in Paridise? And how full of it are Angels in Heaven? The
more men know of God, the more like they are to him; and the more they resemble
him, the more beautiful and perfect they are. You count a clear eye not only
useful to the body, but a piece of beauty in it. Light in the mind is an
ornament to the Soul, as well as a help. Saints in Heaven that are most
perfect, are most knowing; and the fullness of their knowledge is a great part of
their perfection.

4. It is a most becoming thing, most suitable to you as Christians, suitable
to your new nature, your new state, your Spiritual relations and Spiritual
privileges. It ill becomes them, who are called into Gods mavelous light, 1
Pet. 2.9. Who are the children of Light, Ephesians. 5.8. and the children of him who
is the Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17. they that are said to be in the Light, 1.
Joh. 2.9. nay to be Light, Ephesians. 5.8. yet to he without light. An ignorant Saint
is as great a Soloecism in Christianity, as a Graceless Saint, and that is such
a Saint as is no Saint.

5. Consider the mischief and danger of ignorance.

1. It exposes you to errors and delusions, Math. 22.29. Who so apt to be
misled as he that has no eyes? He that knows not which is the right way, may
easily be drawn into a wrong one. He that walks in darkness knows not whither
he goes, Joh. 12.35. Affection is a good follower, but a bad leader; It is too
blind to be a guide: It embraces its object and yet knows it not. It must be
beholden to the eye of the mind, light in the understanding, or else all its
motions will be but wanderings. It will be sure to rove, where it is not led. It
is an egregious paralogism of them that argue against the translation of the
Scriptures into vulgar languages, that that is the way to increase errors, and
divisions among Christians; For that multitude of errors which is among us, is
not the effect of too much knowledge, but too little: as Men's losing their way
by daylight is not the effect of their having eyes, but either of their not
having them, or not using them. Men do not run into errors because they know
the truth, but because they do not know it, or are not established in it, or
are not able to prove it. Not only pride and obstinacy, but ignorance too has
a hand in Heresies. That which is Heresy at last, may be but a simple error at
the first; and that too men may embrace, not so much, or not only, because they
hate the truth, but because they do not know it. Perverse disputings of men of
corrupt minds proceed from them as being destitute of the truth, 1 Timothy 6.5. In
other places we see by experience, that where men have ordinarily more
knowledge, they have fewer errors; where they are better catechized, they are
less unsound. It is scarce to be imagined, that so many absurd and ridiculous
opinions should pass current among us for greater truths, were it not for
ignorance, as well as interest. And I doubt not, but many of the greatest
patrons of errors, if thoroughly examined, would be found guilty of the deepest
ignorance; and while they pretend to know more then others, they know much less
than is needful for themselves. When Men walk the rounds in Religion, it is a
sign that it is night with them. It is darkness that fills them with so many
fancies and whimsies. Men's heads are most apt to be giddy, when their eyes are
closed.

2. It exposes them to wickedness too. When the mind is dark, no vvonder if
the mind be impure. When there is no light coming in at the vvindow, the House
may well be dirty. He that cannot judge what is good, and what is evil, may
easily refuse the good and choose the evil. He that is ignorant of duty, may
soon come to be prejudiced against it, and then disaffected to it, and then to
embrace the contrary. Crooked steps are but the ordinary consequents of blind
eyes; and none more ready to walk after the course of this World, than he that
is unacquainted with the ways of God's Commandments; or (to invert the
Apostle's words, 1 Cor. 14.20.) None are more like to be Men in malice and
wickedness, than they that are Children in understanding. That the Heathen,
Ephesians. 4.18. were alienated from the life of God, it was because of the ignorance
that was in them. I shall never vvonder to see a Conscience not informed to be
debauched; to see him that knows not God, to neglect God; him that knows not
duty; neglect duty, or him that is ignorant of sin, live in sin. And though the
beginning of sin be out of ignorance; yet Men's progress in it may be out of
affection. If at first they commit it, because they know not the evil and
bitterness of it; yet they may afterward love it, when they have tasted
sweetness in it. They that have no knowledge to do good, may the sooner learn to
be wise in doing evil. Men's lusts do then especially rule over them, when they
are themselves under the power of ignorance, 1 Pet. 1.14. Not fashioning your
selves according to your former lusts in your ignorance.

3. It exposes them to Apostasy, even from what good they professed to have.
How soon are their leaves shaken off from them by the storms of temptation? how
soon are they withered by the hot Sun of persecution, who are not well rooted
in Spiritual knowledge? Men will never heartily love the truth, if they see not
its beauty; and never adhere to it, if they do not love it. An unsettled
judgment will make unconstant affections. I have heard of a Martyr that could
not dispute for Christ, and yet could burn for Christ; but I never heard of any
that could burn for him, and yet did not know him. They that do not know the
truth, the excellency, and power, and preciousness of it, cannot see reason
enough for their laying down their lives for it. They that know not the riches
and glory of the other World, those great things which may deserve their
perseverance, and encourage their resolution and constancy, will hardly be
induced to secure the hope of they know not what, by the loss of what they see
and enjoy. We may certainly say, that ignorance of God's truths and vvayes is
one main root of Apostasy from them; and had many of them, who in these
declining times have forsaken either, seen as much in them as others see, they
might have found as good reason for their adhering to them, as others have
found; So that to conclude this, ignorance is a sin which exposes Men to
temptations of all kinds: the Devil can scarce desire fitter matter to work
upon, than ignorant persons. To whom should he put off his wares but to those
that are so dim sighted, Ephesians. 6.12.
that they cannot perceive the falseness of them? where should the Ruler of the
darkness of this world set up his Throne, erect his Kingdom of darkness, but in
dark souls? where should the Devil reign, but where ignorance reigns? none more
obedient Vassals to him, than they that know not the Laws of their true
Sovereign.

4. Lastly, Ignorance exposes men to Gods judgments, as well as any other sin
does, and those not only temporal, Isaiah 5.13. but eternal too, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
Christ when he comes to judgment will execute vengeance on them that know not
God. Those that God will love, he will have them come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And even the servant that knows not his masters will, shall
have his share of stripes, Luke 12.48. Men may perish not only for lack of that
knowledge, which is absolutely necessary to salvation, but for lack of that
which they were bound, according to their opportunities to have gained. I have
heard it as the saying of a learned man, that a Papist might be saved, but a
Recusant could not; as having sufficient means for conviction, and information.
I am not concerned to dispute the truth of the former, but see no reason to
question the certainty of the latter. And might it not be said of many
Protestants, that they might be saved in another Country, but cannot be saved
here, and that for the same reason, because here they have means of getting
more knowledge? alas! how many ignorant souls are in Hell already, and how many
more are posting after them? when they dye there goes not only dust to dust,
but darkness to darkness; the darkness of ignorance to the darkness of Hell.
They will at last find themselves greatly deceived, that think they shall be
saved because they are poor ignorant creatures, and know no better: that is,
that they shall be saved because they know not the way to salvation; they shall
be healed because they know not wh^t will cure them. And however they may for a
time flatter themselves, upon the account of any external privileges, that
they are Christians, Protestants, Professors, yet they may read their doom in
the Text, which will one day be made good upon them; and if they will not know
what else they should, yet let them know this, that Because they are a people
of no understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them,
and he that formed them, will show them no favor.

Of Sabbath Sanctification. Sermon. VI.
Isaiah 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the LORD,
honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

Then shall thou delight thy self in the LORD, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
Father: for the mouth of the LORD has spoken it.


THese two verses contain a model of Sabbath Sanctification.

The 13. v. contains the Duties enjoined.

The 14. v. contains the privileges annexed.

The Duties are set forth unto us 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.


The Negatively Duties are expressed 1. Generally and Comprehensively. 2. More
particularly and distinctly.


The General in these words.

If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day.

Wherein there are three things.

1. The thing forbidden, i. e. The doing of our pleasures on the Sabbath. God
never appointed a Sabbath for the satisfaction of corrupt nature.

2. The manner of doing or forbearing it; and that is by turning away our foot
from the Sabbath. The meaning of which phrase may be

(1.) Either a turning away of our mind and affections from each objects to
which corrupt will do strongly incline us. The Affections are the feet of our
souls.

(Secondly,) Or an awful fear of trespassing upon the Sabbath, for the
satisfying of our carnal desires. As men that are afraid of trespassing upon
some great man's freehold, withdraw their foot, and turn another way, etc. The
Sabbath is Gods Freehold of which God says as once to Moses, put thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground. When we
are tempted to any thing unworthy of the Sabbath, we should make a stop and
turn away, that we may not transgress.

3. The third thing in the General is the reason, why we should be so afraid of
incroaching upon Sabbath-time, implied in this clause, upon my holy day.

Wherein are two considerations.

1. It is holy time. 2. It is Gods time.
To take holy time, and bestow it upon our own lusts, it is profaneness.

To take Gods time, and bestow it upon the uses of the flesh, it is sacrilege.

It is not fit to make sacred time to serve any but sacred uses. This is the
general inhibition.

Secondly, The more particular and distinct inhibition follows in the end of
the verse. Wherein,

Three things forbidden in the particular.

1. We are forbidden the doing of our own ways. It is an Hebraism as much as
(in our English) going our own ways, i. e. following our carnal and sinful
courses, pursuing our own corrupt and sensual inclination.

2. We are forbidden the finding of our own pleasure: which is the same
forbidden in the General, ut supra, only with this difference, that there (as I
conceive) [pleasure] is taken more largely: so, whatsoever is pleasing to
unregenerate nature and inclinations, whether they be bodily labor or Carnal
recreations, profit, or pleasures, sports, or the works of our Callings, we
must not find them; that is, we must be so far from making provision for the
satisfying of the sensual Appetite, that we must not so much as own them, when
we meet them, we must not suffer our selves to be tempted, or ensnared by them;
we must be to them [when we meet them] as if we had neither eyes, nor ears, nor
hands, nor feet, we must not desire them, or have any thing to do with them.

3. We are forbidden the speaking of our own words, that is, our own
impertinent discourses, worldly contrivances, or in the Apostles language, All
filthiness, Ephesians. 5.4. (...)
and foolish talking and jesting, or any thing, that is not convenient:
Christians should not only consult what is lawful; but what is decent, and
ornamental to the Sabbath. None of these things must be so much as named on our
days, much less on Gods days.

Christians look to it, you may profane the Sabbath by your Words as well as
your Works, and by vain words as well as by vile words.

But there is one thing further observable, that is, the note of appropriation,
viz. thine own, thine own ways, thine own pleasure, thine own words; thine own?
what is that? Answ. In opposition to Gods ways, Gods pleasures, Gods words,
thereby utterly excluding not only wicked ways, and sinful pleasures, and
profane words whatsoever, which are unlawful at all times, but even all such
ways, pleasures, words, and thoughts also (which are the words of the mind)
which relate to our own private concernments, whether personal or domestical,
of a worldly and secular nature, which though they may be lawful upon other
days (duly circumstantiated) yet by no means to be allowed of on Gods day;
unless they fall under the general exception of Gods own indulgence, namely
Necessity and Charity, of which I shall speak more largely hereafter. In a word,

Nothing may be done or spoken, but what is of a divine or Sabbath nature and
tendency, upon pain of forfeiting our part in the blessed privileges following
verse 14. and so much for the negative part of Sabbath Sanctification.

I come to the Affirmative.

And shall call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, Honorable and
shall honor him. In these words also there be four branches or duties.

(1.) We must call the Sabbath a delight. (2.) We must call it holy, or the
holy of the Lord. (3.) We must call it honorable or glorious. (4.) We must not
only call it honorable, but must actually and really honor It or Him by a
suitable deportment.
1. If we would sanctify the Sabbath acceptably, we must call the Sabbath a
delight. Call] i. e. account it so; calling] it is an act of the judgment, or
appreciative faculty, a Delight, or (as some render it) thy delights, we must
reckon the Sabbath inter Delicias, as is said of Jerusalem, Lam. 1.7. she
remembered all her pleasant things, surely her Sabbaths were some of those
pleasant things; it is said Her enemies did mock at her Sabbaths, I, but she
did mourn. They were her delightful things, whereupon her heart was: And so
they must be to us. But we must also remember to take in with the Day, all the
Ordinances and religious services and Duties of the day. They must not only be
done spiritualy, holily and Universally, but they must be done with delight and
complacency, we must prefer them to our chiefest joy; yea the very approach of
the Sabbath should be our delight: so have all the Saints and servants of God
in all ages of the Church done; they have been to them the very joy and life of
their souls, Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the
house of the Lord; our feet shall stand within thy gates O Jerusalem, I never
was ^^re affected with joy and gladness in all my life, then when I was wont to
hear the people encouraging one another to assemble themselves to the public
worship of God, in the house of God, on Gods day; O it did my heart good to
hear with what alacrity and rejoicing they did provoke one another, come let us
go to the house of the Lord, notably prophesied of in words at length, Isa.
2.2, 3. verses, many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the
Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. In the loss of Ordinances and
Sabbaths they have been dead in the nest, like Rachel weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted because they were not; And in the recovery and
enjoyment of them they have rejoiced as men rejoice that divide the spoil, see
Psalm. 3. Psalm. 42. and 43. and 84. per totum. Christians, we must write after
this copy, and count the Sabbath not our Duty only, but our Delight and
privilege.

2. Affirmative duty.

The Holy of the Lord.

We must call it, i. e. (ut sup.) count it, keep it, as Lichdosh, Jehovah,
sanctum Domini. One of the titles of Jesus Christ, The Holy one of God: we must
observe the Sabbath as Holy time. Holy, yet not by constitution, not
essentially holy as Christ is holy; nor inherently as the Saints are holy, but
holy by institution, by sanction, relatively holy: the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day and hallowed it, i. e. he set it apart for holy uses, Deuteronomy. 5.12.
keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it. Nothing but holy things must be done in
this holy time, praying, reading, hearing, singing of Psalms, etc. as Psalm. 92.
(which is both a precept and platform for Sabbath-sanctification) meditation,
rejoicing in God, and Thanksgiving, as you may read at large.

Thirdly, We must call it ( i. e. count it) honorable or the glorious day of
God: Glorious upon several accounts.

1. For Gods glorious resting upon that day. Gods rest that is a glorious rest,
rest of God. [As things of God in scripture are great and glorious things.]

2. Glorious or Honorable by a glorious sanction. Coin with the Kings stamp
upon it is counted Royal, not for the metal so much, though it be of Silver or
Gold, but for the Image, superscription and impression it bears. Every day in
the week is Honorable because it is Gods Creation, but the Sabbath is glorious
for the inscription, Jehovah has set his Image upon it. He did sanctify it.
It has Gods sanction upon it and that is glorious.

3. It is Honorable for those glorious ends for which it was set apart, and
they are three.

1. That God might sanctify his people, Ezekiel 20.12. moreover I gave them my
Sabbaths for a sign between me and them; not a ceremonial sign as some would
dwindle it, that have no more Religion in them than an old rotten Ceremony
comes to, but a moral sign, i. e. a Testimony, Pledge, or Covenant, whereby it
might appear that they were Gods people, sanctified to his service and honor.
So it follows, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctifies them.
The Sabbath is Gods Medium to raise up to himself an holy people.

2. That Gods people might sanctify him: so ver. 41. I will be sanctified in
you: so Levit. 10.3. I will be sanctified in them that draw nigh me; God
sanctifies us when he makes us holy, we sanctify God when we acknowledge him
to be holy. God sanctifies us when he makes us what we are not, we sanctify
him when we acknowledge him to be what he is. These be glorious ends; but,

3. Another glorious end for which God made the Sabbath, was, that the Sabbath
on Earth might be a type and figure of the Sabbath in Heaven. That in this
initial and imperfect Sabbath on earth, we might see (though in a glass darkly)
what the Saints and Angels are doing in Heaven without ceasing; that we might
peep into Heaven before we come thither, and long and wait for that eternal
Sabbath. A day wherein God bows the Heaven and comes down, and offers himself
in ways of sweet and friendly Communion with his people, Exodus 20. v. 23.

Fourth Duty is,

As we must call and count it glorious, so we must actually honor it or him,
(it may be rendered both) and indeed when we honor this day we glorify God,
and we glorify God when we make him our end in honoring his day. Without both
these we do take Gods Name in vain, and do but mock God, rather in pretending
to keep a Sabbath, than glorify him. We must set up God in his own day and in
his own Institution. And thus I have done with the opening of this blessed
Model in the Duties of it. I should come now to the Privileges annexed, but
sufficient to the day is the travel thereof.

For the Improvement of this doctrinal Exposition, I shall do these two Things.

(1.) I shall endeavor the stating of some Cases of Conscience concerning the
Sabbath.

(2.) I shall raise some observations instead of more distinct Uses and
application.



Some indeed of the Antisabbatical Doctors, who love neither the Name nor
Thing, will needs expound it of the yearly Sabbath, the day of the strictest
rest among the Jews in their solemn convention for Humiliation and Atonement,
of which we read Levit. 16.31. and 23.27.31. But surely it is an unreasonable
straitning of the text to confine it to this, especially since the Prophet had
sufficiently insisted upon that subject, both by way of reproof and Exhortation
in the former part of the chapter. Here therefore I conceive we are to
understand the Weekly Sabbath, not only the seventh day Sabbath which was yet
in being, but the First day Sabbath also, which was to succeed, the Prophet
being an Evangelical Prophet (as one calls him the Evangelist Isaiah) speaks of
the Evangelical Sabbath, which was to continue to the end of the world.

Rules drawn from the Negative part of this model.
Rules.
1. Note in the first place, that from the Creation of the world to this day God
never suffered his Church to be without a Sabbath. As soon as ever there was a
Church (though it was but in its infancy and confined within the narrow limits
of a single-family, and few souls therein) God did immediately institute a
Sabbath for it.

Genesis 2.3,
And on the seventh day God ended all his works which he had made, and rested on
the seventh day from all his work which he had made, and God blessed the
seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his
work which God created and made.

This some learned Divines suppose to have been by way of Anticipation only; to
be a Sabbath in Deck (as it were) until the Church should have need of it;
Others as eminent and learned as they, do assert it to have been by way of
institution; a notion of a far more easy understanding than the former and
more useful. This Sabbath rested (it seems) sometimes in silence: Save only
that we may possibly spell it out in some imperfect Characters in their
offerings and sacrifices before ever the Law was given, (which were originally
proper Sabbath work) until at length we may read of it in words at length Exodus
16.22, 23. and Moses spoke to the people, this is that which the Lord has
said, to morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath. And this some conceive to be a
second and renewed Institution; but with little probability. Moses rather
speaks of it as a thing notoriously known to the Israelites in the Wilderness,
it being of a more ancient Original than the Miracle of the Manna: yet it may
serve as a testimony unto the Sabbath, and of use unto our purpose.

From thence therefore we must step on as far as Mount Sinai, for a new
institution, and there we may find it standing in the midst of the 10 Moral
precepts, the fourth whereof it makes in number.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Exodus 20.8, 9, 10, 11.


Then was that command which before was given by word of mouth and continued by
tradition, now written in words at length, engraven in stone by the immediate
finger of God; and there it stands during all the time of Moses and the
Prophets on its own basis, until the Messiah came, who put upon it his own
Sanction, Mat. 5.17. to the end. And under that Sanction did the seventh day
Sabbath continue, until upon the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, that
sun of Righteousness, and by his Command to his Apostles, Acts 1.2. the Sabbath
was translated to the First day of the week, and that continued by Apostolical
practice, and by the practice of succeeding ages of the Evangelical Church, the
Gospel Sabbath, or Lords Day even to this present generation.

Such I say has been the care and love of God to his Church to this day, Lam.
2.6.
that it never was without a Sabbath, unless it were when the want of a Sabbath
was the Punishment of sinful neglect and obstinate violation of the Sabbath.
And this care God used upon a twofold account.

1. Upon the account of his own Sovereignty. Sc. that by reserving one day in
seven for his own immediate worship he might be actually acknowledged as the
great Sovereign Lord of our selves and of our time.

The Sabbath is as the first fruits among the Jews; whereby we do not only
entitle God to the whole harvest, but whereby the whole lump and mass is
sanctified to us.

2. A Second Account is Gods pity and compassion to his Creatures, Eccles. 3.11.
God saw the heart of man since the Fall so fixed to the world, and immersed in
the Pleasures and Profits thereof, that had he left man to himself, he would
not have spared for Divine worship one day in seven weeks, not possibly in
seven months, or in the whole year, but he would have even drudg'd himself and
the irrational Creature to death in the pursuit of worldly fruitions. And
therefore God has injoined him the severe observation of one day in seven,
that he might lay upon him the necessity of minding and seeking the things of
eternity, and whilst the rational creature did enjoy a spiritual rest for the
soul, the irrational creature might have natural rest for self-preservation.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift.

2. Observe, Rule or N te^
this day God was pleased to honor with the title of a Sabbath as both here,
and in the fourth Commandment, which signifies rest, because on this day, both
God the Father and God the Son respectively, Genesis 2.2.
did rest from their own proper work: and by their precept and pattern command
it and commend it for a stated rest to the Church of God for ever.

What the reason therefore is why some learned men of our generation should be
so exceedingly offended at that name [Sabbath] that they cannot so much as hear
it with patience, is to me a wonder even to astonishment; And while they are so
much offended at the name, the vulgar sort of Christians, are (thereby I am
afraid) as much offended at the thing.

As to the first of these, I have heard some say they like it not, because it
is Jewish; but to that we reply,

1. Not the Jews, but the God of the Jews gave it that name here and elsewhere,
and

2. The notion of a Sabbath signifies no more but Rest; and is Rest Jewish? Oh
that men would look into their hearts to see whether the reason of this disgust
is not more latent there.

3. And were it a Jewish name (indeed) is not the Jewish name [Sabbath] better
than the Heathenish-name [Sunday]? The name which Heathenish Idolaters gave it
in their Dedication of that day to the Created Sun? Notwithstanding consult
their Calenders, Writings and Languages, and you can meet with no other name or
notion, but Sunday all over. At this we have more cause to be offended, than
they have at the notion of a Sabbath.

As for the vulgar sort of people; it is the thing which offends them more than
the name; not the Rest so much as the Nature of the Rest, is that which they
dislike; were it a Carding Rest, a Gaming Rest, a Dancing Rest, such an one as
the Israelites once celebrated in the wilderness, wherein they did eat and
drink, and rose up to play: (such an one for all the world as the Popish
Devotion celebrates) after Mass and Even Song, (as they call it) pipe and
dance, and then to the Alehouse or Tavern; such a Rest would gratify the
sensual world of carnal Christians: but for an holy rest, a rest to be spent in
Public, Domestic, and Secret duties of Religion; Reading the Scriptures,
praying, singing of Psalms, Hearing the word preached, repeating at home what
they heard in public, Catechizing their families, Meditation, etc. These
things do not please the unregenerate part, but men are ready to murmur, as
they did of old, what a weariness is it, and when will the Sabbath be over,
Amos 8 5.
etc.? This is a lamentation, etc.

[my holy day] take a third Rule.

We must look upon the Sabbath as a day of Divine Institution; not of an humane
ordination: the Sabbath has a jus divinum written upon it, more authentic
than theirs that decry it: My holy day, and the holy of the Lord, twice in this
13. verse, and this not in reference only to the seventh day but in reference
to the first day of the week, which this Evangelical Prophet had then (by
divine revelation) in his eye. How much more does it concern us, who are
reserved to this glorious Administration under the Gospel, to own the Divine
right of the Evangelical Sabbath? Surely it is the voice of the glorious
Trinity that calls it, my holy day; God the Father by Creation, God the Son by
Redemption, and God the Holy Ghost by Sanctification, sending down a rich and
plentiful effusion of Gifts and Graces upon the Apostles, for the enabling them
to go forth and convert the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel. To deny
God his own right is Sacrilege and Atheism.

We learn from hence that we must give God the whole Entire day, my day says
God: a few hours, or the forenoon will not serve Gods turn: but he challenges
the whole time, as his own peculiar.

There is a great dispute amongst Divines, when the Sabbath begins, and when it
ends? the text determines the controversy, says God all is mine. The whole
24 hours is Sabbath: look how many hours we reckon to our days, so many hours
we must reckon to Gods days also, if we will be ingenuous.

Obj. But who is able to spend the whole 24 hours in religious duties without
any intermission?

Answ. None, neither is it required, for neither do we our selves on our days,
spend the whole 24 hours in the employments of our particular places and
callings, but we allow our selves a sleeping time, and a time for preparing
our food, and a time for eating and drinking, and other refreshments of nature,
both for our selves and our relations; and so does God also, provided always,

1. That we be not overlavish and prodigal in our indulgences to the flesh,
and the concernments of the outward man, that we exceed not our limits of
Christian sobriety and moderation.

2. Provided that we do not those things with common spirits; we must eat and
drink and sleep, as part of the Sabbath-work, with heavenly minds, and Sabbath
affections.

The occasional Sabbaths amongst the Jews gave them a greater latitude: no more
time of those days being counted holy, than was spent in the public service
of the day; which continued but from nine of the clock in the morning when the
morning sacrifice was to be offered; and ended at three of the clock in the
afternoon, at evening sacrifice. But the weekly Sabbath was holy in the whole
extent of it: not indeed by constitution but by institution and consecration;
God blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it, i. e. set it apart for divine and
holy uses, of which more infra.

In our sanctifying of the Sabbath, Rule or Note.
we must have an equal respect to the negative prohibition, as to the
affirmative injunction: i. e. to what is forbidden, as well as what is
commanded, and e contra.

And this is a rule which holds in the exposition of all the Commandments of
the Law, and of the Gospel. Cease to do evil, and learn to do good.

The negative and affirmative precept have such a mutual relation one to
another, that one does infer the other, and take away one and you destroy the
other. It is impossible to do what is commanded without due care of avoiding
what is prohibited: neither can that man rationally pretend to keep the
Sabbath, that lies a bed all day, because he does not work; not he that
follows his servile labor, because possibly he may perform some religious
duties.

What God has joined together let no man put asunder.

Carnal sports and pleasures are as great a profanation of the Sabbath, as the
most servile labor and drudgery in the world. Dicing and carding, do as much
violate the Law of the Sabbath, as digging and carting; playing as much as
ploughing; dancing and morrice-games, as much as working in the smiths-forge,
Bowling and shooting, as well as hewing of wood and drawing of water.

The reasons are clear; for

1. Sports and pleasures are as expressly forbidden, as bodily labor in our
ordinary vocation; for he that said thou shall do no manner of work, said also,
thou shall not find thine own pleasures, etc.

2. Sports and pleasures are as inconsistent with a Sabbath frame of spirit, as
the grossest labor in our calling: yea i will undertake that a man in his
particular calling may more easily get good thoughts of God and of eternal
life, etc. than a person that is drench't and immers't in vain delights and
sports. In such cases men are usually so intent upon their sports and pastimes,
that it is not easy to edge in a good serious thought in the midst of sensual
delights. Tota in toto, and tota in quali^et part.
A man in his carnal pleasures is like the soul in the body. All in all; and
all in every part of their pleasing vanities; pleasures do fox and intoxicate
the brain, when as labor is apt to make them serious and considerate.

3. Reason, Pleasures are as great diversions from the duty of a Sabbath, as
labors. It is conceived Adam should have had a Sabbath in Paradise had he
persisted in innocence, why? not because his dressing of the garden would have
wearied him, (for weariness is the fruit of sin) but his dressing of the garden
would have been a diversion from attending his Creator in the Ordinances of a
Sabbath.

4. Carnal pleasures leave a defilement on the spirits, and so do totally unfit
the soul for communion with God. That Character, lovers of pleasures more than
lovers of God, how fully does it agree to such kind of profaners of the
Sabbath? Pleasures draw off the mind from God, and justly cause God to withdraw
from the soul; how totally does this indispose to Sabbath work! In heaven they
cease not day and night saying, holy, holy, holy, etc. Oh Christians never
think of reconciling carnal pleasure and Communion with God together: it is
impossible.

7th Obs.
[Not speaking thine own words.]

The Sabbath is polluted by words as well as by works. Christ will judge men in
the great day for their words: and by them will he either justify thee for
sanctifying the Sabbath, or condemn thee for profaning of it. I am afraid it is
the great controversy God has with this nation: not only profane, but even
professors, are all guilty of not sanctifying the name and Day of God in their
talk and discourses upon the Sabbath Day. If Jesus Christ should join himself
to our Tables, Luke 24.15, 16, 17.
or lesser companies, as he did with the two Disciples going to Emaus, and ask
us, what manner of communications are these which ye have one with another; how
might the question fill our faces with paleness and strike us speechless?

Alas who can tell what day it is by men's discourses and conferences one with
another! how vain, foolish, unprofitable and unsavory is most men's speech all
the day! no jest so idle, no story so common and fruitless, but will pass at
our tables and in our private conference.

Many spend the best of their time no better than the Idolatrous Athenians did
their worst, in nothing else but either telling or hearing some new thing. What
news? is the most innocent question, wherewith (I would I could not say) most
men fill up the vacancies of a Sabbath. And is that sinful will you say? was it
not in Nehemiah's question, Nehem. 1.2. Hanani one of my brethren came, he and
certain men of Judah, and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped,
which were of the Captivity, and concerning Jerusalem, etc. presently what
news? And why may not Christians ask the same question? yes, they may, when
they ask it with Nehemiah's spirit, to Nehemiah's end, sc. that we may get our
hearts sutably affected with the miseries or prosperity of the Church of God
abroad or at home: see what a gracious use he makes of his news in that and in
the following chapter at your leisure: go ye, and do likewise, and it shall be
your honor.

But to tell news, and to inquire after news merely for novelty sake, and to
fill up time for want of better discourse: is a miserable idling out of
precious time, which might be spent to mutual edification; whereas by ordinary
and unsavory discourses which are usually heard amongst us, people do edify
one another indeed, but it is

Ad Gehennam, they edify one another to hell. You that pretend to be the Lords
people be more jealous for the Lords day and honor. The Lord takes pleasure in
his people. Oh let the Saints be joyful in glory. Psalm. 149.4, 5.
Let your speech be always seasoned with salt, especially on Gods day, that you
may season your children and servants, which otherwise will be corrupted by
such rotten communication.

O let your prayer be all times, (but especially on the Sabbath day) that o
holy David; set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips:
the sabbath is Gods glory, let your tongues be so too.

The like caution we ought to use about our thoughts (by the rule of
proportion) they being the language of our hearts, 8th Rule.
and as audible in the ears of God as our words are to men's; yea whereas men
understand our hearts by our words, God understand our words by our hearts.

Moses did set bounds about the mount that neither man nor beast might break
in, whatsoever touched the mountain must dye: Exodus 19 12. (19.
so must we set bounds about our heart, that neither humane, nor brutish
distractions may break in. There is death or life in it, and therefore of all
keepings, keep thy heart, Prove. 4 23.
for out of it are the issues of life.

The heart indeed is not so fenceable as the mountain; but the more open it
lies, the stronger-guard had we need to set upon it, and to pray for a guard
from heaven, (as David) Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my
heart, Psalm. 19 ult.
be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.

If vain or vile thoughts break in upon thee, do as the ravished virgin was to
do (in the Law) cry out, to God, and thou shall not be held guilty. Deuteronomy. 22.27.


Christians, this caution is of a special concern to you. O Jerusalem wash
thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved; Jerem. 4.14.
how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee?

Resolve the Text into its integrals, and it will afford you some such
observables.

1. Thoughts will defile the heart, as well as deeds. Wash thy heart.

2. This defilement will damn the soul, wash that thou may be saved.

3. The reason is implied: they are wickedness; wash thine heart from
wickedness.

4. All this evil is (even) in vain thoughts as well as in vile thoughts, how
long shall thy vain thoughts, etc.

5. Therefore we must wash our hearts from vain thoughts as well as from wicked
and blasphemous thoughts. Hence I infer,

6. If this should be the work of a Christian every day, how much more on Gods
day? the purer the paper the fouler the stain and blot.

Christians look to your hearts.

Further take notice of the appropriation; Thy own ways: Thy own pleasure^ thy
own words.

Object. And are not holy ways, and holy pleasures, and holy words our own, as
well as such as are carnal and sensual? yes they are: but God speaks here
according to our sense and apprehension, from whence

Note how brutish and sensual laps't man is in his notions and apprehensions of
things; that he can call nothing his own but what relates to the flesh.

H^se^ 8.13.
I have written to him (says God) the great things of my law, but they were
accounted a strange thing: Alienum, foreign, and of no concernment to himself
at all.

And let this also serve for a tenth rule.

In our sanctifying of the Sabbath we must be specially careful to distinguish,
what is Gods, and what is our own.

Indeed we must distinguish between what is Satan's. Our own. and Gods.


There be sinful, wicked pleasures, ways, words, thoughts; I say wicked and
sinful (in themselves;) and these are properly the Devils pleasures, the Devils
ways, the Devils words and thoughts, and these are lawful at no time, much less
on Gods time; Gods day and the Devils employment do not well agree.

And there are our own pleasures, ways, words and thoughts, such as concern the
present life, relating to the body and outward man.

These may be lawful on our days; six days shall thou labor and do all thy
work; but are not lawful on the Sabbath day: In it thou shall do no manner of
work, etc. save what is of necessity or Charity.

And then there are Gods pleasures ways, words and thoughts, i. e. of Gods
command, and such as lie in a direct tendency to the worship and service of God
in public, private, or secret; and these only we may and must do, and mind
upon the Sabbath; if we mix any of the Devils, or our own pleasures and profits
with Gods, we pollute the holy things of God, and profane his Sabbath.

This is the sum of what time will give me leave to say upon the Negative part
of this Model: only before I dismiss it, let me add this short note of
observation, that if what has been spoken even on this negative part be the
mind and will of God concerning the sanctifying of the Sabbath, then may the
generality of Christians lie down in the dust, and smiting upon their thigh,
with brinish tears upon their cheeks, confess (with a Pious Honorable Lady
upon her dying Bed) O I never kept a Sabbath in all my life.

The Lord teach us so to lay this sin to heart that God may never lay it to our
charge.

Having thus briefly dispatched the Negative part of Sabbath-Sanctification
contained in this model; I come now to the Positive and Affirmative part.
There, we saw what we are forbidden, as that whereby the Sabbath is polluted.

Here we are informed what we are commanded, as that whereby the Sabbath is
sanctified, i. e. kept holy to the Lord; as we are enjoined, keep the
Sabbath Day t^ sanctify it, etc. in these words following; [ And shall call
the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor Him,
etc.]

In this Positive model are contained four great comprehensive branches or
Duties, wherein the sanctification of the Sabbath does consist, sc.

1. We must call it our delight. 2. We must call it Holy, or the Holy of the
Lord. 3. We must call it Honorable or Glorious. 4. We must not only call the
day an honorable day, but we must really and actually honor God, or honor
the day.
The Heads are few, but they are very comprehensive, and such as will afford us
(in the opening of them) much matter for our use and direction in the
sanctification of the Sabbath, although I intend in this exercise but briefly
to touch upon some few particular heads or rules, reserving the more full and
ample enlargement thereof to some other opportunity.

The first is, we must call the Sabbath a Delight, or (the pronoun supplied)
thy Delight.

Call it so, we are not to account the Sabbath as an ordinary and common thing,
but to put a very high and precious valuation upon it, as, delightful, the holy
of the Lord, and of honorable renown.

A delight, thy delight, we must call it so, account it so, or make it so.

The Sabbath must be a delectable thing to us; a nest of sweetnesses, the
delight of our eyes, the joy and rejoicing of our hearts; a day, wherein all
our comforts and pleasures do concentre, all our fresh springs must be in it.
And this I humbly conceive the Holy Ghost does most significantly oppose unto
the pleasures forbidden before in this same verse.

If thou turn away thy foot from doing thy pleasure, etc. q.d. must we be
excluded and shut out from all pleasures and delights upon the Sabbath. No,
says the Holy Ghost, sanctify the Sabbath of Jehovah, and thou shall not need
to fear the want of pleasure, neither shall thou need to be beholden to the
flesh or the world for delights. The Sabbath it self will be incomparably more
sweet and delectable to thee, than all the sensual and luscious contentments
and satisfactions which this whole sublunary world can afford. Make the Sabbath
thy delight, and thou shall need to knock at no other door for pleasurable
entertainments. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto
thee, call my Sabbath thy Delight, he would make his day unto thee a spring of
sweetness, that shall always be flowing out to eternal life: a day well spent
with God will fill the soul with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Qu. But what shall we do that we may make the Sabbath our Delight? or,

When may we be said to call it so, or make it so.

1. We then call the Sabbath our delight, Rules or signs of making the Sabbath
a delight.
when we can rejoice in the approach of the Sabbath. See how holy David does
solace his soul in the joyful expectation of Communion with God, when his
banishment from the Ordinances did approach,

Psalm. 43.4.
Then shall I go unto the altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy. Heb. the
gladness of my joy.

2. Our early stirring up of our selves to bid the Sabbath welcome to our hearts
and habitations. Psalm. 63.1.
So the holy Prophet, O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. The
earliness of his devotions, shows the delight that he took in them; truly the
great indulgence that most Christians allow themselves in their bed on the
Lords day, is an infallible argument how little delight they take in Gods day,
or in the Ordinances thereof.

3. Then we may be said to call the Sabbath our delight, when we are
universally careful to sanctify God in all the institutions of the day, both
public, private and secret:

And are sollicitous so to Methodize and time them that they may not justle out
or interfere with one another; that is to say, to be so early in our
closet-devotion, that the closet may not exclude or streighten the duties of
the Family; and so to perform the Domestic Duties that they may not trespass
upon our attendance on the more solemn public worship of God.

An universal respect to all the institutions of a Sabbath, is an evident
demonstration that we call the Sabbath our delight.

Psalm. 119.6:
As David evidenceth to his own soul the sincerity of his Obedience, Then shall
I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy commandments.

4. When we are angry with, or impatient of any diversions from, or disturbance
in any duty or services of the day. To be glad of a diversion argues little
love to, or delight in the Sabbath. I esteemed, says Job, the words of his
mouth more than my necessary food. Job 23.12.
Heb. appointed food.

5. And lastly, Then we call the Sabbath a Delight, when the bare having of a
Sabbath, without the presence of God in the Sabbath, and the Ordinances
thereof, will not satisfy us.

Psalm. 16. ult.
Delight springs principally from the presence of God. In thy presence is
fullness of joy. This delight is promised as a reward in the verse following,
Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord. There is a Delight of Duty and
there is a Delight of dispensation, and this is the reward of that; that is Our
work, this is Gods work: when a gracious heart sets it self to delight in a
Sabbath and in the Ordinances thereof, then often God is pleased graciously to
come in, and to fill the Ordinances, and by it the soul with his own presence.
His Convincing presence. Enlightening presence. Converting presence. Quickening
presence. Strengthening presence. Comforting presence.


And when the soul cannot be satisfied unless it be in some measure sensible of
Gods presence in some of these blessed respects or other; then does it really
call the Sabbath a Delight. Psalm. 63.1.
Thus does the holy Psalmist, O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee;
why, what would he have? it follows v. 2. to see thy power and thy glory, so as
I have seen thee in thy sanctuary. It is not the sanctuary of God only, but
Communion with God in the sanctuary which David's soul thirsted after.

This is to call the Sabbath a delight. I come to the second duty.

We must call the Sabbath, the holy of Jehovah; Sanctum Domini; Lichdosh
Jehovah.
This title is very significant. We must not only count the Sabbath holy, but
the holy of the Lord. It is (as it were) one of the Titles ascribed to the Son
of God: for so he is called, thou will not suffer thy holy one to see
corruption, Acts 2.27. and 3.14.
etc.

Ye denied the Holy One, etc.

And well it may, for it is the holy day of the holy Son of God: yea God the
Father and God the Son have put off their own holiness upon it. Not
essentially, for that is incommunicable.

Nor is it an Inherent holiness which they have Communicated to it, 2 Pet. 1.4.
as the Saints of God have, who are made holy by a supernatural change of their
natures. But the Sabbath is holy by divine Institution, by special dedication
and consecration, God having hallowed this day above all other days in the
week, by separating it from common and civil uses, and consecrating it to holy
and religious ends and purposes, viz. to be a Sabbath of holy rest. But now

The Question How may we thus call the Sabbath holy? or When may we be said
truly to make it holy?


1. When we make Gods hallowing and sanctifying this day our Motive and
Argument to sanctify it, by a holy Observation of it, Answer.
when that which God has called holy by his divine sanction, we dare not call
it common and profane by prostituting of it to unsuitable actions, words, or
thoughts. There is a real calling it unholy, as well as vocal; He or She that
spends the day or any part of it in doing evil, or in doing nothing, or in
doing nothing to the purpose, he proclaims to the world, what he calls the
day, although he speak not a word; he speaks his heart by interpretation; and
when all is done, our works are more credible Interpreters of our hearts, than
our words or profession.

Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say.

Then we believe it holy, when we keep it holy.

2. Then we call the Sabbath holy, when we sanctify our selves for the
Sabbath, and for the Ordinances of the Sabbath.

If we have no care what frame of spirit we bring with us into the day, nor
with what frame we drive thorough it, we are far from calling the Sabbath, the
holy of the Lord. For their sakes (says our Lord) I Sanctify my self; John
17.17.
I Sanctify my self, i. e. I separate my self wholly for the work of a
Redeemer. If the Lord Jesus separated himself for our sakes, should not we much
more separate our selves for his. Then we believe Christ to be our holy
Redeemer, when we labor to be an holy people, Holy as he is holy; and then we
have high venerable thoughts of the holiness of the Sabbath, when we labor to
be holy as the day is holy, an unsuitable spirit is a profanation of the
Sabbath. The Day holy, but we unholy, what a reproach is this?

Holiness becomes thy house for ever, q. d. Psalm. 93.5,
Ceremonies were to continue but for a time, but holiness is the standing
qualification of thy day, and of thy worshippers for ever.

3. When we make holiness in the beginning and increase of it our design in our
sanctifying of the day, and of our attendance upon the Ordinances; When we make
holiness our business; It is the great end for which God has ordained a
Sabbath.

Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20.12.
Verily, my Sabbath ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you, that ye
may know that I am the Lord that do sanctify you. Not a Ceremonial sign but a
Moral sign, a Covenant sign, a kind of a Sacramental sign, a Medium to effect
what is promised in the Covenant, 1 Cor. 11.23, 25.
as water in Baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper.

Oh when Gods design and man's design meets, when God makes a Sabbath for a
Medium to make his people holy; and they keep a Sabbath that they may be holy,
this is excellent, this is to call the Sabbath The Holy of the Lord. When we
labor to bring as much holiness as we can into a Sabbath, and to bring more
holiness out of a Sabbath, to come out of Gods day more holy than we came into
it. This is to sanctify a Sabbath indeed.

4. Then we call it holy, when the more pure and holy the Sabbath is kept, and
the more purely and holily the Ordinances are dispensed, the more our souls do
love them; the more beauty and glory we do see in them. As David expresses his
affection to the word, Thy word is very pure, therefore does thy servant love
it.

It is very sad when the more purely and the more holily the word is dispensed,
the more people dislike it, and pick quarrels with it; as that vile people did,
who cried to their Prophets, prophecy not. Or if you will be prophesying,
prophecy smooth things, Jer. 30 10, 11.
Sermons that will go down pleasantly, discourses of peace, that will not
trouble our Consciences, nor cross our corruptions, but cause the holy one of
Israel to cease from before us. It was the Holy one of Israel, etc. the title
which the prophets used in their Sermons: but their ears were so tender they
could not bear it; if the Prophets would prophecy of the Merciful One of
Israel, and of the Bountiful One, The Omnipotent One, etc. let them go on; but
they cared not so much for holiness and strictness, as they pressed upon them
from day to day, this did not please their palate. So when it is with a people
in reference to other Ordinances, Prayer, and the Sacraments, the more
corrupted they be with the mixtures of men, and of humane inventions, the more
acceptance and applause they find; this argues that men seek not Jesum propter
Jesum, Christ for Christ his sake, nor Ordinances for their purity, nor
Sabbaths because they be, Holy days of an Holy God.

When to get holiness and to grow in holiness is our design Sanctifying
Sabbaths;

John 17.17.
When we sanctify Sabbaths that God may sanctify us by his Sabbaths and by his
truth, as our Lord prays; then we do call and account the Sabbath indeed
Sanctum Domini, The Holy of the Lord.

5. We do truly count the Sabbath the holy of the Lord when we come out of
Sabbaths, as Moses came down from the Mount, With our faces shining.

When we bring with us the savor of Christ, Psalm. 45.8.
his sweet ointments upon our garments.

When they with whom we converse may take notice that we have been with Jesus.
Acts 4 13.


It is sad when men come out of a Sabbath just such as they came in, as vain
and loose, as proud, worldly, wanton, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God, in a word, as fit for sin as they were before.

They sanctify the Sabbath (indeed) who can (in truth) say with the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4.18.
We all with open face beholding as in a Glass (or mirror) the glory of the
Lord, are changed (or Metamorphosed) into the same image as by the spirit of
the Lord. When the Sabbath leaves its Image and Impress upon us (in some
measure) then we do count it and keep it holy.

Surely the Sabbath is the very spring upon which the holy conversation of the
whole week is turned and moved.

And therefore it is observable that the Sabbath stands as it were betwixt the
two Tables, the last precept of the first Table, and the Preface to the Second,

To show us, that it is the Bond of union between both Tables: that without a
severe sanctification of the Sabbath, the Duties of both Tables will fall to
the ground; Whence in the Primitive times of Christianity, the strict
observation of the Sabbath was accounted the principal character of a true
Saint.

And so it is even at this day: there are such Christians, for exemplary
holiness, as those which are taken notice of to make most conscience of
sanctifying the Sabbath.

But so much for the second duty.

I come now to the Third Branch, or Duty of Duties, wherein
sabbath-sanctification consists,

Sc. Honorable.

If thou call it, or make it, or keep it as an Honorable day, Heb. Mecubbar,
which signifies honorable or glorious. The Duty implied is, we must keep the
Sabbath, as the Honorable, Glorious Day of Jehovah.

Truly glorious things are spoken of this Honorable Day. The Jews were wont to
call it the Queen of Days; the weekdays they called profane days, but the
Sabbath after Gods example here they called Holy: My Holy Day says God, it is
Gods peculiar. One of ours (now translated into his glorious rest) honors it
thus, calling it, The Map of heaven, the golden spot of the week, Vide Mr. Gee.
Swinnock in his good wish to the Lords day.
the market day of the soul, the daybreak of eternal brightness, the Queen of
days, the blessed amongst days, the cream of time, the Epitome of eternity,
Heaven in a glass, the first fruits of an everlasting and blessed Harvest, and
much more to that purpose. The weekdays are (as it were) the back-parts of the
week, made to carry burdens; a mere Servant or Slave made to do the drudgery of
the humane life. The Sabbath is the face, the seat of Majesty which God has
made to look upward, and to contemplate the glory of the Heavens and of the
maker thereof.

The weekdays are like the Terrestrial Globe, wherein are painted to us the
Earth with the inferior and more ignoble creatures. The Sabbath is the
Celestial Globe, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
wherein we have the prospect of Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and of an innumerable company of Angels, of the general
assembly and Church of the firstborn, and of God the Judge of all, and of the
spirits of just men made perfect, and of Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, etc.

The beholding of these glorious visions (truly beatifical) are the work of a
Sabbath.

Moreover to discover to you the glory of a Sabbath, consider we another
excellent passage in our quoted Author (ut sup.) speaking of the Sabbath.

All the graces triumph in Thee, All the Ordinances conspire to enrich Thee,
The Father rules Thee: The Son rose upon Thee: The Spirit has overshadowed
Thee: Thus it is done to the Day which the Lord delights to honor, on Thee
light was created, the Holy Ghost descended, Life has been restored, Satan
subdued, the Grave, Death and Hell conquered, etc.

Much more might be added, but rather

The Question

Sabbath Honorable, when we make Honorable preparation for it. To which
purpose it is useful to mind seriously that word which stands as a watchman at
the door of the fourth Commandment, Remember, the Sabbath to keep it holy.
Remember: It is like the Baptist, the voice of one crying, prepare ye the way
of the Lord: or that Eccl. 5.1. keep thy foot when thou go to the house of
God, etc.

It calls for solemn preparation for a Sabbath, and the ordinances of a
Sabbath, a duty woefully neglected amongst Christians: some little preparation
people make for a Sacrament, and it is to be feared there is more of
superstition in it than Evangelical affection to the day, consisting rather in
a Ceremonial abstinence from meat and drinks, than a serious separation of the
heart and affections for communion with God. But as to the Sabbath, there is
rarely any thing to separate between the drudgery of the week and the
solemnities of the sabbath, but a little sleep; and that (usually) less than
any other night is allowed; people loading the Saturday-night with so many
worldly affairs, that the Lords-day-morning is too little to satisfy their
sluggish indulgences of the flesh: and there is not time either for closet or
domestic devotion, they cannot force themselves out of their bed time enough
to join with the Congregation, until half the public worship be finished. The
Jews shall rise up against this generation and shall condemn them, of whom it
is reported, they were so severe in their parascueves or preparations for the
Sabbath, which were precisely to begin at three of the clock in the afternoon,
Buxtorf.
that if the servants in the Family were cast behind in dispatching the servile
labor of the Family, the Master of the house though he were a Nobleman would
not refuse to set his hand to the lowest drudgery, that they might observe the
punctual time of preparation: this argued an honorable estimation of the
Sabbath.

2. Then we call it honorable when we give it honorable entertainment. When
we awaken our selves in such good time (yet so as we may not indispose nature
for the service of the day) as David did, Psalm. 108.2.
awake my Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake right early; I say, to get up
early in the morning, Ma^h. 28.1.
to meet our blessed Lord and Bridegroom coming from his Sepulcher to visit us.

That which is but fancied of the natural Sun, its dancing upon Easter Day in
the morning for joy of the Lords Resurrection, I have known reallized by some
excellent Christians, whose hearts have not only leaped in them, but themselves
have hasted out of their beds and have leaped and skipped up and down in their
chamber, when the morning light of the Sabbath has shined on them, in
remembrance of the Sun of Righteousness arising from the grave with healing
under his wings.

Such extraordinary impulses and ravishments are not every Christians
attainment, and must not be imitated to the prejudice of the Body, the spirit
may be willing, but the flesh is weak: but certainly every Christian that has
the love of Christ shed abroad in his heart will be careful to abate himself
somewhat of his wonted indulgences on that morning which was his redeemers
Birthday, that he may have time to get on his wedding Garment by meditation,
Psalm 2.7.
reading and prayer, that he may go forth to meet him whom his soul loves in
the public solemnities of the Sabbath: and bring him home with him into the
chamber of her that conceived him. Cant. 3.


This is to call the day Honorable.

Thirdly, Then we call it Honorable, when we have a precious esteem of every
moment of Sabbath-time, and jealous lest any drop of it should run waste; even
the filings of Gold and the dust of Diamonds are precious. No man can call the
Sabbath Glorious that sets light by an hour, or minute, or moment of so Divine
a creation. Time is a ring of Gold, but the Sabbath is the rich sparkling
Diamond in it.

David's heart smote him for cutting off but a lap of Saul's Royal coat. So
should ours for profaning, or unprofitably wasting any part of Christ's day.

It is like his seamless coat, and cannot be divided without sacrilege.

Fourthly, The day is honorable when we have a singular esteem of all the
Institutions and Ordinances of the day. When Prayer is precious, and the word
Read, Preached, is precious, when singing of Psalms is precious, the Sacraments
precious: when every one in its time and order is observed with such due regard
that none do justle out or exclude the other, but one does catch in the other,
as the links in a chain of Gold.

Fifthly, When it is the grief of our souls that we can keep Sabbaths no
better, and strive cordially and conscientiously to keep the next better than
we did the last.

Sixthly, and lastly, when we are careful that all ours as well as our selves
keep Sabbaths: this is a main clause in our obedience to the 4th commandment.
Thou, thy Son and thy Daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, etc.
Every one in their several capacities must keep the Sabbath.

To be strict our selves in the duties of a Sabbath, and careless what the rest
of our Families do (whether our children or servants) steep or be idle, dance
or play at cards, sing idle songs, or take Gods name in vain, etc.

This is not to call the Sabbath Honorable. Deuteronomy. 5.14. Genesis 8.19.
I know Abraham that he will command his children, and his household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

And shall honor him, or glorify him.

From Cabad honorare.
The verb in the Hebrew Vecibbactto, may be rendered It or Him; but the sense
seems to incline to the latter [Him] rather than It: the day having had its
title of veneration put upon it before, [honourable] this may more properperly
belong to God, even to the whole blessed and glorious Trinity; requiring at the
hands of every one that enjoys this blessed privilege of a Sabbath, that
they ascribe the honor and glory of it unto God: and that is done, 1. When we
make divine Authority the sole ground of our separating and sanctifying the
whole day to his peculiar Service and Worship, without alienating any part or
parcel of that holy time to our own carnal uses and purposes. Keep the Sabbath
day to sanctify it: [there's the duty] as the Lord thy God commanded thee,
[there's the Authority.] 2. When, (as we make Gods command our ground, so) we
make Gods glory our end.


When we make it our design to set up God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in all
his glorious and infinite perfections, in our Adorations and Admirations upon
that his holy day. And that is done in a special manner when we make it the
great business of a Sabbath,

To ascribe to each glorious Person in the Trinity the glory of his proper work
and operation, whereby he challenges a title to, and interest in the Sabbath.
ex. gra.

1. When we ascribe to God the Father the glory of the stupendous work of
Creation: and that is done by a due contemplation of all his glorious
Attributes, shining forth in this beautiful structure of heaven and earth,
celebrated by the Royal Psalmist in Psalm. 19. v. 1. The heavens declare the
glory of the Lord, and the firmament shows his handy work; the transcendent
excellencies of the glorious Jehovah are conspicuous and illustrious in this
admirable Theater of the world, that is to say, 1. His Power. 1. In creating
all things out of nothing. 2. And that by a word of his mouth.


2. His Wisdom, In making all things in such a beautiful and exact manner and
order. Galen l. de usu partium.
As the great Physician said of the body of man, no man can come after God and
say, this might have been better: so in the Fabric of Heaven and Earth,
neither man nor Angels can say, here is a Defect, and there is a redundancy: it
had been better there had been more Suns, and fewer stars, more land and less
Sea, etc. No, when the divine prophet had stood, and in his most serious
contemplation looked through the Creation, he could spy out nothing that could
have been otherwise, but breaks out in admiration,

O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou made them all: he
could see nothing from one end of the Universe to the other, but what speaks
infinite perfection; In wisdom have thou made them all! and as the Omnipotency
and wisdom of God is magnified in the Creation, so also,

3. His bounty, in bestowing all this visible creation upon man for his use and
benefit: (as one says) God made man last that he might bring him (as a father
brings his son) into an house ready furnished. This is one branch of our
honoring God, when we ascribe to God the Father the glory of the work of
Creation.

Secondly, When we ascribe to God the Son the glory of his most glorious work
of Redemption: wherein these particulars are wonderful.

1. His inessable incarnation. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the
flesh, i. e.

The invisible God made visible in a b^dy of flesh. This was a Mystery indeed,
A Son in Heaven without a Mother. Gal 4.4.


And a Son on Earth without a Father.



Secondly, Christ his stupendous being made under the Law. Behold he that made
the Law, was made under the Law; under the Ceremonial Law, that he might
abolish it: under the Moral Law,

The preceptive power of it, that he might fulfill it, that so every believer
might have a Righteousness which he may call his own, Romans 10.4.

The maledictive power of it, that he might take it away. Gal. 3.13.


3. Christ his work of Redemption was principally transacted by his death and
passion: for therein he laid down pretium Redemptionis, Acts 20.28:
the price of Redemption, which was his own precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.

4. This great work and mystery of our Redemption was perfectly consummated in
Christ his glorious Resurrection, Col. 2.15,
wherein he spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly,
(...); some render it, in it, and would refer it to his Cross: but [(...)] is
to be understood here in the masculine gender, not in the neuter; and so to be
translanted in himself: Christ rising from the dead like a conqueror, lead
death, and the grave, and Hell, and the Devil in chains after him, as
conquerors in war were wont to lead their vanquished enemies whom they had
taken prisoners, in chains of Captivity after them, exposing them to the
public scorn of all spectators.

Thus we are to ascribe the glory of the work of Redemption to Jesus Christ the
Son of God; and thereby do honor God in our sanctifying of his holy Sabbath.

Thirdly, We likewise glorify the Holy Ghost, when we ascribe to Him the
honor of the work of Sanctification. Whether we look upon it, in that first
miraculous effusion of the spirit, which our Lord Jesus, as the King and Head
of his Church, did first purchase by the blood of his cross, and afterward
ascended into heaven, and obtained of his Father when he took possession of his
Kingdom, and lastly, did abundantly pour down upon the Apostles, and other
officers and members of his Evangelical Church in the day of Pentecost, Acts
2.1.

Which was (as it were) the Sanctification of the whole Gospel Church at once
in the first fruits.

Or whether we understand that work of sanctification, which successively is
wrought by the Holy Ghost in every individual elect Child of God; happily begun
in their first conversion, and mightily upheld and carried on in the s^ul to
the dying day. This is a glorious work consisting in these two glorious
branches of it, mortification of corruption, which before the Holy Ghost has
done, shall end in the total annihilation of the body of sin (that blessed
privilege groaned for so much by the blessed Apostle, Romans 7.24.) and the
erecting of a beautiful fabric of grace, holiness in the soul, which is the
very Image of God, Heb. 1.3^
(an erection of more transcendent wonder and glory than the six days
workmanship) which the Holy Ghost does uphold and will perfect unto the day of
Christ.

And this is the great end and design of the Sabbath and of the Ordinances of
the Gospel, according to the word which the great maker and appointer of
Sabbaths speaks, I give them my sabbath, to be a sign between me and them,
that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctifies them.

Here then is the third branch of our sanctifying the Sabbath, namely, the
ascribing to God the Holy Ghost the glory of the work of sanctification.

And this is proper work for Christians in the intervals and void spaces
between the public Ordinances, to sit down, and first seriously and
impartially to examine the work of grace in our souls. 1. For the truth of it.
2. For the growth of it. And then if we can give God and our own Consciences
some Scriptural account concerning this matter, humbly to fall down, and to put
the Crown of praise upon the head of Free Grace, which has made a difference
where it found none. And so much for this Text at this time.

How we may hear the Word with profit. Sermon. VII.
Jam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls.


THese Jews to whom the Apostle writes, were guilty of many foul, and
scandalous sins; but their master sin was the love of this world, c. 4. ver. 4.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world
is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the
enemy of God.
and from this sin arose many other Evils wherewith they are charged in this
Epistle, as 1. Their tickling joy in hopes to get gain, chapter 4.13. Go to now, ye
that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a
year, and buy, and sell, and get gain.
2. Their Hoarding up of riches, chapter 5.3. Your gold and silver is cankered, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it
were fire, ye have heaped treasure together for the last days.
3. Withholding the pay of the laboring man, chap. 5.4. Behold, the hire of
the laborers, which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by
fraud, cries; and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath.
4. Their fightings and Contentions one with the other, yea their killing one
the other to get their Estates, chapter 4.1, 2. From whence come wars and fightings
among you? come they not even from your lusts that war in your members? ye lust
and have not* ye kill and desire to have and cannot obtain.
their desiring to have, made them kill one the other, as Ahab did Naboth. 5.
Their Admiring the rich and villifying the poor, chapter 2.3. If there come into
your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also
a poor man in vile raiment.

And ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing.


and lastly to name no more, Hence arose their unprofitable hearing of the
word, chapter 1.22. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves.
They heard, they had the best places at meetings, but they were hearers only,
they did nothing, for Riches, as Christ tells us, Choke the word, Luke 8.14.
And that which fell among thorns, are they which when they have heard, go
forth, and are choked with cares and riches.
.

And as they were guilty of these moral vices, so erroneous in the Doctrine of
faith, especially in that main Article of Justification: Holding an empty and
inefficatious faith, sufficient to interest a man in Christ, chapter 2.14. What
does it profit my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have not works,
can faith save him?
can such a faith save him, (...) can that faith save him, can such a faith
save him? that Faith that saves is always fruitful, and that faith which is
not fruitful is no true Faith, the Apostle does not deny that we are justified
by Faith, by Faith only, but he denies that faith without works is a true
faith, its only an empty and aerie notion, and such a faith cannot justify nor
save a man.

Well then, this being the case and condition of the people, it was impossible
they should be quiet and patient hearers of the word, but must needs fret and
fume against it as that which contradicts their Lusts, Errors and Delusions.
The Apostle therefore to take them off from this bitter and untoward spirit in
Hearing the word, gives them this wholesome counsel and advice from God,
Wherefore laying apart all filthiness, etc.

All filthiness (...), I Will not restrain it to covetousness, nor to scurrilous
and reproachful speeches, but take it in its utmost Latitude, as denoting sin
in the General: (...) from whence comes (...) sometimes signifies the filth of
the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21. Not the putting away of the filth of the flesh.
(...). And (...) is applied to filthy garments, Zach. 3.3. And Joshua was
clothed with filthy garments.
(...) and so it may be taken, Jam. 2.2. A poor man in vile raiment.
(...). Hence we learn, that sin is a filthy thing, sin is called filthiness,
Prove. 30.12. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is
not washed from their filthiness.
and therefore when God calls us from sin, he bids us wash our selves, Isai.
1.16. Wash ye make you clean.
2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, Let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit.
and we read of this as that they are ashamed of their sins, and loath
themselves for them, and abhor themselves because of sin, and cast them away as
a polluted and menstruous cloth, all these expositions denote the filthiness of
sin.

And superfluity of naughtiness, (...) is often taken in the Scripture for
malice, 1 Cor. 5.8. Therefore let us keep the truth, not with old leaven, not
with leaven of malice, (...).
but because it has here no article, and because it often signifies all manner
of sin, I Will give it rope without any limitation. The Apostle then by
superfluity of naughtiness, means the redundancy and overflowing of sin amongst
those professors. There is a Chaos of sin in all of us, but it was very
spreading and luxuriant in these professors, and no marvel, for they loved
money, which is the root of all evil.

Laying apart, (...), or laying down, Acts 7.58. The witnesses laid down their
clothes.
(...), it signifies the rejection, Casting off, or Putting away of sin, put ye
off all these things, says Paul, and again, put off the old man, and so Peter,
1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, (...).
.

Receive with meekness, receive, that is, hear it, entertain it, give it
entrance and admission.

With meekness, (...) or (...); now (...) is (...), it is the moderation or
rebatement of sinful Anger, for then when the Apostle says Receive the word
with meekness, his meaning is, do not shut out the word by a peevish, froward,
stormy, and Angry spirit, but take it in with calmness, mildness and submission.

The engrafted word, (...); though it be not (...) which is the word used for
engrafting, Romans 11. yet since (...) signifies graftings and (...) to graft,
the translation is warrantable; but yet (...) may respect the planting or the
sowing of the word, and may be read the word planted, or the word sown, that
is, sown in your hearts by the hand of Christ's Ministers, see Mark 4.15. But
when they have heard, Satan comes immediately and takes away the word that
was sown in their hearts.
.

Which is able to save your souls, that is, from hell and damnation, there is
this power in the word, but it is mutuatitious, extrinsecal and borrowed, it is
the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, for it is the power of God to salvation.
the word of it self saves not, but God by the word, 1 Cor. 1.21. It pleased
God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.
.

The words thus opened, the Case I am to speak to is this. How we may hear the
Word so as to profit by it.

For the resolution of this question, I shall first tell you what we mean by
the word. Secondly, what by profiting. And thirdly, how we shall profit by the
hearing of it.

1. By the Word I understand the Word of God, which Word of God may be
considered either as it is written in the Scripture, or as it is preached, that
is, expounded and applied by the Ministers of Christ. The question is
concerning the word preached, How we may hear it so as to profit by it.
Ministers are to preach the word, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word.
preach the word, what is that? that is, open and unfold the Scripture with a
suitable application of them to the estate and the condition of the hearers,
Reprove from them, Rebuke from them, Exhort from them.

This was Christ's preaching, Luke 4.17. He found the place where it was
written, the Spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc. and then be expounds it v. 21.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.
Luke 24.27. this was Peter's Preaching, Act. 2.2. And beginning at Moses and
all the Prophets, be expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the things
concerning himself.
in this Sermon he chiefly insists upon two Scriptures and expounds them both,
and then applies all to their Consciences, v. 36. Therefore let all the house
of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye crucified,
both Lord and Christ.
and this was Paul's Preaching, Act. 28.23. There came many to his Lodging, to
whom be expounded, and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning
Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and the Prophets, from morning till evening.
and for the Levites before Christ who taught the People the good knowledge of
the Law, they Preached after this manner, Nehem. 8.7, 8. So they read in the
book of the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading.
and that was the manner in the Synagogues after Christ, Act. 13.15. And after
the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto
them, saying, ye men and brethren, if you have any word of exhortation for the
people, say on.
Moses was not only read but preached, Act. 15.21. Moses of old time has in
every City them that preach him.
and Paul prescribes the way of Preaching to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13. Give
attendance to Reading, to Exhortation to Doctrine.
I understand it of public reading the Scriptures in the Church with the
application of them by way of Doctrine and Exhortation, well then, by [the
word] we understand the word Preached, which is the opening and unfolding the
Scriptures, by the Ministers of Christ.

2. What is meant by profiting, or what is it to profit by the word.

I answer, we profit by the word, when we get that good and spiritual Advantage
from it, for which it was appointed and designed by God. Now God has appointed
his word,

I. For Learning and Instruction, 1 Cor. 14.31. For you may all Prophecy one
by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.
the Colossians learned by the Ministry of the word, As you also learned of
Epaphras.
Col. 1. 7. and the Philippians learned by Paul, Phil. 4.9. Those things which
you have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do.
the things that are to be heard by the Ministry are matters of Faith, and
matters of Practice, and if by hearing the Word, we g^t a good understanding in
things that are to be believed by us, and the things that are to be done by us,
then we profit by it; But if we remain ignorant as to these things after mercy
received, then we hear the Word without profit.

II. For Conversion, God has appointed his Word, Act. 26.18. To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to lig^t.
and the Angel speaking of John Baptists ministry, says Luke 1.16. And many of
the Children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.
now the Word turns man unto God.

1. As it discovers sin. If the Scripture be dexterously handled, they will
search into the very secrets of men's hearts, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. And thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest.
the Baptists preaching discovered to the Jews their carnal security in
trusting to Abram, Mat. 3.9. And think not to say within your s^lves, we have
Abraham to our Father.
their want of charity, their covetous and humorous disposition, Luke 3.11. He
that has two Coats, Let him im^art to him that has none, and he that has
meat let him do likewise.
it discovered the Publicans exactings, v. 13. And he says to them, exact no
more than that which is appointed you.
and the soldiers violence, v. 14. And he said unto them, do violence to no
man.
.

2. As it brings people to the confession of sins, the Baptists Preaching
brought his hearers to confess their sins, Math. 3.6. and so did Paul's, Act.
19.18. And many that believed came and confessed and showed their deeds.
.

3. As it works a kindly mourning and sorrow for sin. Upon Peter's sermon the
Jews were pricked at the heart, And they were baptized of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins.
Act. 2.37. the people wept when they heard the word of the Lord.

Nehem. 8.9. After the children of Israel had heard these words, they wept for
the perverseness of their nature, Jer. 3.21. the word which they heard was, v.
20. surely as a wife treacherously departs from her Husband, so have you
dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, says the Lord.

4. As it works amendment and reformation, the Word turns people from their
sins, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. They themselves show of us what manner of entrance in we
had unto you, and how you turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and the
true God.
and makes them fruitful toward God, Col. 1.5, 6. Which is come unto you as it
is in all the world, and brings forth fruit.
now then if the Word converts you to God, if it discovers your sins, if it
causes you to confess them, to mourn for them, and to leave them, then you
profit by the word. But if under Hearing you do not see the sins that reign in
you, as pride covetousness, passion, if you do not confess them heartily before
God, if you do not mourn kindly for them, nor leave them, you hear without
profit.

III. God has appointed his Word for the building up of those that are called,
converted and sanctified, Act. 20.32. I commend you to God and the word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up.
Apollos by his Preaching helped them that had believed through grace, Act.
18.17. And he went over all the Country of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening
the Disciples.
the Word does not only serve for the implantation of grace, but it excites,
strengthens and draws out the graces of Petitioners, Paul's Preaching
strengthened the Disciples, Act. 18.23. Gods Word is compared to meat, Luke
12.42. Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his Lord shall make
ruler over his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due season.
and meat strengthens and nourishes the body, and so the Word of God, 1 Timothy
4.6. Well then, if by the hearing of the Word, you are built up, and grown by
it, Thou shall be a Good Minister, nourished up in the words of Faith and good
Doctrine.
if your Faith grow exceedingly, if your Love abound, if you bring forth much
fruit; then you profit by it, but if your sins grow not weaker, and your
graces stronger, then you hear it without profit.

4. And lastly to name no more, the Word was appointed for Consolation, 1 Cor.
14.31. You may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all be
comforted.
the Samaritans rejoiced at Philips Preaching, Act. 8, 5.8. Then Philip went
down to the City of Samaria, and preached Christ to them, and there was great
joy in that City.
and so did the Eunuch, v. 29. and so did the Jailer at Paul's preaching, Act.
16.34. And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and he rejoiced believing
in God, with all his house.
now the Word comforts as it opens Gods Attributes, such as his Mercy, Wisdom,
Faithfulness and Power; Secondly, As it discovers Christ, the Promises, and
Privileges of the Saints; Thirdly, As it discovers and reveals the marks and
Characters of Gods Children; Fourthly, As it answers the doubts and fears of
Saints, well then, if in hearing the Word you find that it supports,
strengthens, and revives your hearts like a Cordial, then you profit by it. But
if you find nothing sweet, nor refreshing in it, you hear it without profit.

I come now to the third thing, how we shall profit by hearing of the Word,
that is, how shall we attain the benefit from the Word of God for which it was
appointed. It was appointed for instruction, conversion, edification,
consolation. How may we hear it so that we may obtain these things by it? I
shall give you four directions, and conclude.

1. First, Hear it attentively, Christ in the beginning of his Sermons, calls
upon his auditors to hearken, Mark 4.3. And he said unto them in his doctrine
hearken.
and so does Paul, Acts 13.16. Men of Israel and ye that fear God, give
audience.
and Rev. 2.7. He that h^th an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the
Churches.
and you read Luke 19.48. all the people were very attentive to hear him,
(...), they hung upon him hearing, that is, they hung their ears upon his
mouth, that they might receive every word and miss nothing: This phrase is
common in Greek Authors, (...), and in the Latin, warrantis conjux pendet ab
ore viri, and Augustine speaking of his hearing Ambrose, says, verbi ejus
sus^endebar intentus, and one promising to hear attentively, says, incipe
suspensis auribus, ista bibam, now this attentive hearing is a diligent heeding
of the things that are spoken by the Ministers of Christ, so as not to let any
thing pass without notice and observation, this was the attention of the
Samaritans to Philips preaching, Acts 8.6. And the people with one acc^rd gave
heed unto those things which Philip spoke
and the attention of Lydia to Paul's preaching, Acts 16.14. Whose heart the
Lord opened, that the attended to the things spoken of Paul
that were spoken by Paul, that is to all of them, what says Cornelius, Act.
10.33. Now therefore are we all here present before God, etc.
so that our attention must be catholic, and universal, we must listen to all
that is spoken to us in the name of Christ the Lord, but yet in preaching, some
things are more especially to be attended to. 1. If any Scripture be clearly
opened, attend to that. 2. If any doubt of Conscience be fully resolved, attend
to that. 3. If any sin of yours be particularly discovered, attend to that.
Lastly, if any thing be spoken by the Minister with a more than ordinary warmth
and servency, attend to that, there is some divine signature with it, and it
calls for our special observation, that is the first; we are to hear the word
attentively. I Will only mention two hindrances of attention, and proceed.

1. Wandering thoughts, thoughts that are foreign and Heterogeneous to the duty
in hand, these thoughts employ the mind and hinder the hearing of the word. Now
these thoughts are various according to the employments, inclinations and
circumstances of men; wanton people have filthy thoughts; finical people are
thinking of their attires and ornaments, worldly people of their Trades and
Callings.

2. Drowsiness and sleepiness, when the head nods and the eyes begin to swim,
the Sermon is like to be heard well, but yet this is too common a practice, and
that amongst Professors, whereby they vilisie the ordinance of Preaching, they
give an ill example to others, and render their uprightness and integrity
suspected by sober Christians, and I wish that those Professors who use it
customarily and indulge themselves in it, would put off their livery and tell
us plainly they are none of the Lords family.

2. Direction, Hear and receive the word with meekness, this is the direction
of the text, wherefore lay aside all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, etc. we must not be
angry at the word, if so it will do us no good, people are very apt to be angry
at the word, see Luke 4.28. And all they in the Synagogue, when they heard
these things, were filled with wrath.
Matthew. 15.12. Know thou that the Pharisees were offended when they heard
this saying?
Acts 5.33. When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and took counsel
to slay them.
Jerem. 26.8, 9. Now it came to pass when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking
all that the Lord had commanded him, he sp^ke unto all the people, that the
Priests and the Prophets and all the people took him, saying thou shall surely
dye.
2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16. Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Azariah, and he sent unto him a Prophet, which said unto him, why have thou
sought after the Gods of the people which could not deliver their own people
out of thine hand?

And the King said unto him, art thou made of the Kings Council? forbear, why
should thou be smitten.


2 Chronicles. 16.8, 9, 10. Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a
prison house, for he was in a rage with him, because of this thing.
this is a notable instance. 1. Because this anger is great, a rage, and such a
rage as put the Prophet in prison. 2. It is expressly said that this rage was
against the word, ver. 10.3. This rage was found in a good and holy man, whose
heart was perfect with the Lord his God, now from this instance we may learn
what part of the word it is that men are most angry at. 1. The word which
discovers their sins, and charges them home upon their Consciences, as the Seer
charged Asa home: thou have relied on the King of Syria, and not on the Lord
thy God, and this vexed him. 2. That word that reproaches them for their sins,
ver. 9. herein thou have done foolishly. Men cannot endure to have their
actions charged with folly. 3. That word that threatens them for their sins,
ver. 9. henceforth thou shall have wars: people cannot bear it to be threatened,
this was the great quarrel that the Jews had with Jeremiah, he came so often
with a burden of the Lord and threatened them, see Jer. 26.9. Why have thou
prohesied in the name of the Lord, saying, this house shall be like Shiloh, and
this City shall be desolate without an inhabitant.
when Christ threatened the Scribes and Pharisees, they could bear no longer,
Math. 12.12. And they sought to lay hold on him, for they knew that he had
spoken that parable against them.
Thus you see people are apt to be angry at the hearing of the Word, but what
kind of people are most apt to be angry. First, They that are great in the
world, Luke 19.47. And he taught daily in the Temple, but the chief of the
people sought to destroy him.
It was Jeh^jakim the King that cut Jeremiahs roll in pieces, and it was Herod
that thrust John into prison for reproving him. Secondly, proud men, Jerem.
43.12. When Jeremi^h had made an end of speaking, etc. Then spoke all the proud
men saying unto Jeremiah, thou spe^kest falsely.
proud men cannot endure a check either by the public ministry, or by a
private admonition. Thirdly, Guilty persons, why was Cain so touchy when God
asked him about Abel? because he was guilty of his blood. Guilty persons are
like galled horses, they kick if you touch their sores, nothing hinders us from
receiving the word with meekness, like the Conscience of sin; wherefore when
the Apostle bids us receive the word with meekness, he bids us lay aside all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, if the heart be surfeited with sin,
it will rise and boak against the Word, when Christ preached against
Covetousness, the Pharisees that were Covetous, were vexed at him, and expressed
their vexation by sneering at him, Luke 16.13, 14. And the Pharisees which were
covetous heard all these things, and they derided him.


3. Direct. Hear the Word with a good and honest heart, Luke 8.15. But that on
the good ground, are they which in an honest and good heart, having heard the
word, keep it.
this is a comprehensive head, and takes in all particulars that concern the
right manner of hearing, but I shall contract it and reduce it, 1. to an
understanding heart. 2. A believing heart. 3. A loving heart.

1. Then hear the Word with an understanding heart. The vvay-side hearers hear
but do not understand, Mat. 13.19. When any one hears the word and
understands it not: this is he that receives the seed by the ways side.
but they that receive it into good ground, that is, into an honest heart,
understand it, v. 23. But he that received seed into the good ground: is he
that hears the word and understands it.
Jesus Christ calls upon his auditors to hear and understand, Mar. 7.14.
Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand.
and blames them that do not understand, v. 18. And he says unto them, are ye
so without understanding also?
and it was his manner after preaching to ask if they understood him, Math.
13.51. Jesus says unto them; have ye understood all these things?
the generality of hearers are without understanding; they neither understand
doctrinal nor experimental truths, not the one for lack of knowledge, nor the
other for lack of feeling; and hence it is that they remember so little of the
Word, and that they are so little affected with the Word.

2. With a believing heart, Mar. 1.15. Believe the Gospel.
2 Chronicles. 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established,
believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.
Two things especially we are to mingle our faith with; the threatenings and
the promises. With the threatenings, so the people of Nineveh, Jonah 3.5. So the
people of Nineveh believed God.
With the promises, Exodus 4.31. And the people believed, and when they heard
that the Lord had visited the children of Israel: they bowed their heads and
worshipped.
Were the threatenings and promises which are constantly preached, fully
understood, thoroughly believed, and brought home to your Consciences by
spiritual application, this would quickly put an end to sin, for the
threatenings would scare you from sin, and the promises would allure you to duty.

3. With a loving heart, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes, desire the sincere milk
of the word.
as new born babes love the breast. David was a great lover of the Word of God,
Psalm. 119.140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
He loved it exceedingly, 167 My soul has kept thy testimonies* and I love
them exceedingly.
his longing after the word was so vehement that it almost consumed him, v. 20.
he loved it far better than gold, 127. but how far he loved it he could not
tell, 97. and therefore leaves it with God to judge his love to it. 159.
Consider how I love thy Precepts.
Brethren, had there been such a love in the people of England to the word, the
mouths of so many Minist^rs had never been stopped: and whereas we judge that
such and such are the causes of it* pray let us remember that no man living can
take the word from us, unless they be first empowered by our disaffection to it.

4. And last Direct. If you would profit by hearing of the word, keep what you
hear of it, Luke 8.15. Having heard the word keep it, (...), is to hold fast
the word that it slip not from us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Luke 4.42. 1 Cor. 15.2. you
know if the seed be not kept in the ground, it is sown to no purpose, so if the
Word be not kept in the memory, and in the heart, it will come to nothing, keep
therefore the Word in your hearts, (...) hold it fast lest the Devil snatch it
from you; for look as the fowls of the air follovv the seeds-man to pick up the
corn as soon as he has scattered it, so the prince of the air, the devil, is
at hand to take the Word out of our hearts, Mar. 4.15. But when they have
heard, Satan comes immediately, and takes away the word that was sown in
their hearts.
Immediately as soon as we have heard the Word, the Devil is at hand to take
the Word out of our hearts. He takes the Word out of our hearts; in Matthew it
is (...), he snatcheth it, and if you would know why the Devil is so hasty to
snatch away the Word; Christ tells you, Luke 8.12. Then comes the Devil and
takes away the word out of their hearts, least they should believe and be
saved.


But how shall we keep the Word? 1. Repeat it in your families, the Bereans
conn'd over Paul's Sermons, and examined his proofs and allegations, Act. 17.11.
They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scripttures
daily, whether those things were so.
.

2. Talk of it as you go from hearing, Jesus Christ's hearers talked of the Word
by the way, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with
us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures.
after Paul had preached, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning amongst
themselves, Act. 28.29. And when he had said these words the Jews departed, and
had great reasoning among themselves.
.

3. Pray to the Lord, that he would preserve the Word in your hearts by his
spirit, the Devil would snatch away the Word of God from us if there were not
a stronger to guard it, and that is the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good
thing which was committed to thee keep, by the holy Ghost which dwells in us.
pray then after the Word as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. The Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac and Israel our fathers, keep these for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of the hearts of thy people.
and such a prayer coming from an honest heart shall secure the word, so that
it shall abide with you, and it shall come after to your minds; it shall come
seasonably in the very nick and stress of exigency, and it shall come with
efficacy and power.

Thus much shall serve for the resolution of the question, how to hear the word
so as to profit by it: only this I add and conclude, that if God shall bless
these directions, and give us thus to hear his word, it will be an excellent
sign that God will continue the preaching of it to us, and that his Ministers
shall teach these things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
confidence, no man forbidding them.

How we may Read the Scriptures with most Spiritual Profit. Sermon. VIII.
Deuteronomy 17.19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the
days of his life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God to keep all the
Words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them.


WHat Cicero said of Aristotle's Politics, may not unfitly be said of this
Book of Deuteronomy, it is full of golden eloquence. In this Chapter God
instructs the People of the Jews about setting a King over them. And there are
two things specified in order to their King. His 1. Election. 2. Religion.


1. His Election, v. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him over thee, whom the
Lord thy God shall choose. Good reason God should have the choice of their King,
seeing by him Kings reign, Prove. 8.15.

2. His Religion, v. 18. When he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, he
shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the
Priests Levitici Sacerdotes in atrio templi volumen legis quod erat primariae
authoritatis custodiebant. P. Fagius.
. Here was a good beginning of a Kings reign; the first thing he did after he
sat upon the Throne, was to Copy out the Word of God in a Book. And in the
Text: It shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life;
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the Words of this Law,
and these Statutes, to do them. It shall be with him] The Book of the Law shall
be his Vade mecum, or daily Companion. Charles the Great used to set his Crown
upon the Bible. Indeed THE BIBLE is the best Supporter of the Crown. And he
shall read Legere debuit, and sibi privatim, and in templo ut sciret populus
neminem a lege excipi. Grotius.
therein] It is not below the Majesty of a Prince to peruse the Oracles of
Heaven; in them are comprised sacred Apothegms. Prove. 8.6. I will speak of
excellent things. In the Septuagint, it is (...).
Grave things; in the Hebrew, Princely (...) (b)
things: such as are fit for a God to speak, and a King to read. Nor must the
King only read the Book of the Law at his first instalment into his Kingdom,
but he shall read in it all the days of his (...) (c) (...)
life.] He must not leave off reading till he lest off reigning. And the
reasons why he must be conversant in the Law of God, are in the subsequent
words: 1. That he may learn to fear the Lord his God. Reading of the Word is
the best means to usher in the fear of the Lord. 2. That he may keep all the
words of this Law to do them. 3. That he may prolong his days in his Kingdom. I
shall now confine my self to these words; He shall read in it (i. e. the Book
of the Law) all the days of his life. The holy Scripture is (as Austin says) a
Qu d est sacra Scriptu^a, nisi quaed^m epis^ola Omni potentis Dei ad creaturam,
i^ qua verba Dei s^nant, and cor Dei discitur. Aug. in Psalm.
Golden Epistle sent to us from God. This is to be read diligently; ignorance
of Scripture is the mother of error, not devotion. Matthew. 22.29. ye err, not
knowing the Scriptures. We are commanded to search the Scriptures, John 5.39.
The Greek word (...) signifies to search as for a Vein of Silver. How
diligently does a Child read over his Fathers Will and Testament! and a Citizen
peruse his Charter! with the like Quaerit Scriptura lect^rem vigilantem,
desidi^sum resiuit. Rivet Isag. ^d scriptur. c. 13.
diligence should we read Gods Word, which is our Magna Charta for Heaven: It Is
a mercy the Bible is not prohibited. Trajan the Emperor forbade the Jews to
read in the Book of the Law. Let us enquire at this sacred Oracle. Apollos was
mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24. Melancthon Melch. Adam. in vita Melancth.
when he was young, sucked (...), the sincere Milk of the Word. Alphonsus King
of Arragon read over the Bible fourteen times. That Roman Lady Cecilia, had by
much reading of the Word, made her Breast Bibliothecam Christi; the Library of
Christ, as Si Alexander Homerum ita amplexus est, and Scipio Afric. Zenophontis
(...) vix e manibus d posuit, quid nes in sicro codic^ agere oportet? Quistorp.
vide Chytraei praelect in Jos. and Mornaeum.
Hierom speaks. Were the Scriptures only in their Origin^l Tongue, many would
plead excuse for not reading; but when this sword of the spirit is unsheathed,
and the Word is made plain to us by being translated, what should hinder us
from a diligent search into these holy Mysteries? Adam was forbid upon pain of
death to taste of the Tree of Knowledge, Genesis 3.17. In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall s^rely dye. But there is no danger of touching this Tree of
holy Scriptures; if we do not eat of this Tree of Knowledge, we shall surely
dye. What will become of them who are strangers to Scripture? Hosea 8.12. I
have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a
strange thing. Many lay aside Scripture as rusty Armor, Jer. 8.9. they are
better read in Romances than in St. Paul, they spend many hours inter pectinem
and speculum, between the Comb and the Glass, but their eyes begin to be sore
when they look upon a Bible. The very Turks will rise up in judgment against
these Christians; they reverence the Books of Moses; and if they find but a
leaf wherein any thing of the Pentateuch is written, they take it up and kiss
it. They who slight the Word written, slight God himself whose stamp it bears.
To slight the Kings Edict, is an affront offered to the Person of the King.
Scripture-vilifiers Dei eloquia rejicientes, multis se exi^ialibus l^qu is
involvunt. Calvin.
are in a damnable state. Prove. 13.13. Whosoever despises the Word, shall be
destroyed. Nor is it enough to read the Word of God, but it should be our care
to get some spiritual emolument and profit by it, that our Souls may be (...),
nourished up in the words of faith, 1 Timothy 4.6. Why else was the Scripture
written, but that it might profit us? God did not give us his Word only as a
Landscape to look upon, but he delivered it to us as a Father delivers a stock
of Money to his Son, to improve. It Is sad not to profit by the Word; atrophy
that does not thrive: Men would be loath to trade and get no profit. The grand
Question I am to speak to, is this, How we may read the Scriptures with most
spiritual profit? Resp.
It Is a momentous Question, and of daily use. R. For the resolution of this
Question, I shall lay down several Rules or Directions about reading of
Scripture.

1. If you would profit by reading, remove those things which will hinder love
of every Pla^imi peccata radunt non eradic^nt. Bern.
Sin. Let a Physician prescribe never so good Receipts, if the Patient takes
Poison, it will hinder the virtue and operation of the Physic. The Scripture
prescribes excellent Receipts, but sin lived in Poisons all. The Body cannot
thrive in a Fever; nor can the Soul under the feverish heat of Lust. Plato
calls the love of Sin Magnus Demon, a Great Devil. As the Rose is destroyed by
the Canker which breeds in it, so are the Souls of men by those Sins they live
in. 2. Take heed of the Thorns which will choke the Word read: These Thorns our
Savior expounds to be the Cares of this World, Matthew. 13.22. By Cares is meant
(...).
Covetousness. A Covetous man is a Pluralist; he has such diversity of secular
employments, that he can scarce find time to read; or if he does, what
solecisms does he commit in reading? while his eye is upon the Bible, his heart
is upon the World; it is not the Writings of the Apostles he is so much taken
with, as the Writings in his Account-Book; is this man like to profit? you may
as soon extract Oils and Sirrups out of a Flint, as he any real benefit out of
Scripture. 3. Take heed of Jesting with Scripture; this is playing with fire.
Some cannot be merry unless they make bold with God; when they are sad they
bring forth the Scripture as their Harp to drive away the evil Procul hinc,
procul esse profani. Ovid.
Spirit: As that Drunkard, who having drunk off his Cups, called to his
Fellows, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out. In the fear of God
beware of this. Quos Deus vult perdere iis permittit ludere cum sacris
Scripturis. Luth.
King Edward the Fourth would not endure to have his Crown jested with, but
caused him to be executed, who said, He would make his Son Heir to the Crown;
Speeds Chron.
meaning, the sign of the Crown: Much less will God endure to have his WORD
jested with. Eusebius relates of one who took a piece of Scripture to jest
with, God struck him with frenzy. The Lord may justly give over such persons
(...), to a reprobate Romans 1.28.
mind.

2. If you would profit, prepare your hearts to the reading of the Word; the
heart is an instrument needs putting in tune. 1 Samuel 7.3. Prepare your The
Heathens (as (...), etc. Plut.
Plutarch notes) thought it indecent to be too hasty or rash in the service of
their supposed Deities. This preparation to reading consists in two things: 1.
In summoning our Thoughts together to attend that solemn Work we are going
about; the Thoughts are straglers, therefore rally them together. 2. In purging
out those unclean affections which do indispose us to reading. The Serpent
before he drinks casts up his Poison; in this we should be wise as Serpents;
before we come to these Waters of Life, cast away the Poison of Impure
Affections. Many come rashly to the reading of the Word, and no wonder, if they
come without preparation, they go away without profit.

3. Read the Scripture with reverence; think every line you read God Ark,
wherein the Law was put, was overlaid with pure Gold, and was carried on Bars,
that the Levites might not touch it, Exodus 25. Why was this, but to breed in
the people reverence to the Law? When Ehud told Eglon he had a message to him
frrom God, he arose from his Throne, Judge. 3.20. The Word written is a message
to us from JEHOVAH; with what veneration should we receive it?

order. Though occurrences may sometimes divert our method; yet for a constant
course it is best to observe an order in reading. Order is an help to memory;
we do not begin to read a Friends Letter in the middle.

Psalm. 119.73. Give me understanding, that I may learn thy Commandments. Though
there are some (...), knots in Scripture, which are not easily untied; yet
things essential to salvation, the Holy Ghost has plainly pointed out to us:
The knowledge of the sense of Scripture is the first step to profiting. In the
Law Aaron was first to light the Lamps, and then to burn the Incense; the Lamp
of the understanding must be first lighted, before the Affections can be
inflamed. Get what knowledge you can by comparing Scriptures, by conferring
with others, by using the best Annotators. Without knowledge the Scripture is a
sealed Book, every line is too high for us; and if the Word shoot above our
head, it can never hit our heart.

seriousness. If one go over the Scripture cursorily, (says Erasmus) there is
little good to be got by it; but if he be serious in reading of it, (...)
it is the savor of life: and well may we be serious, if we consider the
importance of those Truths which are bound up in this sacred Volume. Deuteronomy.
32.47. It is not a Non est verbum inane quod contemni debeat a vobis. Pagnin.
vain thing for you, for it is your life. If a Letter were to be broken open
and read, wherein a man's whole Estate were concerned, how serious would he be
in reading of it? In the Scripture our Salvation is concerned; it treats of the
Love of Tit. 3.4.
Christ, a serious subject. Christ has loved Mankind more than the Angels that
fell, Heb. 2.6. The Loadstone, despising the Gold and Pearl, draws the Iron to
it; thus Christ passed by the Angels, who were of a more noble extract, and
drew Mankind to him. Christ loved us more than his own Life; nay, though we had
a hand in his Death, yet that he should not leave us out of his Will, this is a
Love Ephesians. 3.9.
passes knowledge; who can read this without seriousness? The Scripture speaks
of the Mystery of Faith, the Eternal Recompenses, the Paucity of them that
shall be Saved. Matthew. 20.16. Few Chosen. One says, Flavius. V^piscus.
The Names of all the good Emperors of Rome might be engraven in a little Ring:
There are but few Names in the Book of Life. The Scripture speaks of Tanquam
pro vita and morte luctitandum. Corn. a ^ap.
striving for Heaven as in an Agony, Luke 13.24. it cautions us of falling
short of the promised Rest, Heb. 4.1. it describes the horror of the Infernal
Sic morientur damnati ut semper vivant, and sic vivent ut semper moriantur.
Bern.
Torments; the Worm and the Fire, Mark 9.44. Who can read this, and not be
serious? Some have light feathery Spirits, they run over the most weighty
Truths in haste; (like Israel, who eat the Passover in haste) and they are not
benefited by the Word. Read with a solemn composed spirit. Seriousness is the
Christian's ballast, which keeps him from being overturned with vanity.

Labor to remember what you read. Satan would Mat. 13.4.
steal the Word out Psalm 119.52. I have remembered thy judgments of old.
Memoria est intui scriba.
Hierom writes of that Religious Lady Paula, she had got most of the Scriptures
by heart; we are bid to have the word dwell in us; (...), i. e. h^ud memoria
excidat.
Col. 3.16. The Word is a Jewel, adorns the hidden man, and shall we not
remember it? Can a Maid forget her Ornaments? Jer. 2.32. such as have a disease
they call Lienteria, the Meat comes up as fast as they eat it, and stays not in
the Stomach, are not nourished by it; If the Word stays not in the memory, it
cannot profit; some can better remember a piece of News than a line of
Scripture; their memories are like those ponds, where the Frogs live, but the
Fish dye.

Meditate upon what you read, Psalm. 119.15. I will meditate in thy Precepts.
Hebrew (...) (b) (...). Chrysostom.
word to Meditate, signifies to be intense in the mind; in Meditation there
must be a fixing of the thoughts upon the object, Luke 2.19. The Virgin Mary
pondered those things, etc. Meditation is the Concoction of Scripture; Reading
brings a Truth into our head, Meditation brings it into our heart; Reading and
Meditation must, like Castor and Pollux, appear together. Meditation without
reading is erroneous; reading without Meditation is barren: the Be sucks the
flower, then works it in the Hive, and so turns it to Honey: by Reading we suck
the flower of the Word, by Meditation we work it in the Hive of our mind, and
so it turns to profit. Meditation is the bellows of the affections, Psalm. 39.3.
While I was musing the fire burned: The Reason we come away so cold from
Reading the Word, is, because we do not warm our selves at the fire of
Meditation.

Come to the reading of Scripture with humble hearts, acknowledge how Pride is
an Enemy to profiting. It is observed the ground on which the Peacock sits is
barren; that heart where Pride sits is barren: an arrogant Person disdains the
Counsels of the Word, and hates the reproofs, is he like to profit? Jam. 4.6.
God gives grace to the humble. The eminentest Saints have been but of low
stature in their own eyes; like the Sun in the Zenith, they showed least when
they were at the highest. David had more understanding then all bis Teachers.
Psalm. 119.99. but how humble was he? Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm and no (...).
Greg. Nazianz.
man. David in the Arabic Tongue signifies a worm.

Give Credence to the Word written; believe it to be of God; see Romans, that
they might gain Credit to their Laws, reported that they were inspired by the
Gods at Rome. Believe the Scripture to be Coelo missa, divinely inspired. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is (...), of Divine inspiration. Who but God could
reveal the great Doctrines of the Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, the
Resurrection? Whence should the Scripture come, if not from God? 1. Sinners
could not be the Authors of Scripture; would they indite such holy lines? or
inveigh so fiercely against those sins which they love? 2. Saints could not be
the Authors of Scripture; how could it stand with their Sanctity to counterfeit
God's Name, and put Thus says the Lord to a Book of their own devising? 3.
Angels could not be the Authors of Scripture. What Angel in Heaven durst
personate God, and say, I am the Lord? Believe the Pedigree of Scripture to be
Sacred, and to come from the Jam. 1.17.
father of lights. The Scriptures Antiquity speaks its Divinity. No humane
Histories extant reach further than Noah's Flood, but the Scripture writes of
things Id verum, quod primum. Tertul.
before time. Besides, the Majesty, Profundity, Purity, Harmony of Scripture,
show it could be breathed from none but God himself. Add to this the Cum animum
tangit, est sicut fulmen. Luth.
Efficacy the Word written has had upon men's Consciences; by reading Scripture
they have been turned into other men, as might be instanced in St. Austin,
Junius, and others. If you should set a Seal upon a piece of Marble, and it
should leave a Print behind, you would say there were a strange virtue in that
Seal; so, that the Word written should leave a Heavenly Print of Grace upon the
heart, it argues it to be of (...)
Some Scepticks question the Verity of Scripture; though they have the Articles
of Religion in their Creed, yet not in their belief, Isa. 53.1. Who has
believed our Report? Unbelief enervates the Virtue of the Word, and makes it
abortive; who will Vbi male creditur, ibi nec been vivitur. Hierom.
obey those truths he does not believe? Heb. 4.1. The Word did not profit them,
not being mixed with Faith.

11. Highly prize the Scriptures, Psalm. 119.72. The Law of thy mouth is better
to me than thousands of Gold and Silver. Can he make a proficiency in any Art,
who does slight and depreciate it? Prize this Book of God above all other
Books. Saint Gregory calls the Bible the Heart and Soul of God. The Rabbis
say, that there is a Mountain of sense hangs upon every Apex and tittle of
Scripture. Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect. In illa continentur
omnia quae ad perfectam pietatem pertinent. Musculus. Camero.
The Scripture is the Library of the Holy Ghost; it is a Pandect of Divine
knowledge; an exact model and Platform of Religion. Adoro plenitudinem
Scripturae. Tertul.
The Scripture contains in it the Credenda, the things which we are to believe,
and the Agenda, the things which we are to practice, it is able to make us wise
to Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. The Scripture is the Regula and mensura veritatis.
Rivet. (...). Irenaeus. Isa. 8.20.
Standard of Truth, the Judge of Controversies; it is the Animarum Cynosura.
Quistorp.
Pole Star to direct us to Heaven. Prove. 6.23. The Commandment is a (...).
Clem. Alex.
Lamp. The Scripture is the Compass by which the Rudder of our Will is to be
steered; it is the Field in which Christ the Pearl of price is hid; it is a
Rock of Diamonds; it is a sacred Collyrium, or Eye Salve; it mends their eyes
that look upon it; it is a spiritual Opti^k-glass in which the glory of God is
Resplendent; it is the Pana^y or Vitae pharmacum. Quistorpius.
universal Medicine for the Soul. The leaves of Scripture are like the leaves
of the Tree of life, for healing of the Nations. Rev. 22.2. The Scripture is
both the Breeder and (...). Athanas.
Feeder of Grace; how is the Convert born, but by the Word of Truth? Jam. 1.18.
how does he grow, but by the sincere Milk of the Word? 1 Pet. 2.2. The Word
written is the Book out of which our Evidences for Heaven are fetched; it is
the Sea-mark which shows us the Rocks of Sin to avoid; it is the Antidote
against Error and Apostasy; the two-edged Sword which wounds the old Serpent.
It is our Bulwark to withstand the force of Lust: like the Capitol of Rome
which was a place of strength and ammunition. The Scripture is the Cant. 4.4.
Tower of David, whereon the Shields of our Faith hang. Take away the Word and
you deprive us of the Sun, said Si verbum Dei auferas Solemn e Mundo sustulisti.
Luth.
Luther. The Word written is above an Angelical Embassy, or voice from Heaven.
2 Pet. 1.18. This voice which came from Heaven we heard, we have also (...), a
more sure Word. O prize the Word written, prizing is the way to profiting. If
Caesar so valued his Commentaries, that for preserving them he lost his Purple
Robe, how should we estimate the Sacred Oracles of God? Job 23.12. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. King Edward the
Sixth on the day of his Coronation, had presented before him three Swords,
signifying that he was Monarch of three Kingdoms, the King said there was one
Sword wanting, being asked what The Holy Bible, which is the Sword of the
Spirit, and is to be preferred before these Ensigns of Royalty. Robert King of
Sicily did so prize God's Word, that speaking to his Friend Petrarcha, he said,
I protest the Scriptures are dearer to me than my Kingdom; Juro tibi,
Petrarcha, multo mihi chariores esse sacras Scripturas, quam regnum, etc. Corn.
a Lap.
and if I must be deprived of one of them, I had rather lose my Diadem than the
Scriptures.

12. Get an ardent love to the Word; Prizing relates to the judgment; Love to
the affections. Psalm. 119.159. Consider how I love thy Romans 7.22^
precepts. He is likely to grow rich who delights in his Trade; he who is (...)
will be (...); a Lover of Learning will be a Scholar. St. Austin tells us,
before his Conversion he took no pleasure in the Scriptures, but afterward
they were his chaste Sint castae delitiae m^ae scripturae. Aug.
delights. David tasted the Word sweeter than the Honey which drops from the
Comb, Quod sp^nte ex favo stillat, mellis medulla vocatur; plus autem melleae
dulcedinis ab uberibus Scripturae sugitur.
Psalm. 19.10. Thomas a Kempis used to say, He found no content but to be in
angulo cum libello, in a Corner with the Book of God in his hand. Did Alphonsus
King of Sicily recover of a fit of Sickness with that great pleasure he took in
reading of Quintus Curtius? What infinite pleasure should we take in reading
the Book of Life? There is enough in the Word to breed holy complacency and
delight; it is a specimen and demonstration of God's Love to us. The Spirit is
God's Love-Token, the Word his Love-Letter; How does one delight to read over
his Friend's Letter? The Word written is a Divine Treasury, or Pietatis gaz^^
hylacium. Quistorp.
Storehouse; in it are scattered Truths as Pearls, to adorn the hidden man of
the heart. The Word written is the true Manna which has all sorts of sweet
taste in Manna cujuslibet Saporis.
it; it is a sovereign Elixir, it gives wine to them of an heavy heart. I have
read of an ancient Rabbi, who in a great concourse of people made Proclamation
of a sovereign Cordial he had to sell; many resorting to him, and asking him to
show it, he opened the Bible, and directed them to several places of Comfort in
it. Holy David drank of this Cordial, Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in my
affliction, thy Word has quickened me, (...), etc. (...) -- St. Chrysostom
compares the Scripture to a (...), etc. Chrysostom. Hom. in Psalm. 44.
Garden; every line in it is a fragrant Flower, which we should wear, not in
our bosom, but our heart. Delight in the Word causes profit: and we must not
only love the comforts of the Word, but the reproofs. Myrrh is bitter to the
Palate, but good for the Stomach.

honest hearts. Christ speaks of the (...) * the honest heart, Luke. 8.15.

Quest. What is it to read the Word with an honest Heart?

Answ. 1. whole counsel of God; a good Heart would not have any Truth
concealed; but says as Job, What I see not, teach thou Job 34.32.
me. When men pick and choose in Religion, they will do some things the Word
enjoins them, but not others; these are unsound Hearts, and are not benefited
by holy Writ. These are like a Patient, who having a bitter Pill prescribed,
and a Julip, he will take the Julip, but refuses the Pill.

2. To read the Word with an honest Heart, is to read it that we may be made
better by Cor integrum, i. e. quod prorsas desideret proficere. Brugensis.
it. The Word is quoad se, the Medium and Organ of Sanctity; and we come to it
not only to Illuminate us, but Consecrate us. John 17.17. Sanctify them
through thy Truth. Some go to the Bible, as one goes to the Garden to pick
Flowers, i. e. fine Notions. Austin confesses, that before his Conversion he
went to hear Ambrose more for the elegancy of Speech, and quaintness of Notion,
than the spirituality of the Matter. This is like a Woman that paints her Face,
but neglects her health. But this is to have an honest Heart, when we come to
the Scriptures as Naaman to the Waters of Jordan, to be healed of our Leprosy.
Oh! says the Soul, That this Sword of the Spirit may pierce the Rock of my
Heart; that this blessed Word may have such a virtue in it, as the water of
jealousy, to kill and make Number. 5.27.
fruitful; that it may kill my Sin, and make me fruitful in Grace.

apply Scripture; take every word as spoken to your selves. When the Word
thunders against Sin, think thus, God means my Sins; when it presses any Duty,
God intends me in this. Many put off Scripture from themselves, as if it only
concerned those, who lived in the time when it was written; but if you intend
to profit by the Word, bring it home to your selves; a Medicine will do no
good, unless it be applied. The Saints of old took the Word, as if it had been
spoken to them by Name. When King Josiah heard the threatening which was written
in the Book of God, he applied it to himself; he rent his clothes, and humbled
his Soul before the Lord, 2 Kings 22.13.

preceptive part of the Word, as well as the promissive; the Precepts carry
Duty in them, like the Veins which carry the Blood; the Promises carry Comfort
in them, like the Arteries which carry the Spirits. Make use as well of the
Precepts to direct you, as the Promises to comfort you. Such as cast their eye
upon the Promise, with a neglect of the Command, are not edified by Scripture;
they look more after Comfort than Duty. They mistake their Comforts, as Apollo
embraced the Laurel-tree instead of Daphne. The Body may be swelled with wind
as well as flesh; a man may be filled with false comfort, as well as that which
is genuine and real.

Let your thoughts dwell upon the most Material passages of Scripture. The
Emphasis, and be more quick and pungent: Reading the names of the Tribes, or
the Genealogies of the Patriarks, is not of the same importance as Faith and
the new Creature. Mind the magnalia Legis, the weighty things of the Law, Hos.
8.12. They who read only to satisfy their curiosity, do rather busy then
profit themselves. The searching too far into Christ's Temporal Reign, has I
fear weakened his Spiritual Reign in some men's hearts.

Compare your selves with the Word. See how the Scripture and your humbled but
humble? the Word calls for regeneration, John 3.7. Have you the signature and
engraving of the Holy Ghost upon you? have you a change of heart? not only a
partial and moral change, but a Spiritual? is there such a change wrought in
you as if another Soul did live in the same body? 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some
of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, Similia habet Nazianz. orat.
sunebri in laudem Cypriani, ubi enarrat mirabilem ejus post gratiae adventum
(...).
etc. The Word calls for love to the Saints, 1 Pet. 1:22. Do you love grace
where you see it? I em est motus animi in imaginem and rem.
do you love grace in a poor man as well as in a rich? a Son loves to see his
Father's Picture, though hung in a mean frame: do you love grace though mixed
with some failings? as we love Gold though it be in the Oar: the bringing the
rule of the Word and our hearts together, to see how they agree, would prove
very advantageous to us. Hereby we come to know the true complexion and state
of our Souls, and see what Evidences and Certificates we have for Heaven.

Take Special notice of those Scriptures which speak to your particular Case,
were a consumptive person to read Galen or Hypocrates, he would chiefly observe
Paragraphs of Scripture, which are most apposit to ones present case. I shall
instance only in three cases.

1. Affliction. 2. Desertion. 3. Sin.
1 Case. First Affliction. Has God made your chain heavy? Consult these
Scriptures, Heb. 12.7. If you endure chastening, God deals with you as Sons,
Job 36.8. Deuteronomy. 8.15. 1 King. 11.39. Psalm. 89.30. Heb. 12.10, 11. Psalm. 37.39.
Romans 8.28. 1 Pet. 1.6. 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. Rev. 3.19. 2 Cor. 4.16. Job 5.17.
Micah 6.9.
Isa. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the
fruit to take away his Sin. Flagellis domini lasciva caro atteritur, anima
pennis virtutum ad coelestia sublevatur. Bern. Ser. 10. de Coen. d.
John 16.22. Your sorrow shall be turned into joy. The French have a berry
which they call uve de Spine; the grape of a thorn. God gives joy out of
sorrow, here is the grape of a thorn. 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction, which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more eternal and exceeding weight of
glory. The Limner lays his Gold upon dark colors, God first lays the dark
color of Affliction, and then the Golden color of Glory.

2 Case. Secondly Desertion. Are your spiritual comforts eclipsed? see Lam.
3.31. Psalm. 106.6, 9. and 103.9. Mark 15 34. Isa 8.17, 49. chapter 15.50. chapter
10.54. 2 Cor. 7.6.
Isa. 54.8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee. The Sun may hide it self in a cloud, but it
is not out of the Firmament, God may hide his face, but he is not out of
Covenant, Isa. 57.16. I will not be always wroth, for the Spirits should fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made. God is like the Musician, he will
not stretch the strings of his Lute too hard least they break, Psalm. 97.11.
Light is sown for the Righteous. A Saints comfort may be hid as seed under the
clods, but at last it will spring up into an harvest of Joy.

3 Case. Thirdly Sin. 1. Are you drawn away with lust? read Galat. 5.24. Jam.
1.15. 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against your Souls.
Pravae cupiditates sunt portae inferni, per quas homines descen^unt ad inferos,
Lust kills with embracing. Prove. 7.10, 22, 23. There met him a woman with the
attire of a harlot, he goes after her as an Ox goes to the Slaughter, till a
dart strike through his liver, Plato in Hepate (...) ponit.
etc. Prove. 22.14. The mouth of a strange Woman is a deep Pit, he that is
abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. Go to the waters of the Sanctuary to
quench the fire of lust.

2. Are you under the power of Unbelief? read Isa, 26.3. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, (...)
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Mr. Bolton speaks
of a distressed Soul who found much comfort from this Scripture on his sick
bed. Zeph. 3.12. Psalm. 34.22.55.22.32.10. Mark 9.23. 1 Pet 5.7.
2 Samuel 22.31. The Word of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler to all that trust
in him. John 3.15. That whosoever believes in him should not perish. Unbelief
is a God-affronting Sin. 1 John 5.10. He that believes not God has made him a
liar: it is a Soul murdering Sin. John 3.36. He that believes not the Son
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Thus in reading
observe those Scriptures which do rem acu tangere, touch upon your particular
case. Although all the Bible must be Read, yet those Texts, which point most
directly to your condition, be sure to put a special Star upon.

Take special notice of the examples in Scripture; Praecepta docent, exempla
movent.
make the examples of others living Sermons to you.

1. Observe the examples of God's Judgments upon Sinners. They have been hanged
up in Chains in terrorem. How severely has God punished proud men?
Nebuchadnezzar was turned to grass, Herod eat up with Vermin; How has God
plagued Idolaters? Numb. 25.3, 4, 9. 1 Kings 14.9, 10. What a swift witness
has he been against liars? Act. 5.5, 10. These examples are set up as
Sea-marks to avoid. 1 Cor. 10.11. Jude ver. 7.

2. Observe the examples of God's mercy to Saints. Jeremy was preserved in the
Dungeon, the three Children in the Furnace, Daniel in the Lions den. These
examples are props to Faith, spurs to Holiness.

Psalm. 119.93. I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have
quickened me. Read the Word, not only as an History, but labor to be affected
with it. Let it not only inform you, but inflame you. Jer. 23.29. Is not my
Word like as a fire says the Lord? Go not from the Word till you can say as
those Disciples, Luke 24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us?

Set upon the practice of what you read. (...), Chrysostom.
Psalm. 119.66. I have done thy A student in Physic does not satisfy himself
to read over a systeme or body of Physic, but he falls upon practicing
Physic: the lifeblood of Religion lies in the practick part. So in the Text,
He shall read in the Book of the Law all the days of his life, that he may
learn to keep all the Words of this Law, and these Statutes to do Tantum scimus
quantum operamu^.
them. Christians should be walking Bibles. Zenophon said many read Lycurgus
his Laws, but few observed them. The Word written is not only a rule of
knowledge, but a rule of obedience; Bis memin ^ legis qui memor est ^peris.
Bill. Autholog.
it is not only to mend our sight, but to mend our pace. David calls God's Word
a lamp to his feet, Psalm. 119.105. It was not only a light to his eyes to see
by, but to his feet to walk by; by practice we trade the talent of knowledge,
and turn it to profit. This is a blessed reading of Scripture, when we fly from
the Sins which the Word forbids, and espouse the duties which the Word
commands; reading without practice will be but a torch to light men to Hell.

Make use of Christ's Prophetical Office. He is the Lion of the tribe of Judah,
given to open the Book of God, and loose the seals A canorum Dei revelator.
Pa^eus.
thereof. Rev. 5.5. Christ does so teach as he does quicken. John 8.12. I am
the light of the world, he that follows me shall have lumen vitae, the light
of life. The Philosopher says, light and heat increase together: Calor and lux
concr^scunt.
it is true here, where Christ comes into the Soul with his light, there is the
heat of Spiritual life going along with it. Christ gives us Spiritualem gustum,
a taste of the Word, Psalm. 119.102, 103. Thou have taught me, how sweet are thy
words to my taste! it is one thing to read a promise, another thing to taste it.
Such as would be Scripture-Proficients, let them get Christ to be their
Teacher, Luke 24.45. Then opened he their understanding that they might
understand the Scriptures. Christ did not only open the Scriptures, but opened
their understanding Cathedram habet in caelo qui corda docet in ter^d. Aug.
.

Tread often upon the threshold of the Sanctuary. Wait diligently on a rightly
constituted Ministry, Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that hears me, waiting
diligently at my Gates. Ministers are God's Interpreters, it is their work to
expound and open dark places of Scripture. We read of Pitchers and Lamps within
the Pitchers, Judge. 7.16. Ministers are earthen Pitchers, 2 Cor. 4.7. But these
Pitchers have Lamps within them to light Souls in the dark.

Pray that God will make you profit. Isa. 47.18. I am the Lord thy God make
David's prayer, Psalm. 119.18. Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy Law. Pray to God to take off the vail on the Scripture, that
you may understand it, and the vail on your heart, that you may believe it.
Pray that God will not only give you his Word as a rule of Holiness, but his
Grace as a principle of Holiness. Implore the guidance of God's Spirit, Nehem.
9.10. Thou gave them thy Good spirit to instruct Christu^ sedens ad d xtram
Dei misit Vicariam Vim spiritus sancti. Tertul.
them. Though the Ship has a Compass to Sail by, and store of Tackling, yet
without a gale of wind it cannot sail; though we have the Word written as our
Compass to sail by, and make use of our endeavors as the tackling, yet unless
the Spirit of God blow upon us we cannot sail with profit. When the Almighty is
as dew unto us, then we grow as the Lilly, and our beauty is as the Olive Tree,
Hos. 45.6. Beg the anointing of the Holy 1 John 2.20.
Ghost One may see the figures on a Dial, but he cannot tell how the day goes
unless the Sun shine: we may read many Truths in the Bible, but we cannot know
them savingly till God's Spirit shine in our Souls. 2 Cor. 4.6. The Spirit is
(...), a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation. Ephesians. 1.17. When Philip joined
himself to the Eunuch's Chariot, then he understood Scripture. Acts 8.35. When
God's Spirit joins himself to the Word, then it will be effectual to Salvation.

These rules observed, the Word written would through God's blessing be (...),
an ingraffed Word, Jam. 1.22. A good Cyens grafted into a bad stock changes
the nature of it, and makes it bear sweet and generous fruit: So when the Word
is graffed savingly into men's hearts, it does sanctify them, and make them
bring forth the sweet fruits of Righteousness, Phil. 1.11.

Thus I have answered this question, how we may read the Scriptures with most
Spiritual profit.

I shall conclude all with two Corollaries.

1. Content not your selves with the bare reading of Scripture, but labor to
find some spiritual increment and profit. Get the Word transcribed into your
hearts, Psalm. 37.31. The Law of God is in his heart. Never leave till you are
assimilated into the Word. Such as profit by reading of the Book of God are the
best Christians alive; they answer God's cost, they credit Religion, they save
their Souls.

2. You who have profited by reading the Holy Scriptures, adore God's
distinguishing grace. Bless God that he has not only brought the light to you,
but opened your eyes to see it; that he has unlocked his hid Treasure, and
enriched you with saving knowledge. Some perish by not having Scripture, and
others by not improving it. That God should pass by Millions in the World, and
the Lot of his Electing Love should fall upon you; that the Scripture like the
pillar of Cloud should have a dark-side to others, but a light-side to you;
that to others it should be a dead letter, but to you the Savor of Life; that
Christ should not only be revealed to you but in you, Gal. 1.16. How should you
be in an holy ecstasy of wonder, and wish that you had hearts of Seraphims
burning in love to God, and the voices of Angels to make Heaven ring with God's
Praises?



Resp.
As in the body, when there is a Lipothymy or Fainting of the vital Spirits,
Cordials are applied: so let me apply a few Divine cordials to such as are
ready to faint under the fear of non-proficiency.

1. You may profit by reading the Word, though you come short of others. The
ground which brought forth but thirty fold was good Ground. Mat. 13.8. Say not
you are Non-proficients, because you do not go in Equipage with other eminent
Saints; those were counted strong men among David's Worthies, though they did
not attain to the honor of the first three, 2 Samuel 23.19.

2. You may profit by reading the Word, though you are not of so quick
apprehension. Some impeach themselves of Non-proficiency, because they are but
slow of understanding. When our blessed Savior foretold his sufferings, the
Apostles themselves understood not, and it was Hid from them, Luke 9.45. The
Author to the Hebrews speaks of some who were, Segnes auribus, dull of hearing,
Heb. 5.11. Yet they belonged to the Election. Such as have weaker judgments may
have stronger affections. Leah was tender-eyed, yet fruitful. A Christian's
intellectuals may be less quick and penetrating, yet that little knowledge he
has of Scripture keeps him from Sin; as a man that has but weak sight, yet it
keeps him from falling into the water.

3. You may profit by reading Scripture, though you have not so excellent
memories. Many complain their memories leak.

Nec retinent patulae commissa sideliter H^^.
aures. -- Christian-art thou grieved thou can remember no more? then for thy
comfort,

1. Thou may have a good heart, though thou have not so good a memory.

2. Though thou can not remember all thou read, yet thou remembrest that
which is most material, and which thou have most need of: At a Feast we do not
eat of every dish, but we take so much as nourishes. It Is with a Good
Christian's memory as it is with a lamp; though the lamp be not full of oil,
yet it has so much oil as makes the lamp burn: though thy memory be not full
of Scripture, yet thou retainest so much as makes thy love to God burn. Then be
of good comfort, thou do profit by what thou read, and take notice of that
encouraging Scripture, John 14.26. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, he
shall bring all things to your remembrance.

How we may make Melody in our Hearts to God in Singing of Psalms. Sermon. IX.
Ephesians. 5.19. Speaking to our selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and
making Melody in your Hearts to the Lord.


IN the former part of this Chapter, especially in the fourth Verse, we have
the Apostle checking carnal Mirth, and accounting that a Sin, which the Heathen
Philosophers (especially Aristotle in his Ethics) made a Virtue; viz. (...), a
kind of jesting which they supposed was an ornament to their speech, and a
specimen of their ingenuity: But in this Verse, where the Text is, we have the
Apostle commending spiritual Mirth, which he approves as a Duty, which the
Heathens, especially in the primitive times, accounted a Crime.

In the Verse going before the Text, we have the Apostle condemning a Vice
universally reputed so both by Christians and Heathens, viz. Intemperance;
which does usually frollick it in putidos sermones, into foolish speeches, fond
gestures, E vini (...) oritur laetitia quaedam, sed impura, quae tuming stibus,
tum inputidis sermoni^us se prodit. Bod.
impure Songs, wanton Sonnets, as Bodius observes. But here in the Text the
Apostle teaches us a more refined way of rejoicing, viz. To tune the heart in
Psalms, to raise the heart in Hymns, and to vent the heart in spiritual Songs;
nay, to make the heart a Quire where spiritual Music may be chanted.

In the Text we have five parts remarkable; viz.

1. The Singers, (...), Christians; especially those who dwelt in the City of
Ephesus. Christians understand how to rejoice in God; their hearts can so set
the Tune, that God shall hear the Music. Zanchy well observes, that the
Apostle does here make the Comparison between the Mirth which is made ex
ubertate Vini, from abundance of Wine, and that which is made ex ubertate
Spiritus, from abundance of the Spirit. The Drunkard's Song, how toyish! but
the Saint's singing, how triumphal! how confused the one! how sweet the other!
how empty the one, even to the very Companions of their Cups and Mirth! but how
melodious the other, even to the Lord himself! And he gravely takes notice,
that gaudent pii, sed garriunt ebrii; Saints rejoice, but Intemperate persons
drivel in their chat.

2. The Song it self; and here the Apostle runs division, Cantio sacra est vel
(...), vel (...), vel (...), vel (...), vel (...). Bod. Psalmi proprie ad locum
Ethicum pertinent: In Hymnis Dei beneficia and facta miramur. Qui vero
concordiam and consensum mundi contemplatur, ille spirituali ^anticum canit.
Hier.
diversifying Songs into three species; which according to the descants of
Learned men may be thus understoood. And here Hierom gives us a dextrous
Interpretation. 1. Psalms (says he) may belong to moral things, what we ought
to put in use and practice. 2. Hymns may belong to sacred things, what we ought
to meditate on and to contemplate, as the Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Majesty
of God. 3. Odes, or spiritual Songs, may belong to natural things, what we
ought to debate, discuss; viz. The Race, Order, Harmony, and Continuance of the
World, and God's infinite Wisdom manifested in it. 2. Some distinguish these
according to the Authors of them. 1. Psalms; they are the Composures of holy
David. 2. Hymns; they are the Songs of some other excellent men recorded in
Scripture, as Moses, Heman, Asaph, etc. 3. Spiritual Songs; they are Odes of
some other holy and good men not mentioned in Scripture, as the Song of
Ambrose, Nepos, and others. 3. Some aver that these several speeches mentioned
in the Text, answer the Hebrew distinction of Psalms: Among them there were
(...) Mizmorim, which treated of various and different Subjects. 2. (...) which
only mentioned the Praises of the most High. 3. (...) which were Songs more
artificially and musically composed; and some Divines observe, were sung with
the help of a musical Instrument. But I may add, Are not all these several
species mentioned, to prefigure the Plenty and the Joy which is reserved for
the Saints within the Vail, when they shall join in consort with the glorious
Angels in singing their perpetual Hallelujahs to their glorious Creator?

3: The manner of Singing. Our Text says, with Melody; with inward joy and
tripudlation of Soul: If the Tongue make the Pause, the Heart must make the
Elevation. The Apostle says to the Colossians, Colos. 3.16. We must sing with
grace; which is as some expound it, 1. Cum gratiarum action; with giving of
thanks. And indeed thankfulness is the very Selah of this duty; that which puts
an accent upon the Music and sweetness of the Voice; and then we sing
melodiously when we warble out the Praises of the Lord. 2. With gracefulness;
with a becoming and graceful dexterity. And this brings both profit and
pleasure to the Hearers, as Davenant observes. Psalms are not the Comedies of
Venus, or the jocular Celebrations of a wanton Adonis; but they are the
Spiritual ebullitions of a composed Soul to the incomprehensible Jehovah with
real grace. God's Spirit must breathe in this service; Et prodess^ veliat and
d^lect^re. Dav. Cantemus cum gratia a Spiri^u S^ncto donata. Chrysostom. Hoc quod
praecinitur sine gratia D^i impleri non potest. Oec^m. Sine cord nulla est
modalatio. Bod.
here we must act our joy, our confidence, our delight. Singing is the triumph
of a gracious Soul; the Child joying in the praises of his Father. In singing
of Psalms, the gracious heart takes wings, and mounts up to God, to join with
the Celestial Quire. It is grace which sits the heart for, and sweetens the
heart in this duty. And where this qualification is wanting, this service is
rather an hurry than a duty; it is rather a disturbance than any obedience.

4. The Master of the Chore, the Preceptor, that is, the Heart. We must look to
the Heart in singing, that it be purged by the Spirit, and that it be replete
with spiritual Affection. He plays the Hypocrite who brings not the heart to
this Duty. One observes, There is no Tune without the Heart; Singing takes its
proper rise from the Heart; the Voice is only the further progress. And indeed
God is the Creator of the whole man; and therefore he will be praised not only
with our Tongues, but with our Hearts. The Apostle tells us, He will sing with
the spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15. And David informs us, his heart was ready to sing and
give praise, N^n vox, sed votum, non musica cerdula, sed cor. Aug. De modo been
vivendi. Bern.
Psalm. 57.7, 8. and 108.1. Augustine admonishes us, It is not a
Musical-string, but a Working-heart is harmonious. The Virgin Mary sings her
Magnificat with her heart, Luke 14.47. And Bernard tells us in a Tract of his,
That when we sing Psalms, let us take heed that we have the same thing in our
Mind, that we warble forth in our Tongue; and that our Song and our Heart do
not run several ways. If we in singing only offer the Calves of our Lips, it
will too much resemble a Carnal and a Jewish service.

5. The End of the Duty; To the Lord. So says the Text, viz. To Jesus Christ,
who is here principally meant. Our singing must not serve our Gain, or our
Luxury, or our Fancy, but our Christ, our Lord, and dear Redeemer. In this Duty
it is his Praises we must mainly and chiefly celebrate. And most deservedly we
magnify the true God by Psalms and Singing, when the Heathens celebrate their
false and dung-hill-Gods, Jupiter, Neptune, and Apollo, with Songs and Hymns.
One well observes, Singing of Psalms is part of Divine Worship, Deus est
canendi Vnicus Scopus. Bod.
and of our Homage and Service due to the great Jehovah. Bodius takes notice,
that God is the true and only scope of all our singing. And truly if the Spirit
of God be in us, he will be steddily aimed at by us. Thus Deborah and Barak
sang their Triumphal Song to the Lord, Judges 5.3.

The several parts of the Text being thus opened, they may be set together
again in this Divine and Excellent Truth.

Doct. Non franges vocem, sed frange voluntatem, non serves tantum Consonantiam
Vocum, sed concordium Mo um. Bern. Aug.
In the Ordinance of Singing, we must not make Noise, but Music; and the Heart
must make Melody to the Lord. So the Text. Augustine complained of some in his
time, That they minded more the Tune than the Truth; more the Manner than the
Matter; more the Governing of the Voice, than the Raisedness of the Mind: And
this was a great offense to him. Singing of Psalms must only be the joyous
breathing of a raised Soul; and here the cleanness of the Heart is more
considerable than the clearness of the Voice. In this Service we must study
more to act the Christian than the Musician. Many in singing of Psalms are like
the Organs, whose Pipes are filled only with Wind. The Apostle, Col. 3.16.
tells us, we must sing with our Heart. We must sing David's Psalms with David's
Spirit. One tells us, God is a Spirit; and he will be worshipped in Spirit even
in this duty.

Now to traverse the Truth. 1. We will show the Divine Authority of this
Ordinance. 2. We will show the Sweetness of it. 3. The Universal Practice of
it. 4. We shall show the Honors God has put upon this Ordinance. 5. And then
come to the main Case. 6. And make Application.

For the first, We shall show the Divine Authority of this Ordinance. 1. By
Scripture-Command. 2. By Scripture-Argument. 3. By Scripture-Pattern. 4. By
Scripture-Prophesie.

1. From Scripture-Precept: And here we have diverse commands laid upon us, both
in the Old and New Testament. David, who among his honorable Titles obtains
this, to be called the Sweet Singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. he frequently calls
upon himself, Psalm. 7.17. I will sing Praise to the Name of the Lord most High.
And sometimes he calls upon others, 1 Chronicles. 16.9. Sing unto him, sing Psalms
unto him, and tell of his wondrous Works. Nay, sometimes he summons the whole
Earth to join in this duty, 1 Chronicles. 16.23. Psalm 68.32. Sing unto the Lord all
the Earth, show forth from day to day his Salvation. And holy Hezekiah, he
propagated this service, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Nay, in their times when the Royal
Majesty was lodged in Judah, Singers were a peculiar Office enjoined constantly
to sing the Praises of the Lord, 1 Kings 10.12. And Jehosaphat appointed
Singers, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. Nay, and Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and Ethan, men
eminent and holy, were employed in this holy service, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. But why
should I light a Candle at Noonday? Thus this harmonious service was most
usual, and most acceptable in the times of the Law.

And I need not straggle from my Text to bring in Gospel-Precept for this sweet
Ordinance: And the Apostle takes care to acquaint other Churches with the same
injunction. So Colos. 3.16. Col. 3.16.
Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs;
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And so firmly the Apostle states
this Musical Service, this exhilarating Ordinance, that he himself act; his own
injunction, though fettered in a Prison, and makes Barnabas a Companion of his
Song as well as of his Sorrows, Acts 16.25. (...). They Hymned God, (i.e.) they
celebrated his Praises with a Hymn; and as Bede says, Lorinus. Bid.
with singing.

2. From Scripture-Argument: And I shall only take out one shaft out of the
whole Quiver. I shall use one Argument among many, which is this, viz. We
always find this duty of singing Psalms linked to and joined with other Moral
Duties. Thus the Psalmist joins Singing and Prayer together, Psalm. 95.1, 6. O
come, let us sing unto the Lord, Psalm. 95.1.6.
in the first Verse. O come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the
Lord our Maker, in the sixth Verse. There is Prayer and Singing connexed;
Singing being supposed to be of equal necessity and authority with other
Ordinances. And so the Apostle James, Jam. 5.3. joins these two together; Is
any among you afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. So
you may observe, both these Services are equally calculated for man's
necessity. (...). Just. Mart. 119. Quad Orthodox.
Thus Paul and Silas join them in their practice, Acts 16.25. And so Justin
Martyr in his 117. Question ad Orthodoxos tells us, that in his time They Sang,
and sent up Prayers to God, the Primitive Church confirming David's Injunction,
and the Apostolical Command. So that by these instances we may observe, That
the duty of Praying and Singing have walked in the same equipage, and lay claim
to an equal Authority from Divine Writ; the Scripture jointly favoring both.

3. From Scripture-Pattern. Moses both pens a Psalm, viz. the Ninetieth, and
sings a Holy Song, and the 15th of Exodus, Is the record of it. So David
tripudiates in the practice of this delightful service, Psalm. 104.33. Psalm.
104.33.
Nay David composeth Psalms and Hezekiah appoints them to be Sung, 2 Chronicles.
29.30. So David, and Asaph, Hezekiah, and the Levites, all join to Sing forth
the praises of the Lord. Nay our dearest Jesus, the King of Saints, and the
Redeemer of Mankind practices this sweet duty, and calls in his blessed
Apostles to make up the Quire, Mat. 26.30. Rev. 15.3. Mat. 26.30.
And when they had Sung an Hymn, they went up into the Mount of Olives. Our
blessed Savior honors this Ordinance with his own practice; and this he did a
little before his death, so to seal this Ordinance with his blood as well as to
consecrate it with his lips. Thus this Celestial Quire of Christ and his
Apostles six this sweet Ordinance in the Church for future successions.

4. From Scripture-Prophesie; And here I may speak of Singing as Paul speaks of
Timothy's Ordination, 1 Timothy 4.14. It was given by Prophecy. There are diverse
Prophesies in the Old Testament concerning this Ordinance in the New. So in
Psalm. 108.2. Upon which Mollerus Mollerus.
observes, That in that Text David pours forth ardent Prayers and wishes for
the Kingdom of Christ. And so Divines observe that the Psalm 100.1, 2. are
Prophetical. Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all ye Lands, serve the Lord
with gladness, come before his presence with Singing. To which may be added
that pregnant prophecy recorded in Isa. 52.8. Isa. 52 8. Speculatores simul
jubilabunt; opinare quantum sit gaudium futurum ob Redemptionem ad eptamper
Christum. Musc.
My watchmen shall lift up their voice, with their voice together shall they
sing; which clearly prognosticates this Musical Ordinance in Gospel times. And
Musculus much favors this Interpretation, when he says, These watchmen shall
Jubilee when they shall consider the great joy approaching for the Redemption
obtained by Christ. And there are two things which not only establish, but
sweeten and honor an Ordinance, 1. Promises, 2. Prophesies. Christ himself was
the fruit and issue of both.

Secondly, we may take notice of the sweetness of this Duty: Singing is the
Soul's Jubilee; Our Spiritual recreation; The shout of the heart; Our tuning of
our Hallelujahs; The sweetest solace of a Sanctified Soul. David was in a kind
of rapture, when he cries out, I will Sing praise to the Lord while I have my
being, Psalm. 104.33. Psalm. 104.33.
One well observes of Singing, There is a dilating of the sound, and a drawing
out of the voice which gives more time for the fixing of the heart upon that
which is Sung, and so puts the Soul upon a sweeter Meditation, Psalm. 10.4, 34.
Psalm. 104.34.
And we may animadvert it, That when we Sing Psalms, there is more than
ordinary raising and lifting up of the Soul, there is an elevation to a higher
degree of Communion with God. It is the Soul's high Mount toward Heaven, the
Saint flies higher toward the Element and Sphere of joy; Then we are fledged
for sublime things. One asserts, There is not a greater resemblance of Heaven
upon Earth, than a company of God's people Singing a Psalm together; Then the
Soul rejoices in Divine goodness, and exults in Divine excellencies, meditates
on Divine promises. And whatever we make the matter of our Singing it will much
affect the heart. 1. If we Sing of God, Of his goodness, It inflames our heart
to love; Of his Wisdom, It raises our heart to admiration, Romans 11.33. Of his
Power, It engages the heart to Faith and Confidence; Nay of his Judgments, It
over-awes the heart to a due and reverential Fear. 2. If we Sing of any thing
concerning our selves, If for the diversion of a trouble, It fills the heart
with humility: If for the obtaining of a mercy, It boils up the heart in
Desire. 3. If we Sing of our Enemies, This likewise draws the heart to a just
indignation, Zeal and Compassion. The very matter we Sing does abundantly
sweeten this Duty. Nay further,

1. Singing is the music of Nature. The Scriptures tell us, the Mountains
Sing, Jer. 44.23. The valleys Sing, Psalm. 65.13. The trees of the wood Sing, 1 Chronicles. 16.33. Nay the Air is the Bird's Music room, where they chant their
musical notes.

2. Singing is the Music of Ordinances. Augustine reports of himself, Aug lib.
3. conf. cap. 6. B^za,
That when he came to Millain and heard the people Sing, he wept for joy in the
Church to hear that pleasing Melody. And Beza confesses, That at his first
entrance into the Congregation and hearing them sing the 91 Psalm, he felt
himself exceedingly comforted, and did retain the sound of it afterward upon
his heart. The Rabbis tell us, That the Jews after the feast of the Passover
was celebrated, they sang the 111 Psalm and the five following Psalms; and our
Savior and his Apostles sang an HYMN immediately after the Blessed Supper,
Mat. 26.30. Mat. 26.30.


3. Singing is the Music of Saints. 1. They have performed this duty in their
greatest numbers, Psalm. 149.2. 2. In their greatest straits, Isa. 26.19. 3. In
their greatest flight, Isa. 42.10, 11 4. In their greatest deliverances. 5. In
their greatest plenties. Isa. 65.14.
In all these changes Singing has been their stated duty and delight. And
indeed it is meet that the Saints and servants of God should Sing forth their
joys and praises to the Lord Almighty: Every Attribute of him can set both
their Song and their Tune.

4. Singing is the Music of Angels: Job tells us, The Morning Stars Sang
together, Job 38.7. Now these Morning Stars, as Pineda Pineda comment in Job.
tells us, are the Angels; to which the Chaldee Paraphrase accords, naming
these Morning Stars, Aciem Angelorum, an host of Angels: nay when this heavenly
Host was sent to proclaim the Birth of our dearest Jesus, they deliver their
message in this raised way of duty, Luke 2.13. They were (...), delivering
their messages in a laudatory Singing, the whole Company of Angels making a
Musical Quire. Nay in Heaven, there is the Angels joyous Music, Creaturarum
Psalmus est Stella.
they there sing Hallelujahs to the most High, and to the Lamb who sits upon
the Throne, Rev. 5.11.

5. Singing is the Music of Heaven; The glorious Saints and Angels accent
their praises this way, and make one harmony in their state of blessedness; Ibi
nil nisi laus Dei, nisi amor Dei. Aug.
and this is the Music of the Bride-chamber, Rev. 15.3. The Saints who were
tuning here their Psalms, are now Singing there Hallelujahs in a louder strain,
and articulating their joys, which here they could not express to their perfect
satisfaction; here they labored with drowsy Hearts, and faltering Tongues:
But in glory these impediments are removed, and nothing is left to jar their
joyous celebrations.

Now thirdly, we come to show the Universal practice of this Duty: Singing
Psalms and Spiritual Songs to God is not more sweet than Ecumenical; It has
been always the way of Saints thus to express their joy in the Lord. -- This
Duty has been practiced:

1. By all varieties of Persons. 1. By Christ and his Apostles (as has been
shown) Mat. 26.30. The glorious Sun and Stars have shined in favor upon this
joyous Service, and left their practice of it upon Record; The Supernal and
upper Orders of the World have not been too high for this Spiritual Harmony. 2.
Godly Princes have glorified God in this Duty, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Their Thrones
have not raised them above this Spiritual service. King Jehoshaphat assaults
his enemies not only with the brandishing of his Sword, but with the Singing of
his Song, 2 Chronicles. 20.21. Princes who have swayed regal Scepters, have sang
Spiritual Songs, and have minded the Quire as well as the Crown. David not only
takes the Scepter into his hand to rule the people, but takes the Harp into his
hand to sing the praises of the Lord. 3. Worthy Governors. Nehemiah takes
care, that as soon as the wall of Jerusalem was set up, Singers should be
appointed to perform this part of God's Worship, Nehem. 7.1. These Eminent
Magistrates held not only the reins of Government, but lifted up those hands
which held them with the voices in Singing the Praises of God. Magistracy is a
spur, not a curb to Duty. I need not mention Ethan, Heman, and Asaph, Eminent
and Worthy Men, engaged in this pleasing service, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. 4. Holy
Prophets. They did not only prophecy of things to come, but they practiced
Duties for the present, more especially this. And as David pens Prophetical, so
he sings Musical Psalms, and professes his dying and his singing Air should
both expire together, Psalm. 146.2. Psalm. 146.2.
This Duty should lie by him on his Deathbed; and as Moses in the 32 Chapter
of Deuteronomy, he will close up his life with a Swan-like, with a Saint-like
Song. So the 22 Chapter of the second of Samuel was a song of Thanksgiving for
manifold mercies, a little before his death. 5. The body of the People. As
Singing is not too low for Kings, so not too choice for Subjects; the whole
multitude sometimes engaged in the harmony. Then Israel Sang this Song, Numb.
21.17. The Peoples voice may make melody, as the lesser birds contribute to the
Music of the Grove, their chirping notes filling up the harmony. 6. Eminent
Fathers: Basil Basil. August. lib. 9. Conf. cap 6. Non discumbitur priusquam
Oration ad Deum sit, etc. Tertul.
calls the Singing of Psalms, Spiritual incense: Augustine was highly
commendatory of this service, and assures us Ambrose and Athanasius were
coincident with him in this particular. 7. Primitive Christians; and here I
shall only mention what Tertullian relates of the practice of those times he
lived in; When we come to a feast (says he) we do not sit down before there is
Prayer; and after the meal is past, one comes forth, and either out of the
Holy Scriptures, or else from some composure of his own, begins a Spiritual
Song.

2. In all Ages. This service of Singing to God was soon started in the World;
Moses the first Penman of Scripture, he both Sung a Song, and Penned a Psalm,
as we hinted before. In the Judges time, Deborah and Barak Sang a Triumphant
Song, Judge. 5.1, 2, etc. During the time of the Kings of Judah, the Levites
sang the praises of God in the Sanctuary. A little before the Captivity we find
the Church praising God in Singing, Isa. 35.2. In the time of the Captivity,
Israel did not forget the Songs of Zion, though they were in Babylon, Psalm.
126.2. After their return from Captivity, we soon find them return to this
joyous Service, Neh. 7.1. their long Exile had not banished this Duty. Toward
the close of their Prophets prophesying, the Church is again engaged in this
part of God's Worship, Zeph. 3.15, 17. In the beginning of the Christian Era,
when the Gospel first made the World happy with its glorious shine, we find the
primitive Christians much taken up in this Duty; Cyprian in his Epistle to
Donatus, Nec est hora Convivii Caelestis gratiae immunis, Sonet Psalmis
convivium Sobrium. Cypr.
advises, That there may not be an hour of feasting without some Heavenly
grace, and let every sober feast be accompanied with Singing of Psalms. And
Chrysostom in his Commentary on the 41th Psalm admonishes all persons,
Contrymen, Marrines, Weavers, etc. to sing Psalms and spiritual Songs.
Estius cries out, Take notice of the custom of the Primitive Christians, who
did not only sing Psalms and Hymns in their public Assemblies, but in their
private Families. Eusebius relates, That Plinius Secundus in an Epistle he
wrote to Trajan the Emperor makes mention, that the Christians of those times
being gathered together before day, Sang Hymns and Praises to Christ, as to a
God. This was about the year 98 after the birth of our Savior: Those early and
more pure times rejoiced in this Duty. Nicephorus tells us, that Chrysostom
caused Psalms to be Sung for the suppression of the Arrian Heresy. And Ruffin
witnesses, That Basil commanded the people to meet for the pouring out of
their prayers to God, and for singing of Psalms to the Most High. The worthy
Junius informs us, That the Eastern Church from the time the Sun of
Righteousness arose in the East did propagate the practice of Singing of Psalms
to successive Generations. And Paulinus testifies, Per omnes pene Occidentis
provincias manasse refert. Paulin.
That this practice overspread every Province of the Western Church. Holy
Ambrose so zealously pressed this Duty of Singing Psalms, that he would not
allow times of persecution to be a sufficient excuse for the neglect of it; But
the Empress Justina raging against Ambrose, He commanded the Common people to
lie in the Church, and there Sing Psalms and Hymns according to the practice of
the Oriental Christians, that they might not be sensible of their sorrows or
tediousness. And this Custom prevailed in after times, and was scattered in
other places, the Churches in other parts imitating this Worthy Practice. This
then was the Genius of the primitive Times.

In the middle times of the Church, Rabanus Maurus, and Gregory the Great,
mention this service with great approbation, and speak liberally of the
practice of it.

But since the Reformation, the universal practice of the Reformed Churches
give free suffrage to the Duty of Singing Psalms; and I need not cite Zanchy,
etc. to give in their testimony, our judgments being best discovered by our
practices.

3. In all places. Moses praises God by singing in the Wilderness, throughout
the 15th Chapter of Exodus. David practices this Duty in the Tabernacle, Psalm.
47.6. Solomon in the Temple, Psalm. 10.12. Jehosaphat in the Camp, 2 Chronicles.
20.21. Christ and his Apostles in a particular Chamber, Mat. 26.30. And Paul
and Silas in an uncomfortable Prison, Act. 19.25. We may say of Singing, as the
Apostle speaks of Prayer, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will (says he) that men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands; Thus every place is now Commodious for lifting up
pure voices and pure hearts to the Most High. Where devout Christians meet in
any convenient place to sing praises to the Lord, they make up a Heavenly Quire.

4. In all Conditions. 1. In a time of cheerfulness and inward joy. The Apostle
James commands us then to take the advantage of singing Psalms, Jam. 5.13. Holy
Singing is the best Exertion of inward rejoicing; Joy may excite, must not
stifle this Duty. A dilated heart is fittest for a raised voice. 2. In a time
of affliction. Paul and Silas sang in Prison, a place of sorrow and
confinement, Acts 16.25. A chain might bind their feet, but not their tongue;
while others sleep, they sing, and turn their Dungeon into a Chapel. Holy
singing can nobilitate every Duty, and raise it to a better Notion. 3. In a
time of Fear. When some would press Luther with the dangers the Church was in,
and what a black Cloud hung over Zion, he would presently call for the 46th
Psalm to be sung, and he thought that Psalm was a charm against all fears
whatsoever. And since, Quemadmodum est emnium Deus, olim uterque Sexus
ad^ibebatur ad lauds Dei canendas. Rivet. Importunas in Ecclesia l^quacitates
Apostoli Domini in Ecclesiis and Magistri med stiae and gravitatis reprimore
students, ut mulieres in ipsis Ca^erent sepien in co^cilio permiserunt. Isid.
Pelus.
this Psalm is called Luther's Psalm, his sacred spell against invading Fears.

5. By all Sexes. Miriam sings a Song to God, Exodus 15.21. as well as Moses.
Rivet well observes, God is the Lord of both Sexes, and therefore both may sing
his praises. Every Sex may tune their hearts to proclaim their Thanksgivings to
God. And so Deborah may sing her song as well as Barak, Judge. 5.1. Holy singing
befits the Female, as well as the Masculine Tongue; though Women may not speak,
yet they may sing in the Church; there is no silence imposed on them in this
particular. Rivet here takes notice, Women are not to be driven from joining in
Divine praises, when the Apostle enjoins singing of Psalms and Hymns upon all
believers, Col. 13.16. And here Isidore Polusiota well interposes, Although the
holy Apostles, those masters of modesty, will not permit women's loquacity, and
the loudness of their Tongues; yet in the greatness of their Wisdom they do
permit the loudness of their Voices in singing forth the praises of the
Almighty. Thus He. Women though they are removed by Apostical command from the
Desk or Pulpit, yet they are not debarred the Quire, to join in that Harmony,
where God's praises are elevated.

And now we come to speak of that Honor which God has put upon this Heavenly
Duty. And this will appear in three things, viz.

1. God has Honored this duty with glorious appearances. This we find upon
record in 2 Chronicles. 5.13. And it came to pass, as the Trumpeters and Singers
were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord,
and when they lift up their voice with Trumpets, and Cymbals, and Instruments
of Music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. Then the House was filled with a Cloud, even the House of the Lord.
The Cloud was a certain sign of Divine presence in those times. A Cloud to rain
blessings; a Cloud, because Divine brightness would overpower human sight; a
Cloud, not to darken Service, but to denote the certainty of God's approach.

2. With Eminent Victories. This we find upon record, 2 Chronicles. 20.21, 22. And
when he had consulted with the people, he appointed Singers unto the Lord, that
they should praise the Beauty of Holiness, as they went out before the Army,
and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever: And when they
began to sing and to praise, the Lord set ambushments against the Children of
Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which came against Israel, and they were smitten.
Israel's success follows Israel's singing. If the people of Israel will look to
their Duty, God will look to their Enemy, and lay that Ambush which shall
ensnare and overthrow their power.

3. With Evident Miracles. This we find upon Record, Acts 16.25, 26. And at
midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises to God, and the prisoners
heard them, and suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the Foundations
of the prison were shaken, and immediately the doors were opened, and every
ones hands were loosed. Behold here an eminent Miracle! Prisons saluting the
Prisoner's Liberty: Paul and Silas singing set God on working; and if their
Tongues were loosed in Duty, their hands shall be loosed for Liberty; Singing,
like praying, can work wonders. Lorinus observes, Angelica peculiari ^pe^d
S^l^tio Vinculorum accidit, Lorin. Case.
that the prisoners Chains were taken off, and their bands loosed by the
peculiar power and work of Angels.

And now I come to the main Case, How we may make melody in our hearts to God
in Singing of Psalms.

Answ. 1. We must sing with understanding. We must not be guided by the Tune,
but the Words of the Psalm; we must mind the Matter more than the Music; and
consider what we sing, as well as how we sing; The Tune may affect the fancy,
but it is the Matter affects the heart, and that God principally eyes. The
Psalmist advises us in this particular, Psalm 47.7. and so does the Apostle, 1
Cor. 14.15. Otherwise this sweet Duty would be more the work of a Chorister
than of a Christian; and we should be more delighted in an Anthem of the
Musician's making, then in a Psalm of the Spirit's making. A Lapide observes,
that in the Text 1 Cor. 14.15. the word understanding is Maschil (...) profound
judgment: We must sing wisely, if we will sing gratefully; we must relish what
we sing. In a word, we must sing as we must pray; now the most rude Petitioner
will understand what he prays; 1 Cor. 14.15. If we do not understand what we
sing, it argues carelessness of Spirit, or hardness of Heart; and this makes the
Service impertinent. Upon this the worthy Davenant cries out, Facessunt Boatus
Papistarum, qui Psalmos in Templis reboant, sed lingua non intellectu. Dav. Non
clamans, sed amans cantat in aure Dei. Aug.
Adieu to the bellowing of the Papists, who sing in an unknown Tongue. God will
not understand us in this Service, which we understand not our selves. One of
the first Pieces of the Creation was Light, and this must break out in every
Duty.

2. We must sing with affection. Love is the fulfilling of this Law. It is a
notable saying of Augustine; It is not Crying, but Loving, sounds in the Ears
of God. In Isa. 5.1. It is said, I will sing to my Beloved. The pretty Child
sings a mean Song, but it delights the Mother, because there is love on both
sides. It is love, not skill, makes the Music and the Service most pleasing.
When we go about this Work, we must lay our Book before us; a heart full of
love. The Primitive Christians sang Hymns to Christ, whom they entirely loved.
Love indeed is that ingredient which sweetens and indulcorates every Service.

3. We must sing with real Grace. This the Apostle admonishes us, Col. 3.16. It
is Grace, not Nature, sweetens the Voice to sing. We must draw out our Spices,
our Graces, in this Duty. The Hundred forty four thousand, which were Elected
and Glorified Saints, sang the New song, Rev. 14.3. Singing is the tripudiating
of a gracious Soul. Gratia est devotionis radix. Gorran.
Gorran well notes, That Grace is the Root of true Devotion. Wicked men only
make a noise, they do not sing; they are like cracked Strings of a Lute or a
Viol, they spoil, they do not make Music. The Righteous rejoice in the Lord,
Psalm. 33.1. The Raven croaks, the Nightingale sings the Tune. As God will not
hear Sinners when they pray, so neither when they sing; the singing of Wicked
men is disturbance, not obedience. Indeed the Saints singing is a more solemn
Ovation, Praising Him who causes them to triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. The
Saints above sing their Hallelujahs in Glory, and the Saints below must sing
their Psalms with Grace. Fashion Puppets as you please, they cannot sing; it is
the alive Bird can chirrup that pleasing noise.

4. We must sing with excited Grace. Not only with Grace habitual, but with
excited and actual; the Musical Instrument delights not but when it is played
upon. In this Duty we must follow Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. (...),
stir up the Grace that is in us; and cry out as David, Psalm 57.8. Awake Love,
awake Delight. The Clock must be plucked up before it can guide our Time; the
Bird pleases not in her Nest, but in her Notes; the Chimes only make Music
while they are going: Let us therefore beg the Spirit to blow upon our Garden,
that the Spices thereof may flow out, when we set upon this Joyous Service.
Cant. 5.16.
God loves active Grace in Duty; that the Soul should be ready trimmed, when it
presents it self to Christ in any Worship.

5. We must sing with spiritual joy. Indeed singing only makes joy articulate;
it is only the turning of Bullion into Coin; as the Prophet speaks to this
purpose, Isa. 65.14. Isa. 65 14.
Singing is only the triumphant gladness of a gracious heart, a softer Rapture.
We must sing as David danced before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.15. with shouting and
rejoicing in God. We sing to Christ. And Dr. Bound observes, There is no joy
comparable to that we have in him: this is joy unspeakable and full of glory.
Joy must be the Selah of this Duty.

6. We must sing with Faith. This grace only puts a pleasingness upon every
service; if we hear, the Word must be mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.2. if we pray, it
must be the prayer of Faith, Jam. 5.15. We must bring Faith to Christ's Table,
or else, as Austin says, Dormit Christus, si dormit Fides; Dormit Christus, si
dormit Fides. Aug.
if Faith sleeps, Christ is likewise asleep: and so Faith must carry on this
Ordinance of Singing: especially there must be a credence in the Hallelujahs
above; we must believe that the Saints here are only tuning their Instruments,
and the louder Music will be above; that in glory there will be such pleasing
sounds, which the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 2.9. No Ear ever heard.

7. We must sing in the Spirit. As we must pray in the Spirit, Jude v. 20. so
we must sing in the Spirit; the Spirit must breathe, as well as Grace act, or
the Voice sound in this Duty. Davenant well observes, they are called spiritual
Songs, ratione Originis; in point of their Original: Spiritu Sanct. impellente
and excitante. Dav.
the Spirit excites and impels the Soul to this holy Service; and he observes,
that the Spirit is the prime Artificer in this work. Thus in the foregoing
Verse to the Text, Ephesians. 5.18. the Apostle advises us to be filled with the
Spirit; and in the Text it self, he calls us to be singing of Psalms and Hymns,
etc. When the Spirit fell upon the Apostles, Acts 2.1. then they spoke those
glorious things recorded; and so must we sing, being sublimated and raised with
the Spirit. This Wind, as the Spirit is called, John 3.8. must fill our Organ,
In Psalmis canendis praecipua Christianorum cura esse debet ut cor rite
afficiatur. Dav. Quatuor sunt conditiones recte canendi. 1. Vocis abieritas. 2.
Operis conformitas. 3. Cordis attentio. 4. Pia rectitudo. Gor. Cantas ut
placeas populo, non Deo; francis vocem, etc. Bern.
before we can make any Music.

8. And what Davenant suggests, is very pertinent here; In singing of Psalms,
our principal care must be of our Hearts, and to follow the Wise man's counsel,
Prove. 4.23. to keep our Hearts with all diligence. And this Learned man gives
us a good reason; For they who neglect their Hearts, may please men with the
artificial suavity of their Voice; but they will displease God with the odious
Impurity of their Hearts. And we must watch our Hearts; for vain and sinful
Thoughts will fly-blow this Duty as well as others. Gorran well observes, There
are four Conditions of right Singing: There must be, 1. The Alacrity of the
Voice. 2. The Conformity of the Work. 3. The Attention of the Heart. 4. A
Rectitude toward God. And holy Bernard draws up an Indictment against
Offenders in this kind: Thou singest (says he) to please the people more than
God; thou breakest thy voice musically, break thy Will morally; thou keep a
Consonancy in thy Voice, keep a Concord and Harm my in thy Manners. A holy
heart and life make them that sing to chant melodiously. First purify, then
thou will tune thy Heart.

9. Neglect not Preparatory Prayer. Prayer prepares for singing as well as
other Ordinances. Indeed Jehovah est Archimusicus, the great Harmonist who must
put every heart in tune: he must screw up every peg of affection, and strain
every string of meditation in this Ordinance. The Wise man observes, Prove.
16.1. The preparations of the heart are from God. Preparations in the plural
number, preparation to Hearing, Preparation to Praying, Preparation to
receiving of the Holy Supper, and so preparation to Singing: Our singing must
needs be melody to the Lord, if it be assisted by the Lord: God will surely
hear the melody he himself makes in a gracious heart engaged in this duty --
Thus the Case may be answered.

who despise this Ordinance. Who look upon it as Noise, but not singing, as the
crackling of thorns, but not the Music of Hearts. -- But these do not
consider, 1. The Holy Ends of this Duty, viz.

S^ientiam quam comp^ravimus ex ser^pturis exprominus ad fratrem aedificandum.
In est appetitus piis gen randi p^^s and fideles. Clem. Alex.
1. Psalms are sung for Instruction. We instruct one another in this service;
this duty is for Spiritual and mutual Edification: As a Learned man well
observes, That knowledge we acquire from the Scriptures, we draw out in this
duty for our brother's edification: We edify our brother by singing as well as
by speaking; by warbling forth the Word in Holy Singing, as well as by urging
and pressing the Word in Holy Discourse: A Proclamation is never the less
authentical because it is proclaimed by sound of Trumpet; the Tune only accents
the Matter. Clemens Alexandrinus well observes, There is an appetite in good
persons to strengthen their brethren; and this may be done in singing as well
as in other Ordinances.

2. Psalms are sung for Admonition. This the Apostle expressly intimates, Col.
3.16. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns; we may reprove
a sin in singing of a Psalm, as well as in the quoting of a Text; and encourage
Virtue as well by lifting up our voice, as by giving of our praise. Thus David,
Psalm. 51.13. We may truly be Satyrists in this very Ordinance; When we sing a
Psalms of Judgment, we may awaken sinners; and when we sing Psalms of Mercy and
loving kindness, we may encourage Saints.

3. Psalms are sung for Praise and Thanksgiving. Then as the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 17.8. We awake our Glory, which Interpreters call the Tongue, an
excellent instrument for praising God. Singing of Psalms is only the Echo of
Praise, the rebound of a joyous heart in a laudatory Speech; Praise loudly and
Musically proclaimed, that men may hear our Thanksgivings, and bear testimony
to our gratulatory enlargements; as the passenger bears witness to the Music
of a Grove; there the pleasant birds sit and sing.

Now do such consider the rare effects of this Duty, viz. of singing to the
Lord: and they are,

1. Singing can sweeten a Prison. Thus Paul and Silas indulcorated their
bondage by this service, Ne sit hora gratiae immunis gaudio; Conventus nostri
sonent Psalmos. Cypr-Hoc genus delectationis est animae nostrae valde cognatum;
Deus Psalmos institui^, ut ab iis simul caperetu utilitas and Voluptas.
Chrysostom.
Acts 16.25. As prayer can shed a perfume, so singing can cast a delight on the
most displicent dungeon; this truly Divine Service can turn a prison into a
paradise; a place of restraint into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. As
Cyprian used to triumph; Our Conventions sing our Psalms.

2. Singing can prepare us for sufferings. When Christ was ready to be offered
up, he sang an Hymn with his Disciples; Christ sups, and sings, then dies. Joy
in the Lord (whereof singing is only the rebound) arms against the dint of
suffering. It is a good saying of Chrysostom, Hoc genus delectationis, etc.
This kind of delight is most natural to the Soul; God appointed Psalms, that
from thence profit and pleasure may flow together.

Singing raises the heart above the discouragement of suffering; nor can we so
well muse upon our pains, while we are so sedulously tuning our praises.

3. Singing lightens and exhilarates the Soul. We may say of this duty, as
Tremelius speaks of David's harp, that by the Music of it, the storms of
Readiness Spirit were allayed, and he was composed and serene; Singing both
reveals and amplifies our joy; It is not only a discovery, but an improvement,
Psalmis nos oblectemus, and ex hisce hilaritatem nostram promanare annotandum
est.
As a learned man well takes notice, Let us delight our selves in singing
Psalms, and from them let us draw our Cheerfulness and Delight. Let all our
sweet Waters gush from this spring.

Nor do such consider the sweet allurements, which draw us to this duty; And if
we inquire what it is that puts us upon rejoicing in God by Singing. -- I shall
tell you;

1. The Good Spirit. That Heavenly principle both leads us to this duty and
helps us in it: this is one of the good motions of the blessed Spirit to put us
upon singing the praises of the Lord. Wine tempts us to vain and wanton Songs,
but the Spirit excites us to Holy and Heavenly Hymns; the Spirit first sets the
Tune, and Christ is the burden of the Song.

2. The joyous heart. Holy Singing is both the Sign and Vent of joy. The little
Child is pained, and then it cries; the Saint is surprised with joy, and then
it breaks out into singing. Smothers will turn into Flames; and the heart
overcharged with complacency, will discharge it self in this Holy Exultation.
In the Churches triumph recorded by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 35.2. Singing
follows joy as its proper and genuine product and birth.

3. A sense of Obedience. To sing praises to the Lord is a duty, which the
Saints know not how to wave or respite. The Apostle James joins praying and
singing together, Jam. 5.13. and the Believer knows not how to neglect the one
no more than the other. Sometimes God calls us to the Cross, and then we must
be calm and patient; and sometimes he calls us to the Quire, and then we must
be pleasant and delightful.

This checks those who scruple this Ordinance; surely this must proceed New
England made, even in this Case; The singing of Psalms, (say they) though it
breath forth nothing but Heavenly harmony, and sweet melody, yet such is the
subtilty of the Enemy, and the Enmity of our Nature against God, and the ways
of God, that our hearts can find matter of discord in this Harmony, and
Crotchets of division in this holy Melody. And hence arise so many questions
about singing of Psalms. -- But I shall only touch upon three Objections.

How can a serious Christian sing in a mixed Congregation? The presence

Many who forbear singing in the Congregation, will not forbear it in their
Cham, no Judas, no withered branch? Are all the Son^ of Zion? Are all the
Friends of the Bride-chamber? This is not an usual Happiness.

2. And are there not mixtures when we pray, and when we hear? and this scruple
may be levelled against these as well as against singing. There is as much
purity, and so ought to be in Petitioners and Hearers as in Singers. And why
then are we not as curious in these duties as in Singing? which if we were, few
would join with us in these solemn approaches. Let us not (Dear Christians)
consult fansy, but reason and Scripture Proof.

3. Singing may be sanctified for Conviction of sinners; Moses penned a Song,
and God commands the people to sing it, Deuteronomy. 31.30. And this Song was to
convince the sinful Israelites of their obstinacy and Apostasy.

4. And if we are thus shy and scrupulous, with whom at last shall we join? Our
Savior himself had but 12 Apostles, and there was a Judas among them; what
Constellation shall we aim at, where there is no blazing Comet or falling Star?
Let us at last avoid that Language, stand further off I am holier than thee. It
was but a Pharisaical boast to say, I am not as this Publican, Luke 18.11.

5. If singing be a duty, (as most certainly it is) thou art bound to perform
it in the best manner thou can, and then others presence will not enfeeble
thy comfort, nor invalidate thy service, thou shall have peace in thy own Soul.
Heathenish spectators (for so are wicked men at an Ordinance) did not eclipse
the glory of the Martyrs; their stakes were hung with Laurel notwithstanding.
-- But it is Observed by a Worthy and Learned man, That all these Objections
arise from the Ignorance of the Nature, Use and Ends of this Blessed Duty.





2. What is not now, may afterward be thy condition; thou may fall, and
then the 51th Psalm is accommodated to thee; thou may be under distempers,
and then the 38th Psalm is not incongruous to the; thou may be penitentially
inclined, and then the 6th Psalm is well calculated for thy Condition.

David's Psalms?

David swimming in his tears, Psalm. 6.6. Sometimes ravished with his joys,
Psalm. 43.4. Sometimes eclipsed with distrust, Psalm. 77.7. Sometimes raised with
confidences, Psalm. 30.7. The Psalms are a Christian's choycest Oracle to fly to
in times of distress; And was not the holy Psalmist guided by an infallible
Spirit? How often are the Psalms quoted by Christ? Luke 20.42. and chapter 24.44.
and so by the Apostles, Acts 1.20. as Divine Authority to establish Truth. Let
us therefore not disturb our selves with these groundless Objections, but let
us pursue and embrace this Holy duty, which is the very Suburbs of Heaven; and
let us observe what a reverend person notes upon this Occasion; I observe,
(says he) they never thrive well who neglect or scruple singing of Psalms;
they commonly begin at this Omission, but they do not end there, but at last
they come to be above all Ordinances, and so indeed without them, whose sad
condition is not sufficiently to be deplored. And another Learned and Reverend
Divine yet living, has observed fatal and judicial proceedings of God against
those who have turned their backs upon this joyous and sweet Ordinance; but let
the Lord lead us into all understanding: the wise Christian will pause and
consider.

Let this check those, who suspend and neglect this Heavenly Ordinance; and
Jehovah in this Duty, especially upon the Lord's Day: Then was there a holy
Quire in their houses; their Children were the little birds to sing the praises
of the Creator; the Servants likewise joining in the harmony to make up a
fuller Music. But alas! Now the voice of the Bride, singing to her Beloved, is
not heard in the places of our abode; there is silence instead of singing, and
prating instead of praising, frivolous discourses instead of joyous praises. It
might behove us to ponder, how much of Heaven do we lose in neglecting this
Service? In singing Psalms we begin the work of Heaven. In Heaven we read of
the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Rev. 15.3. And of a new Song, Rev. 14.3.
And the Angels though they have not Tongues, yet they have voices to sing the
praises of the Most High; and therefore that this Heavenly service is so
neglected and unexercised is a lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation,
Ezekiel. 19.14.

This likewise checks those who formalize in this Duty, who Act a Part, not a
Hierome pathetically Exclaims against those Formalists; We must not (says he)
Act as Players, who stretch their throats to accommodate their Tongues to the
matter in hand, but we must sing Psalms as Saints, praising God not only with
our Voice, but with our Heart, not only with a sweet voice, but with a melting
heart. Bernard makes two conditions of grateful singing. 1. We must sing
purely, minding what we sing, nor must we act or think any thing besides; there
must be no vain or vagrant thoughts; no dissonancy between the Mind and the
Tongue. 2. We must sing strenuously, not idly, not sleepily or perfunctorily;
we must sing ex animo, most heartily and Energetically.

is natural, like the singing of a Bird. But the singing of a Saint is musical,
like the singing of a Child; Saints in singing perform a grateful duty: But
sinners offer a vain oblation, Isa. 1.13. It is Christ must put an acceptance
upon this service, as well as others; Here the Altar must sanctify the gift.
Christ perfumes the prayers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. And he must articulate the
singing of the Saints. Indeed he alone can turn our tune into melody; and
though in our selves we have Esau's garments, yet he can give us Jacobs voice;
We are accepted in Christ in this offer of love. Therefore let us get into
Christ, he can raise our voice in singing to a pleasing Elevation. Let us be in
him, and then our steps shall be metrical, our pauses musical, and our very
Cadencies shall be Seraphical; Our singing of Psalms shall be the music of the
Spears.

Psalm. 137.2. In the Bride-chamber, there shall be no sorrow to interfere, when
we sing the song of the Lamb, Rev. 21.3. No grief to jar our harmony. These
pleasing Meditations should sometimes possess and sweeten our Spirits, that
while we are walking in the galleries, Cant. 7.5. we may be nearer to the
Palace of the great King, Psalm. 45.15.

How ought We to Improve our Baptism? Sermon. X.
Acts 2.38. Be Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
Remission of Sins.


THis Chapter gives us an account of the pouring out of the Spirit according to
the promise presently after Christ's Ascension; as soon as the Spirit was
poured out, the Apostles were enabled to speak in various Languages to the
astonishment and wonder of the Hearers:. This was for the Glory of God, the
Confirmation of the Gospel, and to authorize them as Special Messengers sent by
Christ.

At the sight of this Miracle some wonder, others mock, as if this speaking
with diverse Tongues had been a confused jabbering, that proceeded from the
fumes of Wine, rather than the gift and operation of the Holy Spirit.

To satisfy both, Peter declares in a Sermon the effect and intent of the
Miracle; proving Jesus, whom they had Crucified, to be Lord and Christ. When
they heard this, many of the most obstinate among them were pricked at the
heart, and relented. An happy Sermon it was that Peter preached: it brought in
thousands of Souls to Christ; the first hansel of the power of the Spirit, and
success of the Gospel.

It Is good to observe what course they took for ease and relief, after this
piercing and brokenness of heart; they said to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? This is the usual Question of men
under a sound and through Conviction.

To their serious Question Peter makes a seasonable Answer, v. 38. It Is the
part of a good Physician, not only to discover the Disease, but also to
prescribe a Remedy; especially should spiritual Physicians be tender of
brokenhearted Sinners, and willing and ready to give them Counsel.

In Peter's Direction and Counsel to them observe first, What he persuades them
to do. Secondly, By what Motive and Argument; what they should do, and what
they should receive.

In the Advice he persuades them to Repentance, and to be Baptized in the Name
of Christ: The latter we are upon.

For Explaining it, we may enquire,

First, Why is Baptism mentioned rather than Faith, and other things more
internal and necessary to Salvation?

I answer, Certainly Faith is implied; for Mark 16.16. He that Believes, and
is Baptized, shall be Saved. Baptism is an open and real Profession of Christ
Crucified: So that Be Baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, is as much as Be
Baptized, Believing on the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the Remission of Sins.
Secondly, Baptism is mentioned because it was the visible Rite of receiving
Proselytes to Christ. Now it imported them who were convinced as Persecutors to
turn Professors, if they would have ease for their Consciences; and therefore
not only to Believe with the Heart, but to make open Profession of Faith in
Christ, Romans 10.10.

Quest. 2. Why in the Name of Christ only? the Father and the Holy Ghost is not
mentioned according to the Prescript-form, Mat. 28.19. I answer, he speaks not
of the Form of Baptism, but the use and end thereof. Now the great use of
Baptism is, that we may have benefit by the Mystery of Redemption by Christ,
therefore elsewhere we are said to be Baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 5.3. And
to put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. He is the Head of the Church, and by Baptism we
are planted into his Mystical Body.

This being premised, my work shall be to show, what use and respect Baptism
has unto this benefit of obtaining remission of Sins by Jesus Christ. I shall
do it in these considerations.

1. First, that God has ever delighted to deal with his Creatures in the way
of a Covenant, that we might know what to expect from him, and might look upon
our selves as under the firmer Bonds of obedience to his blessed Majesty. In a
Covenant which is the most solemn transaction between Man and Man, both parties
are engaged, God to us, and we to God: It is not meet that one party should be
bound, and the other free; therefore both are bound to each other, God to
Bless, and we to Obey. Indeed in the first Covenant the debitum poenae is only
mentioned, because that only took place, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely dye. But the other part is implied, and it does in
effect speak thus much, Do and Live, Sin and Dye.

2. Secondly, because the first Covenant was broken on our part, God was
pleased to enter into a second, wherein he would manifest the glory of his
Redeeming grace, and pardoning Mercy to fallen Man; this was brought about in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and
therefore this second Covenant is called a Covenant of Peace, as being made
with us after the breach, and when Man was obnoxious to the wrath of God, Isa.
54.10. The Covenant of my Peace shall not be removed. Man needs such a
Covenant, and God appeased by Christ offers it to us.

3. Thirdly, In this Covenant of Peace, the Privileges and Duties are suited
to the State in which man was, when God invited him into Covenant with himself.
Man was fallen from his Duty, and obnoxious to the wrath and displeasure of
God, and therefore the new Covenant is a Doctrine of Repentance and Remission
of Sins. What is Preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16.16. is in Luke
24.47. That Repentance and Remission of sins should be Preached in his Name
among all Nations; for that is the Gospel, or the new Remedial Law of our Lord
Jesus; Repentance to heal us and set us in joint again, as to our Duty:
Remission of Sins, to recover us into God's favor; both these benefits we have
by the Redeemer, Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to give Repentance and
Remission of Sins to Israel; he gives the one simply, and both gives and
requires the other; so that by the New Covenant, Remission of Sins is conveyed
to all true Penitents.

Fourthly, More distinctly to understand the tenor of this New and second
Covenant, we must consider both the Duties and the Privileges thereof; for in
every Covenant there is ratio dati and accepti, there is something promised and
given, and something required; and usually the Promise consists of somewhat
which the Party is willing of, and the Duty or Condition required of that to
which he is more backward and loath to submit; so in the Covenant of Grace, in
the Promise God respects man's want, in the Duty his own Honor. Every man
would have pardon, and be saved from Hell, but God will have subjection; even
corrupt Nature is not against desires of Happiness; these God makes use of to
gain us to Holiness. All men readily catch at Felicity, and would have
Impunity, Peace, Comfort, Glory, but are unwilling to deny the Flesh, to
renounce the credit, profit, or pleasure of Sin; or to grow dead to the World
and worldly things. Now God promises what we desire, on condition that we will
submit to those things that we are against; as we sweeten bitter Pills to
Children, that they may swallow them the better; they love the Sugar, though
they loath the Alloes; so does God invite us to our Duty by our Interest.
Therefore whosoever would enter into the Gospel-state, must resolve to take the
Blessings and Benefits offered for his Happiness, and the Duties required for
his Work. Indeed, accepting of the Benefits is a part of the Condition, because
we treat with an invisible God about a happiness that lies in another World;
but it is but part, there are other terms, and therefore we must draw nigh with
a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. With a true heart,
resolving upon the Duties of the Covenant; in full assurance of Faith,
depending upon God's Word, that he will give us the blessings.

Fifthly, The Privileges are two, Pardon and Life; these are the great
Blessings offered in the New Covenant; you have them both together, Acts 26.18.
To turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by Faith. These two Benefits are most necessary, the one to allay
the Fears of the guilty Creature, and the other to gratify Desires of
Happiness which are natural to us; the one to remedy the misery incurred by Sin
and the Fall of Man, the other to establish our true and proper Felicity in the
everlasting enjoyment of God; the one to ease our Consciences, and support us
against troubles of mind, the other to comfort us against the outward troubles
and afflictions which sin has introduced into the World. In short, the one to
free us from deserved Punishment, the other to assure us of undeserved
Blessedness; the one imports Deliverance from Eternal Death, and the other
Entrance into Eternal Life.

Sixthly, The Duties thereof do either concern our first entrance into the
Christian state, or our Progress therein. Our Lord represents it under the
Notions of the Gate, and the Way, Mat. 7.14. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is
the Way which leads into Life. Other Scriptures deliver it under the notions
of making Covenant, and keeping Covenant with God: making Covenant, Psalm. 50.5.
keeping Covenant, Psalm. 25.10. Psalm. 103.18. The Covenant must not only be
made, but kept.

I. As to entering into Covenant with God, there is required true Repentance and
Faith, Mark. 1.15. Repent, and believe the Gospel. Repentance respects God as
our end; Faith respects Christ as the great means, or way to the Father, Acts
20.21. Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. God is our
end, for Christ died to bring us to God; 1 Pet. 3.18. and Christ is our way,
John 14.6. and whole Christiany is a coming to God by Christ, Heb. 7.25. Now in
our first entrance, Faith and Repentance are both mixed, and it is hard to sever
them, and show what belongs to the one, and what to the other; at least it
would perplex the Discourse. Both together imply, that a man be turned from a
life of Sin to God by Faith in Christ; or a renouncing the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh; and devoting and dedicating our selves to God.

1. A Renouncing of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh; for these are the
three great Enemies of God and our Salvation, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. In time past ye
walked according to the Course of this World, after the Prince of the power of
the Air, the Spirit that works now in the children of disobedience, among whom
also we had our conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires
of the flesh and of the mind. There all our Enemies appear abreast: the Devil
as the Grand deceiver and principal of all wickedness the World with its
Pleasures, Honors and Profits, as the Bait by which it does deceive us, and
steal away our hearts from God; and pervert and divert us, that we should not
look after the one thing necessary; the Flesh is that Corrupt Inclination in
us, which entertains and closes with these Temptations to the neglect of God,
and the wrong of our own Souls; this is very importtnate to be pleased, and is
the proper internal cause of all our mischief, for James 1.14. Every man is
enticed and drawn away by his own lust. These must be renounced before we can
return to God, for till we put away our Idols, we cannot incline our hearts to
the true God, Josuah 24.23. And these are the great Idols by which our hearts
are estranged from him. When God is laid aside, self interposeth as the next
Heir, and that which we count self is the flesh. Many wrong their own Souls,
but never any man hated his own flesh. That which feeds the flesh, is the
World, and the Devil by proposing the Bait, irritateth and stirs up our
affections. Therefore we must be turned from Satan to God; we must be delivered
from the present evil World; we must abstain from fleshly Lusts, for God will
have no Copartners and Competitors in our hearts.

2. A devoting and giving up our selves to God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as
our God, 2 Cor. 8.3. and Romans 6.13. As our owner by Creation, Psalm. 100.3. And
by Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. As our Sovereign Lord, Jer. 24.8. Isa. 26.13.
Other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, etc. As the fountain of our
life and blessedness, Psalm. 31.14. I trusted in the Lord, I said, thou art my
God, Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore will I hope in
him, Psalm. 119.57. I have said thou art my Potion, therefore I will keep thy
Precepts.

II. As to our Progress and Perseverance, which is our walking in the narrow
way, and shows the sincerity and heartiness of our consent in making the
Covenant. And besides, this is not the work of a Day, but of our whole Lives;
we have continual need of coming to God by Christ. Here three things are
required.

1. As to the Enemies of God and our Souls, there must be a forsaking as well
as a renouncing; the Devil must be forsaken, we must be no more of his party
and confederacy; we must resist, stand out against all his batteries and
assaults, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. the World must be overcome, 1 John 5.4, 5. and the
flesh must be subdued and mortified, Gal. 5.24. that we be no more governed by
the desires thereof; and if we be sometimes foiled, we must not go back again,
but renew our Resolutions; and the drift of our lives must still be for God and
Heaven.

2. As to God, to whom we have devoted our selves, we must love and please and
serve him all our days, Luke 1.75. we must make it our work to love him, and
count it our happiness to be beloved by him, and carefully apply our selves to
seek his favor, and cherish a fresh sense of it upon our hearts, and continue
with patience in well-doing, Romans 2.7. till we come to the complete sight and
love of him in Heaven, 1 John 3.2.

3. You must always live in the hope of the coming of Christ, and everlasting
glory, Tit. 2.3. looking for the blessed hope; and Jude v. 21. looking for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus unto eternal life. As we did at first thankfully accept
of our recovery by Christ, and at first consent to renounce the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, and resolve to follow God's counsel and direction; we
must still persevere in this mind, and use his appointed means in order to our
final happiness. The sum then of our Christianity is, that we should by true
Repentance and Faith, forsake the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and give up
our selves to God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that he may take us for his
reconciled Children, and for Christ's sake forgive all our sins; and by his
Spirit give us grace to persevere in those Resolutions, till our full and final
happiness come in hand.

Seventhly, This Covenant, consisting of such Duties and Privileges, God has
confirmed by certain visible Ordinances, commonly called Sacraments, as Baptism
and the Lord's Supper; both which, but in a different manner, respect the whole
tenor of the Covenant: For as the Covenant binds mutually on God's part and
ours, so these Duties have a mutual Aspect or Respect to what God does, and
what we must do: on God's part they are a Sign and a Seal: on our part they are
a Badge and a Bond. 1. On God's part they are sealing or confirming Signs; as
Circumcision is called a sign or seal of the righteousness which is by faith,
Romans 4.11. that is, of the grace offered to us in Christ; so is Baptism, which
came in the Room of Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. In whom ye are circumcised,
buried with him in Baptism. Surely the Gospel Ordinances signify as much grace
as the Ordinances of the legal Covenant; if Circumcision was a Sign and Seal of
the Righteousness which is by Faith, a or pledge of God's good will to us in
Christ, so is Baptism, so is the Lord's Supper; they are a Sign to signify,
and a Seal to confirm; to represent the Grace, and assure the grant of Pardon
and Life. As for instance, Baptism signifies Pardon and Life, so does the
Lord's Supper, Matthew. 26.28, 29. That for our growth and nourishment, this for
our imitation. Baptism is under our consideration at present; that it has
respect to remission of Sins, the Text is clear for it, and so are many other
Scriptures. It was Ananias his Advice to Paul, Acts 22.16. Arise and be
Baptized, and wash away thy sins, and call on the Name of the Lord. So Ephesians.
5.26. That he might sanctify and cleanse us by the washing of water through
the Word. The washing represents the washing away the guilt and filth of sin;
it signifies also our Resurrection to a blessed and eternal Life: Baptism
saves by the Resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. Well then, it is a sealing
Sign. When God promised longer life to Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20.8. he said, What
shall he the sign that the Lord will heal me? So when he promises pardon and
life to us, What shall be the sign that the Lord will do this for us? Baptism
is this sign; a witness between us and God, Genesis 31.48. This heap is a witness
between thee and me.

2. On our part they are a Badge and a Bond to oblige us to the Duties of the
Covenant: a Badge of the profession, and a Bond to engage us to the Duties
which that Profession calls for. As the Apostle speaks of Circumcision, That
whosoever is circumcised, is a debtor to the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. binds himself
to the observances of Moses. So a Christian by being baptized becomes a Debtor,
not to the Flesh, to live after the flesh, etc. Romans 8.12. And it is called an
Answer toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. the answer supposes the demands of the
Covenant, and so it is an undertaking faithfully to perform the Conditions
required of us; a Vow or an Obligation whereby we reckon our selves bound to
dye unto Sin, and to live unto Righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 6.11. It binds us chiefly to the Duties that belong to our entrance, as
the Lord's Supper does more directly to the Duties which belong to our
progress; it binds us to a true belief of the Gospel, or an acceptance of
Christ, and consent to the Covenant of Grace; to renounce the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh, and to give up our selves unto God; and therefore the Baptismal
Covenant, by which we are initiated into Christianity, is expressed by our being
Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. which
implies a giving up our selves to them in their distinct personal Relations: To
the Father, that we may return to him, and obey him as our rightful Lord; that
we may love him, and depend upon him, as the Fountain of all our good and
all-sufficient happiness; and prefer his favor before all the sensual
pleasures of the World. We are Baptized in the Name of Christ, that we may
believe in him, accept him as our Savior and Redeemer; expecting to be saved
by his Merits, Righteousness, and Intercession, from the Wrath of God, and
Guilt of Sin and eternal Death. To the Holy Ghost as our Guide, Sanctifier, and
Comforter; that he may free us from Sin, change us into the image and likeness
of Christ, and lead us into all truth and godliness, and comfort us with the
sense of our present interest in God's love, and the hopes of future glory.

Eighthly, These visible confirming Ordinances give us great advantages above
the Word and bare proposal of the Covenant.

1. As these sealing Signs are an expression of God's earnest and sincere
respect to our Salvation. God has opened his mind in his Word concerning his
love and good will to Sinners in Christ; and he has also added his Seal, that
the Charter of his Grace might be more valid and authentic. It argues the
goodness and communicativeness of God to give notice in his Word; but his
solicitousness and anxious care for our good, to give visible assurance in the
Sacraments, as being willing (...), over and above to satisfy the Heirs of
Promise. If a man be more than ordinarily cautious to make all sure, it is a
sign his heart is upon the thing. Surely it is a great condescension that God
would dispose his grace into a Covenant-form; but it is a further condescension
that he would add Seals, which needed not on his part; but he added them to
give us the more strong consolation. Nudum pactum, a naked Promise is not so
valid and authentic, as when Articles of Agreement are put into a formal
Instrument and Deed of Law, and that signed and sealed, and interchangeably
delivered; this breeds more confidence and security on both sides. God's Word
certifieth us of his good will; but when he is pleased to make a formal
Indenture of it, and to sign it, and seal it, it does breed more assurance in
our minds, that his Promises are made with a real intent to perform them; and
binds us the more firmly to God, when besides our naked Promise, there is a
kind of Vow and Oath on our part solemnly entered into by Baptism.

2. There is this Advantage in the Sacraments above the Word, that they are a
closer Application. The Word speaks to all promis^uously, as inviting; the
Sacraments to every one in particular, as obliging. By the Word none are
excluded from the Grace offered upon God's terms, Go preach the Gospel to every
Creature; but by the Sacraments, every one is expressly admonished of his Duty.
The Object revealed in the Word is like the Brazen Serpent, which without
difference was exposed to the Eye of all, that whosoever looked upon it might
be healed; but the same Object offered in the Sacraments is like the blood
sprinkled on the Door-posts, that every man might be assured that his Family
should be in safety. Now the reason of this difference is, because things
propounded in the Word are like a Treaty between God and us; or an offer and a
debating of matters till the parties do agree: But Sacraments are not of use
till both sides have agreed upon the Conditions of the Covenant. In Adults at
least the Word conduces to the making of the Covenant, but Sacraments suppose
it made; therefore the Word universally propounds that which in the Seals is
particularly applied. Now those things do not affect us so much which are
spoken indifferently to all, as those that are particularly applied to our
selves, because they stir us up to a more accurate care and endeavor to fulfill
the Duty incumbent upon us. The Conditions are propounded in the Word, Repent
and believe, and I will pardon, and give thee eternal life: But the Sacraments
suppose an Actual consent, that thou have done, or undertaken so to do; and
then God comes and says, Take this as an undoubted pledge, that thou shall
have what I have promised; which does more increase our Hope, and persuade our
Duty.

3. By these Sealing Signs we are solemnly invested into a right to the things
promised, as when we are put in possession of what we have bargained for by due
formalities of Law: This is my Body; that is our solemn Investiture into the
Privileges purchased by Christ's Crucified Body. A Believer receives Christ
in the Word, John 1.12. and he receives Christ in the Lord's Supper. What Is
the difference? There his right is solemnly owned and confirmed in the way
which God has appointed. As soon as a man consents to a Bargain, he has an
Interest in the thing bargained for, but the right is made more explicit when
it is delivered to him by some formalities of Law, as an House by a Key, a Field
by a Turf or Twig; in such delivery we say, This Key is my House; this Turf or
Twig is my Field. So are we put in possession of Christ by these words, This is
my Body. Every peninent and believing Sinner has a right to Christ and Pardon,
but his solemn Enfeoffment is by the Sacraments: Repent, and be Baptized every
one of you for the Remission of Sins; or as it is Acts 22.14. Arise and be
Baptized for the washing away of thy Sins. God gave Abraham the Land of Promise
by word of mouth; but Genesis 13. he bids him go through the Land and view it, and
build an Altar, and offer Sacrifice there; then was he actually invested in the
Gift. God gave Israel a grant of Canaan, but the Clusters of Eschol were as it
were the Livery and Seisin of it. Though the Gift be sufficiently made over by
the Promise, yet it is further ratified, and more solemnly conveyed and
delivered by the Sacraments.

4. This is one Advantage more, That the great Mysteries of godliness are laid
before our Eyes in some visible Rites, and so have greater force to excite the
mind to serious Consideration. When God will condescend to give us help against
our Infirmities, it must be by the Senses, by which all knowledge comes into the
Soul: Now Feeling, Smelling, Tasting, seem not so fit for this; as being more
gross, and conducing to the welfare of the Body; but Seeing and Hearing convey
Objects to the Understanding, and therefore are called the Senses of Discipline
and Learning. Now the Covenant is made by words, which strike the Ear; but the
Seals by visible things set it before our Eyes, and as the Apostle says,
Christ is Crucified among us, and evidently set forth, Gal. 3.1. The sight does
in a more lively manner stir up the mind than the bare Hearing. Washing from
Sin does fitly represent to us, and raise thoughts in us about the
Sanctification of the Spirit; and so in a lively manner excite us to expect
this benefit.

Use. Let us not be slight in the use and improvement of Baptism; for
itimplieth a solemn covenanting with God, that we may obtain Remission of Sins
and eternal Life. John the Baptist calls it Mark 1.4. The Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of Sins. Therefore let us reflect upon our selves;
We are all Baptized, but what are we the better? have we the more confidence of
the pardon of our Sins, and a greater sense of our Covenant-Vow, to dye unto
Sin, and live unto God? we cannot have the former without the latter; both must
be regarded by us. Volateranus reports of Lucian, that scoffing Atheist, that
when he revolted from the Profession of Christianity, he scoffed at his
Baptism, saying, Se nihil ex eo consecutum, quam quod nomen ipsius esset
corruptum ex Lucio, Lucianus factum. That he got nothing by his Baptism but a
syllable to his Name, it being changed from Lucius to Lucianus. Alas! what do
most get by their Baptism but a Name? It should not be so with you; you may
have great advantage by it, if you improve it to the ends for which it was
appointed. To quicken you, consider;

1. Baptism is a perpetual Bond upon us, obliging us to Repentance, and an holy
life, Romans 6.4. therefore the Scripture often reasons from it, as Romans 6.2.
How shall we that are dead to Sin live any longer therein? He argues not ab
impossibili, but ab incongruo; not from what is impossible, but what will
misbecome our renewed estate, which we profess to enter into by Baptism; which
is a Vowed Death to Sin, and a Bond wherewith we bind our Souls to New
Obedience. So elsewhere, Col. 3.1. Ye are risen with Christ, (in the import and
signification of Baptism) therefore seek the things which are above. And again,
Ye are dead, therefore mortify, etc. verse 3, 5. Once more, verse 8, 9. Put
off all these, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds. And in many
other places the Apostle argues from the Baptismal Engagement to the effect
intended and signified thereby.

2. The Improvement of Baptism is the best Preparation for the Lord's Supper.
John 13.8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. That washing had a
spiritual meaning; and presently after it the Sacrament of Christ's Body and
Blood was instituted, to the participation of which this spiritual washing was
necessary. In the Supposition, If I wash thee not, is implied Baptism; in the
Commination, thou have no part with me, is implied the Lord's Supper, which
Christ was then about to institute. In foro Ecclesiae, before the Church, none
but Baptized Persons have a right to the Lord's Table, in foro Coeli, before
God: none but those who have the fruit of Baptism have right to the benefits
thereof; they that are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ have only right to
the Benefits purchased by his Blood. Our Lord would mind his Disciples of this,
before he would admit them to his Table.

3. If we improve it not, our Baptism will be a Witness to solicit Vengeance
against us; as the Gospel it self is preached, either for a Witness to us,
Matthew. 24.14. or for a Witness against us, if we obey it not, Mark 14.9. So
Baptism, instead of being a Witness to us, will be a Witness against us, if we
mind it not, and in the Judgment we shall fare no better than the Heathen; for
all the difference between us is, that they are uncircumcised in flesh, and we
in heart, Jer. 9.25, 26. they are not washed in Water, and we are not cleansed
from our sins. I remember a passage in Victor Vticensis concerning one
Elpidophorus, who had revolted from Catholicism to the Vandal Arrians; the
Deacon who had Baptized him, showed him the Stole, or Linen Clothes, in which
he was Baptized, saying, Hae te accusabunt cum Majestas venerit Judicantis,
etc. O Elpidophorus, these shall be a Witness against thee to all eternity for
thy just perdition, when the Judge comes: what will thou do, Wretch, when the
people of God shall be admitted to the Joys of Heaven, and thy self thrust out?
etc. If we have been Baptized, and lived directly contrary to our Baptismal
Vow, as if we were in Covenant with the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, rather
than with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, what will become of us in the Judgment?

But how shall we improve it?

First, We must personally and solemnly own the Covenant made with God in
Infancy; every one of us should choose the Lord for our Sovereign Lord and
Portion; and Christ Jesus for our Redeemer and Savior; and the Holy Ghost for
our Guide, Sanctifier, and Comforter. Every one must personally thus engage
himself to God; it is not enough that Christ engage for us as the common surety
of all the Elect, Heb. 7.22. Something he did for us, and in our Names, but
every one must take a Bond upon himself, before he can have the benefit of it;
You must yield up your selves to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. It Is not enough that
the Church engage for us, as a visible Political Body, or a Community and
Society of men, who are in visible Covenant with God and Christ, Ezekiel. 16.8.
Thou entredst into Covenant with me, and becamest mine, meaning it of the Body
of the Church; but every individual person must also enter into Covenant with
God, and become his, Ezekiel. 20.37. I will cause you to pass under the Rod, and I
will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant: Where there is an Allusion to the
Sheeps passing out of the Fold, when they were to be Tithed for God, Levit.
27.32. they were to be told with a Rod, one, two, three, etc. and the Tenth was
the Lords. God will not covenant with us in the lump and body, but every one
was to be particularly minded of his Duty: it is not enough that our Parents did
engage for us in Baptism, as the Israelites in the Name of their little ones
did avouch God to be their God, Dent. 29.10, 11, 12. No man can savingly
transact this Work for another; we must ratify the Covenant in our own
Persons, and make our own professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor.
9.13. This Work cannot be done by a Proxy or Assigns; our Parents Dedication
will not profit us, without some personal Act of our own, if we live to years
of discretion: Once more, this must be done not only in words, or visible
external Rites, which may signify so much as personal Covenanting with God,
but a Man must engage his heart to God, Jer. 30.21. yea, this is a business
that must be done between God and our own Souls, where no outward witnesses are
conscious to it. God speaks to the Soul in this transaction, Psalm. 35.3. Say
unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation; and the Soul speaks to God, Lam. 3.24. thou
art my Portion, says my soul; and Psalm. 16.2. O my soul, thou have said unto
the Lord, thou art my God: thus the Covenant is carried on in Soul-Language.
Now upon this Personal inward Covenanting with God our right to all the
privileges does depend.

2. Renew often the sense of your Obligation to God, and keep a constant
reckoning how you lay out your selves for him, Acts 27.23. His I am, and him I
serve, Phil. 1.21. To me to Live is Christ. Some few Renegado's renounce their
Baptism, but most Christians forget their Baptism, 2 Pet. 1.9. He is blind, and
cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was washed from his old sins;
therefore we should be continually exciting our selves both to obedience and
dependence, that the sincerity of our first Vow and Consent may be verified by
a real and constant performance of it.

3. You should use frequent self-reflection, that you may come to know whether
you are indeed washed from the guilt and silth of sin, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were
some of you, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. You should observe what further
sense you have of the pardon of sin, how you get ground upon your bondage of
Spirit, and grow up into some rejoicing of Faith, for by these signs God
intended our strong consolation, Heb. 6.18. And the Eunuch when he was
Baptized, went his way rejoicing, Acts 8.39. Has God applied his Covenant to
me? Taken me into the Family? Planted me into the Mystical Body of Christ? and
shall not I be glad and rejoice in his Salvation? So for Sanctification, see
whether God's Interest does prevail in you, or the Interest of the Flesh; what
Power and strength of Will you get against Corruption easily, Gal. 5.16, 17.
whether sin be more subdued, and you can govern your Passions and Appetites
better, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's should find something of this in
themselves, otherwise their Baptism is but an empty formality.

Fourthly and Lastly, You must use it as a great help in all Temptations; as
when you are tempted to sin, either by the delights of Sense: a Christian has
his Answer ready, I am no Debtor to the Flesh, or I am Baptized, and dedicated
to God in the way of Mortification and Holiness to obtain pardon and Life, 1
Cor. 6.15. Shall I take the Members of Christ, etc. this Soul, this Body, this
Time, this Strength is Christ's, not to please the Flesh, but the Lord: Or by
the terrors of Sense. Dionysia comforted her Son Majoricus, an African Martyr,
when he was going to suffer for owning the Godhead of Christ, with this
Speech, Memento, Fili, Baptizatum esse in nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus
Sancti, Remember, my Son, that thou art Baptized in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and be constant. So when you are tempted by the Devil,
taking advantage of your Melancholy, and grievous afflictions, to question
God's Love and Mercy to Penitent Believers. Remember the Covenant Sealed in
Baptism, that you may keep up your Faith in God through Christ, which pardons
all your sins, and has begotten us to a lively hope. We must expect to be
Tempted: the Devil tempted Christ after his Baptism to question his filiation
so solemnly attested. Compare Mat. 3.17. with Mat. 4.16. Luther says of
himself, that when the Devil tempted him to despair, or to any doubts and fears
about the Love of God or his Mercy to Sinners, he would always Answer, Ecce ego
Baptizatus sum, and credo in Christum Crucifixum, Behold, I am Baptized and
Believe in Christ Crucified. And he tells us of an Holy Virgin, who gave this
reply when the Devil abused her Solitudes, and injected any despairing thoughts
into her mind, Baptizata sum, I am Baptized, and entered into God's Covenant,
and will expect the pardon of my sins by Jesus Christ.

Thus should we all the days of our Life improve our Baptism, till we have the
full of that Holy and Happy estate, for which we were first purified and washed
in God's Laver.

By what Scriptural Rules may Catechizing be be so managed, as that it may
become most Universally Profitable? Sermon. XI.
Proverbs 22.6. Train up (or Catechize) a Child in the way he should go, (or in
his way) and when he is old, he will not depart from it.


THIS most Excellent Book of Sacred Aphorisins, or Divine Proverbs, is by some
not unfitly compared to a costly Chain of Orient Pearls: among which, though
there be a fair Connection, yet there is little or no Coherence. I shall
therefore immediately enter on the words themselves; and in them I observe a
Precept and a Promise; an important Duty, and a persuasive Motive.

1. A grand, important, necessary Duty enjoined. -- Train up, or Catechize a
Child in the way he should go. In which words we have

1. The Act or Duty prescribed; Train up, or Catechize. -- Piously and
prudently instruct and educate.

2. The Object or Person that is to be trained up, a Child. By a Synechdoche,
all such Younger ones and Inferiors as are committed to the care and conduct
of their Superiors.

3. The Subject Matter wherein these Inferiors are thus to be trained up, In
the way he should go. -- In that way or manner of life which most suits and
becomes him, that makes most for God's Glory and his own temporal, spiritual,
and eternal good.

2. Quo semel est in buta recens servabit odrem testa diu. A^ plurimum. So.
Observation.
2. A Cogent Argument or prevalent Motive to excite and quicken to the faithful
discharge of this important Duty. -- And when he is old he will not depart from
it; i. e. not easily, not ordinarily depart from it: He will be the better for
it as long as he lives. Hildersham.

From the first of these, viz. the Precept that enjoins the Duty, I infer:

That it is the great and indispensable Duty, and therefore ought to be the
serious and constant care of Superiors, prudently and piously to train up or
Catechize, to instruct and educate all such Inferiors as are committed to
their care and conduct.

In the pursuing of this Momentous Truth, I shall tread in this Method, laying
before you these five things.

1. What it is to train up or Catechize. 2. What is meant by That Way, wherein
persons are to be trained up. 3. Who they are, that are to be trained up or
Catechized. 4. Who they are, that are to train up or Catechize, and why. 5. How
the whole Affair may be so prudently, piously, spiritually managed, as that it
may be Crowned with such a blessed success, as to become most universally
profitable.
(...) a (...) initia, primum imbue institue, instrue, dedica. Buxtorf. (...)
instructos, expeditos, incipientes suos pueros, fidos, initiatos, quos domi
nu^riverat and quos art bellied and lege Divina instruxerat. Whether by way of
Question and Answer. Vid page 7.
1. What it is to train up or Catechize.

Sol. The word in the Text is very pregnant, and greatly significant: Primum
imbue; give the first dip, die, tincture, seasoning. Hence by a Metaphor the
word is diversely translated. Initia, so Ar-Mout. Begin, or give the first
instruction; lay the groundwork, foundation, or first stone. Deduc. So Chald.
Paraph. Verse. Instrue. Set in order or array, arm, train up, instruct. Thus
Abraham armed, or led forth his trained or instructed servants, Genesis 14.14. The
word is also translated Dedicavit, Consecravit; i. e. to set a person or thing
apart, and to devote it to the true God in a right manner, for holy uses and
ends, with solemn prayer and praise. Thus the word (...) is used Deuteronomy. 20.5.
Psalm. 30. title. 1 Kings 9.7. 2 Cbron. 7.5. 1 Kings 13.13. 1 Chronicles. 18.11. The
Greeks render the word (...). A word of a peculiar signification, and imports a
plain and familiar teaching and instructing of the ignorant by word of mouth,
in the first grounds and Fundamental Principles of the true, and, in the
strictest sense, the Christian Religion. Thus the word is used Luke 1.4. Acts
18.25. 1 Cor. 14.19. Gal. 6.6. Hence it may be supposed it was that our
Translators in the Margent render the word Catechize, as being prompted
thereunto by the Jewish Rabbis, who style their form of Catechism (...) a Book
of first instruction.

2. What is meant by that way wherein persons are to be trained up, or
Catechized and initiated.

(...) Juxta viam suam, i. e. juxta vitae genu, quod ipsum sequi velis.
Sol. In the way he should go. -- In the way or manner of his life, Genesis 43.7.
in via sua, in his way, in his kind, and according to his capacity and measure,
and suitably to the weakness and tenderness of his years, in the sound knowledge
and practice of those truths and principles which may fit him for the service
of his God and Generation here, and for the eternal enjoyment of his God
hereafter. Let Paul interpret Solomon in his way: 1. In the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. i. e. in all profitable instruction, suitable
to a Child's age and state, (...)
for the framing and moulding of him by knowledge unto a commendable and
virtuous carriage, and for the doing of greater good in humane Society, when he
comes to write himself Man: but especially in Religious instruction, The first
Principles of the Oracles of God and of the Doctrine of Christ. Heb. 5.12. and
6.1. (...)
in instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. In the words of Faith and of
good doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.6. There is something more yet in the words, -- ad os,
supra os, Ar-Mont. upon the mouth of his way: A form of speaking frequently
used in Scripture to note the suitableness or proportion of the thing, Exodus
16.21. according to the mouth of his eating, i. e. according to the measure of
his eating. So Number. 7.5. To every Levite according to the mouth, i. e. the
condition and degree of his service. Thus here; Train up a Child upon the mouth
of his way, i. e. in such a way as is not only good and honest in it self, Pro
captu ingenii ejus infirmioris, ut non eum plus oneres, quam aetas fert.
but most proper and suitable to the spirit, disposition, end and capacity of
the Child. -- As Children are to be fed with such meat, so they are to be
taught in such a manner as they can most easily and profitably digest. Teach
them but thus upon the mouth, and then out of their mouth shall come praise,
Psalm. 8.3.

3. Who they are that are thus to be trained up or Catechized, and why. (...) a
(...) Excussit: puerum, puerulum, infantem ex utero nuperrime excussum. (...).
Ita hodie Rabbini puerum 5. annotum ad Biblia, 10 ad mischna seu Textum
Talmudium 13. ad Praecept. 15. ad Talmud. Jer. 1.6. 2 Chr. 13.7. Isa. 5.3.


Sol. All younger ones and Inferiors that are committed by God or men to the
care and conduct of Superiors; all included in the name Child. The Original
word admits of several significations: An Infant newly born, Judge. 13.7. of
three months old, Exodus 26. A Child as soon as he begins to speak and exert his
reason. Thus it runs parallel with the Greek word (...): And so we find Timothy
instructed from a Child, a Babe, a Suckling, 2 Timothy 1.5. with 3.15. It takes in
Boys also and Girls, Sons and Daughters of somewhat riper age, youths as
Shechem, Genesis 34.19. Damsels, and those marriageable, Deuteronomy. 22.19. The word is
also applied to Abraham's Menservants, Genesis 22.3. and to Booz Maidservants,
Ruth. 2.22. Est. 4.4. To such, as though they may be men in years, are children
in understanding. These all, and every one of these come within the List of
those that Solomon and his God would have trained up and Catechized: Nay, let
me add, there is not a younger Son of the Prophets, not one that sits at the
feet of those Learned Gamaliels, those truly Reverend Elijahs, that can justly
plead exemption from this seeming task, shall I say, or real honor, of being
clearly taught in, and firmly fixed upon those Everlasting Foundations, the
first principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12. and 6.1.

4. Who they are that are thus to train up or Catechize these Inferiors and
younger ones.

Sol. All their respective Superiors in Church or Family.

1. Superiors in the Church. These, under what Name or Title soever the
Scripture presents them, are all bound to Catechize, that is, in a most plain
and sound manner, publicly to instruct the most ignorant of their charge in
the first principles of the Christian Religion. This duty so peculiarly belongs
to them, that their whole work and office is set down under the name of
Catechizing. Let him that is taught, in the Greek it is Catechized, Gal. 6.6.
(...).
communicate unto him that teaches; in the Greek, that Catechiseth. But to
speak closely.

1. Was not Paul a great Apostle, yea the Grand Doctor of the Gentiles? and yet
he professes himself a Catechist. Paul's work was to plant, as well as to
water; and to beget, as well as to bring up, 1 Cor. 6.7. and 4.15. Paul
compares himself to a Nurse, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. the Saints to Babes, such as had
need of Milk, and not of stronger meat, 1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.12, 13. Paul
professes himself to be one of God's Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. and, if
faithful, he will see that the meanest the weakest in the Family has his due
allowance. In a word, Paul styles himself a Master Builder, 1 Cor. 3.10. And
wherein lies the Art and Honor of a Master Builder so much, as in solidly
laying the Foundation-stone, lest for want of it the building totter, Mat.
7.26, 27.

2. Was not Peter a great Officer in the Church? and yet sure I am, that
whatever Dispensation Peter's pretended Successor, or any of his Allies may
boast and crack of, Peter himself stands charged with feeding Lambs as well as
Sheep, John 21.15. In the Church there are not only adult and perfect Fathers,
and strong in Faith, but Infants and Babes, weak in Faith, such as are ignorant
of the word of Righteousness, Is. 40.11.
Lambs to be carried in the bosom.

3. The great dullness, incapacity, and slowness of heart, that is in the people
to understand by any other way of teaching, calls aloud for this Elementary way
of teaching. By this means those that in vain do hear those Elaborate labors
of the Learned in a more full and copious dilating on the Articles of Faith,
are by these little morsels of Catechizing, as it were chewed for them,
nourished up unto Salvation. This manner of teaching the Prophet hints, Is
28.10, 13.
like a discreet Schoolmaster, not to pour in his Precepts all at once; for
then, like water poured on narrow-mouthed Vessels, 'twould mostly run over: but
instill drop by drop. It becomes Pastors to be frequent in Preaching, to be
accurate in their Sermons; but yet they may by no means forget the shallow,
Laterem lavat. serpendum humi, and cum suis quasi balbutiendum.
indocible, intractable temper of their hearers. It Is in vain to give great
Gobbets of meat to an infant; so far from feeding of him, that is a ready way
to choke him. That Ministry usually proves the most effectual that drops as the
Rain, and distills as the Dew, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Ezekiel. 20.26.

4. Want and neglect of Catechism confessed to be one of the principal causes
of all those desperate defections that have been made from the Faith in this
our English Africa, and of those insolent Invasions that have been made upon it
by loose tongues and lewder Pens. What blasphemous Disputes against the
infinite Merit and Deity of our Savior, as if we intended to justify the Jews
in condemning him to the Cross, for avouching himself the Coessential and
Coeternal Son of God? Joh. 19.7. Biddle 's Lat.
How audaciously have they proceeded in the like sacrilegious attempts against
the Holy Ghost! What proud brags of the purity of man's Nature, and the
sufficiency of his power to save himself! How daring have men been to decry the
Scriptures, the Lord's Day, and all the Ordinances of God's Institution! to
despise the Sacraments, as if they were as beggarly Elements as the Jewish
Ceremonies! to deride singing of Psalms, as if David's Harp were out of tune!
to reject Prayer, as if they were raised to such a plentiful measure of
Spiritual Riches, that it were a shame for them to crave any further supply. In
a word, scarce any Article of the Christian Religion which has not received
many a desperate Stab under it is fifth Rib, and that from the Hand of those
whose hearts did ere-while seem ready to expose their heads to the greatest
hazard, for the least title of sacred Truth. And whence all this, but from
Ignorance of Truth? Had Truth been clearly understrod, it could never have been
so unworthily undervalued, much less so treacherously undermined, and least of
all so impudently affronted, as woe is us, we behold it, both to our grief and
horror. And whence this Barbarous Ignorance, but from want of due Catechizing?
Hinc illae lachrymae.

Ob. 1. True, The laying of Foundations, Instructions in the first Principles
of Religion, a most useful, necessary work, but what ground is there in the
Holy Scriptures for that Form or manner of Catechizing as is now in use, viz.
By way of Question and Answer?

Sol. 1. There are several Texts of Scripture from which the Learned conclude
that this Mode of Catechizing was used in the Apostles days, and by the
Apostles themselves, and their immediate Successors; and this in imitation of
the Jews, Romans 2.20. (...).
who had A Form of Knowledge and of the Truth in the Law, out of which they
Instructed the Ignorant, and taught Babes: Thus Romans 6.17. the Apostle had
given the Romans A Form of Doctrine: and to Timothy, A Form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. A Form of sound words, which contained the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, and the first principles of the Oracles of God, six whereof
are distinctly mentioned Heb. 5.12. with 6.1, 2. To these plain and fundamental
Rules, as to their Standard, the Apostles would have all Doctrines that were
Preached to be brought and tried, and so far to be allowed of as they held
proportion with them. This is that which the Apostle calls Prophesying
according to the proportion of Faith, (...).
Romans 12.6. Thus the Magdeburg. from these Scriptures assert, That there was a
Catechism delivered by the Apostles, in which they had drawn the Doctrine of
the Gospel into short heads, for instructing of the Children of the Church.

Eusebius says, That there was one set apart on purpose for this Office in the
primitive Church, called the Catechist, qui Catechismum docebat, and others
called Catechumeni, that learnt the Catechism; and these were of two sorts.

1. Jews and Heathens, that offered themselves to be listed among the
Christians, and were not as yet sufficiently seen in the great fundamentals of
the Christian Religion. 2. The Children of believing Parents that had been
Baptized. Both these were put under the careful institution of the Catechist,
and by him to be so far instructed, till they had attained so much knowledge in
the Principles of the Christian Religion, as that the Heathens might be
admitted to Baptism, and the Christian Children to the Lord's Supper.
To this custom some of the Learned judge that Peter alludes in 1 Pet. 3.21.
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, (...). 1 Pet. 3.15 A^lusio fact^ ad mor^m veterem
Catechistarum ir^e rogantium Catec^umenos, a daltos ante B^ptis^um, (...) qui
ad Christianismum, vel gentilitate vocati, Credis? Credo. Abrenuntias?
Abrenuntio. Cujus origo in exemplo Eunuchi. Ac. 8.37 Spant. dub. Evang. Pars 3.
p. 97. Trap. in Mat. 13.51. Bowls Pastor Evaag. l. 2. c. 5.
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. True, the main thing is the Answer of a
good Conscience in a man's own self, yet there was a good Answer in his mouth
to the Catechist, who was to ask them a reason of the hope that was in them.

3. The Primitive Fathers, that trod on the Heels of the Apostles, and were
most likely to be best acquainted with the Apostles practice, highly esteemed
this way of teaching, and constantly used it. Cyprian, says Optatus, used it
at Carthage, Origin at Alexandria: Hence Clemens Alexander his paedagogus.
Cyril Mystagog. Lactantius his Institutions. Athanasius his Synopsis. Augustine
his Enchirid. Liber de Doct. Christiana and de Catechiz. rudibus. Fulgentius de
fide.

4. Many of the Ancient Councils made Decrees and Canons for Catechizing.
Council Neocaes. Can. 6.7. Council Tolet. Can. 24. In this consent all the
Reformed Churches uno ore. Nay, which is more, the Papists themselves that were
assembled in the Council of Trent (observing that in the later Spring of the
Gospel, the use of Catechizing in the Reformed Churches was one of the special
means of withdrawing People from the darkness of Popery to the light of the
Gospel, and of so firmly grounding professors in the true Religion, as nothing
could withdraw them from the same; and so the Heretics, as they were pleased
to style them, had got much ground) strongly moved the Council, that there
might be a Catechism compiled of the Principles of the Romish Religion, as that
that was most likely to give check to that deluge of Heresy, which through the
Heretics Catechizing was breaking in upon them.

5. This manner of Teaching by way of Catechizing, viz. By propounding the
Question, and putting the child to Answer it, as the Echo does the Voice, is a
most ready way to make any Instruction to take. Whence it is that in all
Schools of Learning this course is taken, viz. The Teacher propounds his
Questions, and requires Answers from those that are instructed: whereas if you
speak never so well, or so long, yea the longer the worse, in a set and
continued Speech, it uses to vanish in the Air, without any observable notice,
or after fruit.

2. Superiors in the Family, and these are Parents, and Family Governors: to
whom we may adjoin Schoolmasters and Tutors. These all are concerned in this
great duty of Training up and Catechizing those that are committed to their
Charge and Conduct.

1. How deeply Parents are obliged to this Duty, is written as it were with a
Sunbeam in the Scriptures, where we find Precepts, Presidents, Arguments, more
than many to evince it.

Ex. 10.2. Ex. 12.24, 26, 27, with 13.8, 14, 15. Josh. 4.6, 7, 21, 22, 24.
Deuteronomy. 4.9, 10. Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 6 6, 7.
1. Precepts. The Israelites are bound to tell in the ears of their sons, and of
their sons sons, what things the Lord had wrought in Egypt, that they also
might know Jehovah to be the Lord. The Parents are bound to be Expositors of
that great Rite of the Paschal Lamb, and of the Stones set up in the midst of
Jordan. Bound also to teach their Children the words which they heard from the
Lord their God in Horeb, even the Ten Commandments. How does this Duty sparkle
with a Radiant Luster in that great Text, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7? These words which I
Command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
House, and when thou walk by the way, Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. It is the Eternal God that
here gives forth his strict Command to Parents. These words, all these words,
Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, shall be in thy heart, not in thy head only,
so as to know, but in thy Heart to affect. An Heart inflamed with the Love of
God and his Truth, Joel 1.3. Deuteronomy. 11.19.
God knew was one of the most effectual means to engage the Tongue to make
known his Truth; but not only in their Heart, but Houses too. Thou shall teach
them thy Children; nor was this a Ceremonial Precept, or a Command given
peculiarly to the Jews, for their assistance in their Remembrance of the Law of
God, as their Phylacteries and fringes, etc. Exodus 13.9. Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9. but was
and is a Moral, perpetual, standing Precept, binding us in Gospel Times as well
as them: The same things we find in this Text, we find also in the New
Testament. The word of Christ must dwell richly in us, all one with this here,
Let it be in thine heart, Col. 3.16. and in our Houses also: we must teach and
admonish others, Ephesians. 6.4.
we are to bring up our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

2. Branches in this Precept. 1. Parents warned not to abuse their Authority by
provoking their Children. In the best of Parents there is not only Natural
affection, but also Natural corruption, by reason whereof, if they watch not
well, they will be very prone, not only to be rash, but furious with their
Children, that their Will may be fulfilled. Therefore is this bridling Caution
needful, provoke not.

2. Parents are here commanded not to neglect to lay out and improve their
Authority in instructing their Children. This also is necessary, because
Parents are too too apt to be fondly indulgent, and on that account careless to
bring up their Children in such courses as are necessary for knowing and doing
the Will of God. Both therefore are of special use. Do not provoke, but
instruct. Yea in instructing take care that you do not provoke; and so
instructing, you will not, at least you shall not have cause to provoke: for a
well instructed Child is in God's way to be an Obedient Child, and very
tractable to instructing Parents, so that there will be no occasion of
provocation from him, or being provoked against him. Bring them up therefore we
must, but in what? In the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

(...), in all profitable knowledge, Vid Zanch. and Musc. in Loc.
suitable to a Child's Age and State: for the composing and framing of him by
this his knowledge unto a commendable and virtuous carriage, for the doing of
greater good in humane Society for the time to come: but more especially in
Religious Nurture, instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16. and as it
follows, in the admonition of the Lord: In the best and highest kind of
Nurture, that which is drawn and fetched from the Word of the Lord, and so will
be most accepted of him, and most profitable to Children. Not only in Arts and
Sciences, to make them Worldly wise and Learned; nor only in the Mysteries of
Trading and Worldly employment, to make them Rich: nor only in matters of
Morality and Civil honesty, to make them Sober and virtuous; but in the
mysteries of true Religion, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, 1 Timothy
4.6.
in the words of Faith and good Doctrine, to make them truly happy.

2. Presidents. It was the constant practice of the Saints of old carefully to
instruct their children in the things of God: And that

1. In the Truths and Worship of the true God. Thus Divines conclude that Adam
instructed his Sons, Genesis 4.3, 4.
Cain and Abel, to bring their Offerings to the Lord: And from Adam down along
to Moses, for the space of two thousand years, how was the true Religion
communicated, but by Oral Tradition from Parents to their Children? Genesis 18.19.
I know Abraham, that he will command his Children, and his Household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. In this Text we
have Abraham's Testimonial subscribed by God himself: Wherein God

1. Asserts what Abraham was for the present; a man of integrity, a man greatly
beloved of God: I know Abraham, I know his judgment, I know his heart, I am
well acquainted with the frame of his spirit, the inclination of his Will, the
bent of his Affections; and I know him so well, that I cannot but highly
approve, and dearly love him, and will trust him with an Arcanum, make him as
it were of my Privy Council, in imparting to him my great design concerning
wicked Sodom.

2. Foretells for the future.

1. What Abraham would do for God: viz. That he would endeavor to bring all
that were under his Command to be at God's Command. Abraham will not leave his
children and servants to their own Genius, counsels, lusts, ignorance,
idleness, superstition, idolatry, but command them to keep the way of Jehovah.
Abraham will endeavor to set up God in his Family, to instruct it in that way
of Faith, Worship, and Obedience, which God requires.

2. What God will do for Abraham, viz. fulfill his Promise, keep his Word. Holy
Job, that Non pareil of the World, none like him in the Earth, Job 1.8. that
perfect, that upright man, Job sends and sanctifies his children; i. e. says
that late burning and shining Light, sent a Message to them, to command them to
prepare and fit themselves for the holy duty of Sacrificing.

This preparation to holy Duties is often called Sanctifying, Exodus 19.20. 1 Samuel 6.5. Job 11.55. Job 1.5. Jos^ph Caryl on Job 1.5.
Job's main and special care was for the Souls of his children. Job's Message
to his children was not to ask them how they did after their Feasting, whether
they had surfeited, how the reckoning was inflamed: No, his eye and heart
mostly fixed on this, that they might be sanctified: His holy Soul struck a
perfect light to Paul's desire before Agrippa, Acts 26.29. I would to God, that
not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether
such as I am: And to John's joy, John Ep. 3.4. I have no greater joy, than to
hear that thy children walk in the truth.

Thus David, that man after God's own heart, Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children,
hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. But more especially, I
would commend to your most accurate view that lovely Prospect presented to us
in Prove. 4.3, 4. Behold there a great and glorious King, descending from his
Imperial Throne, laying aside his Golden Crown and Royal Scepter, and sitting
down on a lower seat with a Child, a Solomon at his knee. So that the King is
now humbled into a Tutor, the Prince into a Pupil. A brief account of the
Lecture the Text gives us: I was my Father's Son; i. e. I was so my Father's
Son, as that I was also his Jedidiah; so beloved, as if I had been his only
Son. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words, keep
my Commandments and live.

Thus we have seen the practice of godly Fathers; but what have godly Mothers
done? have they been so cruelly forgetful of their children, as not to have
compassion on the Sons of their Womb? What! worse than Sea Monsters, who draw
out their breasts, and give suck to their young ones? No, Lam. 4.3.
no, those true Daughters of Sarah have been more spiritually kind and benign.

1. In the Front of these stands our Mother, the Spouse of Christ: Can. 8.2.
Ass. Annot in Cant. 8.2.
I would lead thee and bring thee into my Mothers House; i. e. into mine own
House or Mansion; as is usual with us to call our own Houses the Houses of our
Fathers. The Church, in her Universal Latitude, is the Mother of all her
Members, -- who would or does instruct me. The Church, John 6.45.
who is the Pillar and ground of truth in this respect, that she presents and
holds forth that truth outwardly, which only Christ brings to the heart and
makes effectual.

2. Upon her right hand stands David's Royal Consort Queen Bathsheba, whom we
find laying the Law before King Lemuel; i. e. her Son Solomon: called Lemuel,
i. e. of God, because God had ordained him to be King over Israel, rather than
any of his Elder Brethren, 1 Kings 2.15, 22. The words of King Lemuel; the
Prophecy. Doctrine, or Instruction that his Mother taught him. 2. What my Son!
and what the Son of my Womb! Prove. 31.1, 2.
and what the Son of my Vows!

3. Upon her left hand let the hoary-headed holy Grand mother Lois, and the
tender, discreet, pious Mother Eunice be placed, who even from the Dug, as it
were, instructed their hopeful Timothy in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures,
(...). 2 Timothy 1.5. and 3.15, 16, 11.
which were able to make him wise unto Salvation.

2. In the ways and works of God's Providence. Thus Gideon gives testimony to
his Forefathers, that they had told their Children of all the Miracles which
the Lord had done; saying, did not the Lord bring us from Egypt? Jud. 6.13.
Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.1, 2. We have heard with our ears, O God, Psalm.
44.1, etc.
our Fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the times of
old. And again, Psalm. 78.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Sayings of old, which we have heard,
and known, and our Fathers have told us. 4. We will not hide them from their
Children, showing to the Generation to come the praises of the Lord, and his
strength, and his wonderful work that he has done. Deuteronomy. 4 9. and 6.7.
5. For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel,
which he commanded our Fathers that they should make them known to their
children. 6. That the Generation to come might know them, even the children
which should be born, who should arise and declare them to their children. 7.
That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God. Thus
Hezekiah upon his recovery from death, Isa. 38.19. The living, the living he
shall praise thee as I do this day; the Father to the Children shall make known
thy truth. -- They that survive, they alone can, and each of them should praise
the Lord; this being the principal end to which men should live, and for which
they should desire life, Psalm. 80.18. The Father to the Children shall make
known thy truth; i. e. they shall transmit the memory of thy faithfulness in
the performance of thy promises to Posterity, Psalm. 145.4.

3. Arguments.

1. The Souls of Children, as well as their Bodies, are committed to the care
and trust of Parents by the Lord, to whom they must give a strict account. It Is
a grand mistake to think that the care of Souls belongs only to Ministers: True
indeed, it eminently belongs to our Spiritual Pastors, Ezekiel. 3.18, 19. If they
warn not the wicked from his wicked way to save his life, the same wicked man
shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will God require at the negligent
Pastor's hand. Omnia, quae deliquerint filii, a parentibus requirentur; qui non
erudierint filios suos. Orig.
And no less does God bespeak Parents in the same language that we find 1 Kings
20.39. Keep this man, this child, if by any means he be missing, then shall thy
life be for his life. If he be lost, and miscarry through thy neglect, thy
life, thy Soul shall go for his.

As therefore Parents dread the guilt of Soul murder of their children, they
ought to be careful of their pious Education,

Psalm. 51.5.
2. The state of poor childrens Souls calls aloud on Parents for the discharge
of this duty. Alas poor Creatures! conceived in sin, brought forth in iniquity;
those whom we fondly miscall Innocent Babes, come into the World with an
Indictment on their Foreheads, with ropes about their necks, full of guilt,
full of filth, bloody, loathsome Creatures, Genesis 8.21. Job 14.4. Prove. 22.15.
Ephesians. 2.3. Children of wrath, nothing in them by nature that is good, Romans 7.18.
An averseness from all good, Psalm. 58.3. Ephesians. 4.18. A proneness to all evil:
These young Lions prone to cruelty; they are Serpents in the very Egg, and
Cockatrices in the very shell, Isa. 59.5. And whence comes all this guilt and
filth, but from the hole of the Pit out of which they are digid, from that
unhappy Rock out of which they are hewn, their unhappy Parents? Job 14.1, 4.
and 15.14.
Isa. 51.5. sinful Parents, having utterly lost God's Image, like Adam, beget
children in their own, Genesis 5.3. Nay Abraham himself, though a circumcised
Saint, as a Natural Father, begets an uncircumcised Isaac: The Vine they spring
from is a Vine of Sodom; and therefore the Children are the Grapes of Gomorrah.
Bloody Parents are we to our Children; Exodus 21.19.
how much then does it concern Parents, even in common Justice, to endeavor to
cure those wounds that they themselves have given and to preserve their Little
Ones from perishing by that Leprosy, infection, poison, which they by Nature
conveigh into them? And here what Topics do not offer themselves to convince
the judgments of Rational Parents.

1. There is a (...), a natural love and affection in Parents to their
Children. Nature gives bowels of pity to them that are in misery, specially to
children, Isa. 49.15. Psalm. 103.13. Will Parents then prove unnatural? nay,
worse than beasts; for even the Sea Monsters draw out their breasts, and give
suck to their young ones, Lam. 4.3. Charity edifies, says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
8.1. 1 Cor. 8.1.
David's and Bathsheba's tender love to their Solomon, put them upon careful
instructing of him: wherein they showed their love to his Soul as well as his
Body.

2. Parents either do, or should principally aim at the Spiritual and Eternal
good of their poor Children: And what more profitable and effectual way to
promote this, than pious instruction and education? The Earth often proves
according to the seeds cast into it: The Vessel usually retains a smack and
tincture of that with which it was first seasoned. What Blessings might Parents
prove to their Children? What excellent things might be effected by them, if
they did but take the advantage of their tender years, and then resolvedly set
themselves to bring them in to God.

3. Parentt cannot but love themselves, their own peace, their own comforts,
their own delights; and what more probable means to advance these than the
pious education of their children? which fully appears by this Dilemma, either
their conscientious endeavors prove successful or not?

1. If not. If after all care, pains, prayer, faithfulness, the Crop should not
answer the Seed, why this may relieve and support, Liberavit animam suam.
that it is not through the Parents default. The Child dies, but not by the
Father's hand: He has discharged his duty, and thereby in the sight of God,
delivered his own Soul from guilt, though he could not deliver his Child's Soul
from ruin. Where God sees such a willing mind, backed with sincere, utmost,
constant endeavors, 2 Cor. 8.12.
God accepts the faithful Parent according to that he has, and not according
to that he has not. But

2. If the Lord please to smile on endeavors, into what a transport and
ecstasy of joy will it raise the serious Parent, to see the corruption of his
Child's Nature healed, to see saving grace wrought in his heart. If such a
sight be so pleasing to Spiritual Fathers, to Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. to John:
John 3. Ep. v 4.
how ravishing must it needs be to Natural Parents, Prove. 10.1. and 23, 24 25.
But especially when this is wrought by their own means.

4. When this grace is wrought in the hearts of children, and that especially
by their Parents, this cannot but inflame the hearts of children with dearest
love of, and engage them to the highest duty to their Parents; they must of
necessity be far more loving and dutiful than otherwise they could or would be.
A wise Son makes a glad Father: But how? Prove. 15.20.
viz. by a dutiful and respectful carriage.

5. By this means Parents shall do unspeakable good to their Families and
Posterity. Hereby even many Ages after they are dead, like Abel, Deuteronomy. 4.9.
they shall yet speak, and Posterity hearing the voice of their Ancestors,
coming as it were from the dead, they will be more apt to credit and believe.
By pious Education the true Religion is kept up in the world, and propagated
from Age to Age. The care of the two Tribes and an half of propagating the true
Religion to their Posterity, is very notable in that famous Scripture, Josh.
22.24, 25. They built an Altar of Testimony, v. 10. At this their Brethren the
Israelites are highly offended, but received full satisfaction, when they were
assured that this was done for the sake of Posterity, lest they should be made
to cease from fearing the Lord.

6. Parents have many and great advantages above all others, for the successful
instructing and educating of their children.

1. Children are more confident of their Parents love than any others. Whether
Ministers and strangers speak to them in love, they are uncertain, but of their
Parents love they are well assured. Now nothing takes so much with any one, as
that which is believed to proceed from love, specially by one that loves. This
instruction, says the loving Child, comes not only from my dear Father's lip
or head, but from his affectionate heart; and therefore I will readily receive
it, and lodge it in my own.

2. Parents have their children in hand betimes, before they are fly-blown with
any false Opinions, or leven'd with bad impressions; before they have any other
sin than that which was born with them. Parents therefore have an opportunity
of making the first impressions on them, even while they are most docile,
tender, flexible, and least apt to make resistance against instruction. But now
when they come to their Minister, Instructor, Tutor, they are as a Paper
Printed before, and therefore unapt to receive another Impression. They have
much to be untaught before they can be taught: fraught with self conceitedness
and proud objections, more apt to strive against and resist Instruction, than
humbly and readily to receive it.

3. To wind up this Argument on the closest Bottom. Children wholly depend on
Parents for their present maintenance and their future Portions, and they know
it is their interest to hearken and obey. Parents Authority over their Children
is most unquestionable. They dare not open their mouths against it, as they
will adventure to do against Ministers. Parents have the Power of the Rod to
back Instruction, Prove. 22.15. They best know the peculiar Diseases and
temperatures of their Children, and so best know how to choose and apply the
most proper Remedy. Parents are nearest their Children, and can best discern
all their faults in time; and have opportunity of speaking to them in the most
familiar manner, that may best be understood, and after this to inculcate their
Instructions, and drive them home, that what is not done at one time may be
done at another.

By all these advantages it appears that God has furnished Parents above all
others, to be Instruments of their Childrens good, and the first and greatest
promoters of their Salvation.

To instruct Children is the grand Duty of our Ministers. It Is they that are to
take the great charge of the Souls of these our Lambs.

1. And do you indeed give up these your Lambs to be fed, to be instructed by
them?

2. Suppose you did, (as Heaven knows thousands of Parents do not, as they
ought) yet know --

That every Parent is as deeply charged with the souls of his Children, as any
Pastor is with the souls of his Flock, and more deeply too.

1. You are as often and as expressly charged to use the means to save your
Childrens souls, and to breed Grace in them, as any Minister is. Read,
consider, remember Exodus 13.18. Thou shall show thy Son the meaning, end, use
of the Sacrament, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Psalm. 78.5. Ephesians. 6.4. Show me any Text of
Scripture more express and peremptory for any Ministers Instructing of his
Flock.

2. Parents stand obliged to their Children by more and stronger Bonds than any
Pastor can be to his Flock, Bonds of Nature, as well as Grace.

3. Parents have more means and opportunities to prevail with their Children,
than any Pastor living can have to do good on his Flock. What a surpassing
Interest have Parents in the esteem, love, affection of their Children! What
Advantage may they take of their Childrens tender years! What continual
Converse with them! What an awful Authority over them! What strict Obligations
upon them, which no Minister can so much as pretend unto. The truth is, none
upon Earth have such fair opportunities to instruct and bring others to
goodness, as Parents have. This was that that holy Hezekiah meant in his
Prayer, Isa. 38.18, 19. The Living, Deuteronomy. 4 10.
the Living he shall praise thee, and who among all the Living, The Father he
shall do it chiefly, principally, but how? by making known Thy truth to their
Children: q. d. Parents by deriving Religion to their Posterity, may greatly
honor God above others.

Obj. 2. But to what end should we teach Children? Alas, they do not
understand what they say. They do but Act the Parot, know not what it is they
do repeat, and so, whilst we pretend to advance the fear and service, we do
but make our Children to profane the Name of God, or to take it in vain.

Sol. 1. Our carnal Reasonings ought not to countermand Divine injunctions* The
Text is express, Train up a Child, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Thou shall teach them diligently
to thy Children, or whet and sharpen my Law upon them. Timothy's Instruction,
and that from a little sucking Child, is commended by the Apostle as a fair
president to the whole Christian World. 2 Timothy 3.15.
We know not who are under God's Election, nor the appointed time of his
effectual Calling, and therefore must use the means to all, especially to
Children that are under the federal stipulation; such are commanded to Remember
their Creator in the days of their Youth. Eccl. 12.1.
And who should endeavor to make deep impressions of God upon their Hearts,
Ephesians. 6.4.
but those that are over them by Divine appointment, who ought to bring them up
in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

2. If this fear and jealousy must hinder Catechizing of Children, who knows
how long it will be hindered for even Children well grown up, being not before
Catechized, are not likely at their first Teaching so to understand what is
said to them, as to repeat it with due reverence. Do we not find Christ himself
instructing Nicodemus in the great Mystery of Regeneration. when he was able to
return him no more than that childish Answer, How can a Man be born again when
he is old? John 3.4.
Can he enter the second time into his Mothers Womb? We find our Savior
delivering a Divine Truth to those that were known to be his Disciples, who
still accompanied him, and repeated themselves what he spoke to them, in the
very same words wherein he delivered it, and yet when all was done confessed
they could not tell what he said. Joh. 16.16, 17, 18.
May we therefore say, that by reason of their Ignorance they took that Name of
God, his Word, in vain? No, this was not a vain business, for in this way they
understood the words of Christ at last, the meaning whereof they knew not at
first.

3. Catechizing may be considered under a double notion.

1. In regard of the present Action.

2. As it is an Introduction and preparation to the future and further knowledge
of God. Now though little ones do not at first so understand as to use with due
reverence the Name and things of God, yet it follows not that they take God's
Name in vain, because they repeat good things in order to, and for the gaining
of such a knowledge of God and of those Holy things, as whereby they afterward
come to use them more reverently. And therein the first use of them, though not
so reverent, has a part, as being preparatory to it, and having an influence
into it, and working as a good means for the begetting of it. Do not we teach
little Ones their Letters by signs, and certain petty devised sayings and
resemblances, which put them in mind of their Letters. And this is not a
vanity, but a way suited to their narrow capacities, to make them learn them
the sooner. So in this and the like cases; the first Rudiments are still to be
taken and judged of, not in a way of disjunction from what follows after, but
as a preparation to it, and being so taken, they are not vain, but material
things, because they serve to very considerable ends. It is neither vanity nor
Hypocrisy, says a reverend Author, to help Children first to understand words
and signs, Baxter's Christian Directory, p. 582.
in order to their early understanding of the matter and signification.
Otherwise no Man may teach them any Language, or to read any words that be
good, because they must first understand the words before the meaning. -- If a
Child learn to read in a Bible, it is not taking God's Name or Word in vain,
though he understand it not, for it is in order to his learning to understand
it. And it is not vain, which is to so good a use.

Thus for Parents.

2. Nor are Christian Ministers and Governors of Families, together with
School-Instructors and Tutors less obliged to take care of the Religious
Instruction and Education of their respective Servants and Pupils: which
clearly appears from hence.

1. The Lord commands it, and expects it at the hands of Masters. When others
entrust Masters with the bodies of Servants, God intrusts them with their
Souls, commands them to take care of them, as for which they must and shall
give a strict account. Lo here, says God, is a poor mean Servant, but he has
a precious and an immortal Soul. A Soul purchased with the same Blood of
God-Man, that his Master's was: and himself, though never so vile in the eye of
sense, Col. 3.11.
yet capable of being made a Coheir with Christ in Heaven. Take this Man, and
take care of him, as thou will answer it at the great Day. If this Soul perish
through thy default, thy Life shall go for his. Look to it therefore Masters,
give to your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also have a
Master in Heaven. Do not use them as Slaves, as Beasts, but rather as
Fellow Servants of the same Lord, Col. 4.1.

In this Text we may observe a Divine Precept, and a persuasive Argument to
back that Precept.

1. The Precept. Ye Masters give unto your Servants,

1. That which is just; (...), Oecon. 15. (...).
whatever is due to them by any positive contract, legality or obligation.
Aristotle names three things as due to Servants; Work, Food, Correction. To
which, since our Servants are usually such as are not so by conquest, but by
compact, we may add a fourth, viz. Wages. -- Moderate Work, convenient Food,
due Correction, proportionable Wages.

2. Not only that which is just, but that which is equal too. (...). Dav. in
Col. 4.1.
And this refers not to the works themselves of Servants and Masters, but to
the mind and manner of doing, which ought to bear a due proportion in both: v.
gr. Col. 3.22. Servants are commanded to obey their Masters in all things, not
with eye-service, but in singleness of heart, fearing God, and as serving the
Lord Christ. And Masters are required to return them that which is equal, when
they rule them piously and religiously. That is just which the Law of Nature or
Nations requires; that is equal which true Christian Charity and meekness
requires, and which is due to servants by a moral obligation.

2. The Argument. Knowing, i. e. holding this for an undoubted principle,
believing it, and constantly remembering, that Masters on Earth have a Superior
Master in Heaven. As Servants, if gracious, are Gods Sons, and thereby may be
comforted; so Masters are God's Servants, and thereby may be cautioned. Are
Masters eyes on their servants to see whether they do their duties faithfully;
so God's eye watches them much more, to observe whether they carry themselves
in their Relation conscientiously. Holy Job Job 31.13^
stood in aw of this great Master, and acted accordingly; Ephesians. 6.5. to 8.
Servants must be obedient unto their Masters as unto Christ, as serving the
Lord Christ; and the Masters must instruct and command in Christ. Mr. Dod, that
great Servant of our Lord Jesus Christ, from Exodus 20.10. gravely observes from
those words, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Manservant, nor thy
Maidservant, etc. That it belongs to all Family-Governours to see that their
servants, and all inferiors under their charge, holily observe and keep the
Lord's Day.

2. I argue from those many and great benefits which accrue from the holy
instruction of Servants and other Family inferiors.

1. The Church is in an immediate capacity to receive benefit by it. If
Mistresses of Families did their parts, and sent such polished materials to the
Churches as they ought to do, the work and life of the Pastors of the Church
would unspeakably be more easy and delightful: What a reviving of heart would
it be to us to Preach to such an Auditory; to Catechize, instruct, examine, and
watch over them who are so prepared by a wise and holy education, and
understand and love the Doctrine which they hear. How teachable and tractable
will such be! How successfully the labors of their Pastors laid out upon them!
How comely and beautiful the Churches be, which are composed of such persons!
and how pure and comfortable will their Communion be! The Orchard is according
to what the Nursery is: So Churches are according to what Families are; Good
Families make good Churches, and good Education makes good Families.

2. Not only the Church but State would receive much good by this: Towns,
Cities, Counties, Kingdoms would gain by it: and it must needs be so; for what
are they, but the whole made up of these parts? And the whole must needs be
such as the parts are of which it consists. Families are but like the Book in
loose sheets, and Kingdoms like the Book bound up: The one but like letters
that are single and apart; the other like letters joined together. Now if the
sheets be not good, or the letters not good, the book or writing cannot
possibly be good. Give us the best Magistrates, let them Enact the best Laws,
and back them with the strictest Exccution, yet Societies will be naught,
whilst Governors of Families neglect their duty in Religious Education.

3. With what a Cloud of Witnesses do the Holy Scriptures present us of
Governors of Families, that have been greatly conscientious in their faithful
discharge of this duty. Josh. 24.15.
We told you before of Abraham's Trained, Instructed, Catechized servants, Genesis
18.19. After him Joshua, who resolves that whatever others might do, he and his
household would serve the Lord: though others should forsake the Lord, yet he
like Noah and Lot, just in his Generation. Joshua does not only choose to be
saved by Jehovah, but to serve Jehovah: But more especially observe the
latitude and circumference of his choice; I and my House: Not himself without
his Family, much less his Family without himself; but himself and his Family;
and first himself, and then his Family: We will serve the Lord. Lo here the
firmness and stability of Joshua's choice: We will serve the Lord; not only we
desire to do it, but we are fully resolved to do it.

Hear what David promises, and pre-ingages, when ever he came to sway the Royal
Scepter; viz. to be a singular example, both as a Prince, and as a Master of a
Family, Psalm. 101. In which respect this Psalm should be often read and
ruminated on by such, that their Houses may be as the House of David, Zech.
12.8. And as Melancthon attests concerning the Palace of George Prince of
Anhalt, that it was at once Ecclesiastica, Academica, and Curia, a Royal Court,
a Learned Academy, and an Holy Church. Act and Mor. 1559. fol.
Mr. Fox reports, that Bishop Ridley often read and expounded this Psalm to his
household, hiring them with money to get it by heart. Well, what says David
here? v. 2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will beg^n the
intended Reformation at my self, and then set things to rights in my Family. I
will walk within my house with a perfect heart; and then see what work he
makes, how conscientiously he demeans himself toward those under his
Family-charge, from v. 3. to 8. Good Governors of Families are like that
Nobleman, who had for his impress two bundles of Millet bound together, with
this Motto, Servare and servari, meum est: for the Nature of Millet is to guard
it self from all corruption, and all those things that lie near it. It Is a rare
Elogy that is given the late Reverend and Religious Dr. Chatterton, that he was
an Housekeeper 53 years, yet in all that time never kept any of his Servants
from Church to dress his Meat, saying, Clark's lives.
that he desired as much to have his Servants know God as himself.

In short, observe the strain and current of the whole Scriptures, Dr. Jacom ^
Dom. Deo Jun. ^07.
and you shall find very few or none of those Family-Governours, that were
really converted themselves, but they gave this excellent testimony of the
Truth, and soundness of the Grace of God in them, viz. in being careful and
sollicitous to beget and breed it in the hearts of those that were under their
roof and charge. If Esther fasts, so shall her Maids too, Esth. 4.16. And in
the New Testament we find the Masters interest and duty taken to be so great
for the Conversion of the rest, that as he was not to content himself with his
own Conversion, but to labor presently that his household should join with him,
that so the whole Family at once might be devoted to God. So God did bless his
own Order and Ordinance to that end. And where he imposed duty on Masters, he
usually gave such success that commonly the whole Family was converted and
baptized with the Ruler of the Family. So we read Act. 10.2. Cornelius a
Centurion, a godly Captain, a devout man, and one that feared God with all his
house: to whom the Angel promised that Peter should tell him words whereby he
and all his household should be saved, Acts 11.14. Does the Lord open Lydia's
heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul? It follows instantly, she was
baptized, and her household. Does the Jailer believe on the Lord Jesus? Paul
assuxes him that he shall be saved, and his house; and so it was, for he, and
all his, were baptized streightway, for he believed in God with all his house,
Acts 16.32, 33, 34. Christ no sooner comes to Zacheus his Soul, but Salvation
comes to Zacheus house, Luke 19.9. Crispus believes on the Lord with all his
house, Acts 18.8. The Noble man himself believed and his whole house, John
4.53. These Family-Governours, it seems, took special care of the welfare of
their Servants Souls; did not act like Turks, who mind nothing about their
Slaves but their doing their own work. These judged that if it were cruelty not
to allow their servants bodily food, much more savage and bloody to starve
their Souls: And therefore it might well be said of those happy Servants whom
Providence fixed under their Conduct, as the Queen of Sheba of Solomon's
Servants, 1 Kings 10.8. Happy are these thy servants which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom.

Obj. But there are some Masters whose weakness and delusion I cannot but pity
that are apt to object thus. True, it is good to teach our ignorant Servants,
but we must question, yea in our Consciences doubt, whether we may require and
command them to learn. Will not this incroach on the Liberty of their
Consciences which ought to be left free.

Sol. 1. I cannot but wonder at this depth of Satan, who so strangely inveigles
men to tolerate all things by mere scrupling of them, and to let the Reins
loose purely out of strictness: To think it a sin in themselves to press a duty
on others; and no less than a breach of God's Holy Laws to injoin the keeping
of them.

2. Tell me how comes it to pass that Masters who can allow themselves to be
severe enough to their Servants for loytering in their Shops, cannot find in
their hearts to rebuke them for neglect of their Souls; that they who hold
themselves bound in Conscience to inform their Servants in all the secrets of
their Trade, should think themselves as much tied up from pressing them to
learn the Mysteries of Religion.

3. There is but too much cause of fear, lest they who use not all the means
they can to bring their own Servants to the Faith, be themselves brought at
last to an unprofitable Repentance. Sure I am, they that have not learned their
duty to God, will never rightly perform their duty to men. I heartily wish,
that proud, saucy, debaucht behavior, and lame quarrels, be not too sad proofs
of this unhappy Truth.

I have done with the fourth, I now proceed to the fifth and last Enquiry, viz.
How the whole affair may be so prudently, piously, Scripturally managed, as
that it may become most Universally profitable. And here I shall first address
my self to my Superiors, and then close all with directions to Inferiors.

1. Then for Superiors; and among these Oeconomical ones.

1. Let Parents begin betimes with their children, (...), as soon as ever they
find them to have any use of Reason, as soon as ever their understandings begin
to bud and blossom.

The discreet Gardener begins to graff as soon as ever the Sap begins to arise,
and the Stock to swell. In the Old Law we find more Lambs, Kids, young Turtles,
First Fruits, and green Corn required, than other Elder Sacrifices, Levit.
2.14. Sow thy Seed in the Morn, Eccl. 11.9. Begin I say betimes, the sooner the
better; according to that of the Prophet, Isa. 28.9. To whom shall I teach
knowledge? and whom shall I make to understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned
from the milk, and drawn from the Breasts. Old men, nay indeed, and too many
young men, think themselves too wise as well as too old to learn. Indeed
Childhood and Youth are the fittest times to learn in. Vdum, and molle lutum
e^z nunc, nunc pr^pirand^s, and a^ri^ingendus sine sinc rota.
It Is b^st drawing a fair Picture on a Rasa Tabula: The most legible Characters
are best written on the whitest Paper before it be soild and slur'd: The Twig
whilst young, is most easily twisted: The Ground best sown when soft and
mollified. Hence that of the Royal Preacher, Eccl. 72.7. Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy Youth. Little ones have not as yet imbibed such false
Principles and Nations, nor are they drencht with such evil habits as Elder
ones are too too frequently died with. He has a very difficult Province, whose
task it is to wash out the spots of a Leopard, or to whiten an Ethiopian: And
little less work has he that undertakes to teach the Truth to one that has
been brought up in, and is now as it were Naturalized to Err: For those false
notions must first be wholly rooted up, before Truth can profitably be
implanted. Such must be untaught much, before they can well be taught, though
but a little.

2. Labor as much as in you lies, to entertain their tender attention with
such ^ruths as mostly affect their senses and fancies, and are most easily
conveyed to their little understandings. To wit:

1. Such Truths, the sparks whereof are most alive in their corrupt nature,
v.g. To know God that made the whole World, and them in particular: That this
God is to be worshipped: That their Parents are to be h^noured: That no lie is
to be told: That they must love others as themselves: That they must certainly
dye, and after Death be judged to an Eternal state. Begin to season them with
the sense of God's Majesty and Mercy.

2. Deal as much in Similitudes and plain and easy Resemblances as you can,
taking your Rise from the Creatures they see and hear, always greatly
respecting their weak capacity. Are you sitting in your Houses, you may thus
bespeak them: Oh my dear Child, is this an handsome dwelling, this house made
with Stones and Timber? O how much desirable is that House above with God, that
House not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens? When they awake out of
sleep, mind them of their Duty, Psalm. 139. Ephesians. 5.14.
of giving their first thoughts to God, and of awaking out of sin unto
righteousness, and of their awaking the last day out of the Grave by the sound
of the Trumpet, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. Do they see the light of the day shining into
their eyes? Ask them. Is it inde^d a pleasant thing to behold the Sun; O how
excellent then is God's goodness in causing the Sun of Righteousness to arise
upon us with healing in his wings? Mal 4.2.
Are you putting on their clothes? O my Child, think on sin, which was the
cause of your Soul's nakedness, and of your Bodies need of apparel. Be not
proud of your clothes which are given to hide your shame: Never rest satisfied
till your Soul be arrayed with the Robes of Christ's Righteousness. When at the
fire, tell them of that Lake of fire and brimstone that burns for ever, into
which all those that live and dye in sin shall be cast. At Table, how easy is
it, how profitable, how delightful will it be, out of every Creature there to
extract spiritual food for our Souls? The Bread minds them of the Bread of
Eternal Life; their hunger, of hungring after Christ's Righteousness. By a
Rivers side, how easy is it to mind them of the Water of Life, and of those
Rivers of pleasure at God's right hand for evermore. Thus may you, Psalm. 16.11.
Hos. 12.10. Assimilavi (...) properte ^^enim multis rebus Deum compararunt,
Patri, Pastori, am^e^, le^ni^. Pool's Synops.
without the least taedium or disgust, teach those little Bees to such
spiritual Honey out of every Flower. By these similitudes, as by so many golden
Links, you may draw Truths into their heads and memories. Thus it pleased the
Lord to teach his people of old, by using Similitudes, Isa. 5.1. Ezekiel. 16.3.
Hos. 1.2. Thus the Great Bishop of our Souls taught his Disciples by Parables,
Mat. 13.38.

3. Teach them the most useful, delightful, affectionate stories you can find
in the Word of God. v.gr. The Creation of Man. Man's Fall. The Deluge. Isaac
Sacrificed. Lot and Sodom. Joseph. The Golden Calf. David and Goliath. Three
Children in the Fiery Furnace. Daniel in the Lions Den. Jonah in the Whales
Belly. The Children devoured by Bears.

4. Betimes acquaint them with the practice of Religious Duties. Read the Word,
Pray, give Thanks, sing Psalms in their presence. It Is conceived by the
Learned, that the little Children learnt to sing Hosanna to the praise of
Christ, by hearing their Parents sing the 118th Psalm, out of which that
Hosanna is taken.

5. Endeavor to restrain them from all evil, and to breed in them a Conscience
of sin, even from the very breast. No playing, no idle and vain chat on the
Lord's Day. Exodus 20.10. Ezekiel. 4.14.
Ezekiel from his youth and infancy had not eaten any thing forbidden in the
Law. Made Conscience of meals, when the Appetite was most unruly. One fault
amended by a Child out of Conscience that it is a sin, is worth amending an
hundred out of fear of the Rod, or hope of reward only.

6. Bring them to the public Ordinances as soon as they can come to be there
and kept there without the disturbance of the Church, Exodus 20.9, 10. The
Parent is to take care that the Child Sanctifies the Sabbath day. Joshua read
all the words that Moses commanded before all the Congregation of Israel, Josh.
8.35. Joel 2.15, 16. Jon. 3.5. Omnes sine ullo discrimine, ne infantibus
exceptis. Drusius. Mark 10.13. Luke 18.15. Vt Patres, and majores natu in illis
perspicerent quid essent meriti, and magis exhorrerent scolerasua pr^pter quae
nou sibi solum, sed et liberis suis imminebat interitus. Calv. Deuteronomy 66. (...)
Et exacues ea, accurate and commodissime m^^lcabis. ^^no (...) Proverbium, quod
in ore sit, and inculcetur. Act. 17.11, 12. (...), of better descent. Non per
civilem dignitatem, sed per spiritualem dignationem. Trap.
with the women and the little ones. And Deuteronomy. 29.11. not only Captains, and
Elders, and Officers, with all the men of Israel, but their little ones also
stood before the Lord, to enter into Covenant with him, Mat. 19.13, 14. There
were brought unto Christ little Children, that he should put his hands on them
and pray, but the Disciples rebuked them. But our Savior gives check to their
rebukes, and commands them to suffer little children, and forbid them not to
come unto him: and that on a weighty reason, because of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven: and those little ones enjoyed the benefit and blessing of Christ's hand
and prayer. Sanctify a Fast, call a Solemn Assembly, gather the children and
those that suck the breast, Joel 2.15, 16. Isa, 17.5.

7. After their return from the public, be sure to call them to an account
according to their capacity: Examine, and try how they profit, how they
understand and remember anything at all that they have heard: Repeat it, and
make it still more and more plain to them; and in repeating it, apply it also
to their Consciences This is that which some Divines understand by that
whetting or sharpning of the Word on our Children; i. e. teach them by way of
repetition, going over and over again, as men do with knives when they whet
them; that so, as knives by such whetting are more keen and fit to cut, so the
Truths of God by often turning and returning them on the ears and tongues of
children, may pierce more deeply into their hearts and consciences, for their
better understanding and affecting of them. This was our Savior's practice, to
call his Disciples to an account, and to know of them what they remembered and
understood of what they heard, Mat. 13.51. Jesus says unto them, have ye
understood all these things? and Mark. 4.34. when they were alone he expounded
all things to his Disciples. How careful will the child or servant be heedfully
to mark what he hears, if he knows he shall be examined when he comes home? How
much will this course help and confirm your children and servants, yea your
selves also to understand, believe, and practice that which has been taught
you. When those Noble Bereans had publicly received the Word with all
readiness of mind, i. e. took the heads of Paul's Sermon truly, they privately
searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether things were so: and finding on
their search, that the Truths delivered were consonant to the Scriptures; it is
said, therefore, i. e. for that very reason many of them believed; and not your
understandings only, but your memories also, This way with your Family, will
make you the Governors of it better able to retain. This is clearly inferred
from Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou
forget the things, etc. But how shall this forgetfulness be prevented? Why, by
teaching them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons. 2 Pet. 1 13.
And this refreshing of your memories will not a little conduce to the stirring
up of your affections, and to work in you greater sense and deeper feeling of
the Truths you have heard.

8. In all your instructions most carefully avoid all tedious prolixity.
Nothing more disgusts a Child's spirit, than long and tedious discourses. Make
up the shortness of your discourse by frequency? a little now, and a little
then, not all at once: Drop by drop, as you pour liquor into narrow-mouthed
Bottles. As you do when you first begin to feed their Bodies with a Spoon, so
must you do when you first begin to feed their Souls with instruction. Long
Speeches burden their small memories too much; and through men's imprudence may
unhappily occasion them to loath spiritual Manna. As Physicians therefore in
their Diuretic Precepts prescribe to children little and often, so must we.
Young Plants may quickly be even over-glutted with rich manuring, and rotted
with too much watering. Weak eyes newly opened from sleep, at the first can
hardly bear the glaze of a Candle. Line upon line therefore, and Precept upon
Precept, here a little, and there a little. Isa. 28.10. Genesis 33.13.
You must drive the little ones toward Heaven, as Jacob did his toward Canaan
very gently. Fair and soft goes far.

9. Having thus far seasoned your little ones, Dr. Jacomb Dom. Deo 167.
and their understandings being somewhat grown with their years, now is the
fittest time to put a Catechism into their hands, i. e. a platform of sound
words, 2 Timothy 1.13. by way of Question and Answer, in a short compendious
Method; whose terms being clear and distinct, Morn. Exercise at Cripplegate, p.
196.
should be phrased, as near as may be, out of the Holy Scripture, and fitted to
their capacities by a very plain and solid style, and to their memories by
brief expressions. And here I would humbly offer this advice; make use of a
double Catechism, a shorter and a larger. A shorter, to be learned by those
that have weak memories and capacities: A larger, to be got by heart by those
that have more years, greater parts, and larger capacities. Nov. 30. 1618.
Sess. 17. Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
Thus I find the Synod of Dort prescribing in their Act for Catechizing. In
this we agree with that burning and shining Light, Mr. Crook of Winton in
Somerset, and that acute, grave, and pious Pastor of Sutton in Bedfordshire,
Mr. Bowls in his Pastor Evangelicus; and especially we find it done to our
hands by the late Assembly of Divines sitting at Westminster, in their lesser
and larger Catechism: And that upon this solid reason, lest on the one hand
whilst we impose a burden on such weak shoulders as are not able to sustain
it, they should despond and sink: and on the other hand, when we require of
others that which is much beneath their supposed ability, they should pass it
by with neglect at least, if not throw it off with scorn.

But what are the Forms of Catechizing I would propose? I answer.

1. For the youngest and lowest Rank, I suppose the Articles of the Christian
Faith, contained in that very Ancient Creed, commonly called the Apostles
Creed; The Decalogue, or Ten Commandments; the Lord's Prayer, and the
Institution of the two Sacraments of the New Testament. But here, as indeed in
all Religious instruction, remember that you are not to teach Parots but
Christians; persons, though for the present ignorant, yet capable of
understanding both words and things. Be not therefore satisfied in the Child's
bare repeating of the words, Bowls Past. Evang. l. 2. c 5.
as a thick-skul'd Papist is taught to mumble over his Pater noster or Ave
Maria, which he no more understands than that sottish Priest did his Mumpsimus,
but first unlock the Cabinet, that is, open to the Child the true meaning of
the words, and then present him with the Jewels, that is, the Truths contained
in those words: Remember it as an undoubted Maxim. It is impossible clearly to
apprehend Truths, unless we rightly understand those words in which Truths are
wrapped up.

2. For others that are of a larger capacity. I shall not presume to dedicate
among those more than scores of excellent Catechisms that are extant, and may
be of singular use both in Families and Churches, which to pitch upon, with the
slighting of any of the rest. I bless the Lord for the common Catechism of our
Church, and for Doctor Hills improvement of it, in which I was initiated when a
Child. God has signally owned Mr. Perkins his Six Principles, and no less Mr.
Bali's Catechism, Crook's Guide is highly esteemed by the Learned judicious and
godly; and I judge not unworthily, if for nothing else than this its great
harmony with the sum and substance of Christian Religion, composed by that
great Master in our English Israel.

These Catechisms, I say, to me, with many, many more, sparkle like so many
precious Diamonds in my eyes; but it pleased the Lord, in the beginning of my
Ministry, to direct me to the use of those Catechisms that were composed by the
late Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Catechisms which I then found
greatly approved, not only by the godly and judicious at home, but also by
several of the Reformed Churches abroad; and such as have this peculiar
Excellency beyond most that I have seen, that every Answer in them is an entire
Proposition of it self, without relation to the Question preceding. These
Catechisms I have made use of, both in my Congregation and Family, now near
thirty years; and I desire to speak it with all humility and thankfulness, if
ever the Lord smiled on my poor Labors, it has been whilst I have been
busied in this great, useful, necessary work of Catechizing, and that out of
these Catechisms.

How these Excellent Catechisms may be used to the best advantage by Parents
and Governors of Families, I have long since given directions, which may be
had at Mr. Parkhurst's at the Bible and three Crowns near Mercer's Chapel: 2.
Ecclesiastical Superiors.
And as to my dear and Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, that would at the
Great Day be publicly owned as Pastors after God's own Heart, such as have
minded the Flock more than the Fleece, and in that Flock the Lambs as well as
the Sheep: To these my Brethren, though I dare not presume to give advice,
(what can my Taper do to their Sun, my d^op to their stream?) yet they will
give me leave to be their Remembrancer. Dear Brethren, who are to me as my own
Soul, our great and good God has been pleased to honor us so far, as to set
us up as Stewards in his house, to give every one his proper portion in due
seas^n; and of all others, you know our Master's will is, that young ones be
especially provided for: The Duty therefore that we ow to God, the love we bear
to Truth, and to Souls that are not capable of being saved without the knowledge
of Truth; to the Souls of younger ones especially, who if they be not taught
the Truth in their greener years, will more difficultly be brought to learn it
when they are grown older: Nay, the love we owe to our own souls, who must give
a just account for every poor Soul committed to our charge, we knowing how
great a Price the least Lamb of our Flock has cost, how rich a Prey Satan has
ever reckoned on in the poorest Soul, how industrious he is in hunting, how
many nimble Beagles he has that rejoice to do their best in the worst service
he lists to employ them, how great advantages they have at this time by the
many sad and fatal breaches made in all our hedges: Surely, in the serious
consideration of these, and many more particulars, we shall, in the strength of
our God, arise and be doing, and revive that most necessary exercise of
Catechizing in the midst of us. But how?

1. For advice at large, and such as you will have cause to bless God for ever
for, if you please to follow it, I refer you to that faithful and skilful
Workman Mr. Baxter his Christian Directory, fol. page 498. 509. 512. 515. 543.
582. and fourth Part. 44.

2. More particularly.

1. Whatever you do in this work, you will do it soundly and purely. If ever a
Pastor will in Doctrine show incorruptness, gravity, sincerity, let him do it
in Catechizing. Tit. 2.7, 8. Sound speech that cannot be condemned, that he
that is of the contrary part may not be ashamed. Give to Babes the sincere
Milk, 1 Pet. 2.2^
not sophisticated Wine.

2. Do it plainly: so plainly, that he that runs may read and understand; so
plainly, that none may excuse themselves at the Day of Judgment, and say, Lord,
we would have learned thy saving truths, but they were too high, too hard, too
difficult for us. Remember, the generality of people are very dull of hearing,
and such as have need of Milk, Heb. 5.11, 12.
and not of strong Meat: Speak we therefore so, as that our Discourse may rise
to the Conviction of the wisest, but yet at the same time sink and condescend
to the capacity of the meanest. I am apt to fear, that even then, Dr. Wilkins.
when we aim lowest, we yet at that very time shoot above, not only the
hearts, but heads of our people: Let our main care therefore be to open the
understandings of our Catechumeni. This is that which the Lord had in his eye,
when he did not only command the Levites to instruct the children of Israel in
the meaning of all his Statutes; Lev. 10.11.
but he laid this charge also upon every Parent to teach the Children the
meaning of every Law and Ordinance of God, Exodus 12.26, 27. and 13, 14. Dent.
6.20. If God required this under the Law, much more now under the Gospel, Isa.
11.9. Neh. 8.2, 3
when it is promised that the Earth should be filled with the knowledge of God.
The only service that is now acceptable unto God, is our reasonable service,
Romans 12.1. i. e. such service as is done unto him with reason and
understanding. Act. 8.30.
The Word read profits not unless understood: Understand thou what thou
read, said Philip to the Noble Eunuch, q. d. To what purpose read thou,
if thou be not careful to understand what thou read? The Word Preached
either by Pastor or Teacher; the Truth delivered in a way of Catechizing will
do us no good, unless we hear with understanding. Hearken unto me every one of
you, and understand, Mark 7.14. says the greatest Preacher: and have ye
understood all these things? Matthew. 13.51. Dear Brethren, as I know you desire
not to sow your seed on the highway, Mat. 13 19.
so as that the Fowls of that Prince of the Air should come and pick it up, so
be careful to make poor Creatures to understand what they are taught. Now for
the opening of the Truths laid down in the Assemblies Catechism, I cannot but
commend those four Books which I have found so exceeding useful for the younger
ones among our people, viz. Dr. Wallis, Mr. Jos. Alleyn, Mr. Tho. Vincent, and
Mr. Tho. Dolittle, their excellent Explanations.

3. You will be sure to act very wisely, very discreetly. You know in
Catechizing you have to do with different Sexes, Ages, Tempers, Capacities;
some are less capable and more bashful: these must not be exposed to the scorn
and contempt of those that have, it may be, more glib tougues and brazen
foreheads, but worse hearts. You know when and how to encourage the willing, to
praise the forward, to check the presumptuous, to admonish the unruly,
patiently to bear with all. You know what it is (...) to be Soul Nurses, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. how to impart with all dearness those Fundamental Truths which
make for their spiritual and eternal good and growth: (...).
And shall I take leave, in your names, to assure younger ones that you will
have a tender eye to the slowness of apprehension in some of them, to the
slipperiness of memory in others, to the bashfulness of most, to the reputation
of them all: That you will opportunely prevent their grosser mistakes, and
heartily palliate their lesser ones; that you will give the best sense to the
worst of their Answers, and put some necessary words into their mouths, the
better to facilitate the expression of their thoughts; that you will so wisely
manage the whole business, as that it may make for their reputation as well as
instruction, and that they may find favor both with God and men.

4. What you do, do it resolvedly, and that in God's strength, not in your own.
Expect opposition from within, from without. From within, a proud heart, apt to
mutter: it is a low, mean piece of drudgery. No, but rather the most Doctor-like
part of our work, and such as cannot accurately be performed, without a clear
insight into the greatest depths of Religion, and a proportionable gift of
ready Exposition: The lowest Principles of Religion are the highest Mysteries.
Again, the tender shoulder that shrugs, and enters its Plea against the
burden, as being too troublesome a weight to be added to the Load of our other
Lords-day-labours. Neither will this prevail with you, Brethren; we are
confident you are not only able, 2 Timothy 2.14. 2 Cor. 12.15.
but apt to teach. It Is your joy to spend your selves, and be spent in the
utmost service of your God and his Church. You will not be much concerned in
the consuming of your Oil, so you may lend your Light. To such gracious Souls
as yours, there is, there can be no greater burden than the sense you have of
the heaviness of your people in hearing. But from without, the general
averseness of young ones is pleaded; as a grand obstruction. As to that, you
are so well seen in spiritual Logic, as to fetch meat out of this Eater, and
will easily conclude, that this averseness in young ones from this exercise of
Catechizing, is not the least Argument of its singular usefulness. The more
unwilling the Patient is to have his Wound opened, searched, plastered and
bound, the more eager the compassionate Surgeon is to give relief. The more
unwilling they are to present themselves to be Catechized, the more reason have
we to press them to it by the greatest violence of persuasion.. Lastly, let not
want of success discourage: Your Heavenly Master you know has assured you that
your labor is not, 1 Cor. 15. last.
shall not be in vain in the Lord. God takes the measures of his servants, not
from their success, which is his sole work, but from their sedulous and
faithful endeavors, which is their duty. Go you on to plant and water, let the
great Lord of the Vineyard alone to give the increase. And know, 2 Cor. 8.12. 1
Cor. 3.6, 7. 2 Cor. 2.15.
you are a sweet savor unto God; and though Israel be not gathered, but you
seem to have spent your strength in vain, yet surely your judgment is with the
Lord, and your work and wages with your God, Isa. 49.4.

I have now done with the particular directions; there remain yet some more
general ones, which being observed, may, with God's Blessing, much promote the
success of this whole work. And so

1. To spiritual instruction, add holy admonition, exhortation, good advice and
counsel. Do not only let them know by instruction what their duty is, but
press, urge, enforce this duty upon them by admonition and good counsel. O my
Child, you see your Duty, you know what you ought to do, O do according to what
you know. What a strong, powerful, prevailing influence has good counsel when
duly applied. Only see,

1. That you back your counsel with the clearest Scripture, and most convincing
Arguments you can possibly: Good advice without these is but a Bullet without
Powder, and Arrow without a Feather. Argue with them about the Excellency of
God, Christ, the Spirit, Grace, the vanity of the Creature, the folly and
sinfulness of sin. See how Job handles the matter with his Wife about murmuring
and impatience against God, Job 2.10. What, shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and not evil? Hear what Bathsheba says to Solomon, Prove. 31.2, 3, 4.
What my Son, and what the Son of my Womb, etc. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel,
it is not for Kings, etc. Show them the beauty of Christ, draw aside the
Curtain, let them behold the Image of that blessed Savior pourtrayed in
Scripture. Do to them as the Spouse did to the Daughters of Jerusalem; run over
all the Excellencies of Christ to them, and then conclude, He is altogether
lovely; This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend, Can. 5.16.
O Daughters of Jerusalem.

2. Labor as much as possible to insinuate your selves into their affections.
Having cleared your way into their heads, labor to wind and scrue your selves
into their hearts. Let them know that you have no design upon them but to make
them happy; no private end, only their everlasting good. This done, thou have
done all thy work: when all jealousies of any sinister ends are blown away,
then Exhortations and Counsels go down glibly. When persons are fully satisfied
that in all our Addresses to them, we study only their benefit and profit, this
opens an effectual door to all the means that we shall use. Thus Paul accosts
the Romans, I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift,
Romans 1.10, 11. Thus he smooths his way to the Philippians, Phil. 1.8. God is my
Record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. Labor
then to get their love, their good esteem, and the work will thrive beyond
expectation. Love is like the oiling of the Key, which makes it to open the
lock more easily, love greaseth the nail, and makes it enter with more facility.

2. To holy, hearty, serious, affectionate, frequent admonition, add an
exemplary Conversation. Inferiors are apt to be led rather by example than
rule, and are more prone to imitate Practices than to learn Principles. They
are more mindful of what we do, than of what we say, and they will be very
prone to suspect, that we are not in good earnest, when they see that we
command them one thing, and do another our selves. When we teach them well, and
do amiss our selves, we do but pull down with one hand, what we build with the
other: Like a man, that at the same time sings a lovely Song, and drowns the
melody of it by playing an ugly Tune. When the Father is immodest, the Child
that sees it soon grows impudent: and therefore the Ancients thought themselves
concerned to be very reserved and cautelous before their children. Maxima
debetur pueris reverentia. Psalm. 101.2. N^l faedum dictu, vis^que ea limina
^angat, intra quae pura est. P^il. 1.4. Col. 1 3. Romans 10.1.
Walk as David therefore in thy house with a perfect heart. Let thy children
and servants behold nothing in thy deportment, which if followed, may prove
sinful.

3. To an exemplary conversation add faithful, fervent, humble, constant
supplication. Paul without ceasing makes mention of his heart's desire, and his
prayer to God for Israel was, that they might be saved. Ministers, like
spiritual Priests, should not fail to offer their daily Sacrifices for their
people, confess their iniquities, bewail their misery, and cry mightily to God
for his mercy.

All our instructions without prayer will do no good: Go to God to sanctify
all. By prayer carry thy children, servants, to the blessed Jesus in the Arms
of Faith, and beseech him to bless them, by laying on his hands on them, as
Isaac did, The accustomed Ceremony used in Blessing. Beza in Mat. 19. Impositio
manuum Symbolum fuit apud Judaeos familiare, quoties sol^nnis erat precatio,
vel benedict^. Mat. 15.22.
Genesis 27.1. and 48.9, 14. with Matthew. 19.13. and Mark 10.16. How pathetically
did Abraham plead with God for Ishmael? Oh that Ishmael might live before thee,
Genesis 17.18. Bathsheba calls for Solomon the Son of her Vows, Prove. 31.2. Austin
the Child of Monica's prayers and tears. O pray then, pray earnestly, O that
this my Son, Daughter, Servant, might not dye for ever. Thou Lord art the
Prince and Lord of Life; O speak powerfully to their poor Souls, that these
pieces of my bowels, that are now dead in trespasses and sins, may hear thy
voice and live. Cry out to God with that poor man in the Gospel, Lord have
mercy on my Son, Matthew. 17.15. If a Mother, do as the Woman of Canaan did, Have
mercy on me, O Lord, my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. If he seem
not to hear, and to be silent, go nearer to him by Faith, and cry, Lord help
me, Lord help me: If his Answer seem to be a repulse, do not thou desist, but
rather gather Arguments from his denial as she did; and conclude, that if he
once open his mouth, he will not shut his hand: and if importunity may prevail
with an unrighteous man, then much more it will obtain with a gracious God.
Never leave him therefore, till by laying hold on his own strength thou have
overcome him. At last thou may hear that ravishing voice, O Woman, be it unto
thee even as thou will, and see thy Daughter made whole from that very hour.

4. Lastly, To fervent supplication add wary inspection. Keep a strict hand,
Dr. Jacomb Them. D^c 83.
and a watchful eye continually over those that are committed to your charge;
your utmost care and vigilance in this will be found little enough. How soon
will those Gardens, that now look like a Paradise, be overgrown with weeds, if
the Keepers thereof do not look to them daily? How soon is Childhood and Youth
tainted with sin, if it be not narrowly watched? Be thou diligent therefore to
know the state of thy Flock, and look well to thy Herds. Carefully observe the
natural temper of your inferiors, you will by this the better know how to
apply your selves to them in advice, reproof, correction. Observe the first
sprouts and buds of what is either good or evil in them: encourage, commend,
reward them in the one; curb, restrain, and prevent the further growth of the
other. Do they begin to take God's Name in vain? Do they nibble at a lie? Does
Pride in apparel peep forth? Be sure to kill this Serpent in the very egg, to
crush this Cockatrice in the Shell.

2. Thus of Superiors. A word to Inferiors, and I have done. Dear Lambs, the
Searcher of Hearts knows how greatly I long after you all in the Bowels of
Jesus Christ. Shall I prevail with you to remember this, when I am laid with my
Fathers? viz. That it is no less your Duty to make Religion your business in the
relation of Children and Servants, than it is ours in the relation of Parents
and Masters. Oh what a credit, what a glory is it to drink in the Dews of
Godliness in the morning of your lives? What a lovely sight to behold those
Trees blossoming with the fruits of the Spirit in the Spring of their Age?
Better is a poor and a wise Child, than an old and a foolish King, Eccl. 4.13.
What a Garland of Honor does the Holy Ghost put on the head of an holy Child?
How profitable is early Piety? Some Fruits ripe early in the year are worth
treble the price of latter Fruits. Godliness at any time brings in much gain;
but he that comes first to the Market is like to make the best price of his
Ware. On the other side, how dangerous are delays? Remember Children, late
Repentance like untimely fruits seldom comes to any thing. Your lives are very
uncertain. As young as you are, you may be old enough for a Grave: Oh then seek
your God, 1 Timothy 6.6. We read of one that truly repented at his last gasp, that
so none might despair; but it is of but one, that none might presume.
and seek him when and whiles he may be found, Isa. 55.5. If thou refuse him
now, he may refuse thee hereafter. I have heard of one that deferring
Repentance to his old age, and then going about it, heard a voice, des illi
furfurem, cui dedisti farinam; give him the Bran to whom thou have given the
Flour. Every day renders you more and more indisposed. The longer sin and Satan
possess the Forts of your hearts, the more they will fortify and strengthen
them against God and Holiness, Jer. 13.23. your God deserves your youth. The
best God deserves the best of days. Briefly, your God will call you to an
account for your youth, Eccles. 11.9. Here is a cooler for the high-flown
Youngster's courage. The words after an Ironical concession thunder out a most
dreadful commination. Well then, be persuaded truly to Reverence and honor your
Parents, Masters, Ministers. Even Lambs will kneel to their Dams. Mal. 1.6.
Ephesians. 6 2. Levit. 19.3.
Reverence them inwardly in your hearts with an awful fear: outwardly in your
lives, in language and in carriage, Genesis 4.12. 1 Kings 2.19. Obey your
Superiors, Ephesians. 6.1. In a word, read Prove. 2.1. to 6th. 1. My Son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my Commandments with thee. 2. So that thou
incline thine ear unto Wisdom, and apply thine heart unto Understanding. 3.
Yea, if thou criest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding.
4. If thou seek her as Silver, and searchest after her as for hid Treasures.
5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God.

Up therefore and be doing, and the Blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush
shall be with you.

How may it appear to be every Christian's indispensable Duty to partake of the
Lord's Supper? Sermon. XII.
1 Cor. 11.24. This do in Remembrance of me.
THese words are a Command of the Lord Jesus, received (through revelation) by
the Apostle Paul, and by him as Christ's Herald proclaimed to the Church, that
not only this particular Church of Corinth, but that the whole Catholic Church
of Christ (in their successive Generations until his second coming) might take
notice thereof, and yield obedience thereto, as to a command of that nature,
wherein very much of the glory of their once crucified Redeemer, and their own
spiritual joy and consolation is concerned: this will further appear in the
following explication of the words.

In the words you have four parts, two of which are expressed, and the other
two implied.

1. A duty; this do. 2. The end for which: in remembrance of me. 3. The
Obligation to the duty, Christ's command, this is implied. 4. The persons under
the Obligation: the whole Church Catholic militant, so far as they are
Scripturally capacitated thereto; this likewise is implied.
But of these in their order.

1. The duty; this do. What is this to be done? the Apostle tells you in the
beginng of this verse, and in the following verse: and it is this. This broken
bread take and eat, This Cup take and drink.

Here is a Duty, my brethren, so plain, so easy, of whose obscurity or
difficulty certainly we have no cause to complain.

For what can be less obscure than a command so evidently expressed, and what
more easy than to eat and drink and call to mind the greatest and best of
friends that loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood? Rev. 1.5.
and surely then a neglect herein must needs prove a sin that will admit of no
excuse.

But if any of you be offended at the outward meanness of the Ordinance and be
thereby tempted to neglect the observance; I wish you to remember, who they
were that stumbled at Christ himself because of the poverty of his Parents, is
not this (say they) the Carpenter's Son? Mat. 13.55.
This was the introduction to their rejecting of Christ, and to that great
plague that followed, viz. their being rejected of Christ. Certainly as the
meanness of his Parents ought not to have prejudiced the glory of his person to
those infidels: so ought not the seeming poverty of these elements of bread and
wine any ways abate of the glory of that mystery of our Redemption that is
shadowed out by them. I know our carnal reasonings are apt to suggest, that
since Christ intended to leave behind him a monument of the greatness of his
person, and of his gracious undertaking in redeeming a Church to himself by his
blood, that it would have been more suitable to the honor of such an
undertaking, if the monument had been more magnificent; as if he had given in
charge to his Disciples to have erected his Statue of beaten gold, and set it
up in the places of their solemn Assemblies, as the Roman Senate used to do for
the honor of their excellent men, whose Statues they erected In their
Capitols; or as the London Senate does in honor of their Kings, they give them
their Statues in their Royal Exchange.

To this I say, that certainly Christ is wiser than man, and that this memorial
of himself, which is already appointed by him, is more suitable to the end
intended, than what our vain thoughts have or can propose. For to what end
should he have caused such golden statues to have been erected to his memory,
when he was so acquainted with the nature of man, and with his propensities to
Idolatry, and therefore could not but foresee, that at least they would
probably make no better use of them, than the Israelites did of the Brazen
Serpent, to whom they most unworthily paid that honor that was only due to God
himself? And that this is no vain conjecture, I only desire you to call to
mind, that, though the wisdom of our Savior pitched upon bread and wine, that
of all things seem most unfit to make Idols of, yet what bad use men have made
thereof; and how foolishly their vain minds have transubstantiated them into
God, I need not tell those that know there are Papists in the World, and have
heard of their Idolatrous doctrine of Transubstantiation.

But peradventure some may yet further urge, that since it pleased our Savior
to choose, to appoint a feast for his remembrance, it had been meet this feast
should have been more magnificent, and consequently more significant of the
Majesty and riches of that Lord, whose Table it is; but to have only a piece of
broken bread and a cup of wine, what poor man could have made a meaner
entertainment?

This also is easily answered, I say therefore, that such a pompous feast you
talk of had not so well comported with his principal end in the institution:
for Christ did not in this Supper intend the filling of your bellies, but the
refreshing of your souls: it was not instituted for that end as the Feast of
first fruits among the Jews, for the remembrance of God's blessing of the earth
and giving them full harvests, but for the remembrance of things of a higher
nature, of things invisible, spiritual and eternal, as the saving you from sin,
the law, from the grave and hell, which were all procured by the breaking of
Christ's body, and the pouring out his blood for you; now your magnificent
feasts were not so fitted for such a Commemoration, for they rather would have
tended to have clogged your spirits, made them dull and stupid, and far less apt
to have contemplated such Divine and Heavenly things as those now named are:
And therefore that this Supper is so mean as it is, it is far better, than if
it were so great and royal as you conceive.

There are others are well enough satisfied with the wisdom of their Lord, and
in the nature of the things appointed for the remembrance of him, which yet may
be, and ought to be inquisitive as to the reason of them;

Which I shall reduce to these 4 Questions.

1. Why did the Lord appoint bread rather than any other kind of food? 2. Why
must it be broken bread? 3. Why must it be taken and eaten? 4. Why wine as well
as bread? and why Wine rather than any other drink?
1. To the first I say, he appointed bread as most apt to signify the thing
thereby to be presented to our Faith, and that is himself, as he is bread of
life to our Souls, for so he calls himself, Joh. 6.33. The bread of God is he
which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world. And 35. Jesus
said, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never hunger. This is
evident that man's natural life does not more depend on the virtue of the bread
that perishes, than the Soul's life of Grace and Glory depends on that virtue
that proceeds from a suffering Jesus; I live (says the Apostle Paul) yet not
I, but Christ lives in me; all that life of Faith, all the indwellings of
Grace in our hearts, comes from, and is maintained by the virtues and
influences of Jesus Christ this bread of life: and so likewise does our eternal
life depend on him, as he likewise tells us, v. 27. Labor for the meat that
endures to eternal life, which the Son of man shall give you: this meat is the
Lord himself, who by his sufferings made our peace, and purchased the life of
grace and glory for us.

And indeed no other meat, as bread, could so aptly set forth this Mystery;
because no food is so suitable to man's nature, none for a constancy so
pleasant, none so strengthening; a man can better subsist with bread without
other meats, than with any other meats without bread: thereby the Mystery of
conveighing Soul-l^fe to the sinner is excellently set forth; for as there is
other meat for the body besides bread, so there is another way of giving life
to the Soul besides that of a Savior, and that is an exact obedience to the
Law of God; but alas! the sinner through the weakness of the flesh can never
digest that strong meat, and so cannot live by it: But for a poor, weak, infirm
sinner to be maintained in a life of grace and acceptance with an offended God
in and by a Savior, is a way of living so suitable to a sinner, that Men and
Angels could never have thought of one so suitable; and therefore nothing, as
bread, was so fit to set forth this Mystery.

2. But why must it be broken bread? Christ himself acquaints us with the
mystical reason thereof in the verse of the Text, it is to set forth the
breaking of the body of Christ; by breaking his body must be taken to
comprehend all the sufferings of his Humane nature as united with the Divine,
as all his soul-sufferings, (of which there are 3 Phrases used by the
Evangelists very emphatically, as (...), which all signify those dolors of
mind he underwent through the dereliction of God) and likewise all other
sufferings of his body, which are by Isaiah set forth with great variety of
Phrase, speaking of Christ, he says, He was despised and rejected of men,
Isaiah 53.
a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, and v. 4. He has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows, and v. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed, and
v. 7. he was oppressed and he was afflicted. Now all these sufferings were
consummated in his Crucifixion, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the tree. These are those sufferings that made that one
sacrifice of himself by which he put away sin, and has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 9.26. Heb. 10.14. Upon this account it is that the
bread of this Supper must be broken before it be taken and eaten, the broken
bread that is the sign, and Christ's sufferings that is the mystery signified
by it, as I have showed.

3. Why must this broken bread be taken and eaten? This is not without its
Mystery, for thereby is meant that these Breakings, Bruisings, Woundings of
Christ's Soul and Body, was not for any sin of his own, for he was a lamb
without spot; 1 Pet. 1.19.
but it was for our sins and for our benefit. Our dear Jesus sows in tears, and
we reap the harvest of his tears in joy; he by the meritorious extraction of
his bloody sweat and agony in the Garden, by his tremendious dolors of Soul and
Body on the Cross, prepares a Cordial, and perfects it by his death; which
prepared Cordial we by Faith drink up, and from a state of sin and death
revive: he offered himself as good wheat to be ground by the law and justice of
God, that thereby he might be made bread of life for us by Faith to feed on,
that we may live for ever. So that Christ's breaking and giving the bread (in
this Sacrament) to his Church does mystically declare that the sole intentions
of all his sufferings was for us, and therefore he says, this is the bread
that was broken for you: and likewise taking and eating it does further
signify that we do profess to believe in him for life, and do rely wholly on
him for acceptance with God, and for the salvation of our souls.

4. But why did he add wine also to this supper, and commanded us to drink
thereof in remembrance of him?

I Answer, this addition was for a very good reason, for thereby a further
mystery of our Salvation by his bloody death is explained.

1. As first, if you consider that man's natural life is not maintained by
eating only, except he drink also, for we may dye as well by thirst as by
hunger: Christ therefore by giving us his blood to drink, which is signified by
the Cup, as well as his body to eat, does thereby declare that his suffering of
Death for us is every way complete and sufficient for the spiritual and eternal
life of our souls. So that as he that has bread and drink, wants nothing for
the sustaining his natural life, so he that has by Faith an interest in a
broken bleeding Christ, wants nothing to the upholding the Soul in a state of
acceptance with God, or in a condition of spiritual life, that is the
forerunner and earnest of a life of glory.

2. But again, if you consider the nature of the drink which he has appointed,
it is wine and not water: By it may be signified thus much; that as there is no
sort of drink so grateful to the palate, so reviving and strengthening to the
spirits, so that spiritual life that the Soul is raised to by the Death of
Christ, is a life of the greatest pleasure and joy that is conceivable; for as
no liquor like Wine does cheer a sad drooping spirit, so nothing does so glad
and cheer the Soul as Faith in a Crucified Christ, according to that of the
Apostle Peter, in whom, though we have not seen, 1 Pet. 1.8.
yet believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Thus much for the Duty, this do.

2. The end of the Duty, and that is, in remembrance of me. Here are two things
to be inquired into.

I. What reason was there for the instituting an Ordinance for his remembrance?

II. Why of all the acts and expressions of his love to sinners above all he
would be remembered in his sufferings for us, which is the special signification
of this Supper?

(1) To the first I say, you must call to mind, that the time of instituting
this supper was the night before that day he died. Now the consequent of his
Death was to be this, that he should be taken from Earth to Heaven, there to be
personally present till the day of judgment: Now that his Church on Earth might
not forget him in this long absence, he therefore appointed this supper for a
frequent quickening them to the remembrance of him till he came again.

(2) To the other Question I Answer: That the reasons why Jesus would have this
act of his love to be especially remembered above all other, may be these.

1. Because his dying for his Church was the greatest act of love he ever
showed his Church. Greater love (says Christ) has no man than this, John
15.13. 1 John 3.16.
that a man lay down his life for his friends. Again says the Apostle, Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us. If a man
should part with his liberty, and suffer bonds, or lay down his estate and
become poor, or leave his Country, and become an exile for his friend, these
were all expressions of great love; but none of them are comparable to laying
down life and shedding ones blood for a friend. This last is that wherein
Christ has eminently demonstrated his love to his Church, this he glories in,
and this is that which he would never have his Church forget, but frequently
remember in this supper.

2. Because that though he gave and still does give very great testimonies of
his love to us, as in his Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, preparing
Glory, and lastly in his coming again to raise us, justify us, and to take us
to himself to behold and enjoy that Glory that he had with the Father before
the World was; yet this Ordinance is rather for the remembrance of his bloody
Death for us, than for the remembrance of any of the other blessings, and why?
Because that all these other depend on this; Christ could never have risen to
our justification, had he not died for the satisfaction of the Law and his
Fathers Justice. Nor would he have been admitted as an Intercessor, nor have
been allowed one mansion in Glory for any of us, nor would his Father have
suffered him to have returned again to take any one of us to himself, if he had
not by his death made our peace, opened the new way into the Holy of Holies,
and purchased a glorious Resurrection, and an Ascension to the Heavenly and
eternal glory for us: So that since all his other acts of love to his Church
depend on this of his dying, no wonder if he appointed this Supper for the
remembrance of his death rather than any thing else he either did or promised
to do for us.

The Conclusion is, that since that the end of this Ordinance is so glorious,
and that is the remembrance of the greatest love that ever God the Father or
Son showed to us, it cannot but cast a Luster and Glory upon the duty of
coming, to this Supper, and engage us to a cheerful participation thereof.

3. The Obligation to this duty: and that is Christ's Command, this is implied
in the Text but expressed in the foregoing verse: what says the Apostle Paul, I
have received of the Lord that which also I declare unto you. The Apostle does
but declare, the Command is Christ's, he is the Author of it. It is Christ not
Paul that said, This do in remembrance of me. Christ's Commands are the bonds
by which we are tied up to Obedience, if we break his bonds we are
transgressors. Remember who they were that conspired together saying, Let us
break his bonds asunder, and cast away his cords from us; they were such that
the Lord has in derision, to whom he will one day speak in his wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure.

The commands of superiors set out all duty to inferiors, and punish for
neglect; and the higher or greater the superior is, the more authority has the
command, and the greater punishment will be inflicted on the disobedient. If
disobedience to the word spoken by Angels received a just recompense of reward,
of how much sorer punishment shall they be thought worthy that disobey the
command of Jesus Christ. If a Child's disobedience deserves the rod, or a
Servants the cudgel, or a Subjects the axe or halter, what does disobedience to
the Lord Jesus deserve that is greater than Father, or Master, or any earthly
Sovereign whatever: Take heed then (my brethren) of being found guilty of
neglect of this duty that is bound upon you by the command of so great an
authority as this of the Lord Jesus that has said, This do in remembrance of
me.

4. In the next place is to be considered the persons obliged: and those are
the Church of Christ, so far as by Scriptural Qualifications they are
capacitated to a participation thereof, who are,

1. Those that can discern the Lord's body in this supper, the want of this the
Apostle gives as the reason of unworthy receiving it, 1 Cor. 10.29. and tells
us, they eat damnation to themselves. Now there are two ways wherein the Lord's
body may be said to be discerned in this supper.

1. When the Understanding is spiritually enlightened to perceive the true
nature and ends of this supper, and thereby is enabled to see a greater
difference between this and our ordinary meals; for he that shall for want of
knowledge therein come to this Table with no better preparations, or to no other
intents than when he goes to his own Table, he does certainly pervert the ends
of the institution, and prophanes the Ordinance, and therefore cannot choose but
incur the great displeasure of God for so doing.

2. But there is another way of discerning the Lord's body in this supper, and
that is by a spiritual taste and relish, for the palate has not a greater
ability of discerning the different relish in the variety of meats man feeds
on, than the soul of man (that has its spiritual senses exercised) has in
tasting the things of God and of judging the different sweets thereof. This is
that spiritual faculty that Jesus Christ speaks of when he tells Peter that he
savoured of the things of man, Math. 16.43:
but not of the things that be of God. Now this you must well observe, you that
do partake of this Supper, whether you do relish the love of the Lord Jesus in
his dying for sinners and for you in particular: is this great love of Christ
sweet to your souls, sweeter than honey or the honey comb? can you admire the
heights and depths of this love, and wonder that the Son of God should take a
body to be bruised, wounded, slain for the vilest of sinners, among which you
reckon your self as one? do you find this love of his to you draw your hearts
to a love of him, and a delight in him, and a readiness to part with all for
him? this is indeed to discern the Lord's body in this supper: and by this you
are enabled to see a vast difference betwixt this supper and all the feasts of
fat things that ever you were at in all your lives. If it be so with you, then
are you qualified for this supper, and are by Christ's command obliged to
partake thereof.

2. Those that have fellowship with God in Christ, they are those Christ has
obliged by his command to partake of this supper.

This is another qualification the Apostle gives us in 1 Cor. 10.18, 20, 21.
where discoursing of the nature of Divine and likewise of Diabolical
sacrifices, and of the reason of the Priests and Peoples eating some part
thereof, he also shows the reason of our partaking of the Lord's Table, which
(though it is not properly a sacrifice that is there offered, yet it) holds
some resemblance unto the sacrifices of the Law and to the Peoples eating
thereof, inasmuch as it is a Commemoration of that one sacrifice Christ offered
up to the Father for our sins, of the benefits of which one sacrifice, those
that communicate at the Lord's Table do as effectually partake, as if Christ
was offered up as often as you there do eat and drink.

Now says the Apostle of the Legal sacrifices, v. 18. they which eat thereof
are partakers of the Altar; that is, are partakers of the blessings of that God
to whom that altar is erected, and to whom those sacrifices are offered. And
not only so, but there is yet a further meaning, which is, that those that eat
of the Altar do thereby declare that they take the God of that Altar to be
their God, from whom they expect all that good they are capable of in this
life, and that which is to come, and likewise they thereby declare that him,
and him only will they worship and serve. Now this engagement of themselves to
God signified by eating of the sacrifice, is that fellowship spoken of v. 20.
where the Apostle further tells you that there is the very same intendment in
those sacrifices that are offered to Devils, and the peoples eating of those
feasts that attended those sacrifices; they thereby did signify that they took
those Devils to be their Gods, and resolved for the future to worship and serve
them as Gods, which is the proper meaning of that 20 v. But I say, that the
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils and not to God,
and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils, i.e. I would that
you would not associate with devils, or enter into a confederacy with them to
serve and worship them, as the Idol-feasts do signify. Now if the Idol-feasts
signified the confederacy betwixt the Devils and their worshippers, so also did
the feast that attended the Jewish sacrifice signify a fellowship betwixt the
true God and his worshippers, whereby the true God was acknowledged as their
God, and that they would worship and serve him only. Thus the Apostle having
illustrated the meaning of eating of the Jewish and also of the Gentile
sacrifice, he proceeds to accommodate those notions to that of the Lord's
Table, v. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: ye
cannot be partakes of the Lord's Table, and of the table of devils. The meaning
is this; you cannot serve two such contrary Masters as the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus, and devils also: for if you eat of Idols feasts, you thereby
declare you own devils as Gods, and then coming to the Lord's Table, you
thereby declare you only acknowledge the true God to be your God in and through
Jesus Christ your Sacrifice and Mediator, which practices are very absurd and
contradictory. The Conclusion is this, that those that partake of the Lord's
Table, are such that from the heart do take the God of that Christ whose death
is remembered in that Supper, to be their God, and that do believe that God is
really reconciled to them by that sacrifice, and they declare likewise hereby
they will worship and serve this God in this Christ, and him only: now if any
of you are thus engaged to God in Spirit, you have fellowship with him, and you
are those that have right to partake of this Supper.

Having thus opened the words of the Text, I shall now give you that chief
point I would have you observe, which is this.

Doct. That it is the indispensable duty of all such members of Jesus Christ
(that can discern the Lord's body in this Lord's Supper, and have fellowship
with the Father by this crucified Jesus) to come to this Supper, and to partake
thereof.

There is not any thing in the Doctrine I shall insist on, except this one,
which is to prove it is your duty to partake of it, and that it is therefore
indispensable, because the neglect of it is a very great sin.

Which I prove by this one argument: Jesus Christ who instituted it, he has
commanded you to remember him in it; and therefore if you do it not, you break
his command, and what is that but to sin against him? for what else is sin, but
either to do what your God and Savior forbids, or not to do what he commands?
this is so plain that it were but to waste time to use more words for the
clearing thereof. What I have therefore more to say is to show you those many
things that accompany this sin, that tend to aggravate it, that, when you
understand not only that the neglect of this duty is a sin, but a very great
one, you may be deterred from continuing any longer in it.

1. I beseech you consider whose command it is you break: it is the command of
the Lord Jesus; to remember him in this Supper is a debt you ow to him your
Savior, Lord, and head; it is a command that bears the superscription of the
most supreme Authority in Heaven or Earth, and if by the sentence of Christ it
was but just to pay the tribute-money to Caesar, because it bore his
superscription, it is much more just for you to pay the tribute of obedience to
this command, that bears the superscription of an Authority greater than all
the Caesar's that ever were. What Is the name of Caesar in compare to the name
and title of the Son of God? which is a title that speaks him greater than all
Angels or Archangels in Heaven; for to which of his Angels said he at any
time, thou art my Son, Heb. 1.5.
this day have I begotten thee: this is he whom the Prophet Isaiah calls
Wonderful, Is. 9.6.
Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of peace, on whose shoulders it has
pleased the Everlasting Father to lay the government, this is he whose Kingdom
is an Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 4.3.
and of whose dominion there will be no end, of whom David speaks, Thy
Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter
of thy Kingdom; Psalm. 45.6.
all power (my brethren) God has given into his hands, and has given him to
bear this royal title, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16.
and it is he only that is head of his Church, it is this great Lord that has
said, this do in remembrance of me; how then dare you disobey him? believe it,
if he has so great authority to command, he has as great a power to punish,
if he find you presumptuously disobedient: he that could strike some sick and
others dead for profaning this Supper, he can do as much to you for not
observing it; and that he does not, is not because he wants power, but because
he is gracious, long suffering, not willing you should perish for your neglect,
but that you may be drawn to repentance, and so to obedience; but if you be
obstinate after you are told thoroughly of your fault, take heed, it will be a
horrible thing for you to fall into the hands of consuming fire.

2. Consider your neglect of this Ordinance is a sin against the command, not
only of the greatest, but of the best Prince in Heaven and Earth, he is not
only Maximus but Optimus also, this is a further aggravation of your sin. Who
ever thought but that Absalom's taking up arms against David was treason? but
he that shall consider that the rebellion was against David the man after God's
own heart: against David the holiest of men, and the justest of Princes, and
besides all this, against David his Father: cannot but judge it an act of the
highest treason imaginable. My brethren, in your disobeying this command, you
sin against Jesus the just, and Jesus the gracious, against him that is by
place your head; in love your Father; in openness of heart your Friend; against
him that emptied himself that he might fill you, that became poor that he might
enrich you, that became an exile from his Throne and Father's Kingdom, that he
might bring you home to your Father's house, that became a curse that you might
be blessed, that hung on a tree for you, that you might sit on Thrones with
him, who called you and washed you from your sins in his blood; and after all
this, when he shall leave such a command as this, to remember him in this
Supper, for all this his love: how inexcusable must your neglect be? let your
Conscience be judge, with whom I leave it.

3. If you consider what relation you that are believers stand in to this Jesus
that left this command with you; ye are the Elect of the Father who committed
you to his Son to Redeem, and effectually call you, that he might save you from
sin, wrath, the grave, Hell, and to bring you to everlasting glory. Why are you
called believers but from that faith whereby you acknowledge this Jesus as your
Lord and your God, whereby you trust in him, and in what he has done and
suffered for you, for the making your peace, procuring your pardon, and opening
a new and living way into your Father's Kingdom and glory: it is by this faith
that you love him, cleave to him, and are therefore called his friends, his
children, his brethren, his subjects, servants, followers, witnesses; and shall
such as you be found disobedient to him? shall you carelessly forget to remember
him in a supper appointed by himself for the remembrance of the greatest act of
his love, that is, his dying for you? I tell you Christ will take it worse of
you than of any others: how hainously did David take a contempt from his
friend, Psalm. 41.9. Yea mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did
eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me, ye are those that he has
chosen out of the world, brought into his Father's family, and for you to turn
the heel upon him and refuse to eat at his Table, this is a contempt that
cannot but grieve and anger him: when Christ had been teaching that they who
did not eat his flesh and drink his blood, had no life in them, at this
multitudes were offended and forsook him, but (says he) to his Disciples, will
ye go also, implying, that if they should forsake him, it would be matter of
greater trouble than that of the multitudes leaving him. John 6.53.67.
That the profane world comes not nigh his Table; that comes not so nigh his
heart, but that ye believers should withdraw, this is that which he must needs
take ill from you. Oh do not as you tender the good pleasure of your Lord, do
not grieve him by absenting your selves from his table.

4. If you consider the command it self as it is easy, pleasant, honorable,
your neglect must needs receive further aggravation. What is more easy than to
eat and drink, or more pleasant than to come to a feast, or more honorable
than to feast with the King of Kings. Christ puts you not upon the painful duty
of circumcising your flesh, nor on the troublesome duty of washing your selves
every time you touch a dead carcass, or what is ceremonially unclean, nor on
the costly duties of sacrificing your Lambs, Goats or Oxen; nor on the costly
and toilsom duties of traveling scores of miles every year to feast before the
Lord at Jerusalem, to which the Church of the Jews were bound; he has eased
you of all these burdens, and made your task far easier, instead of all these
he has instituted but two duties like them, the one of Baptism, the trouble of
which you are to undergo but once in all your lives, and the other of this
Supper, which you may have without traveling far for, and which costs you next
to nothing.

But further, it is a duty not less pleasant than easy, what is more pleasant
than a feast? and this of all feasts is the sweetest, if the perishing Manna in
the wilderness were so delicious as that the taste of it was like wafers made
with honey, Exodus 16.31.
how much more delicious must this celestial Manna, this bread of eternal life
be which is spread before you in this Supper? it is a feast of love, of the
love of the Father and of the Son; there is a voice in every morsel of bread
you there eat, and in every draught of wine you there drink, saying, behold O
sinners how you are beloved of the Father and Son; had not the Father loved you
he would never have parted with his Son, and if the Son had not loved you, he
would never have parted with his life for you. Oh therefore come ye to this
Supper, come eat and drink ye beloved of the Lord, and remembes his love more
than wine; let all the redeemed of the Lord come hither and praise him.

Nor is it a duty less honorable than pleasant: it is a pleasant thing to
feast, but it is honorable to feast with a King, most honorable with the King
of Kings and Lord of the whole earth. How did Haman glory that he was invited
to the banquet with the King? he reckoned not of it as his task but his
privilege, not as his work but his reward. And shall a feast with an earthly
mortal King be more valued than a feast with the heavenly and immortal God?
this Supper is the Lord's Supper, it is the great God has made the provision,
and it is his eternal Son that has made the invitation. Oh take heed of
excuses, for though you make them, God will not take them; make therefore your
selves ready, put on your wedding-garments and come away; let not a Table so
well furnished want its guests, least Christ lose the honor and you the
comfort of the entertainment. But if you will still draw back, know this, that
you do not only sin, but that your sin is great because against a command that
is so easy, sweet, and honorable as I have shown you this is.

5. There is one circumstance more in the command which should quicken you to
the observance, and that is the time when this command was given. It was the
very night in which he was betrayed, the very last night he lived on the earth,
the night before that day in which he offered up himself a sacrifice to justice
for us. Then it was he said do this in remembrance of me. As if he had said, my
friends, I am now to leave you and to be taken out of your sight, but oh! let
me not be out of your mind, to morrow you shall see how I love you, when you
see me scorned of men, deserted of God, praying, groaning, bleeding, dying for
you, oh let not that love of mine be forgotten: and least it should, I
therefore institute this supper, charging you with my whole Church till I come
again, that so often as they eat this bread and drink this cup they remember
me. This is the charge of our dying Lord, and surely if we have any love for
him we should not dare but observe it. When Jacob was dying, he gave in charge
as some of his last words, that Joseph should forgive the unkindness of his
brethren; and when he was dead, the brethren thought it a good argument to move
Joseph to take pity on them: they therefore sent messengers to Joseph, saying,
thy Father did command before he died, Gen 50.16, 17, 18.
saying, forgive I pray thee, the trespass of thy brethren: this argument broke
Joseph's heart, it is said he wept when they spoke unto him, and said fear not:
oh how did the words of his dying Father move and melt him! methinks I hear him
say, was this the desire of my dying Father? I cannot then but yield; would my
Father have me forgive? I freely do it. Now (my brethren) why should you not do
as much for your dying Jesus, as Joseph for his dying Jacob? was Jacob his
Father? Jesus is our Savior; did Jacob love Joseph? but he did not dye for him
as Jesus did for us; and shall we find a heart to deny our Lord in his dying
request, when Joseph could not find one to deny his Father? oh then as Joseph
forgave, so let us. This do in remembrance of him, which will be an instance of
that great love and honor we do keep for his memory.

6. In the next place, I desire you would think of the contempt you throw upon
this Ordinance by your neglect. What is it but that you have slight thoughts of
the Authority of the Institutor, and very mean thoughts of the institution it
self? and is not this to proclaim to the world that there is (in your judgment)
a command of the Lord Christ, and a duty in the Christian Religion that is
frivolous and childish, not worth the observance? believe it, the World will
judge of it by your practice and not by your profession. The Rechabites would
drink no wine because Jonadab the son of Rechab did forbid them; nor will the
Turks drink wine because that Impostor Mahomet forbad them; thus the one
honored their Father, and the other their false Prophet: and will you that are
Christians let these men rise up in judgment against you? shall error be more
prevalent with them, than truth with you? and will you let the Turks outdo you,
in honoring a false prophet more than you do the true? is Mahomet dearer and
his institutions more sacred to his followers, then Jesus Christ and his
institution are to you? Christ bids you drink of this cup in remembrance of him
and you will not, but Mahomet forbids them wine and they obey him: judge you now
who gives the greatest honor, they to Mahomet, or you to Christ? methinks you
should blush to think of it: Oh Christians for shame amend, and give no more
occasion to Christ's Ministers to reprove you for so gross a sin.

7. I have not yet done. Think once more with what hypocrisy this neglect is
accompanied. What is hypocrisy, but to endeavor to seem better than indeed we
are? to seem zealous for Christ and his Ordinances, when in truth we are
lukewarm and indifferent? Ye are Protestants by profession, your Fathers were
so before you, and ye seem ready to plead their Cause: Oh that ye would look
back and consider the Age past. With what zeal was this Ordinance pleaded for
in King Henry the 8th and Queen Mary's days? The Papists would give you the
bread only, but you would have the Cup also; they would have you adore the
bread as a God, ye would not commit so great Idolatry; for which cause how many
were exiled, how many imprisoned, racked, hanged, burned? and after all these
heats, Oh gross Hypocrisy! you will neither have bread nor wine, nor will you
take it in the Gospel-way without the encumbrances of Superstition and
Idolatry. Ye talk of Popery returning, and truly not without ground: for when I
consider how slight we make of this Ordinance rescued from the Papists with the
expense of so much blood, methinks it is but a righteous thing with God to
bring us under their iron yoke again: and if it once comes to that, then you
would be glad of this Ordinance if you could get it; then you will be brought
into this strait, either you must take it in the Popish way, and be damned for
your Idolatry; or in the Gospel way, and be burnt at a stake for opposing
Antichrist. Oh repent in time, renew your first love, strengthen your zeal that
is ready to dye: Come to the Lord's Table as you are invited, take it in his
way, that is, with Knowledge, Faith, Love, Thankfulness, lest you provoke the
Lord by your neglect to take it quite away from you, as he is like to do if he
suffer Popery to return.

8. Consider again, how scandalous you are in this neglect. There are not a few
about this Kingdom, that are Ancient Christians, that have a long time had the
reputation of wisdom, sobriety, and godliness in their lives, that yet are
notoriously guilty in this matter. I beseech such to consider their scandal
herein. What is it (my brethren) to scandalize weak brethren, but to lay
stumbling blocks in the way of such over which they may fall; and if not ruin
themselves, yet they may at least wound their peace. When weak Christians see
such as you live in the neglect of this Ordinance, what do they but by your
Example take encouragement to neglect it also? for thus it is likely they
reason, if there were any necessity of partaking of that Supper, why do not
such and such do it? they are godly wise men, sure if they thought it a sin
they would not persevere in this neglect, and so are the weak imboldned to sin
also though against their light: for it is scarce possible that they should
read or hear of so plain a command as this, This do in remembrance of me, and
not be in some measure awakened to the sense of their duty, which light yet
they stifle because of your example. I beseech you therefore by the mercies of
God and love of the Lord Jesus, and the bowels you ought to have to your weak
brethren, that you would not give such a manifest occasion of their falls,
their soul-wounds if not their destruction.

9. Once again let me entreat you to lay to heart, how unworthily hereby you
cast contempt upon the practice of the Churches of Christ in all Ages past.
Tell me if you can, what Church of Christians for 1600 years but have made
conscience of this duty. In Justin Martyr's time, by what we can gather from
his writings, it seems the Church always closed their solemn public meetings
with this supper. And Austin tells us, there were Christians in his days that
were for taking it every day of the week; and though he himself thought such
daily participation thereof was not needful, yet he persuaded to partake
thereof every Lord's day. Quotidie (inquit) Eucharistiae communionem percipere
nec laudo nec vitupero; omnibus tamen Dominicis diebus communicandum suadeo.
Now though Christ has not expressly tied us to such a frequency, yet he has
intimated to us, he would have himself remembered herein very often, when he
says, so often as you eat this bread: But for you to live in a perpetual
neglect, is very far from taking it often. It was a saying of Asaph, Psalm.
73.15.
If I speak thus, I should offend against the generation of thy children. Oh
that you would consider that so long as you continue this neglect, you offend
against the children of God in many generations, even from the time of the
institution.

10. Lastly, do but think how unmerciful you are to your own souls in denying
them this Ordinance. What do you but withold their proper and necessary food
from them? you call upon them to exercise their graces, and you find them faint
and languid; you then complain of them, Oh what a dead and listless heart have
I to God and duty? Alas man! it is thy own fault, thou like an Egyptian
taskmaster call for the tale of brick and deniest straw, thou call to thy
soul to do her work, and wilt not give her the bread to refresh her which her
Savior has allowed. Bring thy soul to this Supper, feed her, satisfy her
with a crucified Jesus that is there presented, and then tell me whether her
Faith will not strengthen, her love increase, her joys and consolations
multiply. Ask your brethren what tastes and relishes, what sweet refreshments
they have received from the Lord in this Ordinance? they will cry unto you, Oh
come taste and see how gracious God is to us at this Feast. It was a saying of
Bernard, Cum defecerit virtus mea non conturbor, non diffido, Scio quid faciam,
Calicem salutarem accipiam, that is, when my strength fails me, I am not
troubled, I do not despond, I know a remedy, I will go to the Table of the
Lord, there I will drink and recover my decayed strength: and I dare say, that
good man experienced no more but what ten thousands of the Lord's people do
frequently experience. Where would you have Christ give you his loves, but in
his garden of spices, in his wine cellar, where his banner over you is love?
Here it is he broaches his side and lets out his heart blood to you, which is
more sweet to a believing sinner than the most delicious banquet to the most
hungry appetite; and if it proves not so to all that come, it is because of
their own indispositions, and not because of any deficiency in the Ordinance it
self. And now I had done, were it not that I understand there are some
Objections to be removed, which I shall propose and answer, and then leave you
to the blessing of the Lord for to give you a full satisfaction in the whole
matter.

Object. 1. But some may say, All that you have been hitherto pleading for is
but a Ceremony, and sure God will not be so much concerned with a failure in so
small a punctilio as a Ceremony?

Answ. True, it is a Ceremony, but it is such an one that bears the stamp of
the Authority of the Lord Jesus; if he appoints it, will you slight it, and say
it is but a Ceremony? But again, if it be a Ceremony it is the most glorious
one that ever was appointed, in as much as it is designed to set forth the
Redemption of the world as it was completed and perfected by the death of
Jesus Christ. Yet again, it is but a Ceremony, but you are greatly mistaken if
you think that therefore there is no danger to neglect it: what was the tree of
knowledge of good and evil but a Ceremony? yet for disobedience in eating
thereof do you not know and feel what wrath it has brought on the whole race
of mankind? and tell me, was Circumcision any more than a Ceremony? Exodus 24.25.
yet it had almost cost Moses his life for neglecting to circumcise his son for
the Angel stood ready with his sword to slay him, if he had not prevented it by
his obedience. 1 Cor. 11.30.
So for the Lord's Supper, as much a Ceremony as it is, yet for the abuse of
it, some of the Church were sick and weak, others fell asleep, that is, died.
And if God did so severely punish the abuse, how think you to escape, that
presumptuously neglect the use thereof?

Object. 2. But if I am regenerate and become a New Creature, I am sure I shall
be saved, I do not fear that God will cast me away for the disuse of a
Ceremony.

Ans. Is this the reasoning of one regenerate? surely thou do not understand
what regeneration means; is it not the same with being born of God? and is
not he that is born of God, a Child of God? and what is it to be obedient to
the Father, but to do as he commands? and has he not commanded you by his
Son to remember your Savior in this supper? when you have considered this,
then tell me what you think of this kind of reasoning: I am a child of God
therefore I will presume to disobey him; he bids me remember Jesus in this
supper, and I will not, methinks thou blushest at the very mentioning of it,
and what if he should not cast thee quite off for this neglect, yet thou have
no reason to think but that either outwardly or inwardly or both, he will
scourge thee for this sin before thou die: and do thou examine whether the
languor of thy graces and poverty of thy consolations be not the lashes of your
Heavenly Father for this sin.

3. Object. But I remember a crucified Savior in the Word read and preached, I
see him there lifted up and dying for me, and I (bless God) to my great
comfort. How needless a thing then is it to remember him in this supper so?

Ans. Vain man would be vviser than Christ, who is the Wisdom of his Father.
Jesus Christ has thought fit not only to command that himself should be
Preached to his Church, but also remembered in this supper. But thou do say,
(oh presumption!) that the first was sufficient, the latter is needless and
impertinent. Will thou undertake to give counsel to the Son of God, or advise
him in the affairs of his Kingdom? shall the Holy Ghost say, Heb. 3.5. He was
faithful in his house as a Son, and will thou argue him of weakness in his
Administrations; Job 40.2. He that reproves the Son of God, let him answer it.

But why should thou say this Supper is needless because Christ is remembered
in the Word? may not truth in some cases be more effectually conveyed to the
soul by the eye than ear? do you not find your selves more moved to See the
execution of a man, to See one hanged or beheaded, than barely to hear the
story of it? Jesus Christ in this Ordinance is as it were crucified before your
eyes, in a manner more affecting than when you only hear of his crucifixion by
the Word. But further, this Supper has further ends than the Word preached,
for Christ and the Covenant of Grace founded in his blood, is preached to the
intent that you may Believe, and enter into this Covenant with God; but the
Supper is instituted as an outward sign to Ratify this Covenant betwixt God
and you, after it has been once entered into by Faith, you do not think it
enough in marriage to take one another's word, but you complete it by a solemn
vow in the presence of witnesses. I tell you Christ has not thought it enough
to take your word, but he will have it confirmed solemnly by this Ordinance,
and this he will have often repeated, for he knows us too well as to our
proneness to backsliding, which by this supper he would prevent.

But yet further, who is it dare presume to give Christ his measures, how, and
where, and by what means he should manifest himself and his love to his
believers? what if he has reserved some peculiar degrees of light and strength
and comfort to convey to his people by this Supper, that he thinks not fit
ordinarily to do by his Word? and if it be so, Luke 24.
who shall say to him why do thou thus? I remember what is recorded of the
two Disciples traveling to Emaus, by their discourse it appeared that they
doubted whether Jesus was the Christ, Christ meeting with them and perceiving
that their Faith staggered, took this method, first he endeavored to settle
them in their Faith, that notwithstanding he had been crucified and buried,
that yet he was the true Christ, which he did by expounding Moses and the
Prophets, from whence he proved that it was necessary that Christ must suffer;
and this was with good effect upon their hearts, for they said, did not our
hearts burn within us when we heard him? but yet he reserved a fuller
manifestation of himself to them, until he came to break bread with them at
their house; then it is said, their eyes were opened and they knew that it was
he. I do not say that breaking of bread in that place was the Lord's Supper in
the sense I speak of it; but it will serve me so far as to illustrate what I
intend, which is this: That it may be the pleasure of Christ to intail peculiar
manifestations of himself to his people upon several ordinances; he will beget
faith by the preaching of the word, and set your hearts in a flame of love to
him from what you hear there, and yet may reserve the confirmation of your
faith and establishment of your love to him, to be wrought by this of the
Lord's Supper, which is that which many of his people have experienced. And
therefore it cannot be said to be in vain to have Christ presented to you in
the Lord's Supper, as well as in the Lord's word preached; and this I conceive
abundantly enough to silence this objection.

4th Objection. But I am not prepared worthily to receive, and therefore I dare
not come to this Table, least I eat and drink damnation to my self.

Answer, Whose fault is that? what have thou been doing all thy life? if thou
have not been working out thy salvation with fear and trembling, thou have done
nothing. Repentance has been preached, why has not thy heart been broken?
Christ has been offered, why have thou not received him by faith? This Supper
has been explained, why have thou not understood it? if thou had but
repented of thy sins, and believed in the Lord Jesus, and understood the
meaning of this Supper, thou had been prepared for a worthy receiving of it:
but if it be not thus with thee it is thy own fault, get thee therefore into
thy closet, humble thy self mightily before the Lord for this long abuse of the
means of grace; and pray him to give thee that repentance, faith and knowledge
that may make thee worthy: and be assured that God is merciful, Jam. 1. Mat. 7.
and gives liberally to those that ask, and upbraideth no man: ask and you
shall have, seek and you shall find. But if you will not be at this pains, thy
unworthiness is voluntary, and thy complaint of unfitness is mere hypocrisy:
and then remember the many woes denounced against Hypocrites.

Yet there may be some children of God that are prepared, but yet dare not
come, because they do not understand that they are prepared.

To these I say, if through ignorance of your own state you be kept off, why do
you not come to such Ministers that you judge faithful to help you? you will
carry your evidences to men skilful in the Law to judge of your title to an
earthly inheritance; and if your body be under some distemper, you will ask
your Physician what he thinks of you; and why will you not then go to some able
Minister, and ask his judgment of you, and desire his directions? I dare say
this course would set many a weak Christian at liberty from his doubts and
perplexities, which have and may so entangle him, that as he yet has not seen
his right to his privileges, so he may go on in this darkness (for ought I
know) to his death. Be therefore persuaded to take advice.

The Conclusion is this, I would that all of you whose consciences bear you
witness that you are the Lord's people, and that you have given your selves up
to Christ, would take up a resolution to be obedient to the Lord in coming to
this Supper as he has commanded; and as you have heard this morning, take heed
of sinning against light, with your eyes wide open upon it; sins of ignorance
God may wink at, but when you sin presumptuously, though it be against the
least command, and persevere in it, I question whether it be consistent with
salvation; but if it be, doubtless it will be a Salvation through the fire. The
Lord give you understanding.

A Religious Fast. The duty whereof is asserted, described, persuaded, in a
brief exercise upon
Mark 2.20. But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they Fast in those days.


THose words are an answer to a question, or rather a reply to an objection
made by the Disciples of John and the Pharisees against Christ concerning
Fasting, v. 18. And the Disciples of John and the Pharisees used to fast, and
they come and say unto him, why do the Disciples of John and the Pharisees
fast, but thy Disciples fast not.

Christ returns his answer by a fit parable (as that was his usual way of
teaching) v. 19. Can the Children of the Bride-chamber fast while the
Bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the Bridegroom with them they
cannot fast. And so the duty was not now in season. We have the same story
recorded by two other Evangelists, Math. 9. Luke 5. only with this difference.
In Matthew we read it was only the Disciples of John that made the objection,
but in Mark and Luke is added the Disciples of John and the Pharisees. Again,
Matthew and Mark mention only fasting, Luke adds why do the Disciples of John
fast often and make prayers: he means it of the prayers used by them upon their
fast days Luke also adds but eat and drink: here was the objection.

Wherein we shall first consider the occasion of it, and then the persons that
made it, and then the reply that Christ makes to it, which will bring me to
the Text.

The occasion of it was

First, That which is mentioned by all these Evangelists, Christ's entering the
house of Levi the Publican, who had made him a great feast, and there was a
great company of Publicans and others present, and Christ and his Disciples sat
down and did eat and drink with them. Now this was one ground of the
objection, That Christ and his Disciples did not use that austerity and
abstinence in meat and drinks as they ought, but did too much indulge their
sensual appetite, as elsewhere he was accused as a wine-bibber and gluttonous,
Math. 11.19. especially seeing he did eat and drink with Publicans and sinners.

Secondly, The Disciples of John and the Pharisees used several fasts besides
the Annual fast enjoined by the Law upon the seventh month and the tenth day of
the month for the whole congregation of Israel. As we read of their often
fasting, Math. 9.14. Luke 5.33. And the Pharisee mentioned Luke 18.12. pleads,
I fast twice in the week, and Chemnitius in his Harmony conjectures they did
still observe the fasts of the fourth month, and fifth month, seventh and
tenth month that the Jews observed in the 70 years captivity mentioned Zach.
8.19. As also that which was observed by Esther and her Maidens, Mordecai, and
the Jews in Shushan, before her going into the King, to speak for the lives of
her people, Esther 4.16. to preserve the solemn remembrance of the calamities
of those times, he thinks they kept still those fasts; but besides, they
observed many Fasts devised and appointed by themselves, which may be reckoned
among the Traditions of the Pharisees imposed upon their Disciples. Now Christ
and his Disciples not fasting as they fasted, was another ground of the
objection, as is expressly mentioned by the Evangelist.

Next we may consider the persons that make the objection, whereby we may see
yet further ground of it. It was the Disciples of the Pharisees and John. These
Pharisees were the chief Ringleaders upon all occasions in any opposition
against Christ; one while they object against him and his Disciples for not
observing the Sabbath. Another while for not washing before they did eat, and
sometimes for his too much familiarity with Publicans and sinners, etc. And
here for not fasting. And now they engaged the Disciples of John with them that
they might make their objection and opposition the more plausible, for John was
in great reputation with the people. Wherein John's Disciples were justly to be
blamed for joining with the Pharisees in an opposition to Christ, who were his
inveterate adversaries. But John their Master being now in Prison, they were
the more easily drawn in with them, for had he been with them he would not have
suffered such a thing: (his great errand and business being to raise up the
reputation of Christ among the people, to remove prejudices against him, to
prepare the way for him, and to turn the hearts of the people to him.) A
pregnant instance whereof we have John 3.26, 27, 28. where John's Disciples
came with a story to their Master, Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan,
to whom thou bear witness, behold the same baptizeth, and all come to him,
but John answered, A man can receive nothing, except it be given from above, ye
your selves bear me witness that I said I was not the Christ, but that I am
sent before him. He that has the bride is the Bridegroom, etc. he must
increase, but I must decrease; John would not suffer any envy or prejudice to
remain in the hearts of his Disciples against Christ upon his account, but
seeks to check it presently. But he being now not present with them, the
Pharisees more easily engaged them in this opposition and objection against
Christ about Fasting, to join with them therein. And the zeal that John's
Disciples had for the reputation of their Master might somewhat incline them
also to it; for they saw the people following Christ: which they thought might
be some eclipse to it, and consequently to their own, as they were his
Disciples.

And besides they knowing the austerity and abstinence that was practiced by
John, (his meat being locusts and wild honey, such food as he found in the
wilderness) they might be more easily offended at that greater liberty that was
taken by Christ and his Disciples about eating and drinking.

Especially at this time when their Master was in Prison, they thought fasting
might be more seasonable than going to a feast, as Christ and his Disciples did
at the house of Levi, as Grotius observes upon the place.

Next we have Christ's reply to the Objection, and he presents it in a parable,
as I said; the parable of a Bridegroom, who at his wedding has his Bridemen
and Bridemaids attending him in the wedding chamber, who according to the
Hebrew Dialect are here called the Children of the Bride-chamber. And is it
then a proper season for their fasting, while they are in the wedding-chamber,
and the Bridegroom with them.

Wherein Christ does represent himself as a Bridegroom, and his Disciples as
the Children of the Bride-chamber. And he does now represent himself thus, the
rather to put these Disciples of John in remembrance of their Masters speech
when he called Christ the Bridegroom. As we read John 3.29. He that has the
Bride is the Bridegroom. And should then his Disciples fast and mourn while
Christ the Bridegroom was with them? And their Master John he professed that he
was the friend of this Bridegroom, and rejoiced greatly to hear his voice, John
3.29. And therefore why should they be offended at his Disciples that they did
not fast and mourn, when their Master John rejoiced, and had his joy fulfilled
in hearing his voice; as we read John 3.29.

And herein Christ does intimate to them, that if they were indeed his
Disciples, and the children of the Bride-chamber, they would not fast neither;
for the children of the Bride-chamber cannot fast while the Bridegroom is with
them.

But he adds; The days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, and then shall they fast in those days. And so I come to the Text.

Wherein we may observe by the way

1. That Christ does exempt his Disciples from observing those fasts that the
Pharisees and John's Disciples were in the practice of. Chemnitiu Harm. in loco.
And the rather because they were observed, especially on the Pharisees part,
Ex simulato pietatis studio, out of ostentation of piety, and for
self-justification. As he did exempt them from their other traditions, so also
from their fasts.

2. That the Bridegroom was to be taken away, which is to be understood of
Christ's fleshly presence, for his spiritual presence never was, nor never will
be taken away from his Church.

And this presence discontinues till his coming to judge the world, and then the
cry will be heard at Midnight, Behold the Bridegroom comes. Mat. 25.6.
The Bridegroom that was once visibly present on earth with his Disciples, is
so taken away that he will not be in that manner present with them again till
his return from heaven.

And his taking away does either respect the acts of men, who by cruel hands
took him from prison, and from judgment, and nailed him upon the cross, Isa. 53
8.
and took him out of the Land of the living. Or else it respects the act of his
Father, who took him up into heaven after he had finished his work here upon
earth, as it is said 1 Timothy 3. ult. Received up into glory, which is the more
probable, (...)
though there is nothing in the original word to determine it to either sense.

3. He also declares what the practice of his Disciples would be after his
taking away. Then shall they fast in those days, so that he does not deny the
practice of Fasting to his Disciples, but rather commends it, only it was not
at present seasonable, as it afterward would be.

Qu. But why should they fast after he was taken away?

Ans. 1. Some say, because till then the Holy Ghost was not given in such a
degree as might fit them for such extraordinary duties.

Chrysostom.
As Christ seems to intimate, when upon this occasion he excuses his Disciples,
as being not yet fit for such spiritual services. No man puts a piece of new
Cloth into an old garment, nor new wine into old bottles, Mark 2.22. It Is true
they might be able to keep fast days as the Pharisees did; but Christ that
values our duties by the frame of spirit exerted in them, would not have them
put upon extraordinary duties till they had a suitable measure of the spirit to
enable them thereunto.

2. Others (and I think more properly) understand the words of Christ with
respect to the afflictions and persecutions that would come upon the Church
after his ascension into heaven; which would give them great occasions of
prayer and extraordinary supplications, and which would reduce them to such
great sorrows and distresses, whereby fasting would be not only seasonable,
but that principle of grace that would act them in other duties, would also
naturally lead them to it. Not to take up again the practice of these
Pharisaical Fasts, (as the Montanists would hence infer) but the duty of
Fasting as suited to Gospel times.

And these persecutions began early. First by the Jews, and then the Arrians,
and then the Heathen persecutions under the Dragon in the Roman Empire, and
then under the Beast with the seven heads and ten horns, to whom the Dragon
gave his seat and great power, Rev. 13.2. And Christ foretold this to his
Disciples before he was taken away, That they that killed them would think they
did God good service, John 16.1. And that Nation should rise against Nation and
Kingdom against Kingdom, and there should be Famine, Pestilence and
Earthquakes, Mat. 14.7. Now in these days should his Disciples fast. Not that
in these words Christ does give an institution for fasting, but declares what
eventually would come to pass.

Neither does he determine any particular days and times for fasting, but only
general during the absence of the Bridegroom they should fast in those days.
And indeed as soon as the Bridegroom was gone they began to have cause of
mourning: his absence it self was one great cause, as when he foretold them of
it, sorrow filled their hearts. And so upon several other causes of sadness
that should fall out afterward, there would be great occasion of fasting and
mourning till his coming again.

Thus much for explication: And because my subject is about fasting, I shall
not consider Christ in the relation of a Bridegroom as he is here styled, of
which might be made a long discourse, which would rather lead me to speak of
Christian Festivals and spiritual joy, than a religious Fast, which is the
subject I must attend unto.

Neither need I make any logical division of the Text. But instead thereof
shall propose these three observations.

Obs. 1. There are some times that are more particular seasons for Fasting.

Obs. 2. That Christians ought wisely to observe what is the proper duty of the
times, and especially when they are called to the great duty of a Fast.

Obs. 3. That fasting is a duty to be practiced in the days of the New
Testament, even all the time of the Bridegroom's absence. So that it is not a
duty that was peculiar to the times of the Old Testament and the Mosaic
poedagogy, but is to be practiced in the Gospel times.

The last I shall only insist upon, and touch upon the other in the handling of
it, wherein I shall take notice, That Fasting may be considered either as, 1.
Merely natural. 2. Civil. 3. Religious.


1. As merely natural, which is only an abstinence from food. As the Greek
word, (...), a Fast, Grammatically imports no more but a not eating.

Which may arise sometimes from necessity and want of food, as when the people
followed Christ in the wilderness, and continued three days there, and had
nothing to eat; and hereupon Christ wrought a miracle to feed them, because he
would not send them away fasting, and they faint in the way, Mat. 15.32. So
when Paul was in his Voyage to Rome, for want of provision he and his company
fasted fourteen days, Act. 27.33.

Or else this natural fast is through want of appetite, though food is present.
There may be an Atrophy upon Nature, and man fasts only because he cannot eat.
Now this fasting is of no avail with God; if a man eats not, he is nothing the
better, and if he eats, he is no whit the worse. Bodily exercise profits
nothing of it self. As the Kingdom of God is not meats and drinks, so neither
is it abstinence from meats and drinks, especially such abstinence as this that
is not voluntary, but upon necessity.

2. Civil, when there is a fasting upon a civil account, with respect to some
civil end. As when the Magistrate does impose abstinence from meats for a while
for some civil good.

As Saul imposed it upon the people in his pursuit of the Philistines, 1 Samuel
14.
that his victory might not be hindered.

And such fasting sometimes may be imposed for the increase of provision, and
for the public health.

3. Religious. When fasting is attended with duties of religion, and is to some
religious end. For the end does in such things as these specify and denominate
the Action. And to give a particular Account of it, take it thus.

A Religious Fast is the devotion of the whole man to solemn extraordinary
attendance upon God in a particular time separated for that end, for the
deprecating his displeasure, and for the supplicating of his favor, joined
with an abstinence from bodily food, and other bodily delights, and from
secular affairs. So that he that fasteth does for that time separate himself to
God, and does voluntarily dedicate a part of time to his more solemn service;
and does put himself (as it were) under a Religious vow to abide solemnly with
God in the duties of the fast he is engaged in.

Now this Religious fast is either public or private.

1. Public. As when a whole City fasts, as in the case of Nineveh; or a whole
Nation, as in Jehoshaphat's case, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. who proclaimed a fast
throughout all Judah. And the Prophet Joel calls to such a fast, Joel 1.14.
Sanctify a fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the Elders, and all the
Inhabitants of the Land into the House of the Lord, etc. when the occasion is
public, so ought the fast to be.

2. Private. Which is either of a particular person, of which Christ speaks,
Mat. 6.17, 18. But thou when thou faste^, anoint thy head, wash thy face, that
thou appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father in se ret, and thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. And of this private fast, Anna
is an instance, of whom it is said, Luke 2.37. That she served God in the
temple with fastings and prayers night and day: And Daniel another, who tells
us, in three whole weeks he was mourning, did eat no pleasant bread, neither
came flesh and wine into my mouth, Dan. 10.2, 3. And Cornelius is another, Act.
10.30. And the occasion for private fasting is more peculiarly some private
concerns, unless the person that fasts be a public person, and then a private
personal fasting may be upon a public account as Daniels was.

Or of a particular family, which the Apostle seems to speak of, 1 Cor. 7.5.
Where husband and wife, being of the same family, are advised by the Apostle
not to defraud one another, but by consent for a time to give themselves to
fasting and prayer.

And when the Prophet Zachary speaks of families mourning apart, Zach. 12.13,
14. It may probably be meant of fasting joined with mourning: And though the
word family may be understood patronimically, and extend further than to a
particular house, yet it may by Analogy be applied to particular houses and the
inhabitants therein.

Again, a Religious fast is either stated or occasional.

1. Stated, as the fast of the seventh month, and the tenth day of the month
was a stated fast to Israel every year, and the fasts the Jews observed in
Babylon of the fourth, fifth, seventh, tenth month, mentioned Zach. 8.19. were
stated fasts, and the Pharisee in the Gospel boasted of his stated fasting; I
fast twice in the week, Luke 19.12. Against which stated fasts, I have nothing
to speak, or to censure any men's practice herein, if the occasion still
continues, and it do not degenerate into formality.

2. Occasional, of which we have frequent instances, as the fast observed by
Esther and her Maidens, and the Jews in Shushan was occasional. And so that
which I mentioned of Jehoshaphat was occasional. And the fast in Nehemiah's
time mentioned chapter 9.1. was occasional. These fasts did not pass into any
Stated course of observation.

Having premised these distinctions, I shall discourse of this religious fast.

1. In the Sanction of it. 2. The Manner of Observation. 3. The occasion that
requires and calls for it. 4. The concern that abstinence from food has in the
right Observation of it. 5. The abuse of the Ordinance in the wrong managing of
it.
1. First, for the Sanction of it. 1. It seems partly to be dictated by the
light of nature, for the heathen observed it, especially when any fore calamity
was either felt or feared by them. As in the case of Nineveh, when Jonah
denounced destruction to the City, they presently betook themselves to fasting,
both King, Nobles, and People, yea, the very Beasts must be concerned in it,
Jonah 3.7, 8. So when they would make their prayers more prevalent, in such
cases they would join fasting with their prayers. As Baals Priests, when they
cried to their God Baal to hear them. The Text says, they cried all day until
the evening sacrifice, 1 Kings 18.19. So that they did not only pray, but fast
also. As they used lustrations, sacrifices, festivals in their religious rites
and worship of their Gods, so sometimes they had their Jejunia, and religious
fasts. As we have some account of this in Tertullian in his Book adversus
Phychicos. By which they thought to make some satisfaction for their sin, and
to reconcile to themselves the Deity they had offended, or to obtain some
special favor they had need of.

2. It is a duty by Institution, and that both in the Old and New Testament,
the fast of the seventh month was by direct institution in the Old Testament.
And at other times God called them to it. Sanctify a fast, call an Assembly
(said the Prophet Joel) chap. 1.14. And God is said to choose it, Isa. 58. Is
not this the fast that I have chosen? And God's declaring there in that Chapter
the right way of observing it, does prove the duty it self to be of his own
appointment.

And the New Testament requires it also, for the duty is of a Moral nature, and
therefore the obligation of it remains, only with this difference.

1. We are not to use those rites and outward expressions of sorrow that were
practiced in those times; which belonged to the rigor of that legal
ministration As Rending the garment, Joel 2.13. putting on of sackcloth, Neh.
9.1. covering with Ashes, Dan. 9.3. bowing down the head, Isa. 58.5. Putting
earth upon their head, Neh. 9.1. and sometimes putting off their sandal, or
shoes, and plucking off the hair, Ezra 9.3. and making themselves bald, Isa.
22.12. And the Pharisees used disfiguring of their faces, Mat. 6. But says
Christ to his Disciples, when thou fastest anoint thy head, wash thy face,
which in their fasting the Jews should forbear, though used at other times, as
appears by Daniels fasting, chap. 10.3. I ate no pleasant bread, neither did I
anoint my self at all. But says Christ, do not ye do so, but anoint thy head,
and wash thy face, etc. and so use not such visible signs of sorrow, that thou
may not appear to men to fast.

2. We ought not to fast with that legal frame of spirit which was upon the
Jews in those days, for every duty in the days of the New Testament is to be
managed with a spirit suiting the Gospel ministration.

3. As to its sanction, there may be also the addition of humane authority in
the appointing of fasts, especially public fasts, when the public state of
affairs may require it, the duty in general being of God's institution, and the
voice of Providence calling people to it, the Magistrate in this case may
determine the time, if it be general to a Nation. Or the Pastors and guides of
the Church with respect to the several Churches over which they preside. For
where a duty is required of God, and the circumstance of time not determined,
there Christian prudence in Magistrates or Churches is to be the rule for
determination. As the particular times for Baptism and the Lord's Supper are
left to Christian prudence to determine.

2. The manner how a religious fast is to be observed.

And that both with respect to the outward and inward man.

And if some cannot hear a total abstinence, some courser food may be used, as
in Tertullian's time they had their Xerophagiae, so called from a dry kind of
food used by them. Tertullian de jejun. adv Psithicos.
1. With respect to the outward man.

1. Abstinence from food is requisite and necessary so far as may consist with
mercy to the body. For the very name of a fast implies this abstinence, and not
only the Jews but the very Heathen in their fasts did injoin this abstinence
upon themselves and others, as appears by that of Nineveh, Jonah 2.7.

2. As also meaner apparel than what may be used at other times, though not to
put on Sackcloth, yet to lay aside ornaments and richer dresses upon such a day.

When the Israelites would express their sorrow for the sad tidings of God's
refusing to go before them. It is said, they laid aside their Ornaments, Exodus
33.4.

Though they had a command for it, yet nature it self did teach it them. As it
did the King of Nineveh who laid aside his robe when he fasted and mourned.

Purple and scarlet and shining apparel are not suitable to such a duty, nature
it self being judge.

Non est conveniens luctibus ille color. And verily those gay and gaudy dresses
which multitudes garb themselves with at this day, are no whit suitable to the
sad times upon which God has cast us.

3. Yea, and humble gestures also, which may best express a solemn serious
mind. Though no particular gesture is absolutely commanded, yet nothing ought
to be discovered either in the countenance or any actions and gestures of the
body that may be unsuitable to the nature of the day, and the solemn duties
thereof; wherein partly the light of nature, and the custom of the place may
direct and regulate us.

The Jews had three sorts of gestures that were used in worship.

The one was bowing the head, called (...)

The other was bending the knee, called (...)

The third was prostration of the body, called (...)

But where there is no particular gesture determined there Christians are left
to their liberty, only it is to be guided by a due respect to the greatest
advantage of the duty, and with caution against any just offense.

4. Abstinence from secular affairs is requisite, for a fast is a solemn
devoting a certain part of time to God, and to an extraordinary attendance upon
him. And if meats and drinks are to be forborne, for to give advantage to the
duties of the day, so also bodily labors and secular business upon the same
account.

The Jewish fasts were reckoned among their Sabbaths, and so they were days of
rest from bodily labors.

And there was a severe punishment to be inflicted upon the men that did any
work upon their solemn fasts of the tenth day of the seventh month, as we read
Levit. 23.30. The same soul will I destroy from among his people.

Though the rigor of that legal ministration is abated under the Gospel, yet
it holds still in the moral and equitable part of it, that whatever may hinder
the managing of any duty in that manner that is suitable and necessary
thereunto ought to be laid aside; but

5. To these I shall here add the external duties of religion, and sacred
ordinances to be used in the discharge of the work of the day.

1. Is confession of sin, a fast day is for atonement, and therefore confession
of sin is necessary. As we read of Ezra when he heard of the sin of the Jews in
their making affinity with the people of the Land, he rent his garment and sat
astonished till the evening sacrifice, and made confession of their sin, Ezra
9.7, 8, 9, 10.

So in Nehem. 9.1, 2. we read the Children of Israel were assembled with
fasting, and they stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
Fathers.

And so Daniel in his solemn fast, which he set himself to in the behalf of the
Captivity now almost expired, he makes an ample confession of sin, as we read
Dan 9.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

And as a fast is an extraordinary duty, so confession of sin ought to be more
than ordinary in such a day, and what may suffice at another time, may not be
sufficient then. It ought to be more extensive with respect to the several
kinds and acts of sin, with respect to the aggravations of sin, and with
respect to the persons that are under guilt, and with respect to the inward
principles of sin in the heart, out of which all actual sins do spring. As
Daniels confession of sin extended to the kinds of it, the several aggravations
of it, and to the persons that were concerned in it, as their Kings, Princes,
Fathers, people of the Land, those that were near, and those that were far off,
as we find in that chapter. And this confession of sin is requisite to the
deeper humiliation of the soul, to the condemnation of our selves; and to the
justifying of God, whereby he may have the greater glory.

2. Is supplication, which is the imploring mercy from God, either with respect
to the pardon of sin committed, or the preventing those judgments that are
impending, or the removing such as are inflicted. As we find Daniel in the time
of his fasting, after his confession, made earnest supplications for
forgivenesses of sin, v. 9. for the turning away God's anger and fury, v. 16.
for the shining of his face upon his sanctuary, v. 17. for the repairing the
desolations of their City called by his name, v. 18. and for the people in
general, ibid.

And therefore fasting and prayer are frequently mentioned together in
Scripture, Luke 2.37. Acts 10.30. Acts 14.23, 24. 1 Cor. 7.5. though prayer in
general comprehends confession and thanksgiving in it, as well as supplication,
yet in a stricter acceptance, petition for mercy does most properly express
the import of the word and the main matter of the duty.

And this the King of Nineveh enjoined in the fast appointed by him, Jonah 2.8.
Let man and beat be covered with sackcloath, and cry mightily to God.

So that supplication and crying to God is another great part of the duty of
the day.

3. Hearing the word, for the word is necessary both for the discovery of sin
for our present humiliation, and for the discovery of our duty with respect to
future reformation, both which are necessary to an acceptable fast. And the
word of the Gospel sets before men a door of hope, that their sin may be
pardoned, and judgment removed. It presents God not only as reconcilable, but
delighting in mercy; It sets before men many instances of God's h^aring prayer,
and the prevalency of repentance and humiliation with him. And particularly
what acceptance solemn fasting has found with him in several ages. And all
this mightily tends to the furthering the great duties of the day. And it is
observed of the fast kept by the children of Israel, Nehem. 9.3. that they read
in the book of the Law of the Lord their God one fourth part of the day, and
another fourth part they confessed and worshipped; if repentance, spiritual
mourning, and soul humiliation be necessary to the day, as I shall show
presently, then the hearing the word may be of great use thereunto: As when
Josiah heard the words of the Law, he rent his clothes and humbled himself, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. and Ahab upon the like occasion humbled himself, though not in
the like manner; and we read how God appointed Jeremiah, and Jeremiah Baruch to
read the roll that was written from the mouth of God, in the ears of the people
upon their fasting day, Jer. 36.6. and what was the cause of Ninevehs
repentance and humiliation, was it not Jonah's preaching? as our Savior speaks
of it, Math. 12.41. They repented at the preaching of Jonah, though his
preaching was only this, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. The
word is effectual through Christ to bring the impenitent to repentance, and to
renew the exercise of repentance in those that have already repented; which is
a proper work for a fast day.

4. Renewing our Covenant with God, which in private fasts is to be done
betwixt God and a man's own soul, and in public fasts by the mouth of the
preacher, and the peoples consent thereunto.

And this Covenant is either the general Covenant that we renew, or else a
particular Covenant, with respect to some particular duties that we engage our
selves unto: Or else both together. As in the public fast observed by the
children of Israel in Nehem. 9. both Princes and Nobles and people renewed
their general Covenant to walk in God's Law, which was given by Moses the
servant of the Lord, and particularly they covenanted not to give their
Daughters to the people of the Land, nor take their Daughters for their Sons,
as we read Nehemiah Chap. 10. ver. 19, 20. and the Covenant being written,
their Princes, Levites and Priests did seal to it. So if a Church or people
have contracted guilt upon themselves by the omitting of some duties, or the
committing of any sins, for which the Lord may have a controversy with them.
It is a proper work upon a day of fasting to engage themselves to a reformation
by a solemn renewing their Covenant with God.

And though we have not a particular Instance of this in the New Testament, yet
the Law of says that requires men now to take hold of God's Covenant, and in
all cases to make use of it, so in some special cases to renew it also. Not
that it needs renewing as to the substance or sanction of it on God's part, but
we are on our part to renew it with God, by laying new engagements and
obligations upon our selves to carry it in all things according to the Law of
this covenant in the restipulating part of it.

5. The next duty of the day is Thanksgiving. Though this seems not the proper
duty of the day, yet is not to be omitted, for the due consideration of God's
mercy tends to the aggravation of sin, and so to make men's confessions and
humiliations more affectionate and evangelical. As in that fast I mentioned
before, Neh. 9. The Levites did stand up among the people, and begin the day
with blessing God. Blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all
blessing and praise, ver. 5. and so they proceed to recite a catalogue of God's
mercies, even from the first call of Abraham, to their settlement in the Land
of Canaan, which reaches to ver. 25. And all this was to bring in the
Nevertheless mentioned v. 26. with the greater Emphasis to their humiliation,
Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy Law
behind their backs, and show thy Prophets, etc. and the same we may observe in
Ezra, chap. 9. He takes notice of the reviving God had given them in their
bondage, and the Nail in his holy place, and the Wall in Judah and Jerusalem,
ver. 8, 9. the more to aggravate the peoples sin in doing according to the
abominations of the Canaanites, and mingling themselves with the people of the
Land, ver. 1, 2. The goodness of God is said to lead men to Repentance, Romans 2.
And therefore mention is to be made of it upon a day when the exercise of
Repentance is specially in season.

Yea, Thanksgiving also is requisite as an attendant of supplication, for the
giving thanks for mercy received is an effectual way to obtain New mercy:
According to that known saying, Efficacissimum genus rogandi est gratias agere.
Giving thanks for mercy received, is the most effectual way to obtain new mercy.

Thanksgiving carries supplication in the spirit of it. And if according to the
Apostle, Phil. 4. We are in every thing to make known our request with
supplication and thanksgiving, then when ever we come to God with
Supplications, we are to couple them with thanksgiving.

6. The last duty I mention, which is the Appendix to the rest, is that of
Alms-deeds, for when we come to beg mercy from God we should not forget to show
it to men. And he that stops his ear to the cry of the poor, Prove. 21.13.
he may cry but shall not be heard; yea, his prayers are so far from coming up
as incense before God, that they are an abomination. Cornelius that was a man
much in prayer and fasting also, as is noted of him, Act. 10.30. was full also
of Alms-deeds, Act. 10.31. and both together came up as a memorial before God.
Alms-deeds as they are not to be confined to a fast day, so surely are not to
be excluded. He that will on such a day shut up his purse, let him take heed
least God shut up against him his ear his heart and his hand. The People
complain, Isa. 53.8. Wherefore have we fasted and thou see not? God tells
them they fasted, but showed not mercy; and therefore fasted not aright: and
then tells them what was the fast that he had chosen, ver. 7. Is it not to deal
thy bread to the hungry, and when thou see the naked that thou cover them,
etc.

Certainly those duties that ought to follow our fasting, or else it avails
nothing with God, ought not to be shut out of the duties of such a day, if
there be call and opportunity thereunto.

Thus I have shown the duties of a fast day, which are external, with respect
to the outward performance.

And next I shall show what frame of spirit is requisite to such a day, without
which all these duties may be externally performed, and yet the fast not
accepted. Romans 2. ult.
For as the Apostle says of Circumcision, It is that of the heart, and of the
spirit, so is that fasting that is well pleasing to God. There may be
confession, supplication, renewing the Covenant, Thanksgiving, Alms-deeds, and
yet if there be wanting a suitable frame of heart, all this may be but as a
body without the soul, or matter without form, that may have praise with men,
but none with God.

Now this frame of soul consists in, 1. Self-debasement. 2. Godly sorrow. 3.
Filial fear. 4. Ingenuous shame. 5. Inward purity. 6. Evangelical faith and
hope.


I shall speak briefly to them all.

1. Is self-debasement. God complains of the Jews fasting, Isa. 58.5. they did
hang down their heads like a bulrush, but their souls did not bow down within
them. We call a fast day a day of humiliation, but we have the name but not the
thing, if the soul be not humbled: What is it for the body to wear sackcloth,
if Pride cover the heart; or to spread ashes under us, if the soul lie not down
in the dust, or to fast from bodily food, if the soul be not emptied of
self-fulness.

2. Godly sorrow. A fast day is for afflicting the soul, and how is the soul
afflicted without true sorrow? The Hebrew word (...) that signifies a fast, is
derived from a root that signifies to afflict, so essential is the afflicting
the soul to the day. It was a charge against the Jews, Isa. 58.2. Behold in the
day of your fast ye find pleasure. What kind of pleasure it was, is not there
mentioned, but it was some sinful pleasure that was not congruous to the day.
Daniel speaks of his fast, chapter 10.3. I sat full three weeks mourning. As at our
funerals, many enter the house of mourning and wear black, but there is no
mourning within, nor no garment of heaviness covers their soul.

So do many enter the day and duty of fasting, but no godly sorrow enters with
them into it, or attends them in it. Every thing is beautiful in its season,
Eccl. 3.11. A fast day wants its beauty if no true sorrow attends it.

We make confession of sin, but if there be no sorrow, we feel not what is
spoken, and what will words of confession avail? Ephraim is said to bemoan
himself, Jer. 31.18. And God is said to hear it, and he bemoaned him also; But
how can we think God's heart should be affected with our confessions, when our
own are not. The Jews upon their solemn days had their solemn sacrifices. A
fast day is a solemn day, and it is not to be without its sacrifices, and the
great Sacrifice or Sacrifices of the day, is a broken and contrite spirit.
psalm. 51.


3. Filial fear. Natural fear has sometimes brought a people to the duty, and
a filial fear is to be exercised in the performance of it, as Jehoshaphat
feared, and then proclaimed a Fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. And so did the King of
Nineveh, Jonah 2. when God's judgments are abroad we ought to fear, and this
fear should lead us to meet him in the ways of his judgment by prayer and
fasting, for all our serving God is to be coupled with fear, Psalm. 2.11. our
rejoicing is to be with trembling, much more our mourning.

In a fast day we especially deprecate God's wrath, and therefore we ought to
have such a sense of it, as may cause sacred fear. There is no affection of the
soul but ought to be sanctified to the service and honor of God, and so fear
among the rest, and is then to be exercised when we draw nigh to God,
especially in the solemn duties of a fast.

4. Ingenuous shame. Sin is in it self a shameful thing, and therefore when it
is confessed upon a solemn day, it ought to be with shame. As Ezra hearing of
the sin of Israel after their return from their captivity, he sat astonished
until the Evening, and then rises up, and rends the mantle, and speaks to
God: O my God I am ashamed and blush to lift up my faee unto thee, Ezra 9.5.
And to us belongs confusion of face, said Daniel in his fasting, Dan. 9.8.
Two things cause shame. One is to act contrary to our own reason, an I the
other is, to act unsuitably to another's kindness. The one is absurd, and the
other is disingenuous, and both may cause shame. And there are both these in
sin, especially when committed with allowance, for right reason does condemn
it, and it is a high violation of the law of kindness, to return evil where we
receive all our good.

5. Inward purity, by which I mean not a total freedom from sin, but a freedom
from a corrupt end, and the secret allowance of sin in our fasting. Either of
these will spoil the fast.

1. A corrupt end; As the Pharisees who fasted to appear religious before men.
And the Jews in Babylon who fasted, but did ye fast to me, even to me? says
the Lord, Zach. 7.5. their end was not right.

2. A secret allowance of sin, this made the Jews fasting of no avail with God,
Jer. 14.10. They have loved to wander. There is their allowance of sin, And
when they fast I will not hear their cry, ver. 12. There their fast turns to no
account. It is said of Ahab, he rent his clothes, put on sackcloth and fasted,
1 Kings 21.27. But still he kept fast his sin, and so not accepted. As when the
Jews came to enquire of God, Ezekiel. 14. God tells them, he well not be enquired
of by them. And why? because they set up Idols in their heart v. 7. so if men
come to God by fasting and prayer, and have in their hearts an allowance of
sin, (which God the searcher of hearts can know,) they bring an Idol along with
them in their hearts, and their prayer and fasting are rejected of him. David
well knew this, when he says, If I regard iniquity in mine heart, God will not
hear my prayer: Though men while they are fasting and praying are not visibly
acting sin, yet God sees the aspect of the soul, if that be looking toward
sin with pleasure and delight (as that Hebrew word (...) there imports) the
prayer is rejected.

Si j'eusse pente quelque malice, etc.
Or if we read the words as the French Translation (I think more properly)
renders them. If I had regarded some wickedness in my heart, God would not have
heard my prayer; the sense is the same to my present purpose.

6. Evangelical Faith and Hope in God. All our confessions and humiliations and
supplications ought to be joined with faith in Christ, and hope in God's
mercies, or else they want the great Ingredients of their acceptableness with
God. As in Ezra's fast, Shechaniah stands up and says to him, we have
trespassed against our God, and taken strange wives, etc. Yet there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing, Ezra 10.2. And to the Lord our God belong mercies
and forgivenesses, said Daniel in his fasting, Dan. 9.9. God's mercy and
Christ's merits should bear up our faith and hope, while our sin is casting us
down with sorrow. As Samuel endeavored to bring the people, first to a sense
of their sin in their choosing a King, and then bears up their faith and hope,
by telling them God will not forsake his people for his name sake, 1 Samuel
22.22. and David while he was confessing his sins of adultery and murder,
Psalm. 51. yet styles God the God of his Salvation, ver. 14. and whiles he was
crying to God out of the depths, as he speaks, and making his supplication,
Psalm. 130.1, 2. yet he joins therewith faith and hope in God's mercy, ver. 4.
But there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. All our duties,
even our fasting and humiliations ought to be performed Evangelically, which
cannot be except faith and hope do accompany the performance of them.

3. I next proceed to speak of the special occasions that call us to this
religious fast.

1. Is the affliction and distress of the Church.

When the Jews were in great distress, then Esther appointed Mordecai and the
Jews to fast, Esther 4.16.

When the Ammonites and Moabites invaded Judah with a great Army, then
Jehoshaphat proclaimed a fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. When a great famine was upon the
land of Israel, then said the Prophet Joel, chapter 1.14. Sanctify a fast, call a
solemn assembly. And when the Jews were in Babylon, then they kept their fast
of the 4th 5th 7th and 10th month, all the time of their captivity though the
several months had respect to some particular calamities that befell them in
those months. Sympathy and sorrow are naturally expressed by fasting; and are
spiritually to be expressed with respect to the Churches distress by a Religious
fasting.

2. Upon the occasion of extraordinary sin: If in a particular family it may be
a just occasion for a fast in the family, if in a particular Church, or in a
Nation, it may be an occasion of a more public fast. As the fast of Ezra chap.
9. and of Nehemiah chap. 9. was upon the occasion of the sin of Israel in
making marriages with the people of the Land. And Hezekiah rent his clothes,
and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord upon
the occasion of Rabshakehs reproaching and blaspheming God, as well as the
distress that was upon himself and the people by Senacheribs invasion, as we
read Isa. 37. beginning. We should mourn over the dishonor done to God, as
well as any distress and trouble that may come upon our selves, and we read of
the Congregation of Israel weeping before the door of the Tabernacle, upon the
account of the whoredom committed by many of them with the Daughters of Moab,
and bowing down to their Gods, Numbers 25.6.

3. For the obtaining some eminent mercy, or for success in any great
undertakings and enterprises. As Esther Esther 4.11.
before she went in to the King to beg for the lives of her People, she
required her Maidens, Mordecai and the Jews to fast. And Ezra proclaimed a fast
to seek a right way from God, for themselves, their little ones and all their
substance, when they were coming out of the Captivity to settle in their own
Land, Ezra 8.21. When Paul and Barnabas were sent forth to their more public
Ministry, certain Prophets fasted and prayed, and laid hands on them, and sent
them away, Act. 13.3. and when they ordained Elders for the Churches, they
commended them to the Lord with prayer and fasting, Acts 14.23.

4. For Conquest over some eminent Temptation. This may be the occasion of a
private fast, when a private person lies under it, or of a more public fast,
if the temptation reaches further. As Christ speaks of some kind of Devils
that are not cast out but by Fasting and Prayer: And the Rule may reach to
Soul-temptations, as well as bodily possessions, whereof our Savior there
speaks. But I hasten.

4. I shall next speak of the concern that abstinence from food has in the
duties of a fast.

1. That hereby the soul may be more fit for its operations; Jejunium purgat
mentem, s^blevat sensum, carnem spiritui subjicit, concupiscentiae nebulas
dispergit; as Austin speaks of it. Tom. 10. Ser. 230. de Temp.
the pampering and feeding the body is usually injurious to the free exercise
of the soul. And therefore the chastening it with due fasting may befriend the
soul therein, especially in such exercises wherein the soul is to have least
communion with the body.

As the body ought not to be robbed for the serving of God of that which is
necessary for it; for God hates robbery for sacrifice, so by undue providing
for it, we may rob the soul, and rob God of that service which it ought to
perform unto him.

The body is called by Philosophers (...), or bruta pars hominis, the brute
part of man. And a brute is not so fit for man's service, if he be kept either
at too high or too low a rate, nec supra negotium, nec infra negotium, sed par
negotio, is a good rule for the body to be treated by; and as Aquinas speaks,
abstinence from food upon a solemn fast is requisite ob elevationem mentis, for
the elevation of the mind, that it may get loose from the sensitive part, and
so more freely ascend to things above. As the Apostle kept his body in
subjection, that he might with more freedom run the race to obtain the Crown
that is incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27. Severity to the body may in some cases
be mercy to the soul.

As David chastened his soul with fasting, Psalm. 69.10. It was its sensitive
part he immediately chastned, that the rational and intellectual part might be
more vigorous and active.

2. In this bodily abstinence there is something of a self-judging in it: for
by abstaining for a while we judge our selves unworthy of returning to such
refreshings and comforts of nature at all. We are by abstaining from food to
reckon our selves unworthy of it.

3. By it we also express our sympathy with the Churches sufferings, I mean in
those fasts that are kept upon that account. And nature seems to teach men
this: as when David would have had Vriah go to his own house when he was come
from the Camp; 2 Samuel 11.11.
he answered, The Ark and Israel and Judah are encamped in the open field,
shall I thou go to my house, and eat and drink, etc. As by eating and drinking
we express our gladness, so by abstaining we properly express our sorrow and
sympathy with others suffering. Whiles David's child lay sick, he fasted and
would eat nothing, but when the child was dead, 2 Samuel 12.20.
he then would declare his shaking off his sorrow by calling for food and
eating.

5. Lastly, I shall speak of the abuse of a religious fast.

And this great Ordinance is several ways abused.

1. There is a Pharisaical abuse of it by ostentation.

When men fast to put on a disguise of extraordinary devotion and sanctity, as
the Pharisees did thus; and by disfiguring their faces and counterfeiting a
solemn and dejected countenance, and by mortified habits, etc. did seek to gain
the reputation of extraordinary holiness among the people. As the Pharisee in
the parable among other things boasted of his often fasting, I fast twice a
week. Strict piety has such a real value in it, that some that have it not,
yet will pretend to it, as thinking to advance their reputation by it.

1 Kings 21.
2. There is a mischievous abuse of it, (if I may so express it) when men's
hearts are full of malice, mischief and cruelty, and will hide it under the
disguise of a religious fast. As Jezebel when she was designing against
Naboth's vineyard, and life also, she proclaims a fast; and those Jews that are
reproved, Isaiah 58. they fasted and fasted, but it was for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness. They oppressed the poor, laid heavy
yokes upon their necks, and ruined them by their cruelties, and yet were very
zealous fasters, as our Savior speaks of the Pharisees, who made long prayers
for a pretense while they were devouring widows houses, Math. 23.14.

3. There is a formal abuse of it, when men have not such sinful ends as I
mentioned, but yet rest in the externals of the day, and care not to reach the
spiritual part of the duty. They go along with the several duties of the day;
but deest aliquid intus: there is that wanting within that is the proper work
of the day. They sit before God as his people, as if they were humbling
themselves before him, 1 Cor. 11.
but there is nothing in their hearts that answers before God to the outward
show they make before men. Religious duties according to Scripture Language are
not done, if not done aright: so that as the Apostle tells the Corinthians,
This is not to eat the Lord's supper, because they did not eat aright, so when
men are formal in fasting, this is not keeping a fast.

4. There is a Popish abuse of it,

1. By groundless fasting, as on the vespers of their Saints days, and their
Quadragesima's, fasting the holy time of Lent, in imitation of Christ's fasting
in the wilderness which was miraculous, and so not imitable.

2. By making fasting meritorious, and that which is part of satisfactory
penance for the expiation of sin, as Aquinas speaks expressly, fasting is to be
used ad satisfaciendum pro peccatis, to make satisfaction for sin.

3. By their prohibition of certain meats which God has commanded to be
received with thanksgiving, and yet allowing others in their room, Aquin. 22.
Q. 147. Art. 1. They forbid Carnes, ova and lacticinia, but all sorts of fish
and other vi^nds and junkets are allowed. Aquin. 22. Q. 148. Art. 8.
which are as inconsistent with the abstinence of a true fast; as those that
their Church prohibits, but yet they have the salve of a dispensation in such
cases, and if men will open their purses, they may gratify their palats.

5. Lastly, fasting may be abused by too frequent use, especially public
fasts. It is an extraordinary duty, and therefore not to be practiced upon
ordinary occasions. The too ordinary use of it may take off from the reverence
and solemnity of the duty. We find the several public fasts upon record in
Scripture were taken up upon some eminent occasions.

And besides it may make Religion burdensome; and weak converts may be
discouraged that are already brought in: And those that are without, may be
prejudiced and hindered. We should not make Christ's yoke heavier than he would
have it. Christ did not impose the rigor of the legal ministration upon his
Disciples, nor the burthensom traditions of the Pharisees: nor did himself
practice the austerity used by John the Baptist, nor imposed it upon his
Disciples.

Thus I have run through the five particulars I proposed to discourse this
subject in.

And upon the whole shall make some practical use.

Use 1. It reproves such who instead of prayer and fasting when required of
them, give up themselves to all excess of riot, who make their belly their God,
so far they are from denying it for the service of God, who practice as it was
said of Israel in case of the golden Calf, The people sat down to eat and to
drink, and rose up to play: And say according to this licentious Proverb quoted
by the Apostle out of Isaiah 22.13. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we must
dye.

Though God be visiting the world with his judgments, dashing the nations like
potters vessels, one against another: yet they care for none of these things;
they are loath so far to own God as to fast and pray under his rebukes; and
their spirits are too high to stoop to the humbling duties of such a day,
because fasting and praying have been abused, it may be by some in hypocrisy,
they are glad of that excuse to lay it quite aside.

The Book of Ecclesiastes they value above all Scripture because of two or
three verses they find therein, that they can interpret to gratify a sensual
life, chap. 2.24. There is no better thing than that a man should eat and drink
and that he should make his soul enjoy good of his labor, and to the same
purpose in chapter 3.13. and chapter 5.18, 19. But they should consider that Solomon
only speaks of the good of man with respect to this life, and the end that God
gives man the good things of this life for, which is to use them for the
outward comfort of his life, which he speaks of in opposition to such to whom
God has given wealth and riches and honor, yet has not given him power to
eat thereof, Eccl. 6.2. Sure there is a Medium betwixt sordid sparing, and
luxurious spending, betwixt using meats and drinks to the due comfort of
nature, and the abusing them to the great injury of the soul. And though due
feasting is lawful, yet still with respect to the proper season, and not to be
killing sheep, and slaying oxen, and drinking wine in bowls when God calls to
fasting, and baldness, and girding on of sackcloth, as the Prophet complains,
Isa. 21.12, 13. and who can reckon the manifold evils that arise from this
sensual course of life. The Schoolmen speaking of the sin of gluttony, assign
to it five Daughters: Inepta Laetitia, Scurrilitas, immunditia, multiloquium,
and hebetudo mentis circa intelligentiam. That is, foolish Mirth, Scurrility,
Uncleanness, Talkativeness, and dullness of mind.

And Solomon gives an account of the offspring of sensual and inordinate
drinking, Prove. 23, 29. Who has w^? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who
has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness of eyes? they
that tarry long at the wine, etc. And as men are hereby injurious to
themselves, not only as Christians, but as men, so they walk contrary to God in
the present course of his Providence among us.

Use 2. We may hence take notice that God sometimes calls us to extraordinary
duties, as this of Fasting is, and in such cases we are not to satisfy our
selves with Ordinary.

Christians should, like those men of Issachar, be wise in discerning the
times, and the proper duties that belong to them. Christ would not have his
Disciples fast while he was with them, but when he was departed the duty
would come in season.

So that if we meet with matter of sorrow and mourning, let us not be
discouraged or offended, it will be so until the Bridegroom's return.

Now therefore let us take a view of the present face of the times, and
consider whether this Extraordinary Duty of Fasting be not now in season.

If we consider the several occasions which call for this duty, are they not
all found at this day amongst us?

1. Is the abounding of sin an occasion? Pray consider whether wickedness is
not grown up to a greater height and impudence than in former ages in this
Nation? what shameful, and yet shameless whoredom and drunkenness are among us,
and Oaths that our Fathers knew not.

How many of these fools have we amongst us, which Solomon speaks of, that
make a mock of sin, Prove. 14.9. and mock at Religion as Fanaticisin, deny
Providence, and dispute against a Deity. That now it becomes necessary with
respect to many, instead of leading them to the higher points of Religion, to
convince their reasons of the Being of God, and to awake the innate notices of
a Deity in their hearts, which are even extinguish't by a course of sin.

What endeavors are used by many to debauch men into wickedness, and then to
glory in what they have done? And the more to take off the scandal of sin they
seek to propagate it and make it common, and if it was possible to make piety
scandalous and wickedness noble and honorable.

Now ought there not to be fasting and mourning, when religion is thus
despised, the great God dishonored, and his Laws made void; was not this
practiced by David, who said, Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men
keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136.

What we cannot reform, let us mourn over, and mourn the rather, because those
that can and ought to do it, so little concern themselves in it.

And has not the Temptation of the times overtaken many that have formerly
made great profession, and drawn them to many unworthy compliances for secular
advantages, and who have thereby laid up matter to themselves for future
repentance and sorrow? and are become to others objects of sorrow also. As the
Apostle blames the Corinthians about the incestuous person, why have ye not
rather mourned, 1 Cor. 5.3. and was it not to have been wished that all that
fear God in the Nation should have been better united by this time both in
Principles and practice, that we might no longer defame and persecute one
another until the Net be thrown over us all, and it be then too late to
relieve our selves, though not to repent. When many are at work to let in
Popery as a torrent upon us, we should sure endeavor to stern the Tide both
by fasting and praying unto God, and unity amongst our selves.

2. Is the distress of the Church of God an occasion for it? Look abroad, and
look at home, and you may behold such a sad face upon it, that may reflect
sadness upon all your hearts, where has God a people, especially in these
European parts of the world, but there is a distress upon them? whether ye look
into France, Germany, upper or lower Hungaria, Silesia, Polonia, etc. And does
not all this make fasting a duty in season; when Nehemiah heard from certain
that came from Judah, that the Remnant left of the Captivity were in great
affliction and that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, etc. he sat down,
mourned, fasted and prayed before the God of heaven, Nehem. 1.4. and this he
did, though he himself was in a good Office in the Persian Court. Was our
Condition ever so good at home, yet we should lay to heart the afflictions of
our brethren abroad. For as we are to rejoice with them that rejoice, so to
weep with them that weep, and what further calamities may yet break forth we
know not, but the sky looks still red and lowering, and pourtends bad weather,
and it is our wisdom so to discern the face of the sky, as to betake our selves
to the proper duty of the times.

And thus to observe and serve the times is good Christian policy.

3. Is the agitation of great affairs in the world an occasion for fasting?
this also requires it of us at this day.

Are not the Nations embroiled in Wars both by Land and Sea? are there not also
some negotiations of peace on foot? Is not the great Council of the Land to
meet here at home? and do not these extraordinary affairs call us to
extraordinary duties, that they may be all superintended and guided to an happy
issue in the end.

4. Is there not a strange stupidity and security upon the hearts of most men?
that they will not see the hand of God, though they feel it, and though God
walks contrary to them, yet they observe it not, but rather walk contrary to
him in a course of sin, than meet him by repentance in the way of his
judgments. Now the less others are affected, the more should we endeavor to
affect our own hearts; and to fast the more because they fast not at all, and
the more others are widening the breach, to stand so much the more in the gap,
Ezekiel. 22.20.

Now if we have these calls from God to this great duty of fasting and prayer,
let us not fail God herein, and though we should obtain nothing for others, yet
we may deliver our own souls; and we know the respect God had to those that
sighed and mourned in Jerusalem, that the Prophet was bid to set a peculiar
mark upon them, Ezekiel. 9.4.

2 Chronicles. 20.
And I shall only add this further word of encouragement, i. e. That this
extraordinary duty of Fasting has been often answered with extraordinary
success, as Esthers fast when she went in to the King, and Jehoshaphat's Fast,
when the Ammonites, Moabites and Edomites invaded him, and Ezra's fast, chapter
8.23. and upon Daniel's fasting he had the Angel Gabriel dispatched to him to
give him understanding in the things he sought, chapter 9.22. and again upon his
fasting in chapter 10. he saw a vision, wherein a man appeared to him, and told him
that he was a man greatly beloved, and from the first day that he set himself
to understand and chasten himself before God, his prayers were heard, and
sometimes where ordinary prayer has not prevailed, extraordinary has had
success, which Christ intimates in saying, This kind cannot be cast out but by
fasting and prayer, Mat. 17.21.

Those that now fast and mourn in the Bridegrooms absence shall rejoice with
him for ever at his return, then they shall feast, but fast no more, and the
days of their mourning shall be ended, as Christ said to his Disciples, I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from
you, John 16.21.

Though their present fasting and mourning has a good in it beyond the worlds
feasting and rejoicing, yet the consequent of it makes it incomparably better.
The Bridegroom was once upon earth with his Church, but departed and so gave
her occasion of fasting and mourning, but when he comes again, he and his
Church shall never fast, and therefore fasting will then never come into season
again, as the fast of the 4th 5th 7th 10th month was to the house of Judah joy
and gladness, Zach. 8. so all the fasts kept by the people of God here on earth
will be (and that incomparably) more joy and gladness to them in heaven, and
that for ever.

But to conclude all, take these two Rules.

1. Fasting being an extraordinary duty, ought to be managed with an
extraordinary exercise of grace, Christ would have his Disciples endued with a
greater measure of grace, before he would put them upon this duty; This new
wine must be put into new bottles, so that as Christ asked James and John
concerned his Baptism, are ye able to be baptized with my baptism? so may we
ask Christians now concerning fasting, are ye able to keep a fast.

2. Fasting ought to be followed with sincere and universal reformation, elso
it avails nothing. The Jews fasting mentioned Isa. 58. was rejected upon this
account. They went from their fasts to Strife, Debate, Oppression,
Covetousness, and no wonder then that they complain and say, why have we
fasted, and thou take no notice. Nay this reformation is so necessary, that
the denomination of a fast is attributed to it, Isa. 58.6, 7. Is not this the
Fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to deal thy bread to
the hungry, etc. If moral duties be neglected, the practice of the strictest
Institutions is unacceptable to God.

Quest. How to manage secret Prayer, that it may be prevalent with God to the
comfort and satisfaction of the Soul? Sermon. XIV.
Math. 6.6. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
have shut thy door pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father who
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.


WE have here our blessed Lord's instruction for the management of secret
prayer, the Crown and glory of a child of God: wherein observe,

1. The direction prescribed for our deportment in secret duty, in three things.

1. Enter thy closet, the word (...) Hesychius glosses by (...), a secret or
recluse habitation, and Suidas by (...), a hiding place for treasures, by a
Metonymy. The LXX (such as we have it) turn the Hebrew word (...) so frequently
by (...), that we need enquire no further, as Genesis 43.30. Exodus 8.3. 2 Samuel
13.10. 1 Kings 1.15. and otherwhere for a chamber, a parlour, a bedchamber.
Sometimes the word (...) foramen, caverna, a hole, cleft or cavern in a rock,
as Isaiah 42.22. which they render also by (...) and (...) rima. The Etymon of
the word being derived (...), from holes, pits, caves cut out in rocks, shows
that it notes secret places for retirements or repositories. It Is accordingly
rendered by secret chambers, Math. 24.26. and by closets, Luke 12.3.

2. Shut the door or lock it, as the word insinuates, (...), from whence (...)
a key is deduced, and are both put together, as appears by Rev. 3.7. and 20.1,
3. implying that we must bar or bolt it.

3. Pray to thy Father in secret. [Father] which is pietatis and potestatis
appellatio, as Tertullian notes, a name hinting both piety and power, [ to thy
Father, De Orat.
] noting both propriety and intimacy.

2. A gracious promise, which may be branch't into three parts.

1. For thy Father sees thee in secret, his eye is upon thee with a gracious
aspect, when thou art withdrawn from all the world.

2. He will reward thee, (...), retribuet, reponet, or as Ambrose reads it,
redder; so the word is sometimes translated by rendering, De Cain and Abel.
Math. 22.21. Romans 2.6. and 13.7. by delivering, Math. 27.58. Luke 9.42. by
yielding or affording, Heb. 12.11. Rev. 22.2. All which comes to this, he will
return thy prayers or thy requests amply and abundantly into thy bosom.

3. He will do it openly, (...), perspicuously and manifestly before the world
sometimes, and most plentifully and exuberantly before men and Angels at the
great day, secret prayers shall have open and public answers.

3. Here Is a demonstration of sincerity, from the right performance of this
duty, set forth by the Antithesis: But thou shall not be as the hypocrites,
verse 5.

When] i. e. as often as thou prayest by thy self, enter not thy house only,
thy hall or thy common chamber, but thy closet, the most secret and retired
privacy. Shut the door] that others may neither discern thee, nor rush in
suddenly upon thee. He shall reward thee] i. e. he shall answer thee and
perform thy request as a gracious return to thy secret sincerity. God is
pleased by promise to make himself a debtor to secret prayer. It brings nothing
to God but empty hands and naked hearts: to show that reward in Scripture sense
does not slow in upon the streams of merit but grace. It Is monkish divinity to
assert otherwise, for what merit strictly taken can there be in prayer: the
mere asking of mercy cannot merit it at the hands of God, who out of our most
sincere petitions (being at best impregnated with sinful mixtures) might take
up matter enough to sling as the dung of our sacrifices in our faces. Mal. 2.3.
We halt like Jacob both in and after our choicest and strongest wrestlings.
But such is the grace of our heavenly Father, who spies that little sincerity
of our hearts in secret, that he is pleased to accept us in his beloved, and to
smell a favor of rest in the fragrant perfumes and odours of his intercession.

Hence though I might draw forth several notes, yet shall treat but of one,
containing the marrow and nerves of the Text.

Obs. That secret prayer duly managed is the mark of a sincere heart, and has
the promise of a gracious return. Prayer is the soul's colloquy with God, and
secret prayer is a conference with God, upon admission into the privy chamber
of heaven. When thou have shut thine own closet, when God and thy soul are
alone: with this key thou openest the chambers of paradise and enterest the
closet of divine love. When thou art immured as in a curious Labyrinth from the
tumultuous world, and entered into that garden of Lebanon in the midst of thy
closet: thy soul like a spiritual Daedalus takes to it self the wings of faith
and prayer and flies into the midst of heaven among the Cherubims. I may term
secret prayer the invisible flight of the soul into the bosom of God, out of
this heavenly closet rises Jacobs ladder whose rounds are all of light, its
foot stands upon the basis of the covenant in thy heart; its top reaches the
throne of grace. When thy reins have instructed thee in the night season with
holy petitions, when thy soul has desired him in the night, then with thy
spirit within thee will thou seek him early. Psalm. 16 7. Isa. 26.9.
When the door of thy heart is shut and the windows of thine eyes sealed up
from all vain and worldly objects, Zach. 3.7.
up thou mountest and have a place given thee to walk among Angels that stand
by the throne of God; in secret prayer the soul like Moses is in the backside
of the desert and talks with the Angel of the Covenant in the fiery bush. Exodus
3.1. Genesis 24.63. 1 Kings 19.4. v. 12.
Here Is Isaac in the field at eventide meditating and praying to the God of his
Father Abraham. Here Is Elijah under the Juniper-tree at Rithmah in the
wilderness, and anon in the cave harkening to the still small voice of God.
Here Is Christ and the Spouse alone in the wine cellar, and the banner of love
over her: Cant. 2.4. Gers^n. Ephesians. 5.18. John 1.48.
where she utters verba dimidiata, ubi bibit ebriam Sobrietatem spiritus, but
half words, having drunk of the sober excess of the spirit. Here we find
Nathaniel under the fig tree though it may be at secret prayer, yet under a
beam of the eye of Christ. There sits Austin in the garden alone, sighing with
the Psalmist usque quo Domine, Confess. 1. l. 8. c 12.
how long O Lord, and listening to the voice of God, toll lege, take up the
Bible and read.

It Is true, hypocrites may pray, and pray alone, and pray long, and receive
their reward, (...), from such whose observation they desire, but take no true
delight in secret devotion, Mat. 23 14. Chrysostom. in loc. Cant. 2.14.
they have no spring of affection to God. But O my dove, says Christ, that art
in the clefts of the rock, let me hoar thy voice for the melody thereof is
sweet. A weeping countenance, and a wounded spirit, are most beautiful
prospects to the eye of heaven, when a broken heart powrs out repentant tears
like streams from the rock smitten by the rod of Moses law in the hand of a
Mediator. Oh how amiable in the sight of God, Psa. 130.1.
out of the depths have I cried to thee, as Chrysostom glosses [(...),] draw
sighs from the furrows of thy heart, e sulco pectoris. Let thy prayer become a
hidden mystery of divine secrets, like good Hezekiah upon the bed with his face
to the wall, Isa. 38.2, 5.
that none might observe him; or like our blessed Lord, that grand example, who
retired into solitudes and mountains apart, and saw by night the Illustrious
face of his heavenly Father in prayer: the reasons follow.

1. Because a sincere heart busies it self about heart-work, to mortify sin,
to quicken grace, to observe and resist temptations, to secure and advance his
evidences; and therefore is so much conversant in secret prayer. The glory of
the King's daughter shines within, Psalm. 45.13.
arrayed with clothes of gold: but they are the spangled and glittering
hangings of the closet of her heart, when she entertains communion with her
Lord. The more a Saint converses with his own heart, the more he searches his
spiritual wants and feels his spiritual joys.

2. Because a sincere heart aims at the eye of God, he knows that God being a
spirit loves to converse with our spirits, and to speak to the heart more than
the outward ear. Hos. 2.14.
He labors to walk before God, as being always in his sight, but especially
when he presents himself at the footstool of mercy: Because God is invisible
(...). An invisible God is delighted with invisible prayers, Chrysostom.
when no eye sees but his, he takes most pleasure in the secret glances of a
holy heart. Therefore a gracious soul prays in secret with the same diligence
and care, nay sometimes more, when in a holy frame, that he may reap the
comfort of his sincerity before the eyes of God. Job 31.33.


But no more of this, let us descend to the question deducible from the words, a
question of no less importance than daily use, and of peculiar concernment to
the growth of every Christian.

Quest. How to manage secret prayer, that it may be prevalent with God to the
comfort and satisfaction of the soul?

For methods sake I shall divide it into two branches.

1. How to manage secret prayer that it may prevail with God?

2. How to discern and discover answers to secret prayer, that the soul may
acquiesce and be satisfied that it has prevailed with God?

Before I handle these, I would briefly prove the duty and its usefulness,
leaving some cases about its attendants and circumstances toward the close.

As to the duty it self, the text is plain and distinct in the point: yet
further observe in Solomon's prayer, that if any man besides the community of
the people of Israel shall present his supplication to God, 1 Kings 8 38, v.
39. 2 Chronicles. 6.29, 30. 2 Chronicles. 7.1.
he there prays for a gracious and particular answer, and we know Solomon's
prayer was answered by fire, and therefore hence we may learn a promise given
forth to personal prayer. Besides the many special and particular injunctions
unto individual persons in the case, as Job. 22.27. and 33.26. Psalm. 32.6. and
50.15. etc. wives as well as husbands are to pray apart, Zech. 12.14. (...)
solitary, alone by themselves, and Jam. 5.13.

We may argue this point from the constant practice of the holy Saints of God
in all ages, but especially of our blessed Lord, and it is our wisdom to walk in
the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous, Prove. 2.20.
what should I speak of Abraham, Eliezar, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Hannah,
Hezekiah, David and Daniel. The time would fail me to bring in the cloud of
Witnesses, our Lord we find sometimes in a Desert, in a Mountain, in a Garden
at prayer, Cornelius in his house, and Peter upon the house top in secret
supplications to God.

The experience of God's gracious presence and answers sent in upon secret
prayer, as in the stories of Eliezer, Jabez, Nehemiah, Zechariah, 2 Chronicles.
4.10. Nehem. 2.4. Psalm. 32.6.
Cornelius and Paul, etc. For this cause, because David was heard, shall every
one that is godly pray unto him.

I might urge the usefulness, nay in some cases the necessities of secret
applications to God.

1. Are we not guilty of secret sins in the light of God's countenance, that
cannot, ought not to be confessed with or before others, insomuch that near
relations are exhorted to secret and solitary duties, Zechariah 12.12. 1 Cor.
7.4.

2. Are there not personal wants that we would prefer to God alone.

3. Are there not some special mercies and deliverances that concern our own
persons more peculiarly, which should engage to commune with our own hearts and
offer the sacrifices of righteousness to God. Psalm. 4.45.


4. May there not be found some requests to be poured out more particularly in
secret as to other persons and as to affairs of the Church of God, which may
not commodiously be insisted upon in common.

5. Do not sometimes emergent and urgent passions spring out of the soul in
secret, that are not comely in society.

6. To argue from the text, may not the souls secret addresses about inward
sorrows and joys, Prove. 14.10. 2 Samuel 18.3^.
be a sweet testimony of the sincerity and integrity of the heart, when the
heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger intermeddles not with his joy,
perhaps a man has an Ishmael, an Absalom, a Rehoboam to weep for, Job 16.19, 20.
and therefore gets into an inward chamber: where, behold his witness is in
heaven, and his record on high, and when others may scorn or pity, his eye
pours out tears unto God.

To end this, when a holy soul is close in secret, what complacency does it
take when it has bolted out the world, and retired to a place that none knows
of, to be free from the disturbances and distractions that often violate family
communion: when it is in the secret of the face of God, in the hidden place of
the most high, Psalm. 31.20.91.1. Job 29.4.
and in the shadow of the Almighty, oh how safe, how comfortable.

These and the like I pass by, neither can I insist upon secret prayer under
the variety of mental and vocal; nor enlarge upon it as sudden, occasional or
ejaculatory, referring somewhat of this toward the end.

Let Us address then to the first question, in answer whereto I must preface
that some things which aptly belong to secret prayer, yet being in some measure
coincident with all prayer, public, private, and secret, it is congruous to
treat of such as are of great use as to the management of our present duty, and
therefore must refer to a double head.

1. Quest. How to manage secret prayer, as it is coincident with prayer in
general, so that it may prevail?

1. Use some preparation before it, rush not suddenly into the awful presence
of God. Sanctuary preparation is necessary to sanctuary communion. Such
suitable preparatory frames of the heart come down from God. Thou will prepare
the heart and cause thine ear to hear. 'Twas a good saying of one [intime and
devote nunquam men's orat, quae se, etc. praemeditationibus prius non excitat]
He never prays ardently, Psalm. 10.17. Richard. de S. Vict. de erud. hom. int.
l. 1. c. 7. Dan. 9.3. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Isa. 26.9.
that does not premeditate savourly; Daniel when he made that famous prayer,
it is said he set his face to seek the Lord. Jehoshaphat also set himself to
seek the Lord. The Church in her soul desires the Lord in the night, and then
with her spirit seeks him early. Desires blown by meditation are the sparks
that set prayer in a light flame. The work of preparation may be cast under
five heads, when we apply to solemn and set prayer.

1. The consideration of some attributes in God that are proper to the intended
petitions.

2. A digestion of some peculiar and special promises that concern the affair.

3. Meditation on suitable arguments.

4. Ejaculations for assistance.

5. An engagement of the heart to a holy frame of reverence and keeping to the
point in hand. Cypr. de Orat. p. 106. 6. edit.
[Nec quicquam tunc animus quam solum cogitet, quod precatur] was serious
advice from Cyprian, let the soul think upon nothing but what it is to pray
for, and adds that therefore the ministers of old prepared the minds of the
people with sursum corda, let your hearts be above. For how can we expect to be
heard of God when we do not hear our selves, when the heart does not watch
while the tongue utters. The tongue must be like the pen of a ready writer,
Psalm. 45.1.
to set down the good matter which the heart indites, take heed of ramblings to
preach or tell pious stories, while praying to the great and holy God is a
branch of irreverence and a careless frame of spirit, Heb. 12.28.

2. Humble confession of such sins as concern and refer principally to the work
in hand. Our filthy garments must be taken away, when we appear before the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem. Look upon my afflictions, Zech. 3.4. Psalm. 25.18.
Psalm. 39.8.12. Psalm. 103.3.
cries David, and forgive all my sins. There are certain sins that often relate
to afflictions. First, deliver me from my transgressions, then hear my prayer O
Lord: for this is the heavenly method, he first forgiveth all our iniquities
and then heals all our diseases. A forgiven soul is a healed soul, while a
man is sick at heart with the qualms of sin unpardoned, it keeps the soul under
deliquiums and swooning fits, that it cannot cry strongly unto God, and
therefore in holy groans must discharge himself of particular sins, and pour
out his soul before God. Thus did David in that great penitential Psalm. Psalm.
51.4. Isa. 59.2. Ezra 9.6.
For sin like a thick cloud hides the face of God that our prayers cannot
enter. We must blush with Ezra, and our faces look red with the flushings of
conscience, if we expect any smiles of mercy. Our crimson sins must dye our
confessions; and the blood of our sacrifices must sprinkle the horns of the
golden altar, before we receive an answer of peace from the golden mercy seat.
When our persons are pardoned, our suits are accepted, and our petitions
crowned with the Olive Branch of peace.

3. An arguing and pleading Spirit in prayer. This is properly wrestling with
God, humble, yet earnest expostulations about his mind toward us, Psalm. 74.1.
Isa. 64.9.
Why have thou cast us off for ever, why does thine anger smoke? Be not wroth
very sore, O Lord, remember not iniquity for ever, see we beseech thee, we are
thy people. If so, why is it thus? as frighted Rebekah flies out into prayer.
An arguing frame in prayer cures and appease^ Psalm. 34.4. Genesis 25.22. Psalm.
27.4. Psalm. 22.1, 21. Psalm. 80 4. Jer. 14 8 9.
the frights of spirit, and then inquires of God. The Temple of prayer is
called the souls inquiring place. Why is God so far from the voice of my
roaring? Thou have heard me from the horns of the Unicorns. Art thou angry with
the prayers of thy people? and how long? turn us again and cause thy face to
shine upon us. O hope of Israel, why like a wayfaring man, like a man astonished?
O Lord thou art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us
not. I must refer to Abraham, Jacob and Moses, Joshuah, David and Daniel: how
they urged arguments with God. Sometimes from Ps 5 7. and 6 4 and 31 16.
the multitudes of God's mercies, from Psalm. 4.1. and 6.9. and 22.4, 21. and
31. 2, 3, 7. and 140.7.
the experience of former answers, from the Name of God: from Psalm 9.10. and
16.1.
their trust and reliance upon him, Psalm. 17.1.
from the equity of God, Psalm 31.17 and 34.1.
from the shame and confusion of face that God will put his people to, if not
answered, and that others will be driven away from God, and lastly from Psalm.
20.5. and 35 18.
the promise of peace. These and many like pleadings we find in Scripture, for
patterns in prayer; which being suggested by the spirit, kindled from the altar
and perfumed with Christ's incense, rise up like memorial pillars before the
oracle. Let Us observe one or two particular prayers what instant arguments holy
men have used and pressed in their perplexities. 2 Chronicles. 20.10, etc.
Jehoshaphat what a working prayer did he make taking pleas from God's
Covenant, dominion and powerful strength, from his gift of the Land of Canaan,
and driving out the old inhabitants, ancient mercies! from his Sanctuary and
his promise to Solomon, from the ingratitude and ill requital of the enemies,
with an appeal to God's equity in the case, and a humble confession of their
own impotency, and yet that in their anxiety, their eyes are sixth upon God. You
know how gloriously it prevailed when he had set ambushments round about the
Court of Heaven, v. 8.
and the Lord turned his arguments into ambushments against the children of
Edom, etc. Yea, this is set as an instance Joel 3.2.
how God will deal against the Enemies of his Church in the latter days.
Another is that admirable prayer of the Angel of the Covenant to God for the
restoration of Jerusalem, Zech. 1.12.
wherein he pleads from the length of time and the duration of his indignation
for threescore and ten years, from promised mercies and the expiration of
Prophesies: and behold an answer of good and comfortable words from the Lord,
and pray observe, that when arguments in prayer are very cogent upon a
sanctified heart: such being drawn from the divine attributes, from precious
promises and sweet experiments of God's former love: it is a rare sign of a
prevailing prayer. 'Twas an ingenious passage of Chrysostom concerning the
woman of Canaan, Chrysostom. in Mat. 15.
(...); the poor distressed creature was turned an acute Philosopher with
Christ, and disputed the mercy from him. O it is a blessed thing to attain to
this heavenly Philosophy of prayer, to argue blessings out of the hand of God.
Here Is a spacious field. I have given but a small prospect, where the soul like
Jacob does in arenam descendere, enter the lists with omnipotency and by holy
force obtain the blessing.

4. Ardent affections in prayer betokening a heart deeply sensible, are greatly
prevalent. Exodus 14 15.
A crying prayer pierces the depths of heaven. We read not a word that Moses
spoke, but God was moved by his cry. I mean not an obstreperous noise, but
melting moans of heart. Yet sometimes the sore and pinching necessities and
distresses of spirit extort even vocal cries not displeasant to the inclined
ears of God. I cried to the Lord with my voice, says David, Psalm. 3.4. Psalm.
5.2. Psalm. 39.12. Psalm. 142.1.5, 6, 7.
and he heard me out of his holy hill, and this encourages to a fresh onset:
hearken to the voice of my cry, my King and my God. Give ear to my cry, hold
not thy peace at my tears, another time he makes the Cave Echo with his cries:
I cried, I cried, attend to my cry, for I am brought very low, and what is the
issue, Fath gets courage by crying: his tears watered his faith that it grew
into confidence, (...) Coronabunt.
and so concludes, thou shall deal bountifully with me, and the righteous shall
crown me for conqueror. Plentiful tears bring bountiful mercies, and a crying
suitor proves a triumphant praiser. Holy Jacob was just such another at the
fords of Jabbok he prevailed with the Angel, for he wept, Hos. 12.4. 1 Kings
20.5. Jer. 31.18.
and made supplications to him. Hezekiah may bring up the rear for the Lord
told him he had heard his prayer, for he had seen his tears. Such presidents
may well encourage backsliding Ephraim to return and bemoan himself, and then
the bowels of God are troubled for him. Nay, we have a holy woman likewise
weeping sore before the Lord in Shiloh, 1 Samuel 1.10. and 2.1.
and then rejoicing in his salvation. The cries of Saints are like vocal music
joined with the instrumental of prayer; they make heavenly melody in the ears
of God. The bridegroom calls to his mourning dove, let me hear thy voice, for
that is pleasant. Cant. 2.14. Gers. Tom. 2. Fol. 77.^.
What Gerson says of the sores of Lazarus, Quot vulnera tot linguas habuit, as
many wounds, so many tongues; we may say of sighs, cries and groans in prayer,
so many eloquent orators at the throne of God.

5. Importunity and assiduity in prayer is highly prevalent. Ambrose de Cain
and Abel. l. 1. c. 9. Mat. 5.7. Epiphan. haeres. 30. Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians 5.17.
Number. 28.4, 6. 2 Samuel 9.7.
[Non ut fastidiosa continuetur oration, sed ut assidua frequenter effundatur,]
not that we should lengthen out prayer with tedious and vain repetitions, as
the Heathen did of old, or as the Euchitae in Constantius his time, that did
little else but pray; but that we should be frequent and continue instant in
prayer. Whereas our Lord bids us to pray always, and the Apostle Paul to pray
without ceasing, we are to understand it of Constancy at times every day. As
the morning and evening Sacrifice at the Temple is called the Continual
burnt-offering. As Mephibosheth is said to eat bread Continually at David's
table, and Solomon's Servants to stand Continually before him, i. e. at the set
and appointed times: So it is required of us to be constant and assiduous at
prayer, and to follow our lawful requests with perseverance. Thus Hannah is
said to multiply prayer, 1 Samuel 1.12.
and received multiplied answers; expressly indeed she prayed but for one Son,
but she had six children returned in upon prayer.

When the soul perseveres in prayer, it is a sign of a persevering faith, and
such may have John 16.23 1 Kings 18.43
what they will at the hand of God, when praying according to prescript. Nay,
urgent prayer is the token of a mercy at hand: When Elijah prayed seven times
one after another for rain, Isa. 45.11.
the clouds presently march up out of the sea at the command of prayer. Ask of
me things to come, says the Lord, and concerning the works of my hands,
command ye me. When we put forth our utmost strength in prayer, and will as it
were receive no nay from heaven, our prayers must be like the Continual blowing
of the silver Trumpets over the sacrifices for a memorial before the Lord; Number
10.10.
Like the watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem, which never hold their peace day
nor night, Isaiah 62.6, 7 64 7
are commanded not to keep silence nor to give him rest. Nay, God seems
offended at another time, that they did not lay hands upon him, that they might
not be consumed in their iniquities. Such prayers are as it were a holy
molestation to the throne of grace.

It Is said of the man that rose at midnight to give out three loaves to his
friend, he did it not for friendships sake, but (...), Luke 11.8
because he was impudent, so importunately to trouble him at such a season as
12 a clock at night. Our Lord applies the parable to instant prayers. The like
we find of the success of the widow with the unjust judge because she did (...),
Luke 18 5
vex and molest him with her solicitations. But of all, the pattern of the
woman of Canaan is most admirable, Mat. 15 23
when the Disciples desired her to be dismissed because she troubled them by
crying after them, and yet she persists. May I say it reverently, Christ
delights in such a troublesome person. Though as an Ancient observes by
comparing both Evangelists, that first Mat. 15.22.
she cried after Christ in the streets, but our Lord taking Mark 7.23.
house, she follows him thither and falls down at his feet, but as yet Mat.
15.23. Augustine de consensu Evangelist. l. 2. p 447. Tom. 4 edit. B^^. 1569.
Jam. 5. Rhet. Divin. p. 353.
he answered her not a word, [In eo silentio egressum fuisse Jesum de domo
illa] then our Lord going out of the house again, she follows with stronger
importunity and argues the mercy into her bosom, and Christ ascribes it to the
greatness of her faith; (...), as another terms it: a laudable and
praiseworthy immodesty, as in the former case to knock so rudely at midnight
is deemed no incivility at the gate of heaven. This is (...), as Parisiensis
reads it, deprecatio justi assidua. An assiduous prayer is the way to become
an efficacious prayer. It Is ill taken, if not importunate. Cold petitioners
must have cool answers. If the matter of prayer be right and the promise of God
fervently urged, thou art like to prevail like princely Israel that held the
Angel by the Collar (to speak with reverence) and would not let him go until
he had blessed him. Genesis 32.26. v. 24.
But 'twas hot work most of the night even to break of day: to show that in
some cases of extremity we must hold out in prayers. For our Lord in the next
verse to the Text does not forbid the length of prayer: for he himself upon
occasion continues a whole night in prayer. Luke 6.12.
But such as are filled with impertinent multiplications of vain words, and
have neither holy reasonings nor spiritual and warm affections, and yet think
to be heard for their much speaking.

Qu. But can God be moved by our arguments, or affected with our troubles? He
is the unchangeable God and dwells in the inaccessible light; James 1.17.
There Is no variableness or shadow of turning. A metaphor from the fixed stars,
which admit no parallax, Kepler Astron. l. 4. p. 495. Fran. 1635, etc. Argol.
Tab. p. 72.
and therefore Astronomers cannot demonstrate their magnitude: for our eyes or
instruments can yet give no intelligence of any increase or diminution of their
diameter or light.

Ans. Those holy motions upon the hearts of Saints in prayer are the fruits of
the unchangeable decrees of his love to them and the appointed ushers of mercy.
God graciously determines to give a praying, arguing, warm, affectionate frame,
as the prodromus and forerunner of a decreed mercy. That Is the reason that
carnal men can enjoy no such mercies, because they pour out no such prayers.
Jer. 29 10, 12. Isa. 45.1, 2, 4.11, 19.
The spirit of prayer prognosticates mercy ensuing. Wherefore when the Lord by
Jeremy foretold the end of the Captivity, he also pre-signifies the prayers
that should open the gates of Babylon. Cyrus was prophesied of to do his work
for Jacob his servants sake and Israel his elect; but yet they must ask him
concerning those things to come and they should not seek him in vain. The glory
of the latter days in the return of Israel is foretold by Ezekiel; Ezekiel. 36.24,
37 Rev. 21.12, 17, 20.
but yet then the Lord will be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for
them. The Coming of Christ is promised by himself: but yet the Spirit and bride
say come, and he that hears must say come, and when Christ says he will
come quickly: Even so come Lord Jesus. Divine grace kindles these ardent
affections when the mercies promised are upon the wing. Gerson T. 2. K K. 3, 6.
Prayer is that intelligible chain, as Dionysius calls it, that draws the souls
up to God and the mercy down to us, or like the Cable that draws the ship to
land, though the shore it self remain unmovable. Prayer has its kindlings from
heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1.
like the ancient sacrifices that were inflamed with celestial fire.

6. Submission to the allwise and holy Will of God. This is the great benefit
of a Saint's communion with the spirit, that he makes intercession for them
according to the Will of God. Romans 8.27.
When promised mercies are revealed in more absolute terms; the sanctified Will
concenters with the Will of God. When we pray for holiness, there is a
concurrence with the Divine Will. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Romans 12.1, 2.
For this is the Will of God, even your sanctification. When we pray that our
bodies may be presented a living sacrifice acceptable to God: we then prove
what is that good, acceptable and perfect Will of God. But I speak here as to
outward mercies and enjoyments, and the gradualities or degrees of graces, and
spiritual mercies. But as to substance of spiritual mercies, the pomises in
such cases run freely, as if in any place there seem to lie any limitations or
conditions, those very conditions are otherwhere graciously promised to be
wrought in us. In the Covenant of grace, God does his part and ours too. As
when God commands us to pray in one place: he promises in another place Zec.
20.10.
to pour out upon us a Spirit of grace and supplication. God commands us to
repent and Ezekiel 14.6.
turn unto him. In another place, Lam. 5.21. Jer. 31.18.
Turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God; and again,
turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, Ezr. 18.31
make you a new heart and a new spirit: otherwhere Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, etc. and
cause you to walk in my statutes, that Col. 1.9, 10.
ye might walk unto all pleasing, says Paul, for this cause I cease not to pray
for you, etc. that he would Heb. 11.21.
work in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight. Work out your salvation,
Phil. 2.12, 13.
for it is God that works in you to will and to do of his good pleasure.
Precepts, promises and prayer are connext like so many golden links to excite,
encourage and assist the soul in spiritual duties. But in other cases as to
temporal and temporary mercies, let all thy desires in prayer be formed with
submission, guided by his counsel, and prostrate at his feet, and acted by a
faith suitable to the promises of outward blessings, and then it shall be unto
thee Mat. 15 28. Gerson T. 2.
even as thou will. He said well, cardo desideriorum sit voluntas Dei, exaudiat
pete cardinem. Let all thy desires as to temporals turn upon the hinge of the
divine good pleasure. That man shall have his own Will that resolves to make
God's Will his. God will certainly bestow that which is for the good of his
people, Psalm. 34.18. and 84.11. Math. 7.11. Romans 8.28. One great point of our
mortification lies in this, to have our Wills melted into God's, and it is a
great token of spiritual growth, when not only content but joyful to see our
Wills crossed that his may be done. We pray that his Kingdom may come, let it
appear by sincere prayer that his Will may be done. When our Wills are
sacrificed in the flames of holy prayer, we many times receive choicer things
then we ask expressly. 'Twas a good saying [non dat quod volumus, ut det quod
malimus] God many times grants not what we will in the present prayers that he
may bestow what we had rather have, when we have the prayer more graciously
answered than we petitioned, we know not how to pray as we ought; but the
spirit helps us out with groans that secretly hint a correction of our wills
and spirit in prayer. Romans 8.26.
In great anxieties and pinching troubles, nature dictates strong groans for
relief; but sustaining grace, Heb. 12.10.
and participation of divine holiness, mortification from earthly comforts,
excitation of the soul to long for heaven, being gradually weaned from the
Wormwood-breasts of these sublunary transient and unsatisfying pleasures, and
the timeing of our hearts for the seasons, wherein God will time his
deliverances; are sweeter mercies than the present return of a prayer for an
outward good into our bosoms. What truly holy person would lose that light of
God's countenance, Psalm 4.6, 7.
which he enjoyed by glimpses in a cloudy day for a little corn and wine? Thou
have put more gladness into my heart, says David. Nay in many cases open
denials of prayer prove the most excellent answers, and God's not hearing us is
the most signal audience. Therefore at the foot of every prayer subscribe fiat
voluntas tua, and thou shall enjoy preventing mercies that thou never
soughtest, and converting mercies to change all for the best, resting confident
in this, that having asked according to his will he hears thee. 1 John 5.14.


7. Lastly, present all into the hands of Christ. This was signified of old by
praying toward the Temple, 1 Kings 8.33. Heb. 8.3.
because the golden mercy-seat typifying Christ was there; he is ordained of
God to offer gifts and sacrifices, and therefore it is of necessity that he
should have something from us to offer, being Heb. 10.21.
the high priest over the house of God. What does Christ on our behalf at the
throne of grace? Put some Petition into the hands of Christ, he waits f^r our
offerings at the door of the oracle; leave the sighs and groans of thy heart
with this compassionate intercessor, who is touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 4 15.
who sympathizes with our weaknesses. He that lies in the Father's bosom and
has (...). John 1.18.
expounded the Will of God to us, adds Rev. 8.3.
much incense to the prayers of all Saints before the throne of God, and
explains our Wills to God; Psalm. 141.2
so that our prayers perfumed by his, are set forth as incense before him. He
is the Job 9.33.
days-man, the heavens-man betwixt God and us. Whatever we ask in his name, he
puts into his golden censer John 15 16 and 16.23.
, that the Father may give it to us. When the sweet smoke of the incense of
Christ's prayer ascends before the Father, our prayers become sweet and amiable
and cause a savor of rest with God. This I take to be one reason why the
prevalency of prayer is so often assigned to the time of the evening sacrifice,
pointing at the death of Christ, about Mat. 27.46 Act. 3.1.10.30
the 9th hour of the day, near the time of the evening oblation. Hence it was
that Abraham's sacrifice received a gracious answer, being offered Genesis 15.12
24 63.
about the going down of the Sun. Isaac went out to pray at eventide. Elijah at
mount Carmel prays and offers at 1 Kings 18.36.
the time of the evening sacrifice. Ezra fell upon his knees and spread out his
hands Ezr. 9.5.
at the evening sacrifice. David begs that his prayer may be virtual in the
power of the Psalm. 141.2
evening sacrifice. Daniel at prayer was touched by the angel about the time of
the Dan. 9.21
evening oblation. All to show the prevalency of our access to the throne of
grace by the virtuous merit of the intercession of Christ, the acceptable
evening sacrifice. Yea and therefore we are taught in our Lord's prayer to
begin with the title of a Father: in him we are adopted to children, and to use
that prevalent relation as an argument in prayer. There are some other
particulars in respect to prayer in general, as it may be connext and
coincident with secret prayer, as stability of spirit, freedom from distraction
by wandering thoughts, the actings of faith, the aids of the spirit, etc. which
I pass by and come to the second branch.

Directions special and peculiar to secret prayer. 1. Be sure of intimate
acquaintance with God. Can we presume that are but dust and ashes to go up into
heaven and boldly to enter the presence chamber and have no fellowship with the
Father, or with the Son? Job 22.2^, 26, 27.
Acquaint thy self witb him and be at peace, etc. Then shall thou have thy
delight in the Almighty and lift up tby face unto God* thou shall make thy
prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee. v. 28.
The decrees of thy heart shall be established to thee, and the light shall
shine upon thy ways. First Job 29.3, 4. Dan. 9.3.
shining acquaintance, and then shining answers. Can thou set thy face unto
the Lord God, then thou may seek him by prayer. First Daniel sets and shows
his face to God, and then seeks him by prayer and supplications. Does God know
your face in prayer? do you often converse in your closets with him? Believe
it, it must be the fruit of intimate acquaintance with God, to meet him in
secret with delight. Can ye come familiarly as a child to a father, considering
its own vileness, meanness, or unworthiness in comparison with his divine love,
the love and bowels of a heavenly father? Such a father, the father of fathers,
and the father of mercies. 2 Cor. 1.2, 3.
How sweetly does the Apostle join it, God is our Father because the Father of
our Lord, and because his Father and so our Father, therefore the Father of
mercies. Oh what generations of mercies flow from this paternity! But plead we
must to that (...) that manuduction and access to this father through Christ by
the spirit. We must be gradually acquainted with all three. Ephesians. 2.18. Gal.
4.6. Ephesians. 1.4.
First with the spirit, then with Christ, and last with the father; first God
sends the spirit of his son into our hearts, and then through the son we cry
Abba father. The bowels of mercy first wrought in the father to us, he chose us
in Christ and then sends his spirit to draw us to Christ, and by Christ to
himself. Have ye this access to God by the spirit, bosom-communion flows from
bosom-affection. If your souls are truly in love with God, he will graciously
say to your petitions, be it unto you according to your love.

Times of finding God. A godly man prays in finding seasons. 2. Obser.
When God's heart and ear are inclined to audience, when God is said to Psalm.
31.2. Isa 55.6. Psalm. 32.6. Cant. 2.9.5.2.
bow down his ear unto us. There are special seasons of drawing nigh to him,
when he draws nigh to us, times when he may be found. When thy beloved looks
forth at the window, and shows himself through the lattess. That Is a time of
grace when he knocks at the door of thy heart by his spirit. Motions upon the
heart are like the Doves of the East sent with letters about their necks. As
he said of Bernard [Ex motu cordis spiritus Sancti praesentiam agnoscebat] he
knew when the holy spirit was present with him, by the motion of his heart.
Gerson T. 2. 27. a. 2 ^am. 7.27. Psalm. 27.4, 8.
When God reveals himself to the heart, he opens the ears of his Servants for
some gracious message. When God bids us seek his face, then the soul must
answer one thing have I desired, that will I seek after. First holy desires
warm the heart, and they s^t the soul on seeking. They are ^ik^ m^ssengers sent
from heaven to bring us into his pr^s^. T^ke heed then of quenching the Spirit
of God. He that is (...) knows the sound, (...), John 3.8.
the voice of the spirit. When the (...) word, or softened by afflictions, or
feels some holy groans and sighs excited by the spirit; that is a warm time for
prayer: Romans 8.27.
then we enjoy the sense (...), the intimations of the spirit of God, or when
prophesies are nigh to expire, then there are great workings and searchings of
heart in Daniel, Zechary, Simeon and Anna, or when some promise comes with
applying power. Therefore has thy Servant found in his heart to pray this
prayer unto thee, 2 Samuel 7.27, 28. Cant. 7.9.
for thou have promised this goodness unto thy Servant. When we find promises
dropped into the soul like wine, it causes the lips of them that were asleep to
speak.

3. Keep Conscience tender of, and clean from, secret sins. With what face can
we go to a friend to whom we have given any secret affronts, and will ye be so
bold as to come before the God of heaven, when he knows ye maintain some secret
lust in your heart. De Orat. p. 213. Prove. 28.9.
Dare thou to bring a Dalilah with thee into this sacred closet. True is that
of Tertullian, Quantum a praeceptis, tantum ab auribus Dei long sumus. He that
turns his ear from God's precepts, must stop his mouth in the dust, if God turn
his holy ears from his cries. When our secret sins are in the light of his
countenance, we may rather expect to be consumed by his anger and troubled by
his wrath. Psalm. 90.7, 8.


Object. But then who may presume and venture into Secret Communion.

Ans. True, if God should strictly mark what we do amiss, who can stand? David
was sensible of this objection, Psalm. 130.3, 4.
but he answers it humbly: There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. If we come with holy purposes to leave all sin, he has promised to
pardon abundantly. His thoughts and ways are not as ours, Isa. 55.7.
guilt makes us fly his presence: but proclamation of pardoning grace to a
wounded soul that comes for strength from heaven to subdue its iniquities, Mic.
7.19.
sweetly draws the soul to lie at his foot for mercy. Though we cannot as yet
be so free as formerly, while under the wounding sense of guilt, Psalm. 51.12.
Psalm 69.5.
yet when he restores to us the joy of his salvation, he will again uphold us
with his free spirit. Yet take heed of Scars upon the soul. God knows our
foolishness and our guiltinesses are not hid from him, yet we come for purging
and cleansing mercy. A godly man may be under the sense of divine displeasure,
for some iniquity that himself knows, as the Lord spoke of Eli, yet the way
to be cured, 1 Samuel 3.13. Mark 5.23.
is not to run from God, but like the distressed woman, come fearing and
trembling and fall at his feet and tell him all the truth. But if prayer have
cured thee, sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee. For if we regard
iniquity in our heart, Psalm. 66.18.
the Lord will not hear us, but the guilt may stare conscience in the face with
great amazement. As it is storied of one that secretly had stolen a sheep, it ran
before his eyes in prayer that he could have no rest. How strangely will memory
ring the bell in the ears of conscience! If we have any secret sin in deliciis,
if we look but a squint with desires and secret thoughts (after our
peace offerings) to meet our beloved lusts again, this is dangerous, Prove. 7.14.
God may justly give up such to cast off that which is good, to cleave to their
Idols and let them alone. Hos. 4 17. and 6.3. Gerson T. 2. p. 76.6.
But if the face of the heart be not knowingly and willingly spotted with any
sin or lust (bating infirmities which he mourns under) then thy countenance
through Christ will be comely in the eye of God and thy voice sweet in his
ears, and as he said Qui been vivit semper orat: a holy life will be a
vvalking continual prayer, his very life is a constant petition before God.

4. Own thy personal interest with God, and plead it humbly. Consider whom thou
go to in secret, pray to thy father who sees in secret. Can thou prove
thy self to be in Covenant, what thou can prove thou may plead, Psalm.
50.15, 16.
and have it successfully issued. In prayer we take God's Covenant into our
mouths, but without a real interest the Lord expostulates with such, what have
they to do with it. God never graciously hears but it is upon interest. This
argument Solomon presses in prayer, for they be thy people and thine
inheritance: 1 Kings 8 51.
Thus David pleads, Ps 140.6.
Thou art my God, hear the voice of my supplication, 119 94.
I am thine, Lord save me. 116.16.
Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant; Arias turns (...) by obsecro,
quaeso, I beseech thee O Lord, I am thy servant. God will avenge his elect when
they cry unto him, I was cast upon thee from the womb, Luke 18.7. Psalm. 22.10.
thou art my God from my mothers belly. Therefore Asa turns the contest
heavenward, O Lord thou art our God, let not mortal man prevail against thee. 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Psalm. 119.176.
Thou take me for the sheep of thy fold, and the servant of thy household,
therefore seek me. When Israel shall be refined as silver and tried as gold,
they shall call on his name and he will hear them. I will say it is my people,
my tried, refined, golden people, and they shall say the Lord is my God. Zech.
13.9.
When thou can discern the print of the broad seal of the Covenant upon thy
heart, and the privy seal of the spirit upon thy prayers, and can look upon
the Son of God in a sacerdotal relation to thee, thou may Heb 5.16.
come boldly to the throne of grace in time of need.

5. Be very particular in secret prayer, both as to sins, wants and mercies.
Psalm. 32.5.51.9.
Hide none of thy transgressions if thou expect a pardon. Be not ashamed to
open all thy necessities. David argues Psalm. 40.17 70.5.86.1.109.22.
because he is poor and needy; four several times he presses his wants and
exigences before God, like an earnest but holy beggar, and Psalm. 142.2 Job 23.4.
showed before him his trouble, from (...) Coram, presents before him his
ragged condition, and spreads open his secret wounds, as Job said, he would
order his cause before him, from (...) disponerem instruerem, marshal every
case as a battle in rank and file. There we may speak out our minds fully, and
name the persons that afflict, affront, and troubles us, and woe to them that a
child of God upon a mature judgment names in prayer, I find not that such a
prayer in Scripture returned empty. Jacob in a great strait, Deliver me from
the hand of my brother, Genesis 32.11.
from the hand of Esau. David in the ascent of Mount Olivet, O Lord I pray thee
turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness. 2 Samuel 15.31. 2 Chronicles. 20.10.
Prayer twisted the rope for him at Giloh. Thus Jehoshaphat in his prayer names
Ammon, Moab and Edom conspiring against him. Thus Hezekiah spreads the railing
letter before the Lord, Isa 37.14. Psalm. 83.6. etc. Act 4 27. Joseph. l. 18. c.
9. Eusebius. Chron. l. 2. p. 159. Ephesians. 3.14. Luke 17.5. 2 Cor. 12.8.
and the Psalmist takes them all in a round Catalogue that consulted against
Israel. Thus the Church in her prayer names Herod-Antipas, and Pontius Pilate,
whereof the first was sent into perpetual banishment, and the latter slew
himself. It Is of great use in prayer to attend to some special case or single
request with arguments and affections suitable. For this cause (says Paul) I
bow the knee. Suppose a grace deficient in its strength: Lord increase our
faith; or a temptation urgent: For this I prayed to the Lord thrice. A great
reason why we reap so little benefit by prayer, because we rest too much in
generals, and if we have success it is but dark, that often we cannot tell what
to make of the issues of prayer. Besides, to be particular in our petitions
would keep the spirit much from wandering: when we are intent upon a weighty
case, and the progress of the soul in grace would manifest its gradual success
in prayer.

6. Holy and humble appeals before the Lord in secret, when the soul can
submissively and thankfully expose it self to divine searching about some
measures of holiness and grace wrought in the heart. Psalm. 139.23. Tertal. de
orat. p. 213.
The soul cannot bide by the presence of God under flashings of defilement,
[neque agnosci poterit a spiritu sancto spiritus inquinatus,] neither will the
holy spirit own a defiled soul. But when a person can humbly, modestly and
reverently say, search me and try my reins, and if there be any way of
wickedness in me, lead me in the everlasting way; it will be the means of the
ebullitions and boilings up of joyful affections and meek confidence at the
footstool of grace, especially in pleas of deliverance from wicked and proud
enemies. When David can plead in comparison with, and in the case stated
between his enemies and himself: For I am holy: Psalm. 86.2, 14, 17.
It shows him a token for good: or when we plead against the assaults of Satan,
can we be conscious, that we have watched and prayed against entering into
temptation. When in the main we can wash our hands in Innocence, Psalm. 26 6.
Psalm. 18.20.7.3.
we may then comfortably compass God's altar about. In case of opposition and
injustice. He rewarded me (says David in the point of Saul) according to my
righteousness and the cleanness of my hands before him. Or about the truth of
the love that is in the heart to God. Thou that know all things, John 21.17.
Neh. 14.14, 22 Isa. 38.3. Isa. 26.8.
says Peter, know that I love thee. As to zeal for the Worship and
Ordinances of God, so did Nehemiah. As to the integrity of a well-spent life,
so did Hezekiah: or if we cannot rise so high, yet as the Church did, The
desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. Or lastly,
when we can unfeignedly plead the usefulness of a mercy entreated, in order to
the divine glory. As when a minister, or the Church of Christ for him, prays
for such gifts and graces, Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4 3.
such knowledge and utterance that he may win souls to Christ, and can appeal
that it is his principal aim; this is glorious.

7. Pray for the spirit, that ye may pray in and by the spirit. Awaken the
North and the South to blow upon thy garden that the spices thereof may flow
forth. Cant 4.16.
Then thou may invite Christ, Let my beloved come into his garden and eat
his pleasant fruits; that the soul may enjoy him and hold sweet communion with
him. All successful prayer is from the breathing of the spirit of God, when he
inspires and indites, when he directs the heart as to matter, and governs the
tongue as to utteranee. 1 Cor. 2.10. Romans 8.27. Psalm. 147.18. Ezekiel. 47.1.
Gerson T. 2. K. K. 4. 49. Zech. 12.10.
God graciously hears the sighs of his own Spirit formed in us. He sent forth
his spirit and the waters flow. That I may allude: the waters of contrition
flow upon the breathing of the spirit and the soul is as it were all afloat
before the throne of grace, when these living waters issue from under the
threshold of the sanctuary. Sequitur lachrymosa devotio flante spiritu sancto.
Devout tears drop down from the spirit's influences. Melting supplications
follow the infusions of grace by the spirit. Then they shall mourn for piercing
of Christ, says the Prophet, and be in bitterness as for a firstborn: like the
mourning at the town of Hadadrimmon where Josiah was slain. Then 13.1, 2, 4 and
14.8. Isa. 66.12. Rich. de S^ult. p. 321.
in that day what inundations of mercy shall refresh the Church, when the Lord
will extend her peace like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream: great things to the Church, and gracious things to the soul.
Inter orationem suspiria cognoscit, holy sighs in prayer give intelligence of
great mercies to follow. Nay to withstand powerfully all the wiles of Satan:
one means is, Ephesians. 6.18.
to consecrate every part of the spiritual armor by prayer in the Spirit.

8. Apply special promises to special cases in prayer. For God has and will
magnify his word of promise above all his name, Psalm. 138.2. John 12.28.
when we are under the word of command for a duty: we must seek for a word of
promise and unite them in prayer. When a promise of aid suits to the precept,
it renders prayer victorious and obedience pleasant, when we come with God's
own words into his presence: when we take his words with us that he would take
away all iniquity, he will receive us graciously. Hos 14 2. Genesis 32.9. 1 Kings
8.24.
Jacob urged that God had bid him return from his Country and kindred. Solomon
urges the word of promise to David. Jehoshaphat urges the 2 Chronicles. 20.8, 9.
word of promise to Solomon. Daniel fills his mouth Dan. 9.2, 3
with the promise given to Jeremiah, he reads and then applies it in prayer.
First, search the Bible and look for a promise, and when found, open it before
the Lord. Paul teaches us to take the Heb. 13.5, 6.
promise given to Joshua and then to say boldly, the Lord is our helper, etc.
For the special ground of the answer of prayer lies in the Psalm. 50.15.65.24.
performance of a promise, Simeon lived upon a promise, and Luke 2.29.
expired sweetly in the arms of a promise in the breathings of a prayer.
Sometimes the soul depends for an answer by virtue of the Covenant in general,
as of that, Genesis 17.7.
I will be thy God: sometimes by the great Joh. 14.26.
remembrancer, draws water out of some Isa. 12.3.
well of salvation: but in both, God's faithfulness is the soul's surety. Hence
it is that David in prayer does so often argue upon the veracity and truth of
God, and the Church in Micah is so confident that the Mic. 7.20.
mercy promised to Abraham, and confirmed in truth to Jacob, should be
plentifully performed to his people Israel.

9. Sober and serious resolutions before God in prayer, the 119 Psalm is full
of these, Psalm. 119.6.
I will keep thy statutes, v. 32.
I will run the way of thy commandments, v. 46.
I will speak of thy testimonies before Kings, v. 106.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments,
and other where Psalm. 80.18
quicken us and we will call upon thy name, and again, Psalm. 101.2
O when will thou come unto me, I will walk within my house with a perfect
heart. Visit me with answers of mercy to prayer, and then the soul makes holy
stipulations and compacts of obedience to God. Thus Jacob Genesis 28.22
if God will be with me, then shall the Lord be my God; and resolves upon a
house for God, and reserving the tenth of all his estate to his service and
worship, where the particle ((...) si, if) is not to be taken for a single
conditional, as if God should not bestow what he promised, he should not be his
God, Rivet in loc. p. 489.
that were a great wickedness, but it is a rational particle, or of order and
time. Because or since God is graciously pleased to promise, I will acknowledge
him to be the God, whom I adore by erecting a Temple and paying tithes to
maintain his worship. But whatever it is that the soul in distress does offer
to God in promise, be not slack to perform, Genesis 35.3. (...) ^.4.
for many times answers of prayer may delay till we have performed our
promises, Psalm. 96.13, 19.
David professes to pay what his lips had uttered in trouble, for God had heard
him. If we break our words to God, no wonder if we feel what the Lord threatened
to Israel, that they should know Number. 14.34.
his breach of promise.

10. A waiting frame of spirit in prayer. I waited patiently for the Lord, he
inclined to me and heard my cry, Psalm. 40.1. Psalm. 38.15. Psalm.
123.2.130.6.143.8. Mich. 7.7.
(...). I expected with expectation, he walked up and down in the gallery of
prayer. This is set forth by hope till God hear, In thee O Lord do I hope, thou will hear O Lord my God, our eyes must wait upon the Lord our God, till he have
mercy upon us, more than those which watch for the morning, and persist
praying: cause us to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do we
trust, and say with Micah, I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God
of my salvation, my God will hear me. Hoping, expecting, trusting, living upon
the promise, and looking for an answer of peace, as he said of prayer [ sagitta
movetur post quietem sagittantis, and navis quiescentibus nautis. Gerson.
] When an archer shoots an arrow, he looks after it with his glass, to see how
it hits the mark. So says the soul, I Will attend and watch how my prayer flies
toward the bosom of God, and what messages return from heaven. As the seaman
when he has set sail, goes to the helm and the compass, and sits still and
observes the Sun, or the pole-stars, and how the ship works, and how the
landmarks form themselves aright according to his chart. So do you, when you
have been at prayer: mark your ship how it makes the port, and what rich goods
are laden back again from heaven. Most men lose their prayers in the mists and
fogs of non-observation, and thus we arrive at the second question.

2. Quest. How to discover and discern answers to secret prayer, that the soul
may be satisfied, that it has prevailed with God?

Let us now consider the (...), rendition or reply to prayer, in the text, he
will return it into your bosoms, and as to this in general, when the mercy
sought for is speedily and particularly cast into your arms: Psalm. 104.28.147.9.
Like the irrational creatures in their natural cries, seek their meat from God
and gather what he gives them and are filled with good. When God openly returns
to his children, there is no further dispute: for the worst of men will
acknowledge the divine bounty, Acts 14.17.
when he fills their hearts with food and gladness. But when cases are a little
dubious.

1. Observe. The frame and temper of thy spirit in prayer, how the heart works
and steers its course in several particulars.

2 Cor. 1.17.
1. A holy liberty of spirit is commonly an excellent sign of answers, a copious
spirit of fluentness to pour out requests as out of a fountain. As God shuts up
opportunities, so he shuts up hearts, when he is not inclined to hear. The
heart's sometimes locked up that it cannot pray; or if it does and will press
on, it finds a straitness as if the Lord had spoken, as once to Moses, Speak no
more to me of this matter; Deuteronomy. 3.26. Ezekiel. 14.14. and 7.2, 7, 11.
or as God spoke to Ezekiel, though Noah, Daniel and Job should entreat for a
Nation, when the time of a land is come, there is no salvation but for their
own souls. When God intends to take away near relations or any of his Saints
unto himself: many times neither the Church of God nor dear friends have either
apt seasons or hearts to enlarge. The bow of prayer does not abide in strength:
God took away gracious Josiah suddenly: 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
the Church had time to write a book of Lamentations and to make it an
ordinance in Israel, but no time for deprecation of the divine displeasure in
it: but in Hezekiah's case there was both a season and a heart enlarged in
prayer, and the prophet crying for a sign of the mercy. Holy James might be
quickly dispatched by the sword of Herod-Agrippa, 2 Kings 20.11. Act. 12.2, 12.
but the Church had time for supplication in behalf of Peter. When the Lord is
pleased graciously to grant space of time and enlargement of heart, it is a
notable sign of success, Thou have enlarged me when I was in distress, says
David, Psalm. 4.1.
though it be meant of deliverance: yet it may be applied to prayer as the holy
Prophet seems to do, Psalm. 18.6.
yea though the soul may be under some sense of displeasure and in extremities,
yet lifts up a cry: when conscience stops the mouth of hypocrites, that they
shun and fly the presence of God.

2. A blessed serenity and quiet calmness of spirit in time of prayer,
especially when the soul comes troubled and clouded at first, whiles it pours
out its complaints before the Lord: but at length, nescio quid serenius emicat,
Jer^m.
etc. the Sun shines forth brightly, and the heavens look serenely and
cheerfully upon the soul in prayer; it is said of Hannah, she was no more sad,
Heb. her countenance was not (...) ille ulterius, any longer in the old hue,
cast down and sorrowful because of her rival. Thus the Lord dealt with David,
though not yet fully answered, yet filled with holy 1 Samuel 1.18.
fortitude of spirit, and revived in the midst of his trouble. Prayer dispels
Psalm. 138.3, 7.
anxious solicitude, and chases away black thoughts from the heart, Phil. 4.6,
7
it cases conscience and fills the soul with the peace of God.

3. A joyful frame of Spirit, God sometime makes his people not only peaceful
but Isa. 56.7.
joyful in his house of prayer. Thus sped Hezekiah, when his Crane-like
chatterings Isa. 38.14, 20.
were turned into Swan-like songs, and his mournful elegies into glorious
praises, Hab. 3.16, 19. 2 Chronicles. 7.1, 10.
upon ten-stringed instruments in the house of the Lord, the lips of Habakkuk
quivered and his belly trembled, but before he finished, his voice was voluble
in holy songs, and his fingers nimble upon the harp. Thus at Solomon's prayer,
when the fire came down, the people were warmed at worship, and went away glad,
and merry at heart. David's Psalm. 43.4, 5.
experience of this, sent him often to the house of God for comfort, and thus
chides his soul when cast down at any time, [I am going to the altar of God, to
God my exceeding joy: why art thou disquieted within me] his old harp that had
cured Saul of his malignant dumps: being played upon with Temple songs, now
cures his own spiritual sadness. When we look upon God with an eye of faith in
prayers it enlightens Psalm. 34.5.
our faces with Heavenly joy, when Moses came out of the mount, from communion
with God: how illustrious was his face from that Heavenly vision, wherefore
prayer for divine mercy and comfort sometimes exhibits its self in this
language, Psalm. 80.3.
make thy face to shine upon us and we shall be saved, on this wise the Priests
of old were to bless the children of Israel: Numb. 6.25.
The Lord make his face to shine upon thee and be gracious to thee: these and
the like expressions in Scripture import that sometimes the Lord was pleased to
give forth a shining glory from the Oracle and thereby made known his presence
unto his people, Exodus 4^.34. Lev. 9.23. Number. 16.19, 42. and 20.6. 1 Kings 8.11.
and filled them with awful impressions of his majesty and mercy. This joyful
light of God's countenance is like the Sun rising upon the face of the earth:
it chaseth away the dark fears and discouragements of the night, such heavenly
joy shows the strength of faith in prayer, and the radiant appearances of God,
yea to this end all prayer should be directed, John 16.24.
that (d) our joy may be full.

4. A sweetness of affection to God, when the soul has gracious sentiments of
God in prayer, clouds of Jealousies and suspicions of the divine mercy, as if
God were a hard master, are mavelous unbecoming a soul that should go to God
as to a Father: and hence from such unsuitable thoughts of infinite mercy to
hide the talent of prayer, is greatly provoking. Whereas the apprehension of
God's excellent goodness, should work the heart into lovely thoughts of God.
Parisiens. p. 376.
Man, but especially a Saint, is acervus beneficiorum dei, an accumulated heap
of divine favors; and if nothing but the gifts of mercy should attract our
hearts, yet herein we are every moment laden with his numerous benefits. But
when the soul comes to perceive that all flows from the fountain of his eternal
love, it makes prayer to be res amorosa, to be filled with holy delights and
joys: the ecstasies of love often rise upon the soul in secret, and such divine
affection as Gers. Tom. 2. k. k. 4.
Gerson said it is res extatica, it carries the soul beyond it self: let the
profane World say what they will, when spiritual ardours like so many fragrant
spices flow out of the soul. I love the Lord, says David Psalm. 116.1.
, for he has heard my supplications. As answers of prayer flow from John 16.27.
the love of the Father: so suitable workings of holy affections flow from the
hearts of children. When the soul is filled with gracious intimations, like
those of the Angelical voice to Daniel, O Daniel greatly beloved, O man of
desires, Dan. 9.23. Luke 1.28.
to stand before the King of Saints, or like that to the holy Virgin, Hail thou
that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee: how greatly does it inflame
the heart to God.

5. Inward encouragements sometimes spring in upon the heart in prayer from
remembrance of former experiments, which mightily animate the soul with
fervency. When Moses calls to mind that God had forgiven, and delivered from
Egypt until then, Numb 14.19. v. 20 Psalm. 77.5, 6.7.9.10.
immediately follows a sweet intimation of mercy: I have pardoned according to
thy word. When the soul considers the days of old, the years of ancient times,
and calls to remembrance its former songs in the night, he draws an argument
out of the quiver of experience, will God be favorable no more? can he forget
to be gracious, can he in anger shut up his tender mercies? The soul concludes
this thought to flow from its own infirmity, for when God once hears a prayer,
as coming from a child of his in Covenant, prove our filial interest, and we
may sweetly rest assured in all things according to his Will, to be always
heard.

6. A ready heart for thankfulness and service, the heart is brim full and
ready to flow over in grateful memorials of his mercy. What shall I render to
the Lord for all his benefits toward me. Psalm. 116.12.
As of old at Temple-sacrifices there was Music, so it ought to be now, while
the mercy is praying for, the heart must be winding up and tuning for praise.
Rev. 5 8. Psalm. 108.1.
The vials full of the odours of prayer are joined with harps for heavenly
melody; when the heart is fixed or prepared, then follows song and praise. This
streams from the sense of divine love: and love is the fountain of thankfulness
and of all spritely and vigorous services, that prayer that does not end in
cheerful obedience, is called by Cyprian, ^e Orat. p. ^7.
oration sterilis and preces nudae, barren and unfruitful, naked and without
ornament, and so we may glance upon the expression of holy James, the (...),
Jam. 5.16,
a working prayer within will be working without and demonstrate the labor of
love.

2. Obs. The principal subject matter of prayer, the mark, the white that the
arrow of prayer is shot at, the scope it aims at, there is usually some special
sin unconquered, some untamed corruption, some defect, some pressing strait
that drives the soul to prayer and is the main burden of the spirit, take
notice how such a sin withers or such a grace flourishes, or such a need
supplied upon the opening our hearts in prayer. Watch unto prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
watch to perform it and then to expound the voice of the divine oracle, and to
know that ye are successful. Cry to thy soul by way of holy soliloquy:
Watchman, Isa. 21.11.
what of the night.

3. Obs. Ensuing providence. Set a vigilant eye upon succeeding passages,
examine them as they pass before thee, set a wakeful sentinel at the posts of
wisdom. His name is near, his wondrous works declare. His name of truth, Psalm.
75 1.
his glorious title of hearing prayers. When prayer is gone up by the help of
the spirit; mark how all things work together for good, Romans 8.28. v. 27. Isa.
58.9, 11.
and note the connection there: the working of things together, follows the
intercession of the Spirit for all Saints. God is pleased often to speak so
clearly by his works, as if he said; here I am, I will guide thee continually,
and thou shall be like a watered garden, whose waters fail not. Secret promises
animate prayer, and open providence expound it. Isa. 45 4, 11, 19.
Cyrus was promised to come against Babylon for the Churches sake. But Israel
must ask it of God, and they had a word for it, that they should not seek his
face in vain, Psalm. 107.19, 20.
and then follows Babylon's fall in the succeeding chapters. When we cry unto
the Lord in trouble, he sends his word of command and heals us. There Is a set
time of mercy, a time of life, when Abraham had prayed for a son, the Lord told
him, Genesis 15.2, 18.10.14. Esth 4.16. and 6.1. Psalm. 3.4.5. Eliezer. Genesis 24.15.
at the time appointed i will return. In a great extremity, after the solemn fast
of three days by the Jews in Shushan, and the Queen in her Palace, on the
fourth day at night the King could not sleep, and must hear the Chronicles of
Persia read, and then follows Haman's ruin. Prayer has a strange virtue to
give quiet sleep, sometimes to a David, and sometimes a waking pillow for the
good of the Church. When Jacob had done wrestling and the Angel gone, at the
springing of the morning: then the good man saw the Angel of God's presence in
the face of Esau. Sometimes providence is not so quick, Rev 6.11.
the Martyr's prayer as to complete answer is deferred for a season, but long
white robes are given to every one, a triumphant frame of spirit, and told they
should wait but a little season till divine justice should work out the issue
of prayer, the thunder upon God's enemies comes out of the temple, the
judgments roar out of Zion, Rev. 11.19. Joel 3.16.
the place of divine audience, but the means, and methods, and times of God's
working are various, such as we little forethink: Submit all to his infinite
wisdom, prescribe not, but observe the Embroidery of Providence, its difficult
to spell its characters sometimes, but it is rare employment. Isa. 64.5 Psalm.
111.2^. Eccl. 3.11. 2 Samuel 23.4.
His works are searched into by such as delight in his providence, for all
things are beautiful in his season.

4. Mark thy following communion with God. Inward answers make the soul veget
and lively; like plants after the shining of the Sun upon rain, lift up their
heads and shoot forth their flowers. A Saint in favor does all with delight.
Isa. 61.3.
Answer of prayer is like oil to the spirits, and beauty for ashes. The
sackcloth of mournful fasting is turned to a wedding garment. He grows more
free and yet humbly familiar with heaven. This is one I would wish you to
pick acquaintance with, that can come and have what Joh. 16 23. Genesis 20.7.
he will at Court. As the Lord once told a King by night, that Abraham was a
Prophet and would pray for him, he was acquainted with the King of heaven, O
blessed person! I hope there is many such among you, whose life is a continued
prayer: Psalm. 109.4.
As David that gave himself to prayer. Heb. But I prayer, he is all over prayer,
prays at rising, prays at lying down, prays as he walks, he is always ready for
prayer, like a prime favourit at Court that has the golden key to the privy
stairs and can wake his Prince by night. Christians, there are such (whatever
the besotted profane world dreams) who are ready for spiritual ascents at all
seasons, besides the frequency of set communions. His wings never weary: his
willing spirit is flying continually, and makes God the rock of his dwelling
(...) into which he may upon all assaults have holy retirements. Psalm. 71.3.


But so much for the main Question with its branches. There be many particular
queries of some weight that may attend the princ pal subject, and such I shall
briefly reply to, as

Qu, 1. What Is the proper time for secret prayer?

Ans. Various providence, different temperaments and frames of spirit, motions
from heaven, opportunities dictate variously. Some find it best at even, others
in the night, when all is silent, others at morning, when the spirits are
freshest. I think with respect to others, that conscientious prudence must
guide in such cases, when others are retired and the spirit in the best frame
for communion.

Qu. 2. How often should we pray in secret?

Ans. If we consult Scripture-president, we find David at prayer in the morning
our blessed Lord early before day in the morning. Psalm. 5.3. Mark. 1.35. Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 5. p. 542 Etim. Mat. 14 23. Genesis 24.63. Psalm 55.17. D^n 6 10. Psalm.
119.164.
Chrysostom advises (...), etc. wash thy soul before thy body, for as the face
and hands are cleansed by water, so is the soul by prayer. At another time our
Lord went to secret prayer in the even, and Isaac went to prayer in the
eventide, David and Daniel prayed three times a day, and once it is mentioned
that David said seven times a day will I praise thee, that is, very often. Such
cases may happen that may require frequent accesses to the throne of grace in a
day: But I humbly think at the least once a day, which seems to be imported by
that passage in our Lord's prayer, give us this day our daily bread. Since
after our Lord's appointment of secret prayer in the text, he gives us this
prayer as a pattern to his Disciples.

Qu. 3. When persons are under temptations or disturbance by passions, is it
expedient then to pray?

1 Timothy 2.8.
Ans. Since we are enjoined to lift up holy hands without wrath and doubting, I
judge it not so proper to run immediately to prayer: but with some foregoing
ejaculations for pardon and strength against such exorbitances, and when in
some measure cooled and composed, then speed to prayer, and take heed that the
Sun go not down upon your wrath, without holy purgation by prayer: Ephesians 4.26.
though I must confess, a Christian should always endeavor to keep his course
and heart in such a frame as not to be unfit for prayer upon small warnings.
The very consideration of our frequent communion with God should be a great bar
to immoderate and exuberant passions.

Qu. 4. Whether may we pray in secret, when others must needs take notice of
our retirement?

Ans. I must confess in a strait house, and when a person can many times find
no seasons but such as will fall under observation, I think he ought not to
neglect secret duty, (if his heart be right before God) for fear of others
notice: we must prevent it as much as may be, and especially watch our hearts
against spiritual pride, and God may graciously turn it to a testimony, and for
example to others.

Qu. 5. Whether we may be vocal in secret prayer, if we cannot so well raise or
keep up affection or preserve the heart from wandering without it?

Ans. No doubt; but yet there must be used a great deal of wise caution about
extending the voice. De Orat.
That of Tertullian counselling persons at prayer [ne ipsis quidem manibus
sublimius elatis, etc. Ne vultu quidem in audaciam erecto: Sonos etiam vocis
subjecios esse oportet, aut quantis arteriis opus est, si pro sono audiamur,
etc. qui clarius adorant, proximis obstrepunt imo prodendo orationes suas quid
minus faciunt quam si in publico orent.] Advises that both hands and
countenance and voice should be ordered with great reverence and humility: What
arteries need we, if we think to be heard for noise! and what else do we by
discovering our prayers, than if we prayed in public? yet surely if we can
obtain some very private place, or when others are from home, and the extension
of the voice be found to some persons by long experience to be of use: such may
lawfully improve it to their private benefit.

Q. 6. How to keep the heart from wandering thoughts in prayer?

Ans. Although it be exceeding difficult to attain so excellent a frame, yet by
frequent reflecting upon, and remembering the eye of God in secret, by
endeavoring to fix the heart with all possible watchfulness upon the main
scope of prayer in hand: by being very sensible of our wants and indigencies,
by not studying of impertinent length, but rather being more frequent and
short, considering God is in heaven and we upon earth, and by exercise of holy
communion: as we may through the implored assistance of the spirit attain some
sweetness and freedom, Eccl. 5.22.
so likewise some more fixedness of spirit in our addresses before the Lord.

Qu. 7. What if present answers seem not to correspond to our Petitions?

Ans. We must not conclude it by and by to be a token of displeasure, and say
with Job, Job 10.2.
show me wherefore thou contendest with me: but acknowledge the sovereignty of
divine wisdom and love in things that seem contrary to us in petitions for
temporal mercies, and submit to the counsel of Elihu, 33.13.
since he gives no account of any of his matters, neither can we find out the
unsearchable methods of his holy ways to any perfection. 11.7.


There be other cases and scruples that might be treated of, as about prescript
words in secret prayers, to which I need say but little: since such as are
truly converted Gal. 4 6. Romans 8.26. Zech. 1^.10. Acts 9.11.
have the promise of the spirit of God to assist and enable them, and they need
not drink of another's bucket that have the fountain: nor use stilts and
crutches that have spiritual strength, neither are words and phrases, but faith
and holy groans the nerves of prayer. Yet for some help to young beginners
doubtless it is of use to observe the style of the spirit, as well as the
heavenly matter of several prayers in the holy Scriptures.

Psalm. 23.6 and 139.17.18.
Neither need I to press frequency to a holy heart that is saln in love with
spiritual communion for he delights to be continually with him, the thoughts of
God are so precious to him, his soul is even sick of affection and prays to be
stayed with more of the flagous and comforted with the apples in greater
abundance. Cant. 2.5.
To some (though I fear how few) how far it is lawful and expedient to withdraw
for the necessity of the frail body in this vale of tears. It may be replied
Jam. 5.11. Hos. 6.6.
that the Lord is very pitiful and gracious to our frailties that he had rather
have mercy than sacrifice in some cases. Though I doubt these Phaenixes are but
rare that are in danger of expiring in prayer, as martyrs of divine love as
Gerson expresses. Gers. T. 2. kk. 5.


Having now finished with what brevity I could the foregoing queries, I should
treat about short, sudden occasional prayers, commonly called ejaculations, but
indeed that requires a set and just discourse, yet because of a promise above
recited, I shall give a few tastes of it and then conclude with some application.

Ejaculatory Prayer
Is a sudden short breathing of the soul toward Heaven upon instant and
surprising emergencies. In holy persons it is quick and lively, rising from a
vehement ardour of spirit. swifter than the flight of eagles and keeps pace
with a flash of lightning. It flies upon the wings of a holy thought into the
third Heavens in the twinkling of an eye, and fetches auxiliary forces in times
of straits.

There are many presidents recorded in sacred page upon great and notable
occasions, with strange success. When good magistrates are busy in the work of
reformation, Neh. 13.14.22
let them imitate Nehemiah when redressing the profanation of the Sabbath,
Remember me O my God concerning this, etc. When Generals and Captains go forth
to war, Josh. 1.17.
observe Israel's apprecation to God, rather than acclamations to men, The Lord
thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. In time of battles or pursuit of the
enemy, valiant Joshuah darts up such a prayer as this, O that the Lord would
lengthen this triumphant day, and the Jos. 10.12.
Lord heard his voice. The tribes beyond Jordan in a 2 Chr. 5 23.
battle with the Hagarites, Jehoshaphat in a sore strait 18.31.
at Ramoth Gilead, Sampson ready to perish at Lehi Judge. 15.18, 16, 28.
with thirst, and when blind, exposed to contempt in the Temple of Dagon. David
near 1 Samuel 30.6.
stoning at Ziglag, and when flying from Absalom in the ascent of 2 Samuel 15.31.
Mount Olivet. Elisha at Dothan compast with a Syrian host 2 King. 6.17.
Lord open the young man's eyes. In the midst of lawful and laborious callings,
Boaz to the reapers, Ruth. 2.4.
the Lord be with you, we may pray that our Oxen Psalm. 129.8.
may be strong to labor; no breaking in or going out, nor no complaining in
our streets. It sanctifies the plow as Jerome said of the fields of Bethlehem
[quocunque te verteris, Psalm. 144.14. ad Marcellum p. 129 T. 1.
arator stivam teneus, Alleluja decantat, etc. The tillers of the field and the
dressers of vineyards, sang David's psalms, it keeps the shop and inclines the
hearts of customers, it bars the doors, it quenches fire, it blesses thy
children Psalm. 147.13.
within thee, it preserves thy going out and coming in 128.1.
. Jacob found it to rest upon his children going a journey Genesis 43.14.
to Egypt, it closes the eyes with Psalm. 3.5.4 8.
sweet sleep, it Job 3^.10. Psalm. 139.18.
given Songs in the night and wakens the soul in the arms of mercy. It sits at
the helm when a Psalm. 107.28. Jon. 1.6.
storm rises at sea it gives strength to Anchors in roads and prosperous gales
to the venturous Merchant. When in the palace at dinner Nehemiah presents the
cup to his prince, he presents also a Michtam a golden Neh 3.4. 2 Chro. 34 27
Luke 17.5. Genesis 49.18. 2 Chronicles. 2 4. Act. 7 60.
prayer to the King of Heaven, at the reading of the law Josiah was heard as to
some secret cries to Heaven. At a holy conference in a journey the Disciples
occasionally pray, Lord increase our faith. Jacob on his dying pillow
predicting future events to his children, falls into a holy rapture, I have
wait ed for thy salvation O Lord. At sacred death in martyrdom Zechariah cries
out, the Lord look upon it and require it, and Stephen under a shower of stones,
melts in prayers for the stony hearts that slung them, Lord lay not this sin
unto their chage: and our blessed Savior in his greatest agonies makes a
tender hearted prayer. Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23
34. 1 Samuel 1.17.
and lastly in the distresses of others, Eli puts a sudden petition for Hannah,
the God of Israel grant thee thy petition.

In these and many like cases, the holy word stores us with patterns for
ejaculation in all extremities, which I cannot now digest and improve, only in
a few words lets take a view of the usefulness of such a sudden flight of the
soul to Heaven.

1. It helps us to a speedy preparative for all duties, Lam. 3 4^.
with such an ejaculation lets lift our hearts with our hands to God in the
Heavens.

2. It is a guard against secret sins in the first risings, and the first
assaults of temptation.

3. It suffers not divine mercies to slip by unobserved in a wakeful Christian:
and proves a fruitful mother of gratitude and praise.

4. It sanctifies all our worldly employments, 1 Timothy 4.^, 5.
it fastens the stakes in the hedge of divine protection, and turns every thing
to a blessing.

5. Its a Saints buckler against sudden accidents, a present antidote against
frights and evil tidings. Its good at all occasions and consecrates to us not
only our meals, but every gasp of air, etc.

6. Its a sweet companion, that the severest enemies cannot abridge us of.
Outward ordinances and closet duties they may cut off: the little Ezr. 9 8.
nail in the holy place they may pluck out. But no labyrinth, no prison, not
the worst of company can hinder this, coelo restat iter: in the very face of
adversaries we may lift our souls to God. No more of this, lets briefly
conclude with some uses.

Use. Use. Cant. 4 12.
To convince such of their dangerous state that neglect sacred duties: that
have no heart-communion, that draw no water out of this sealed fountain. But
all they do, is in public only: it is a suspicious token of hypocrisy, since
the kernel and soul of religion lies so much in the heart and closet; mark the
phrase in the text, how it varies: thy Father that is in secret, be sees in
secret. God's eye is open upon thee in the closet, and if thy eye be open upon
his, thou may see a glorious beauty. The excellency of grace lies in making
conscience of secret sins and secret duties.

2. To examine such as perform secret duty, but not from a sincere principle;
like Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.2
that prays, but not with a perfect heart; like Ahab, they mourn, but with
Crocodile tears: such as do it only because they find precept or example for it
and therefore to quiet conscience will into secret; but converse only in the
shell and trunk of a duty: that rest in the naked performance, but matter not
whether they taste of the sweet streams that flow in from heaven in the golden
pipe of an ordinance; what account can such render that go into their closets
but like Domitian to catch flies only, Sueton. in Domit. c. 3.
and when the doors are shut to the world, their hearts are shut to heaven and
communion with God? He that sees in secret beholds the evil frame of such a
heart, and will one day openly punish it.

3. To excite and awaken all to this excellent duty, and to manage it in an
excellent manner. Would ye live delightfully? would ye translate heaven to
earth? then keep up communion in secret prayer, to know him, to discern his
face, to behold the luster of his eye that shines in secret. Remember the
glorious person that meets in your closets: all the world yields not such a
glittering beauty as a gracious person sees, when he is in a happy frame at
secret prayer. Shut your eyes when ye come out: for all other objects are but
vile and fordid and not worth the glances of a noble soul. O the sweetness, the
hidden manna that the soul tastes when in lively communion with God! Psalm. 31.19.
Part of that which is laid up for Saints in glory, let us a little relish our
spirits with it.

1. Consider what amorous agonies the soul delights to conflict with in serret,
fears that raise confidence, humility that exalts, tremblings that embolden,
bright clouds that shine upon our Israelites in the night, and darkness that
inlightens, solitudes full of heavenly company, and tears brim-ful of joy, and
holy sighs like a cooling wind in harvest, sweats of love, and sick fits that
are symptoms of health, and holy faintings that are the soul's cordials, a
weariness to the flesh that is the healthful exercise of, and vigor to the
spirit, and a continual motion that never tires it. Ge^s. T. 2. K. K. 4.
As Austin said of divine love [illo feror, quocunque feror; pondus meum, amor
meus,] it is the weight of my soul, it carries me up and down in all that I
speak, and all that I act.

Quae major voluptas, quam fastidium ipsius voluptatis? Tertul. Eccl. 2.2. c.
7.6, 4. Cant. 5.10.2.3. Rev. 2.7. 1 Samuel 14.26.
2. Its ecstasies and heavenly raptures: which allure and draw the heart from
earthly vanities, when the soul shuts its eyes to worldly delights, and says of
laughter with Solomon, it is mad, and of mirth what do thou? cannot warm its
thoughts at the crackling of thorns under a pot, nor be joyful in the house of
fools. It Is the soul's pleasure to loath pleasure it self; none so beautiful to
him as Christ, the chiefest of ten thousand; no sweetness like that of the tree
in the midst of the Wood, the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God,
he sits under it with great delight, while it drops sweeter than honey into his
closet.

3. Its admirable prophesies: Prayer stands upon mount Zion with a divining,
presaging spirit: It foretells great things to the Churches joy and its enemies
terror 1 King 19.6.
Elijah at prayer in Horeb receives answer of the ruin of the house of Ahab,
and bid to go and anoint Jehu the son of Nimshi King over Israel. The two
witnesses under the Rev. 11.
Romish defection, have power to smite the earth with plagues as often as they
will, consonant to what Tertullian said of old de orat.
[ votum Christianorum confusio nationum,] the prayers of Christians confounded
the nations; and so it will shortly prove; the doom of Babylon comes out of the
Temple. When the sanctuary is full of the smoke of the incense of prayer, Rev.
15.7.8.16, 1.
the seven Angels come out with the seven last vials full of the wrath of God,
to pour them out upon the Antichristian world. Prayer calculates and hastens
the ruin of Rome. When the spirit of prayer Joel 2.21, 32.3.1, 2.
is once poured out, it brings deliverance to mount Zion, and gathers the
nations into the valley of Jehoshaphat unto judgment. Let Us never be
discouraged, if prayer fall to work, and awaken Christ in the ship Luke 8.24.
of the Church, her storms will cease in a halcyon calm.

4. Its comforting evidences: Secret prayer duly managed is a notable evidence
of adoption; pray to thy Father who is, and sees in secret, who knows the
secrets of thy heart, thy groanings are not hid from him. Psalm. 44.21.38, 9.
None but a child of promise has this sweet freedom with God as a Father.

5. Its rewards and revenues: Nothing revives and chears the spirit so much, as
answers of love and mercy from Heaven. As it feasts the conscience with the
royal dainties of sincerity: so it sets a luster upon every mercy as being the
child of prayer; our closets influence upon our shops, our ships, our fields
and all we enjoy, that they smell of divine blessing; as David said of
precepts, Psalm. 119.56.
the soul may say, this I have because I urged the promises.

Use 4. To pity the miserable blind world, that know not where true comfort,
Genesis 27.27.
and feel no sweetness in communion with him, that find no pleasure in closets,
but play houses, which Tertullian called the Devil's Churches, that cry out
with Esau, they have enough. Alas! what enough can be in the Creature, Genesis
33.9. Tertul. de spect. c. 25.26.
unless of dunghils, rattles and vanities? Oh how ignorant of Heavenly
treasures, of that fountain of mercies, whereof prayer drinks and resreshes the
spirit of a Saint! That know not that blessed enough whereof Jacob speaks, Genesis
33.11. (...) mibi omnia.
that Ocean of all things to be found in God. Now Europe's in flames, and the
ark in danger: he cares not though the one be burnt, and the other in ashes, so
he be safe. But if his concerns catch fire, he knows not to repair but 1 Samuel
28.7. 2 King. 1.2.
to Endor or Ekron. Such have no acquaintance with, no help from God, no
interest in the keeper of souls. The world's a deplorable hospital, the great
Lazar-house of sick, lame and impotent persons, as Gerson terms it, Gers. To.
2.76, 6.
that have no face nor heart to go to the physician of souls.

But ah! most lamentable is the state of some prostitute wretches of our age,
that are (I fear almost) incurably gone with spiritual ulcers in their lungs,
and eating putrid cancers in their tongues, that breath nothing but venom, and
openly spit out their rotten Atheistical jeers against the spirit of prayer,
and make a mock at communion with God. That scoff at what God has promised as
one of the choicest tokens of his love to the Church, Zech. 12.10. Joel 2.28,
32. Romans 10.13. Joh. 7.39.
and symptoms of the glory of the latter times, when God will turn such
Ishmaels, into the desert, Amos 8.10. Job 30.31.
and their drunken Songs shall expire in dreadful howlings. Prophaner than many
heathens, that in the Primitive times had some reverence for Christian worship,
though they persecuted. But those of this adulterous Romish age, 2 Pet. 2.12.
like brute beasts speak evil of what they are ignorant, and are in danger to
perish utterly in their own corruption: pity such, if there be yet hope, and
commend their condition to God's mercy and penitent sorrow: that they may weep
here, where tears prick; not in hell, where they scauld and burn, and swell
that river of brimstone. Gerson T. 2. 49. KK. 3.
In the mean time, O ye that fear the Lord, be diligent to observe and
interpret messages after secret prayer; for the life and joy of a Christian is
improved by it. God has declared himself graciously pleased with secret prayer,
Dan. 9.21. (...) V^lans in lassitudine.
so as to send an Angel, that glorious creature, to fly into Daniel's chamber,
and he weary with flying; he moved so swiftly, [volans in lassitudine] as the
original text expresses it. What a high expression is this, that even Angels
are represented weary with hasty flights to bring Saints their answers: and of
what great account does the Lord esteem his praying people, that Angels are
expressed to be tired in bringing tidings of mercy.

6. Meditate on the glory of heaven, where all our prayers shall be turned into
praises. When every sigh below, shall be an accent to the heavenly music
above, and the tears of the valley shall be turned into orient gems in the
diadem of glory. Here we groan under wants and desires, empty within; and live
on the craving hand: But there palms in the hand, white robes, and everlasting
joys upon the heads and hearts of Saints.

How may the duty of of daily Family Prayer be best managed for the spiritual
benefit of every one in the Family? Sermon. XV.
Joshua 24.15. latter part. -- But as for me, and my house, we will serve the
Lord.


JOshua being old and stricken in age, and desirous before his departure out of
the world, solemnly to engage the people of Israel to adhere to God, and his
holy worship, gathered all their Tribes to Shechem, called for the chief of
them that were Governors, and Representatives of the whole body of the People,
Quatuor crant in qualibet urbe gradus officioram. (1.) (...) Senes, vel S^natus
(2) (...) capira ^at^um, singularum tribuum primotes, primi and eminen^to^^ in
urbe, (...) (3.) (...) Judices (...) veram and (...) (4.) (...) Apparitores
(...) res judicates exequebantur, and ^^culo and l^ro p pulum corebant ad
observantiam praeceptorum. Schind. Lexic. Pentag.
namely for the Elders of Israel, or the Senate, that did chiefly manage the
affairs of Church and State; for their Heads, the most eminent of each Tribe,
and prime Rulers thereof; for their Judges, that sat in Courts to hear Causes
and execute judgment betwixt man and man, and such Magistrates that ruled over
them for their peace and welfare; and for their Officers, who did see to the
execution of the sentences and judgments of Superior Magistrates. All these
being present, Joshua makes a brief historical narrative of God's signal
providence and singular benefits to them and their Fathers, in this order.
First, His calling of Abraham from Idolatry to the knowledge of the true God,
and profession of true Religion, ver. 2, 3. Secondly, His multiplying of his
Seed, ver. 3, 4. Thirdly, His delivering them out of Egypt, and making a way
for them through the Red Sea, which returning, destroyed the Egyptians that did
pursue them, ver. 5, 6, 7. Fourthly, His preserving them in the Wilderness,
ver. 7. Fifthly, The Victories that he gave them over the Amorites when they
fought against them, ver. 8. Sixthly, His defending them against Balak the Son
of Zippor King of Moab, and restraining Balaam from cursing of them, ver. 9,
10. Seventhly, His miraculous providence in drying up the waters of Jordan,
that they might pass over, ver. 11. Eighthly, His delivering the men of
Jericho, and their several enemies into their hands, ver. 11. Ninthly, That it
was not by their own Sword, nor by their own Bow, that they subdued the
Nations, but God by weak and contemptible Creatures (as Hornets) drove them out
from before them, ver. 12. Tenth, His giving them the possession of such Cities
which they had not built, and to eat of the Vine-yards and Olive-yards which
they had not planted: thus he brings to their remembrance the great and
wonderful things that God had done for them.

A capite bona vale^udo, inde omnia v^geta sunt, atque erecta, aut languore
demissa; prout animus eorum viget, aut marcet. Et erunt Cives, erunt Socii
digni hac bonitate: and in totum orbem rectimores revertentur. Se^ec. de
Clement. lib 2. cap. 2. (...) and ego and domus mea. (...) and (...)
usurpantur. 1. Pro domicilio.
The mercies of God to man being strong enforcements of man's duty to God, upon
these moral grounds and reasons, Joshua in the 14th verse, earnestly exhorts
them to fear the Lord, and to serve him in sincerity, with a pure heart,
without hypocrisy; and in truth, without false pretenses, and counterfeit
shows of godliness, as becomes such as worship the most Holy, the most Wise,
and glorious God; and declares his own fixed resolution, That he and his house
would serve the Lord: as if he should say; I have given you a Catalogue of the
great and many mercies of God vouchsafed to you, and I have exhorted and
charged you all in the Name of the Great and Eternal God, to fear and serve
him; but if ye will not, I do here declare, profess, and publish my purpose and
resolution in the ears of all you, the Elders, Heads, Judges and Officers, and
all others, that I and my house will serve the Lord; be it known unto you, that
I will not only serve and worship God my self, but will also set up his worship
in my house: and both I and mine will serve the Lord.

The original words in Old and New Testament, translated [House] have various
significations; amongst the rest these,

1. For an earthly habitation properly taken; this house cannot serve the Lord,
but the Inhabitants in this house must serve the Lord.

2. Pro Sepulchro. (...). Dupert. Eheu fugaces -- Labuntur anni nec pietas
morum, rugis and instanti Senectae, afferet, indomitaeque morti. Hor. lib. 2.
Od. 14. Dum loquimur fugerit invida aetas, carpe diem, quam minimum credula
postero. Idem. l. 1. Od. xi.
2. For the grave, where we must all shortly take up our Lodgings, and be
carried on men's backs from our now dwelling houses to this sleeping house: We
that are now alive shall be in a little time housed in the earth: while we
live, we dwell in several houses; one house can contain or entertain but a few;
but what a large capacious house is the Grave, that shall hold all the living:
Job 30.23. For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living. There is no praying to, or praising of God in this
house: in the houses where you now dwell, you may, you ought; but in this you
are going to (and oh how quickly might you or I be in it) you will be past
praying, and past hearing, and calling upon God, when death and dust have
stopped your mouth's and tied your tongues. Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. Sirs, you are going, you
are going every day, every hour, every moment, to this house, whether you are
eating, or drinking, or sleeping; whether you pray, or not pray in your houses
where now you dwell, you are going to this house where you can never pray.
Therefore pray NOW or NEVER: serve God and pray unto him now where you dwell,
or you must hold your peace for ever, except you cry and roar and lament your
negligence and folly in a Lake of burning brimstone, because you did not pray
in your houses upon earth. Psalm. 6.5. For in death there is no remembrance of
thee, in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Isa. 38.18. For the grave cannot
praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down into the pit cannot
hope for thy truth.

3. Pro re familiari.
3. For earthly riches, possessions and goods, Mat. 23.14. These cannot serve
God, but with these men might serve and honor God, by laying them out, when,
and as God commands, Prove. 3.9.

4. For our weak and frail body, in which our souls do dwell in a state of sin
and imperfection, 2 Cor. 5.1. 4. Pro corpore naturali.
This house must serve the Lord, though the Soul be the principal part which
God requires, Romans 12.1.

5. For the state and place and glory of the blessed. 5. Pro sede seu statu
beatorum. Reliquorum sententiae spem afferunt; si te forte hoc d lectat, posse
animos, cum e co^poribus excesserint, in coelum, qu si in domicilium suum
pervenire. Cicero Tusc. Quest.
And blessed are they that are in this house; for sure I am, they in this house
are still praising God, loving him, and delighting in him, 2 Cor. 5.1. -- an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. This is called an house,
(1.) Because there the Saints do dwell with God, as children in their father's
house. (2.) Because there they have clear distinct knowledge of, and perfect
love to God their Father. (3.) Because there they are safe from all their
enemies, and from all dangers, as houses are our castles of defense. (4.)
Because there all God's children shall be gathered together, and called home,
and live in love for ever. (5.) Because of the excellent beauty of that state
and place, as houses of Kings and Nobles are set forth with rich and costly
furniture: what is that then of the King of Kings, the place of the glorious
God!

6. For persons belonging to the house or family. And thus it is taken either
Deo; adorando and venerando: adoravit, veneratus est, religio^e coluit.
More generally, for a People, or whole Nation. 6. Pro domesticis.
Ezekiel. 2.3. the children of Israel are called a rebellious nation, ver. 5. a
rebellious house. Ezekiel. 3.1. Speak to the house of Israel: ver. 4. go, get thee
to the house of Israel: ver. 7. but the house of Israel will not hearken -- for
all the house of Israel are impudent and hard-hearted: or Homini; operando, vel
opera and officiis subjectus fuit.
More strictly, for a stock or tribe. So the house of Benjamin is taken for the
tribe of Benjamin, 2 Samuel 3.19. Or Terrae l^borande, arando, sementem
praeparande, aravit, coluit, exercuit. Schind. Lexic. Pentag.
Most strictly, for an household or persons living together in one proper house.
The whole people of the Jews did consist of several Tribes, a tribe of several
Families, a (...) Serviit Deo, homini, terrae.
a family of several households, an household of several persons. Josh. 7.14. In
the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes, and it
shall be that the tribe which the Lord takes, shall come according to the
families thereof, and the family which the Lord shall take, shall come by
households, and the household which the Lord shall take, shall come man by man.
In this place I take it strictly for an household properly, at least necessarily
included, of which more in the first Argument to prove the Question before us.

[Will serve the Lord] The original word is used concerning God, concerning
Men, concerning the Earth. The first is only to our present purpose, and
signifies the Religious worship which we ow to God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, (...) and him shall thou serve. Psalm. 2.11. (...) Serve
the Lord with fear. Of this more also in the first Argument to the Question,
which I am limited to: which is well enough grounded upon the Text; as will
appear in the proof drawn from it. The Question is this; How might the duty of
daily Family Prayer be best managed to the spiritual benefit of every one in
the Family?

For the more distinct proceeding in this Question, I shall inquire after these
five things, 1. Q. How it will appear, or be proved, that it is a duty
incumbent upon proper Families, jointly to pray to God? 2. Q. Whether it be the
duty of proper Families, or those that live together in one house, under the
government of the Master of the Family, to pray daily to God together? or what
are the reasons for the daily performing of it? 3. Q. How these daily Family
Prayers should be so performed and managed, that every one in the Family might
be benefited thereby? 4. Q. With what Arguments Masters of Families might be
urged, and they press their own hearts withal, to a conscientious, serious,
and constant performance of Family Prayer? 5. Q. What are the common pleas and
excuses ordinarily alleged to stop the mouth of Conscience, or to shift off
the guilt from themselves in the neglect of it? and how they may be made appear
to be frivolous and vain?


In the first I shall speak of the duty it self: In the second, of the time and
frequency of it: In the third, to the manner of it: In the fourth, to the
motives to it: In the last, to the Objections against it.

Question First.
Aff.

Argument 1.
That it is the duty of those that live together under the government of the
Master of the Family to pray together, will appear and be proved from this
chapter, whereof the Text is a part, by making good these four propositions: 1.
That by Joshua his house is meant, or at least necessarily included, Joshua his
household or proper family. 2. That serving of God (taken generally as here it
is) does comprehend and include prayer, as one way whereby Joshua and his house
together would serve the Lord. 3. That Joshua made this resolution, as he was
guided by the Holy Ghost. 4. That Joshua in the name of God, and by Authority
received from him, does exhort all the Families of Israel to do the same in
their houses, which he does promise and resolve for himself and his house; and
this upon moral grounds and reasons, for which all Families are obliged to do
the like.


Proposition 1.
By Joshua 's house is meant, or at least included, 1. (...) in Instrumento
veteri non simpliciter pro aedificio capitur, sed pro ipsa familia, (...),
continens pro contento.

Pro quaque familia, nempe mi ore, and in una domo degente. Pisc. t. in loc.

Domus patris pro domo in qua est p^terfamilias. Oleaster. Mariana.


his household or proper family. That this is a frequent acceptance of the
original words translated [house] in the Scripture, for a proper family consult
these places: Genesis 7.1. Come thou and all thy house into the Ark, Genesis 18.19.
and 30.30. and 31.41. Exodus 12.3. A Lamb for an house, ver. 4. and if the
household, Hebrew [house] be too little for the Lamb -- ver. 21. -- take ye a
Lamb according to your families, and kill the Passover; It was said an house
before, now families, (...) according to your families; both house and family
here are taken strictly and properly; for the Passover was to be eaten in
every household, if there were ten persons in it (for according to some, there
were never less then ten in number, nor more then twenty. Joseph. de bell. Jud.
l. 7. c. 17. Prout numerosa fuerit familia ita sibi magnam v l parvam familiam
ad. junget. Vatab. in loc. Eodem modo (...) and (...) Instrumento novo.
, at the eating of one Lamb at the Passover) if the household were too little
for the Lamb, they were to take the next neighbors in, according to the number
of persons; and the blood of the Lamb was to be sticken on the two side-posts,
and upon the upper door post of the houses, where they did eat it, which was
for a token upon such several houses, that they should not be destroyed. Deuteronomy.
11.6. and swallowed them up and their households: In the Hebrew [their houses] 1 Samuel 1.21. and 2.36. 2 Kings 10.21. Psalm. 101.2, 7. So in the New Testament,
Luke 19.9. John 4.53, Acts 10.2. and 11.14. and 16.15, 31, 34. and 18.8. 1 Cor.
1.16. Phil. 4.22. 2 Timothy 1.16. and 4.19. Tit. 1.11. Heb. 11.7. 1 Timothy 3.4.
ruling well his own house, i. e. Wife, Children, and Servants. By which it is
manifest that frequently by house is understood the persons dwelling together
in one house, constituting one particular proper family.

And it must be taken in a limited sense in the Text; as distinguished from all
the rest of the families of all the people of Israel; for to all the rest
Joshua does declare, That though they all should forsake the Lord, yet he and
his household would serve the Lord: and if any would extend it beyond his own
proper family to his kindred, yet his own house and family strictly taken,
cannot with any color of reason be excluded: for can it be imagined that
Joshua should be so zealously resolute, that his tribe or kindred should worship
God, and yet take no care of those that were nearest to him, in his own house
or proper family? or would this be suitable to the spirit of a man so holy,
wise, and zealous as Joshua was, so to do?

Proposition 2.
2. Graeci Interpretos indifferenter hoc verbum (...) verterunt, modo verbo
(...), modo verbo (...).
Serving of God comprehends and includes under it praying unto God. This
being put for the whole worship of God, prayer that is a most eminent part
thereof cannot be excluded. That serving God is so comprehensive as to take in
the whole worship of God, these Scriptures make manifest: Exodus 3.12. and 4.23.
and 7.16. and 8.1, 20. and 9.1, 13. and 10.3, 7, 8, 11, 24.26. and 12.31. Deuteronomy.
6.13. and 10.10.20. and 13.14. and 28.47. 1 Samuel 7.3. and 12.10. Psalm. 2.^ 1.
Jer. 30.9. Mat. 4.10. and 6.24. Luke 1.74. and 2.37. and 4.8. Acts 7.7. and
26.7. and 27.23. Romans 14.18. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2. Tim. 1.3. Precatio omnium ferme
bonorum operum Complexu^ quidam est, and compendium; nam^ in ea se exerit
cordis fides, agnitio, timor amor and fidu cia in deum -- omnium hominis virium
quies and cessatio ab omni alia occupa^tione -- Sic and Legitima dile ctis
nostrae and proximi salutis per omnes fere virtutum classes piis precibus
exercetur -- imo totius doctrinae theologicae in oratione praxis est. Croc.
Syntag. de precat.
The Septuagint translate the Text, (...), but I and my house will worship the
Lord. So it is translated Phil. 3.3. (...), which worship God in the Spirit.

Calling upon God is such an eminent part of worship, and such a principal way
of serving the Lord, that it is frequently put for the whole worship of God,
according to these Scriptures: Genesis 4.26. and 12.7, 8. and 13.4. and 21.33. and
26.25. Psalm. 79.6. Isa. 43.22. Jer. 10.25. Joel. 2.32. Math. 21.13. Acts 2.21.
and 9.14, 21. Romans 10.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 1.2. ^ Tim. 2.22. Can prayer then be
excluded? can any be said to be devoted to the service of God in general; that
never call upon God, or pray unto him? can a particular person be accounted a
servant of God, that never prays to thim? or can a family as such be said to
serve the Lord, that as such does not call upon him? Are God's Servants
prayerless Servants? or are not such more worthy of the name of Atheists, since
they are described by not calling upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 14.4.

Proposition 3.
3. Superstitio est, qua Deo cultus indebitus exhibetur. Ames. Med. Cultus ab
hominibus extra Dei revelationem, pro arbitrio confictus, uno nomine appellatur
(...), qua non honoratur Deus, neque obedientiae habet rationem, quae esse non
potest, ubi mandatum non est. Wind. Theolog. lib. 2.
Joshua being guided by the Spirit of God, does thus resolve and promise, That
he and his house would serve the Lord. Was this good or evil that he declares
he and his would do? was he bound to do it, or was he not? was this cultus Deo
indebitus, worship not due to God? If it were due upon moral reasons, then upon
the same reasons it is due from other families as well as it was from his; if
not, it was but Joshua's Superstition to serve God in his house; but was he
ever blamed for Superstition in this thing? Was it obedience to God that Joshua
served God in his house? If it was, it must be founded upon some Law, and it
must be conformity to some Rule; for what is no way commanded by God, though
done, cannot be obedience to him. Besides this, add, that in his preface to his
Speech, of which the Text is a part, he declares that what he said to them he
had it from the Lord, ver. 2.

Proposition 4.
Joshua in the name of God, and by Authority from him, 4. Suo and familiae suae
exemplo ad perseverantiam in vero cultu hortatur. Par in loc. Interea ut
puderem ipsis ineutiat se in Dei cultu cum domo sua perseveraturum testatur.
Calv. in loc. Efficacissimunt argumentum erat exemplum Imperatoris, praesertim
p^udentissimi, sanctissimi, and foelic^ssimis exemplum hic proponitur
gubernandae familiae nostrae. Masius in loc.
exhorts all the rest of the Families of Israel to the same duties which he
promised and resolved upon before them all, that is, that they in their houses
should serve the Lord. That his Exhortation was in the name of God, and by
Authority from him, is evident; for he protests that he was to say the Lords
words to them, ver. 2. Thus says the Lord God of Israel. That he exhorted them
in the name of the Lord to serve God with their families is also manifest. Does
he engage that he will serve the Lord? So he exhorts them to do also, ver.
14. Now therefore fear ye the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and truth. --
And again, Serve ye the Lord: the matter of the duty then is the same,
expressed in the same words. That this exhortation of serving the Lord reached
to their families also, is apparent from the Argument that he uses to enforce
it, namely, his own example in his house; else the strength and reason of it
would be lost. Would you have it run thus, When I do so earnestly persuade,
counsel, and command you to serve the Lord, I would not have you to understand
me, as if this reached to your houses and proper families, that ye should there
set up conjunct religious duties; but I and my house will serve the Lord? would
not this destroy the very sense and strength of his reasoning? But if you take
it on the contrary, When I persuade you and command you in the name of God, to
serve him, I would have you understand that my meaning is, that both you and
your houses should be engaged conjunctly to serve God, and I exhort you to no
more then what I do declare before you all, that I will do in my house: And so
the sense is goo^ (...) argument strong to move them to it, when he dot^ (...)
to the A Lare incipe, i. e. a domesticis ac familiaribus initium sumito, recte
dicitur in magistratus and alienae vi^ae censores: quorum o^^icium est ut in
primis suos suorumque vitam corrigant. Erasm. Adag.
Proverb, Begin at home; and by his own, ^^^mple influence them into the same
practice: it being an effectual way to back an exhortation by ones own example,
doing what we persuade others to do.

Sic agitur censura and sic exempla parantur
Cum judex, alios quod monet ipse facit.
Ovid. Fast. lib. 6. In his resolution he does not only show his zeal in
glorifying God by doing him faithful service, though all others should forsake
him -- But also and chiefly like a prudent Governor, draws them on to
imitate him, Beneficioru^^ praedictorum commemorationis scopus est, ut osten
lat extrenae ingratitudinis esse pro tot tantisque heneficiis non vicissim Deum
colere and s qui. Par. in loc.
of whom they had justly so great an opinion for his wisdom and piety. Eng.
Annot.

The sum of all this affords this Argument for Family Prayer,

Arg. 1. If Joshua, guided by the Spirit of God, and upon moral grounds and
reasons, did promise and resolve that he and his house would jointly serve the
Lord, which includes prayer also; and does upon the same moral grounds and
reasons, and in the name of God, exhort and command all the Heads and the
Governors in Israel, and all the people to do the same in their Houses, then
the same moral grounds and reasons still continuing, it is the Duty of all
Families jointly to serve the Lord, including prayer also. But all the parts of
the Antecedent are true:

Therefore it is the Duty of all Families jointly to serve the Lord, including
prayer also.

Argument 2. Quod si homines ab injuria poena, non natura arcere debet, quaenam
solicitude vexaret impios, sublato supplici^rum metu? Quod si poena, si metus
supplicii, non ipsa turpitudo deterres ab injuriosa facinero aque vita, nemo
est injustus, ac inc^u^i potius hubendi sunt improbi: tum autem qui non ipso
honesto movesimus, ^e^oni viri aliqua atque fructu, callidi sumus non boni. Nam
quid faciet is homo in tenebris, qui nihil timet nisi testem and judicem? quid
in deserto loco, nactus quem multo auro spoliare possit imbecillum atque solum?
-- Si negabit se illi vitam erepturum, and aurum ablaturum, nunquam ob eam
causam negabit, quod id natura turpe judicet, sed quod meinat, ne emanet, id
est, ne malum habeat. O rem dignam! in qua non modo docti, vetum etiam agrestes
crubescant. Cicero de Leg. lib. 1.

The Second Topic or Head from whence Family Prayer might be proved to be our
duty, shall be taken from the Law of Nature. In this I shall proceed also by
laying down several Propositions, by which, as by so many steps, we might come
up to the Argument that will determine it.

1. Proposition.
Man being made by God a rational creature, and a voluntary Agent, is obliged
to take God for his Governor and Ruler: the actual existence of a Creature
does necessarily and immediately infer his relation to a Creator, as the being
of a Son does the relation of a Father: actual creation is the fundamentum or
ground of this relation: and as it is an absurdity in nature, that a Son should
be a Son, having his being by his Parents under God, and should not be obliged
to be thankful to them, to (...) them, love them, and obey them; so it is much
more absurd, that man (...) a rational being from God, and not be obliged to
take him for his Gove^^^^^ by how much God is greater then our Parents, and the
first cause of our being. And this man is obliged unto, antecedently to his own
consent; yea, though he should never consent unto it; as a Son is bound to obey
his Parents, though he should never consent thereto. Though to take God for our
Ruler in order to salvation, our own consent is necessary; for God saves no
man against his will, nor without his own consent, but by his powerful Spirit
makes them willingly consent; but as our consent was not necessary (nor
possible) to our own creation, so it is not necessary to our obligation and
subjection unto God; yet if man does not consent to take God for his Governor,
he is a Rebel against his Maker, and though he do it not, he stands bound to do
it; else obedience to God were not man's duty, nor disobedience his sin, and
then man might act as he list, and do what he please, and never have any
accusation from his own Conscience, nor reason to be ashamed of, nor afraid of
any thing he does, if he can by policy or power escape punishment from men, and
if they should come to any harm by what they do, it would be rather for their
silliness and unwariness, then for their wickedness; or if they do good, moved
thereunto by their own profit, and not by obligation of obedience to God their
Governor, it would be attributed to their craftiness, rather than their
goodness.

2. Proposition.
Man being made by God a rational creature it governed in a way suitable to the
nature of such a creature, that is, by a Law, and not merely by Physical
motion, nor natural necessity, or objects proposed to his sense only, Lex est
ratio summa insita in natura, quae jubet ea quae fucienda sunt, prohibet
contraria: seu, regula and mensura actuum agendorum, vel omittendorum: seu,
neque hominum ingeniis excogitata, nec sanctum aliquod populorum, sed eternum
quiddam, quod universum mundum regeret, imperandi, prohibendique sapientia.
Altenst. Lex. Theolog.

Si natura confirmatum jus non erit, virtutes omnes tolluntur -- neque silum in
homines obsequia, sed etiam in Deos ceremoniae religionesque tolluntur -- jus
esset latrocinari, jus adulterare, jus testamenta falsa supponere, si haec
suffragiis, aut scitis multitudinis probarentur: quae si tanta est potentia
siultorum sententiis atque jussis, ut eorum suff^agiis rerum natura vertatur,
cur non sanciunt ut quae mala perniciosaque sunt, habeantur pro bonis and
salutaribus, etc. Cicero de leg. lib. 1.


as bruits and inanimate creatures are, if we consider the nature of man, we
shall discern a necessity and an aptitude in him to be governed by a Law: a
necessity, because in his first estate, mutable, in his fallen estate, corrupt;
an aptitude, because he is rational, acting for some end, to be attained by
such means as are conducible to the same, and both end and means to be
discerned by reason: whereas bruits that neither know the end, sub ratione
finis, nor the means, sub ratione mediorum, are not capable of moral
Government. But it is suitable to the nature of man, being an understanding and
voluntary agent to be ruled by a Law constituting his [debitum officii,
praemii, and poenae] duty unto God, his reward, if he be obedient, his
punishment, if he walk contrary to that Law prescribing his duty to him. Such a
Law God has made for the government of men; else no man could be guilty of
sin, because there would be no such thing as sin, for where there is no Law
there is no transgression; else there would be no such thing as virtue and
vice, and no such difference of men as good and bad; else there would be no
need of repentance for any man, no need of reproofs and exhortations; else
there would be no rewards and punishments; to be short, there would be no
Religion in the world.

3. Proposition.
Though all men for some time were without the written Law of God, Est quaedam
non scripta, sed nata Lex; quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, v^^um ex
natura ipsa art ipuimus, h^^simus, expressimus; ad quam non d^cti, sed f^cti,
non instituti, sed imbuti sumus. Cicero. Orat. pro Milo.
which is full and sufficient to salvation, and many are without it still, yet
all men have a law written in their hearts, showing them that good is to be
embraced, and evil to be shunned, and is sufficient to leave them without
excuse. Besides what is said before, the Apostle proves this, Romans 2.14. by a
twofold argument or testimony; the first external, from the lives of many of
the more sober Heathen, who did many things contained in, and commanded by the
Law of God, for when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves: The second is an internal testimony, v. 15. which show the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. The very
Heathen have been filled with fears of punishment after they have committed
sin: but what need that, unless they knew they had transgressed some Law? Quae
lex est ipsa ratio imperandi and prohib^ndi, qu^m qui ignorant, is est injustus,
sive est illa scripta uspiam, sive nusquam. Cicero. de leg. l^^.

Promulgatio Legis na^u^ae est ex hoc ipso, quod Deus eam mentibus hominum
inseruit naturaliter cognoscendam. Aquin. prim. secundae Q. 90.

Jus natural est dictamen rectae rationis, indicans actui alicui, ex ejus
convenientia aut disc^nvenientia cum ipsa natura rationali, inesse moralem tu^
pitudinem ^ut necessitatem moralem, ac consequenter ab auctore na urae Deo,
talem actum aut vetari, aut praecipi. Grot. de jur. bell. p. 3.

Lex natu ae est lumen and d ctamen rationis, divinitus inditum in intellectu,
hominem communibus notionibus ad justi and injusti, honesti and turpis
discretionem informans, ut quid faciendum sit vel fugiendum intelligat, Croc.
Syntag.


What Law then? Not the written Law of God; for that they had not: Therefore a
Law of Nature; being for such evils for which they were not exposed to
punishment by the Laws of men.

It is not essential to this Law that it be either spoken or written, but it is
sufficient that it be some fit signification of the Will of God to man,
authoritatively instituting what shall be due to God from man, and declaring
what benefit and good shall redound to him, if he do obey, and what evil of
punishment shall be inflicted upon him, if he does transgress. And yet this
Will of God is signified and promulged in that God has engraven such a Law on
all men's hearts, and imprinted it in their very natures, that does discover
such a deformity in some evils, that it is to be abhorred, and such a beauty in
some good, that it dictates it is to be embraced. There are certain (...),
common notions, innate or natural principles known to all men; such light and
dictates of reason by which, when they come to understanding, they may see a
plain difference betwixt good and evil in some things, and conclude that one is
commanded by God, and the other forbidden, and consequently that they are bound
to do the one, and to avoid the other: and withal, does dictate to them that
it shall be well with them that embrace good, and punishment shall be inflicted
on them that do evil, and this signification of the Will of God concerning
duty, rewards, and punishments is the Law of Nature, as it is common to all
men. Lex naturalis est significatio divinae voluntatis, quam Deus ipse nostris
mentibus inserit. Val. Philosop. Sacr. 279. though described something
otherwise by others.

4. Proposition.
Quae est enim gens, aut quod genus hominum, quod non habeat, sine doctrina,
anticipationem quandam Decrum? cum enim non instituto aliquo, aut more aut leg^
sit opi^io constituta, man^ atque ad unum omnium firma consensio, intelligi
necesse est, esse Deos, quoniam insitas little val pollu Innetas cognitiones
habemus; de quo autem omnium natura consentit, id verum esse necesse est, esse
igitur Deos confitendum est: quod quoniam fere constat inter omnes, non
Philosophos s lum sed etiam Indect s. fateamur constare illud etiam, hanc nos
habere, sive anticipationem ut an e dixi, sive praenotionem D^e^um. Cicero de
not. deorum. lib. 1.
By this Light and Law of Nature all men might know that there is a God. The
knowledge we have of God in this life is either natural or by revelation; by the
Book of Nature, or by the Book of Scripture: the Book of Nature is either
External, the works of God's Creation, which declare and show (...), some
things that might thereby be known of God, Romans 1.19, 20. and this is acquired
or objective knowledge of God; or else Internal, to which is referred those
natural, common principles, the relics of the Image of God in man lying in
his rubbish after the fall, and the inward testimony of Conscience, which is
innate, subjective knowledge of God; not that there is any actual knowledge born
with man, but by these we might at years of understanding draw as certain a
conclusion that there is a God, as that we are, or that any thing is that we
behold with our eyes. For when we see the Earth and Heavens, etc. Light of
Nature tells us that they had some cause by which they were produced; because
nothing could make it self, because it would have been before it was, which
Reason tells us is impossible: therefore things made must be made by something
that is and was never made. Reason tells us that if any thing be possible,
there is something that is necessary; if any thing may be, something must be:
that which is possible to be, must have something to bring it into actual
being. Reason tells us, that if there had been one instant, in which nothing
was, nothing could have ever been; for nothing can make nothing. All these four
Propositions do but make way for that which is chiefly to our present purpose,
which is that which follows.

5. Proposition.
The Light and Law of Nature does dictate that it is man's duty to pray to God,
and that not only severally, but conjunctly; and that not only in public
Assemblies, but in private Families. For the clearing of this I shall lay down
several Positions, including certain truths; and fetch the proof of them from
the light of Nature and the testimony of Heathens themselves, and then gather
up the Argument from the whole.

Position 1.
That the Light of Nature does dictate that the souls of men are Immortal,
Maximum vero argumentum est, naturam ipsam de Immortalitate animorum tacitam
judicare, quod omnibus curae sunt and maximae quidem, quae post mortem futura
sunt. Cicero. Tusc. Quest.

Nihil animis admixtum, nihil concretum, nihil copulatum, nihil duplex; quod
cum ita sit, certe nec secerni, n^c dividi, nec discerpi, nec distrahi potest,
nec in^erire igitur: est enim interitus quasi discessus and secretio ac
diremptus earum partium, quae ante interitum junctione aliqua teneban^ur.
Cicero. Tuscul. Quest. Sed nescio quo modo inhaeret in mentibus quasi seculorum
quoddam augurium fu^urorum: idemque in maximis ingenii, altissimisque unimis
and existit maxim, and apparet facillime Cicero, Tusc, Q. lib. 1.


and do not dye when the body dies. This the Heathen did gather from the great
care that there is naturally in all men, at least that do improve their natural
light, and hearken to the voice of sober reason, what shall become of them
after death. Though all men do not seriously provide for the soul after its
separation from the body, and the light of nature cannot direct us in this
matter; yet such cares and fears that there be in men about their state after
death, even in such as never had a Bible, is a certain evidence that they
believed the Soul's immortality. Reason gathers also the immortality of the
Soul from the simplicity and immateriality of its nature, that it is not
compounded of material parts, as the Body is, nor has such contrary qualities
combating one with another, as the Body has, to cause its dissolution or
cessation of being; for the destruction of a thing is the tearing asunder those
parts, which before such destruction were joined together, the Soul therefore
that is not so compounded, has nothing in its own nature that should cause it
to cease to be, nor render it liable to be destroyed by any creature, though it
might be annihilated by Divine Power.

Position 2.
Socrates, supremo vitae die de hoc ipso multa disseruit, and cum pene in
manuj^m mortiferum illud peculum teneret, locutus est ita, ut non in mortem
trudi, verum in calu^n videretur ascendere, ita enim censebat; itaque disseruit
duas esse vias, duplicesque cursus animorum e corpore excedentium: nam qui se
humanis vitiis contaminassent, and se totos libidinibus, dedidissent, quibus
caecati velut domesticis vitiis atque flagitiis se inquinassent -- iis devium
quoddam iter esse seclusum a concilio Deorum; qui autem se integ^os castosque
servassent; quibusque fuisset minima cum corporibus contagio, seseque ab his
semper se vocassent, essentque in corporibus humanis vitam imitati Deorum, his
ad illos, a quibus essent profecti, reditum facilem patere. In Cicerone, Tusc.
Quaest. lib. 1.
The Light of Nature tells us, that the immortal Souls of men must be happy or
miserable after their separation from the Body, and that there is a life of
Retribution after this. Heathens have plainly taught that there are two ways
that the Souls of men do go, after they are loosed from the Body, according as
their lives were in this world, that such as have wallowed in sin, and given
themselves to gratify their lusts, that these Souls are shut out from God, and
shut up in extremity and eternity of torment. Hence Heathens mention Tityus,
who being cast down to Hell, had a Vulture that came every day, and did gnaw
his Liver, and in the night it was repaired and made up again, that what was
torn by the Vulture one while, again did grow, that his punishment might be
perpetual; and some that are punished by being put to labor in rolling huge
Stones, and racked upon Wheels, and to be there in this misery for ever. Saxum
ingens volvunt alii, radiisque rotarum
Districti pendent: sedet, eternumque sedebit
Infoelix Thoseus -- Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
Some roll huge Stones, and stretched on Wheels do lie;
Damned Theseus sits there to eternity.
Thus they make mention of Pluto, by whom those that were most vicious, were
most tormented; and of Charon's Boat, whom they imagined was Ferry-man of Hell;
of Radamunthus the Judge; of Tantalus thirsting in the midst of waters; of the
Stygian and other Infernal Lakes, of Cerberus, a Dog with three heads, Porter
in Hell: and give descriptions of the place of torments.

Spelunca alta fuit, vastoque immanis hiatu
Scrupea, tuta Lacu nigro, nemorumque tenebris,
Quam super haud ullae poteraut impune volantes
Tendere iter pennis: talis sese halitus atris
Faucibus effundens, supera ad convexa ferebat;
Vnde locum Graij dixerunt nomine Avernum. Virg. Aeneid. 6
There was a deep Cave, with a mighty Gulf
With black Lakes moted, and a horrid Grove,
Over which not safely swiftest wings could move,
Such were the vapors from these foul jaws came,
This place the Graecians did Avernus name.
And as they set forth the eternity of their hellish torments, so they did
acknowledge the variety of them to be more than could be expressed.

Non mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas
Omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possem. Virg. Aeneid. 6.
Had I an hundred mouths, as many tongues,
A voice of Iron, to these add brazen Lungs,
Their crimes and tortures never could be displaid.
Take the Testimony of another, that you may see what a common received opinion
this was among the Heathen, of misery of many in Hell.

-- (...),
(...)
(...)
(...). Hesiod. Theogon.
The sense take thus.

God Mighty ones in chains of darkness bound,
And cast them down to Hell; which under ground
(So deep and black) so far remote does lie
As the earth is distant from the Starry sky.
Yet (bear with me) once more: Another of them brings in God threatening the
disobedient with Hell torments, where he uses the same word for Hell as the
Apostle does, 2 Pet. 2.4. describing Hell to be a place far remote from Heaven,
a great gulf or deep pit, whose gates are of Iron, and whose pavement is of
Brass, a place of utter darkness, in sense so near the former, that I shall not
need any further to translate, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...). Homer. Iliad. 8.
All these testimonies of the Heathens (and there are many more) do plainly
manifest that the Light of Nature does discover a place of punishment, where
wicked men after this life shall be sorely tormented. I might bring as many of
them also that by the Light of Nature did determine of a place of happiness for
good men in another world, but that I would not be too tedious in this point.
The use of these, and how they make to our present business in hand, will
appear in the following Positions.

Position 3.
Nemo sibi nascitur. Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed ortus nostri partem
patria, pa^tem parents vindicant, partem amici: atque quae in terris
gignuntur, ad usum hominum omnia creantur, homines autem hominum causa
generantur, ut ipsi inter se alii aliis prodesse possent; In hoc naturam
debemus ducem sequi, and communes utili^ates in medium afferre, mutatione
officiorum, dando, accipiendo, tum artibus, tum opera, tum facultatibus
devincire hominum inter homines societatem. Cicero de Offio. lib. 1.

Quae est melior in hominum genere natura quam eorum, qui se natos ad homines
juvandos, tutandos, conservandos arbitrantur? Cicero Tuscul. Quaest. lib. 1.


As the Light of Nature tells us all this, so also it does dictate to us that
no man is born for himself, to mind only his own good, and to escape evil and
punishment himself; but to our utmost power in the places and societies of
which we are heads or members to endeavor the good of that Society, and every
member thereof. He that will help no other, who should help him? or with what
reason can he expect it? He that is so selfish, is unprofitable to any Society,
and good for nothing. Man being (...), nature has inclined him to a sociable
life, not only for his own, but also for the good of others; which whosoever does
neglect, sins against that Society. Come then you Parents and Masters of
Families, see now why I alleged before what the Light of Nature does dictate
concerning the Soul's immortality, and the state of Souls in another world,
even that you may do your utmost to save the precious Souls in your houses from
this place of torment, and to help them to prepare for an everlasting state.
The Law of Charity firmly binds you to it: If your children were fallen into a
pit, would not nature tell you you are to help them out? If any of your house
were falling into the fire, would not nature tell you you should prevent it if
you can? or snatch them out with haste and speed? Does nature tell you (as has
been showed) that there is a place of torment where sinful Souls must suffer,
and do you see any in your houses in danger of falling into it, and will you
sit still and do nothing to endeavor to prevent their everlasting misery? If
they were sick, or had drunk down poison, does not nature tell you you should
use means for their recovery, to prevent their death? And does not nature tell
you that their Souls are more precious than their Bodies, and more to be
regarded? It does: Certainly it does. Are not their Souls sick and diseased,
and poisoned with the venom of sin, and does not nature tell you there is
charity to be shown to their Souls, as well as to their Bodies, and much more?
Certainly these are the dictates of nature; if I suppose you have not one spark
of grace, the light of reason will tell you all this.

Position 4.
All these things being suggested by the Light of Nature, let me add, that
Reason tells you that for you to pray with them in your Family, rendeth to
their good, and the neglect there if to their detriment and damage. Let reason
be heard, and it will dictate to you, that conjunct Prayer with them is a
likely means for the good of their souls. Will it not tell thee that to pray to
God for them, and to bring them to pray with thee, may be for their benefit to
escape the misery of another world, and obtain happiness in the life to come?
Enter into thine own heart, and debate this with thy self, and judge
impartially, as thou would do if thou wast a dying man; and then tell me, if
the light that is within thee does not prompt thee to all this? Prayer is a
part of natural worship, which is due to God from all, and would it not tend to
the profit of their Souls to give God his due? And should not thou that art a
Parent or a Master, whom nature has set over them and committed them to thy
trust, and requires thy help to the utmost power for their good, assist them
herein, and see that they do it? and use thy gifts and parts and knowledge in
praying with them, that they also by thy example might be induced to this duty,
and by hearing thee pray in their company, may learn to pray also? Light of
Nature did dictate to the heathen Mariners ( Jon. 1.) that prayer to God was a
means to save them in the storm; therefore the Master of the Ship, the Head of
that Society, called Jonah from sleep to Prayers, and this they did not only
severally, but conjunctly, v. 14. they cried unto the Lord, and said, We
beseech thee, O Lord, We beseech thee, etc. and shall the Heathen Master of the
Ship do more in that Society whereof he was chief, than a Christian Master of a
Family in that Household Society whereof he is head?

Moreover, (...). Lores, Penates, Dii domestici, qui domi coluntur. Ego Deos
Penates hinc salutatum domum devortar. Ter. Phorm.

Vestae vis ad aras and focos pertinet, itaque in ea dea, quae est rerum Custos
intimarum, omnis and precatio and sacrificatio extrema est; nec long absunt ab
hac vi d^i penates, sive a penu ducto nomine, sive ab eo quod penitus insident.
Cic. de not. Deor. l. 2.


that the Light of Nature does dictate that there should be conjunct
worshipping of God in men's houses, the practice of the Heathen makes manifest:
they had their household gods, so called, because they thought they had the rule
over them and their Households, and the keeping and preserving of their
Families; though indeed they could not defend themselves, nor them that did in
their houses worship them, as Juno in her speech to Aeolus: Gens inimica mihi
Tyrrhenum navigat aequor,
Ilium in Italiam portans, victosque penates.
Yet these Gods they served in their houses, and sacrificed to them; in which
Sacrifice their custom Godw. Romans Ant. (...) Videntur fuisse dii penates, qui
ad tuendam rem domesticam colerentur. De Dieu. in Genesis 31.19.
was to eat up all that was left at the Offering, thinking it an heinous matter
to send any of that Sacrifice abroad to their friends, or to the poor.

Of this sort were the Teraphim, an Idol or Image made for men's private use in
their own houses: Laban had such household Gods, Genesis 31.19, 30. Why have thou
stolen away my Gods? By this you see that the Light of Nature does dictate
household worship to be given to God, and the Heathens did it to their false
Gods: And if you, called Christians, will not in your houses jointly pray unto
the true God, let the Heathens stand up as witnesses against you. However take
this Argument containing the sum of the five foregoing Propositions.

2. Arg. If all men are bound to take God for their Ruler, governing them by a
Law written in their hearts, which does dictate to them that there is a God, and
jointly to be prayed unto in men's Families, then it is their duty so to do.
(The reason of this is, because if they be bound to do it, and do it not, they
sin.)

But all men are bound to take God for their Ruler (as in the first Proposition
is shown) governing them by a Law (as in the (second) written in their hearts
(as in the third) which does dictate to them that God is (as in the fourth) and
to be jointly prayed to in their Families (as in the fifth). Therefore it is
their duty so to do.

For the proof of the last part of the minor Proposition, viz. That the Light
of Nature does dictate that Men or Masters of Families ought to pray conjunctly
with the Members of their Families: consider this;

Seeing Societies as such are totally dependent upon God and men's gifts are
communicative and solemnities are operative, nature teaches us that God ought
to be solemnly acknowledged, worshipped and honored both in families and in
more solemn appointed assemblies. Mr. Baxter, Reasons of Christ, Rel. part 1.
p. 74.
If the Light or Law of Nature does dictate that Masters of Families ought to
use all means to prevent the damnation of the immortal Souls in that Domestic
Society of which they are Heads and Governors, and to further their eternal
happiness, having opportunities so to do; then it does dictate that they ought
to pray conjunctly with them. The reason of this is because Prayer is a means
(made together with them) which the Light of Nature does dictate, profitable to
prevent their misery, and further their happiness (as in the fourth Position
before laid down) and they have opportunities for this means.

But the Light or Law of Nature does dictate that Masters of Families ought to
use all means to prevent the damnation of the immortal Souls in that Domestic
Society whereof they are Heads and Governors, and to further their eternal
happiness, having opportunities so to do. For if the Light of Nature does
dictate they ought to take care of their bodies that are mortal, it does tell
them they are much more to take care of their Souls which are immortal, and
must for ever live in happiness or misery, (as in Position first, second, and
third.)

Therefore the Light or Law of Nature does dictate that it is their duty to
pray conjunctly with their Families: and if the Law of Nature does, the Law of
God does, because the Law of Nature is God's Law.

Argument 3.
The third seat or head of Argument shall be taken from what God is to Families
as such, in these four Propositions,

God is the founder of all Families (as such:) therefore Families as such
should pray unto him. 1. Familia est inter plures pirsonas quae sunt sub unius
potestate, and vel natura, vel jure subjectae; vel societas constituta secundum
naturam, quotidiani usus gratia: Estque conjugalis, patria, and Herilis.
Liebent. Col. Polit.
The household Society usually is of these three Combinations, Husband and Wife,
Parents and Children, Masters or Servants: though there may be a Family where
all these are not, yet take it in its latitude, and all these Combinations are
from God. The Institution of Husband and Wife is from God, Genesis 2.21, 22, 23,
24. and of Parents and Children, and Masters and Servants, and the authority of
one over the other, and the subjection of the one to the other is instituted by
God, and founded in the Law of Nature, which is God's Law. The persons singly
considered have not their beings only from God; but the very being of this
Society as such is also from him: and as a single person is therefore bound to
devote himself to the service of God, and pray unto him, so an household Society
is therefore bound jointly, as such, to do the same; because as such a Society,
it is from God; utriusque est par ratio. And has God appointed this Society
only for the mutual comfort of the Members thereof, or of the whole, and not
also for his own glory, Patres secundum haec temporalia bona, filiorum sortem a
servorum condition distinguerent; ad Deum autem colendum omnibus domus suae
membris pari dilectione consulerent; qued naturalis ordo ita praescripsit, ut
nomen patrum-familias hinc exortum sit -- Qui autem very patres-familias sunt,
omnibus in f milia sua tanquam filiis ad colendum and promerendum Deum
consulant. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 9. cap. 16.
even from the whole? and does that household Society as such live to God's
glory, that do not as such serve him, and pray unto him? Has God given
authority to the one to command and rule, and the other a a charge to obey,
only in reference to worldly things, and not at all to spiritual? only in
things pertaining to the world, and in nothing to things pertaining to God? Can
the comfort of the Creature be God's ultimate end? no, it is his own glory. Is
one by authority from God and order of Nature Pater-familias, the Master of the
Family, so called in reference to his Servants, as well as to his Children,
because of the care he should take of the Souls of Servants, and of their
worshipping God with him, as well as of his Children, and should he not
improve this power that God has given him over them all for God and the
welfare of all their Souls, in calling them jointly to worship God, and pray
unto him? Let Reason and Religion judge.

Proposition 2.
God is the OWNER of our Families as such; therefore as such they should pray
unto him. God being our absolute OWNER and Proprietor, not only ratione (...)
essentiae suae, by reason of the supereminency of his Nature, sed etiam jure
creationis, giving us our being, and all we have, We our selves, and all that
is Ours (We and Ours being more His than our Own) are unquestionably bound to
lay out our selves for God, wherein we might be most useful for our OWNERS
interest and glory. Besides the title of Creation, God is the OWNER of our
Families by right of conservation and redemption: For has God a right to and
propriety in the persons in a Family, or the particular Members of it, and not
of the whole? Whose are your Families, if not God's OWN? Will you disclaim God
as your OWNER? If you should; yet in some sense you are HIS still, though not
by resignation and wholly devoting of your selves to him. Whose would you have
your Families to be, God's OWN, or the Devil's OWN? Has the Devil any title to
your Families, and shall your Families serve the Devil that has no title to
you, neither of Creation, Preservation or Redemption, and will you not serve
God, that by all this has a title to you, and an absolute, full propriety in
you! If you will say your Families are the Devils, then serve him, but if you
say they are God's, then serve him. Or will you say we are Gods, but we will
serve the Devil? If you do not say so, yet if you do so, is it not as bad? Why
are you not ashamed to do that, that you are ashamed to speak out, and tell the
world what you do? Speak then in the fear of God; If your Families as such be
God's own, is it not reasonable, that as such you should serve him, and pray
unto him? for do not you expect honor and obedience from your Children,
because they be your own? and work and labor and service from your own
Servants, because they be your own? and whatever you are OWNERS of, would you
not have it for your Use? and will you require these things from yours, because
they are yours, and shall not God require service from His? and if he do, shall
he not have it? especially when God's title of Propriety in you is infinitely
greater than any title you have to any thing you have or call your own? Take
heed lest your demands and expectations from yours, be not a condemnation of
your selves in denying that to God, which is his due from you, because you are
his.

Proposition 3.
God is the Master and Governor of your Families; therefore as such they
should serve him in praying to him. If he be your OWNER, he is your Ruler too,
and does he not give you Laws to walk by and obey, not only as you are
particular persons, but as you are a combined Society? Ephesians. 5.25. to the end,
and 6.1. to v. 10. Col. 3.19. to the end, and 4.1. Is God then the Master of
your Family as such, and should not then your Family as such serve him? Do not
Subjects as such ow obedience to their Governors? Mal. 1.6. A Son honors
his Father, and a Servant his Master: if I then be a Father, where is mine
honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear? Where indeed? Not in prayerless
ungodly Families.

(...). Anton. l. 1. Sect. 17. (...). Idem.
Proposition 4.
God is the Benefactor of your Families as such; therefore as such they should
serve God, in praying to him, and praising of him. God does not do you good and
give you mercies only as individual persons, but also as a conjunct Society. Is
not the continuance of the Master of the Family, not only a mercy to himself,
but to the whole Family also? if he be not he is not over good. Is not the
continuance of the Mother, Children, Servants, in life, health and being, a
mercy to the Family? that you have an house to dwell together, and food to eat
together, do not you call these Family-mercies? and do not these call aloud in
your ears and to your consciences, to give praises to your bountiful Benefactor
together, and to pray together for the continuance of these, and the grant of
more, as you shall need them? It would be endless to declare how many ways God
is a Benefactor to your Families conjunctly, and you are shameless if you do
not conjunctly praise him for his bounty. Such an house is rather a stye for
Swine, than a dwelling house for rational Creatures.

May not God call out to such prayerless Families, as to them, Jer. 2. 31. O
generation, see ye the word of the Lord: Have I been a wilderness to Israel? a
land of darkness? Wherefore say my people we are Lords, we will come no more
unto thee: Has God been forgetful of you? Speak, (...). Idem ibid.
ye ungodly, prayerless Families: Has God been forgetful of you? No? every
morsel of bread you eat, tells you God does not forget you, every time you see
your Table spread, and food set on, you see God does not forget you: Why then,
says God, Will not this Family come at ME? when you have food to put into your
Childrens mouths that they do not cry for bread, and you constrained to say, I
would my poor hungry child, I would, but I have it not. Why then, will you not
come at me? live together and eat together at my cost and care and charge, and
yet be whole months and never come at Me! and that your children have reason,
raiment, limbs, not born blind, nor of a monstrous birth, (which things
Heathens have been affected with) and a thousand ways besides have I done you
good, may God say, Why then, will you live whole years together, and never
together come at me? Have you found one more able, or more willing to do you
good? that you never can. Why then are you so unthankful as not to come at me?
After the like manner the Lord expostulates with his People to whom he had been
a bountiful Benefactor, and yet they answered not his bounty, nor served him
their Benefactor, for which he calls to the Heavens to be astonished, and the
Earth to be horribly afraid, Jer. 2.5. Thus says the Lord, Mercies do engage
to duties. We should have him for our God for ever, and serve him that always
does us good. So the Poet.

O Melibaec, Deuo. nobis haec otia fecit
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, illius aram
Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
Virg. Eclog. 1. Officia etiam saerae sentiunt, nec ullum tam immansuetum
animal est, quod non cura mitiget, and in amorem sui. vertat. Leonum ora a
magistris impune tractantur. Eliphantorum feritatem usque in servile obsequium
demeretur cibus; adeo etiam quae extra intellectum atque aestimationem
bemeficii sunt posita, assiduitas tamen meriti pertinacis evincit. Ingratus est
adversus unum beneficium? adversus alterum non erit. Duorum obliru est? tertium
etiam little quae excideru^t, memoriam reducet -- Qui instat and onerat priora
sequentibus, etiam ex duto and Immemori pectore gratiam extundat. N^o audebit
adversus multa ocu^c^ allollere, Senec. de benef. c. 3.


what iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me --
6. Neither said they, where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt. -- Should such a people forsake such a God, and go far from him that did
them so much good? yet they did: ver. 13. Be astonished at this, oh ye heavens
-- You see when God is a Benefactor to a People (and there is the same reason
for Families) and they do not serve him, what monstrous wickedness it is! God
has kept you all safe in the night, and yet in the morning you do not say,
Where is the Lord that did preserve us, come, o come, Let us give joint praises
to him! God has done you and your Families good so many years, and yet you do
not say where is the Lord that has done such great things for us, come let us
acknowledge his mercy together. God has carried you through affliction and
sickness in the Family, the Plague has been in the house, and yet you live,
the Small pox and burning Feavors have been in your houses, and yet you are
alive, your conjugal companion has been sick, and recovered, children nigh to
death, and yet restored, and for all this you do not say, Where is the Lord
that kept us from the Grave, and saved us from the Pit? that we are not rotten
among the dead, and yet you do not pray to, nor pra se this your wonderful
Benefactor together. Let the very walls within which these ungrateful wretches
live be astonished at this! Let the very beams and pillars of their houses
tremble! and let the very girders of the floors on which they tread and walk be
horribly afraid! that such as dwell in such an House together, go to bed before
they go to Prayer together. Let the earth be amazed, that the Families which
the Lord does nourish and maintain are rebellious and unthankful! Being worse
than the very Ox that knows his Owner, and of less understanding than the
very Ass, Isa. 1.2, 3. There is such validity in the consequence from God's
being our Benefactor to our duty to him in serving of him, that Joshua builds
his exhortation to the Heads and People of Israel to fear and worship God, upon
this very foundation, as appears plainly to any that read the Chapter where
the Text lies. From what has been said I reason in this manner.

3. Arg. If God be the Founder, Owner, Governor, and Benefactor of Families as
such, then Families as such are jointly to worship God and pray unto him. (This
cannot be denied.)

But God is the Founder, Owner, Governor and Benefactor of Families as such.
(Neither can this be denied.)

(...), Aristot. Moral. -- Nunc adhibe puro Pectore verba puer, nunc te
melioribus affer:

Quo semel est imbuta recens^ servabit odorem Testa diu -- Horat. Ep. l. 12. --
adeo in teneris consuescere mul^um est. Virg Geor. l. 2.


Therefore Families as such are jointly to worship God, and pray unto him.

Argument 4.
Masters of Families ought to read the Scripture to their Families, teach and
instruct their Children and Servants in the matters and doctrines of Salvation:
therefore they are to pray in and with their Families. No man that will not
deny the Scripture can deny the unquestionable duty of reading the Scripture in
our houses, Governors of Families teaching and instructing them out of the
Word of God. Amongst a multitude of express Scriptures, look into these, Exodus
12.26. And it shall come to pass when your Children shall say unto you, what
mean you by this service? 27. Ye shall say, it is the Sacrifice of the Lord's
Passover, who passed over the houses of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when
he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses -- And there is as much reason
that Christian Parents should explain to their Children the Sacraments of the
New Testament, to instruct them in the nature, use, and ends of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper. Deuteronomy. 6.6. And these words which I command thee this day shall
be in thine heart. 7. v. And thou shall teach Crebris admonitionum quasi
ictibus haec mea praecepta infiges and optabis, sicut repetitis mallei ictibus
f^rram aptatur. Lud. de Dieu.

Et dentabis ea; i. e. inter dentes versabis, assidue lo queris, vel dentibus
mandes, praemansa in os ingeres filiis tuis Malvend.


(...) [whet or sharpen] them diligently to thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk in the way, and when
thou lie down, and when thou risest up, i. e. morning and evening. Deuteronomy.
11.18, 19. Ephesians. 6.4. And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, but
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. And God was pleased
with this in Abraham; Genesis 18.19. For I know him that he will command his
children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.
This then is undeniable, if the Word is to be believed, received as our Rule,
and obedience to be yielded thereunto. And the Heathens taught a necessity of
instructing youth betimes.

The reason of this consequence from Family reading and instructions, (...).
Justin. dialog. cum Tryph 173.

Scriptura sacra est (1) DEI cathedra, ex qua ad nos loquitur. (2) Dei Schola,
in qua nos erudit and informat. (3) Dei (...) and spiritualis rerum medicarum
officina. (4) Dei (...) and armamentarium, in quo ^unit and armat nos contra
omnis generis hosts. (5) Dei manus, qua nos per semitas fidei and justitiae
ducit ad vitam aeternam. Gerhar. loc. com. Tom. 1. p. 141.


to Family praying; is evident (we need to beg of God the illumination of his
Spirit, the opening of the eyes of every one in the Family, the blessing of God
upon our endeavors, without which it will be to no saving benefit) and will
be more manifest, if we consider and lay together these things following.

First, Whose Word it is that is to be read in the Family together: the Word of
the eternal, blessed, glorious God. And does this call for and require
preceding Prayer no more than if you were to read the Book of some mortal man?
The Word of God is that out of which God speaks to us, it is that by which he
does instruct us and inform us in the highest and weightiest concernments of
our Souls, it is that from which we must fetch remedies for the cure of our
spiritual maladies, it is that from whence we must have weapons of defense
against our spiritual enemies that do assault our Souls, and be directed in the
paths of life: and is not Prayer together needful then, that God would prepare
all their hearts to receive and obey what shall be read to them of the mind of
God? Is all the Family so serious and so sensible of the Glory, Holiness, and
Majesty of that God that speaks to them in his Word, that Prayer is not
needful that they may be so? And if it be needful, should it not first be done?
And when it has been read, and the threatenings, commands, and promises of the
glorious God been heard, and your sins discovered, and God's wrath against
them, and duties enjoined, and precious privileges opened, and promises of a
faithful God, both great and precious promises made to such as do repent,
believe and turn to God with all their hearts unfeignedly; have you not all
need together to fall down upon your knees, to beg and cry and call to God for
pardon of those sins that by this Word you are convinced you are guilty of, and
to lament them before the Lord, and that, when your duty is discovered, you
might have all hearts to practice and obey, and that you might unfeignedly
repent and turn to God, that so you may apply those promises to your selves,
and be partaker of those privileges? From this then there is great reason,
when you read together, you should also pray together. Scripturis sacris
incumbat Christianus fidelis, ibi inveniet condigna fidei spectacula --
spectabit mundum in delictis suis, Piocum praemia, Impiorum supplicia,
religione superatas feras and in mansuetudinem c^nversas intu^bitur and animas
ab ipsa morte revocatas -- and in his omnibus jam majus videbit spectaculum,
diabolum illum, qui totum triumpharet mundum, sub pedibus Christi jacentem:
quam hoc decorum spectaculum fratres! quam jucundum! quam necessarium! --
Cyprian. 416.


Secondly, Consider what great and deep mysterious things are contained in the
Word of God which you are to read together, and there will appear a necessity
of praying together also. Is there not in this Word the Doctrine concerning
God, how he might be known, loved, obeyed, worshipped and delighted in?
concerning Christ, God-man, a mystery that the Angels wonder at, and no man
fully understands, or can express and fully unfold? concerning the Offices of
Christ, Prophet, Priest and King? the example and the life of Christ, the
miracles of Christ, the temptations of Christ, the sufferings of Christ, his
death, the victories of Christ, the Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession
of Christ, and his coming to Judgment? Is there not in the Scripture the
Doctrine of the Trinity, of the misery of man by sin, and his remedy by Christ?
of the Covenant of Grace, the Conditions of this Covenant, and the Seals
thereof? the many precious, glorious privileges that we have by Christ,
reconciliation with God, justification, sanctification and adoption; the
several graces to be got, and duties to be done, and of men's everlasting state
in Heaven or Hell? are these and such like contained in the Word of God that
you ought to read daily in your houses, and yet do not you see the need of
Prayer before and after your reading of it? Weigh them well, and you will.

Thirdly, Consider how much all the Family are concerned to know and understand
these things so necessary to Salvation. If they are ignorant of them, they are
undone: If they know not God, how shall they love him? Invisa possunt amari,
incognita nequaquam: Things unseen may be loved, but things unknown cannot. We
might love an unseen God, and an unseen Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. But not an unknown
God. If they in your Family know not Christ, how shall they believe on him? and
yet they must perish and be damned if they do not. They must for ever lose God,
and Christ and Heaven and their Souls, if they do not repent, believe, and be
converted, and yet when that Book is read, Petit se doceri divinitus, ut
doctrinam recte intelligat -- ex antithesi vero monet, omnium hominum mentes
esse coecas, nec intelligere doctrinam quamdiu non illuminantur a Spiritu
sancto -- monet igi^ur quasi velamen esse obductum oculis nostrae mentis, vel
volumen legis seu doctrinae clausum and convolutum esse, ut legi and intelligi
non possit, nisi spiritu detrahente velamen oculis nostris, and evolvente
volumen, ut oculis nostris subjiciatur -- ideoque assidue petendum esse
significat, ut hic d^ctor mittatur in corda nostra, qui ea illuminet and
sapientia coelesti imbuat. Moller. in Psalm. 119.18.
by which they should understand the nature of true saving Grace, is not Prayer
needful? especially when many have the Bible and read it, yet do not understand
the things that do concern their peace.

Fourthly, Consider further, The blindness of their minds, and their inability
without the teachings of God's Spirit, to know and understand these things, and
yet is not Prayer needful?

Fifthly, Consider yet further, The backwardness of their hearts to hearken to
these weighty, necessary truths of God, and their unwillingness naturally to
learn, shows Prayer to be necessary that God would make them able and willing
to receive them.

Sixthly, Once more consider, That Prayer is a special means to obtain knowledge
from God, and a blessing upon the teachings and instructions of the Master of
the Family. David prayed that God would open his eyes, that he may behold
wondrous things out of God's Law, Psalm. 119.18. There are wondrous things in
the Word of God; that fallen man should be recovered is a wondrous thing, that
a holy God should be reconciled to sinful man, is a wondrous thing, that the
Son of God should take upon him the nature of man, and God be manifested in the
flesh, and a believer justified by the righteousness of another, these are
WONDROUS things. But there is darkness upon our minds, and a vail over our
eyes, and the Scripture a clasped, closed Book, that we cannot savingly
understand these great wonderful things, to have our love chiefly upon them,
and our delight in them, except the Spirit of God take away the vail, and
remove our ignorance, and enlighten our minds; and this wisdom is to be sought
from God by fervent Prayer. You that are Masters of Families, would you have
your Children and Servants know these things, and be affected with them? Would
you have impressions made upon their minds and hearts of the great concernments
of their Souls? and therefore you do instruct them; but can you reach their
hearts? Can you awaken their Consciences? Can you not? and yet does it not
become you to pray to God with them, that he would do it? While you are a
praying jointly with them, God may be secretly disposing and powerfully
preparing their hearts to receive his Word, and your instructions from it. From
all this I argue thus for Family Prayer.

Arg. 4. If it be the duty of Families as such to read and hear the Word of God
together read, then it is the duty of Families as such to pray together: (this
is shown by the six things last mentioned.)

But it is the duty of Families as such to read the Word of God, and to hear it
together real: (this was proved from Scripture before.)

Therefore it is the duty of Families as such to pray together.

Argument 5.
Christian Families are or ought to be as so many domestic Churches:
Magnificum elogium, quum u^i familiae nomen Ecclesiae tribuitur; and tamen sic
institutas esse convenit singulas piorum familias, ut totidem sint Ecclesiolae:
quod autem Erasmo congregationis nomen magis placuit, alienum est a mente Pauli
-- honorifice de Christiana oeconomia voluit loqui. Calv. 1 Cor. 16.19. Erasmus
in Annotationibus vertendum potius dicit, congregatione, qua in re ab eo
dissentio, apparet enim Apostolorum commendare Aquilae and Priscillae familiam
quasi sit Ecclesiola quaedam, alioquin dixisset (...). Beza. -- Privatam
familiam Ecclesiam vocat -- Estius. Vel de Ecclesiae membris, vel de domesticis
tantum ipsius Nymphae ad dominum conversis -- Laudans hunc virum -- quod
oeconomiam suam -- Christian admodum rexerit and instituerit. Pareus. Erat
igitur tota familia pia and been and Christian instituta, sicut solent esse
Ecclesiae, quia ibi legebatur verbum Dei -- and preces habebantur, and
canebantur Psalmi -- discamus ita regere familias ut sint verae Ecclesiae.
Piscator. Adjungit etiam familiam ejus, quam honorifico nomine vocat Ecclesiam:
quod ipsum quoque ad Philemonis laudem pertinet ut qui in familia educanda
fidelis patris famili^, efficio fungatur, Piscator. in Phil. 2.
therefore they ought to pray together. In a Church conjunct Prayers are made
to God; but what kind of Church would that be in which there is never no
joint praying. There are three Families in the Scripture renowned with the name
of a Church, and have this honorable title put upon them by God himself; as
(1) The Family of Aquila and Priscilla, Romans 16.5. (...), and the Church in
their house. So 1 Cor. 16.19. The (2) Family of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. (...), and
Nymphas and the Church in his house. (3) The Family of Philemon, v. 2. (...),
and to the Church in thy house. Erasmus renders it the Congregation in their
house, but this is disliked by Calvin and by Beza too. Pareus interprets these
Texts either for the company of Christians that were wont to assemble in their
houses to hear the Word, and to worship God; or else of their proper Families,
of which these were the Heads and Governors, whose houses were called
Churches, because of the religious duties there performed, as reading of the
Scripture, praying unto God together, and singing of Psalms. Aquila and
Priscilla by occupation were Tent-makers, Act. 18.3. yet though they labored
in this Calling, and worked with their hands, they found time for Family
worship and joint religious duties, and were eminent and exemplary therein, and
stand in Scripture upon record for a pattern worthy of all Christian Families
imitation: Here is a plain proof. So did the godly Families in the primitive
times, and they are approved by God; for what they did in their houses and
Families was pleasing unto God, having this honorable name of a Church by
God's holy Spirit put upon them. And they will afford us this Argument: Arg. 5.
Those Families, that are or ought to be houshold-Churches, ought to serve God
together therein, and pray jointly to him: (for the Worship and Prayers of a
Church as such are conjunct, and from such religious duties these Families were
so called.)

But Christian Families are or ought to be houshold-Churches: (And they will be
such Churches, or Synagogues of Satan.) Therefore Christian Families ought
jointly to pray to God.



Argument 6.
That God is to be served and called upon conjunctly in proper Families will
appear from the practice of holy men in the first Age of the world. Conjunct
worship was first performed in Families, before it could be given to God from
more public Assemblies: the Domestic Society being the first, and the
foundation and original of all other. God's Church was first in Adam's Family,
and for some time only there; therefore God was there worshipped and called
upon, or else God had a Church from which he had no conjunct worship at all.

That there was such Religious Worship in the first Families, I offer these two
things for confirmation thereof.

God appointed Adam after his Fall to offer Sacrifice to him, and declared to
him the use and signification thereof, and commanded him to teach his children
to do the same. Which will be manifest by these two things,

1. (...) Deo tributum, significat respicere cum gratia and favore. Par. Q.d.
placuit Domino Fag requievit in Abel. Oleast.

Igne de coelo consumpsit, and sic grata esse probavit. Lyra. Pisc. Ainsworth.
Cultus modum and mensuram homines ex se ignorant, quem a revelatione divina
expectare debent, neque cord se tantopere praesumere oportet, ut modum quo
Deus religiose coli debet, ipsi sibi pro libitu and arbitrio praescribant; non
enim Deus hominum (...) delectatur: aequum est, non quo nos volumus ipsi, sed
quo ipse vult modo eum colamus and veneremur. These. Salmur.


That Abel did Sacrifice, and thereby pleased God. Genesis 4.4. the Lord had
respect unto Abel and his Offering; i. e. God accepted Abel and his Offering.
It is not said what outward testimony it was, whereby God did declare this
respect and acceptance of Abel's Offering, whereby Cain did perceive that Abel
and his Offering was pleasing unto God, when himself and his Offering were both
rejected: It is conceived that fire came down from Heaven and consumed Abel's
Sacrifice, but not Cain's Offering; and by this sign God did discover his
acceptance of the Sacrifices in following Ages, Lev. 9.24. 1 Kings 18.38. 1 Chronicles. 21.26. 2 Chronicles. 27.1. But if this had not been by God's own appointment,
it would not have pleased him; for will worship God is not delighted in: if it
had not been commanded by God, it had not been obedience in Abel, and if it had
not been obedience, it would not have been pleasing to God; for has the Lord
as great delight in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of
the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat
of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22.

Abel did by faith what he did in sacrificing unto God. Heb. 11.4. 2. Fide
oblata fuerunt sacrificiis ab initio, sunt autem (...) in religione fides and
(...). Haec enim habet (...), illa autem nititur divinae revelatione
voluntatis, ut qui cultus Deo ex fide praestatur sit obedientia. Cloppenburgh.
Sacrific. Schol.
But faith must be bottomed upon some signification of the Will of God, and
must be done by virtue of some command, if done in faith; else there is no
ground nor reason to believe that what is done will be pleasing unto God.

That there was religious worship in Adam's Family, 2. A non scripto ad non
factum non valet consequentia. Inter primam promissionem de ventura semine
mulieris and primum sacrificium, non relinquimus ullum temporis intervallum --
Munit hanc sententiam nostram Apostolus docens vetus foedus absque sanguine
dedicatum non fuisse, and absque sanguinis effusione non fieri remissionem,
Heb. 9.18, 22. Hinc enim consequens est, vel cum promissione illa de venturo
semine mulieris nullam factam esse foederis Dei cum bomine spiritualis
instaurationem, qua peccato um remissionem speraret and crederet, vel non esse
factum (...) qui est sacrificiorum character. Cloppenburgh. Sacrif. Schol.
and so handed down from his to others, appears in that Adam did yield
obedience to the command of God given to him concerning Sacrifices and other
duties belonging to it, and did educate his children in the same. Though we do
not read that Adam did sacrifice and pray to God, yet it does not follow that
he did not. The great wickedness of Cain, and the martyrdom of Abel gave
occasion to this first mention of their offering; but it is not likely that
this was the first offering made to God; for do you think that Adam and Eve had
so many Sabbaths before Cain and Abel were born and brought up, that they kept
none of them? No, not one? Or that they spent their time and days in the
matters of the World, in the total neglecting of God and their own Souls? If
any be so uncharitable, let them consider these three things.

1. Had not Adam and Eve sad experience of the difference of being under God's
favor and his frowns, of being filled with the sense of his love, and fears of
his wrath? Were there ever any in the world that knew both these as our first
Parents did? the one in the state of Innocence, the other after their Apostasy?
When God himself came to look after these transgressors of his Law, and to
arraign them at his Bar, and convince them of the evil they had done, and
pronounce sentence upon them for the same, and cursed the one and the other,
and the earth for their sakes, and drove them out in anger from that
delightful, pleasant Paradise in which at first they were placed by God, were
they not terrified now by the anger of the Lord, as they were before delighted
in his love?

Adamus cum totius generis humani esset pater familias and promissionem seminis
victricis posteris omnibus praedicandam acceperit, illius officii nexu, and
naturae and positivi praecepti juris virtute tenebatur. Officio isti cum non de
fuisse, plurima sunt quae suadent. Munere enim mandato ut sedulo fungeretur,
effecerunt sine dubio beneficum a Deo maximum recens acceptum, sui generis amor
and misericordia, a^que in quem sta^um per peccatum redegisset miseres posteros
sensu^^ tenerrimus. Tota itaque illius familia, ipso curante and regente, hoc
est totum in universum humanum genus, nemine excepto, dei erat ecclesia, in qua
fides observantia, and cultus religiosus viguerunt. Doct. Owen de not. ortu,
etc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 2.
2. Then add to this and consider, Did not God after this out of his abundant
grace and mercy toward them lying in this misery, preach recovering grace by
and through his own Son? Genesis 3.15. q. d. Adam thou art a lost man, Yes Lord I
see I am: Thou art exposed to my wrath, and to the death that I did threaten,
if thou did disobey, Yes Lord so I am: Adam and Eve, you two have undone your
selves and all the world, and plunged your selves and them into the depth of
misery, and are exposed to my wrath and justice for ever, Yes Lord so it is, so
it is, woe unto us, so it is. Well, but yet out of my mere mercy and free grace
I will help you out of this condition, I have a remedy for you, I have kindness
for you Sinners, for you Rebels, and such that all the Angels in Heaven could
not have thought of, for you poor Sinners, and that is, my own Son shall be
your Surety, shall become a man and suffer in your nature, and bear the
punishment of your sin, he shall dye and you shall live, he shall suffer and
you shall be saved, if you will yet consent to the terms of a new Covenant,
after you have violated the former, and this shall come to pass at the time
that I have appointed; in the mean while you shall offer such Sacrifices to me,
and pray unto me for your pardon and my grace, and these Sacrifices shall be
Types of this promised Savior, and it shall be through him, but not for these
that I will have mercy on you. Do you not think that these glad tidings did
wonderfully affect their hearts? Do you not think that this grace and kindness
in their sad condition, at the first manifesting of it, did strongly oblige
them to yield obedience to what God should reveal to them to be his Will? Or do
you think that neither the sense of their before desperate condition, when they
saw no way of help or hope, nor the sense of this grace and mercy did stir them
up to hearken to the commands that God would give them? Is it likely that they
did not go together and praise God for such love as this? Do but consider what
they did enjoy before they fell, and what their fears were after; and then how
much must this first tidings of mercy needs affect their hearts, and engage
them to obedience.

3. That our first Parents had religious Worship in their Family, appears by
the religious education of their Children. Do you think that when they had
undone their children, and yet God had discovered a way of salvation to them,
that they did not timely tell their children of this? Had they exposed their
childrens souls to Hell and to damnation, and yet not tell them and teach them
God's gracious dealings with them, by which it might be prevented? Do you think
that they did not pray with them, that themselves and theirs might be indeed
partakers of this mercy? Is it likely that Adam and Eve did not acquaint their
children how God did make them in a blessed condition, and how they lost it,
and how God himself had been with them after they had so offended, and made
known a way of salvation to them? Would not their natural affection to their
children, and the sense of God's mercy, put them on to instruct them in these
things, and praise God with them for his love, and pray for the certain fruits
and benefits of it?

Obj. This might make it probable, Vnde ha^uerunt Cain and Abel quod
sacrificiis Deum honorarent? a patre suo qui eos instituit. Fag. Lyra.

Ex Dei instinctu aut verbo primi parents obtulerunt. Oleast.

Constat cultum aliquem externum Majestati divinae fuisse institutum, and a
patre Adamo de eo fuisse instructos Cainem and Ab^lem. Rivet.

Cain obtulit non fide, sed pro consuetudine paternae institutionis. Musculus.

Deus d cuit Adam cultum divinum, quo ejus benevolentiam recuperaret, quam per
peccatum amiserat, ipsumque docuisse filios suos dare Deo decimas and primitias.


but there is nothing in Scripture from whence you can conclude it.

Ans. But there is. The express mention of Cain's and Abel's offering does
plainly prove that they were thus brought up in the worship of God: Cain though
he had no grace, yet did make a prof^ssion of Religion. And that they were
instructed in the things before expressed is the Judgment of learned men, who
conclude that Adam received instructions from God, and Cain and Abel from their
Father Adam. And Abel's Sacrifice being accepted, does fully prove that he did
understand the fall and recovering grace by Messiah then to come; for was God
pleased with the Sacrifice it self and for it self, that Abel did bring? There
never was any thing in them to reconcile God to Sinners, but they were types
and shadows of good things to come, and they pointed unto Christ: Abel then
must understand this. Besides, Abel did offer by faith; in whom? in Christ to
come; then he was instructed in the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ, and this
does suppose a lost estate. Moreover it is said Heb. 11.4. That by this faith
Abel obtained a testimony that he was righteous: What? By the Works he did? By
the Sacrifice it self that he off^red? Is any Sinner justified from the
condemning sentence of the Law by Works of his own? No, but Abel was justified
by faith in Christ, signified by the Sacrifice which he did offer; for without
a Mediator there is no peace with God, no pardon from God, no justification
before God, no acceptance with him for any sinful man. There were then
religious duties in Adam's Family and that by God's command and appointment.

Obj. But this was offering of Sacrifice; what is this to Prayer, or to us,
when the way of Sacrificing is abolished?

Ans. 1. Do you think they did Sacrifice and not pray when they did so?
Pone^que manum, etc. quo protestebatur se dignum qui pro peccato, jugularetur.
Oleast. in loc. Quae lex instituit oblationem sacrificiorum, eadem praecipit
quoque orationes Deo fieri, quia absque orationibus illa peragi nequeunt.
Hoornbeck. Socin. confu. tom. 2. p 431. The offerer laid his two hands between
the horns of the Sacrifice, and confessed his sin over a sin-Offering -- in
this wise, I have sinned, I have done Perversely I have rebelled, and done thus
and thus; but I return by repentance before thee, and let this be my expiation.
Lightfoot. Temp. Service, c. 8.
Did they not confess their sin when Sacrifice was off^red? and acknowledge that
they deserved to dye for their sins, and this was signified by a man's laying
his hand upon the head of the burnt-Offering, Lev. 1.4. Prayer then usually
accompanying Sacrificing, Heb. 10.3. the one does infer the other. Luke 1.10.
And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of
incense.

If such Sacrifices are ended, yet there are Sacrifices for Christians to offer
up to God; your selves, your hearts, your prayers and praises, Romans 12.1. Heb.
13.15. And there are the same moral grounds and reasons why you should serve
God in your Families, in the way prescribed by God since the coming of Christ,
as there was why they should serve God in their Families, in the way of Worship
appointed by God before the coming of Christ.

Ans. 2. And this was not practiced only in Adam's Family, but by godly
Families after too. So Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.24. and Noah, Genesis 6.9.
which implies their universal sincere obedience, at home as well as abroad;
and that this implies their worshipping God in their Families, I think for this
reason, because if a man be never so great a Professor abroad, if he totally
and constantly neglect God's worship at home, nay if it be not constantly done
(except in some cases that might fall out) he shall not be accounted to be one
that walks with God. I judge that man cannot be said to walk with God, that in
his house with his Family does not Kneel before him. Besides Abraham's duty was
comprehended in this phrase, Walk before me, Genesis 15.1. but Abraham in his walk
took his Household along with him. Genesis 18.19. He will command his children and
his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord: the way in
which his household should walk; and by the way of the Lord, is often
understood the worship of God.

One place more I would have considered for conjunct Prayer of a domestic
combination, which is concerning Isaac, Genesis 25.21. We read it, And Isaac
entreated the Lord for his Wife. Heb. (...) Two words especially make for our
purpose: Ea praesente and una cum illa. Junius. Simul cum uxore, cum qua
communicabat preces. Fagi.

(...) orare quidem significat, sed non simpliciter, quia assiduitatem and
importunitatem simul connotat, and precum multiplicationem -- Res convenit, non
enim dubium est, tam longo tempore, Isaacum saepi^^s interpellasse Deum, fretum
spe promissionum. Rivet. in loc.


That which is translated [for his Wife] might be read with his Wife, in the
presence of his Wife, being with him and joining with him in this duty, He
prayed for and before his Wife; it was then conjunct Prayer, Isaac praying with
his Wife. The other word translated [entreated] signifies to multiply
powerful words in Prayer, to pour out words in abundance, and denotes, (1.)
The multiplying of his Prayers; it was not only once, but frequently that he
prayed with his Wife. (2.) The earnestness of his Prayer. (3.) The continuance
and their perseverance therein, till they had the mercy prayed for; as follows,
and the Lord was entreated of him. Isaac had been married near twenty years
with Rebekah, and so long without a child; so that it seems they had been
exercised in this duty for many years upon this account, that Rebekah had no
child for so long time, for which they did unanimously and constantly offer up
prayers to God: and if they prayed together for issue, should not you for the
favor of God, pardon of sin, interest in Christ, and eternal life?

By all you see, that there was Family conjunct worship and praying to God by
God's command and appointment, and approved by God's acceptance of it. Now let
any one show where God has taken off this obligation; if God has any where
said, though I did appoint Adam to worship me in his Family, and did accept of
Abel 's offering, that did as I commanded, and did hear Isaac- praying together
with his wife, yet now I will be prayed to in Families no more, show it if you
can, What book, chapter and verse is it?

because there was no other to worship him with: but when men did multiply, and
there were public Assemblies, men were not bound to do it?

Public Worship has disobliged men from praying to God in their Families?

When men were multiplied, Godly men did serve God in their Families: Abraham
did, and Isaac did, and Job did, and Joshua did, and Cornelius did. Did they do
it, and were they not bound to do it? What will you make of all the Worship and
Prayers which these did give and offer up to God in their Houses? If there was
no obligation upon them, they had not sinned if they had omitted it, and it was
no obedience, when they did so. Will you say either of these? What! Were they
Works of Supererogation? No surely.

But when Aaron 's Priesthood was instituted, then the obligation on Families
ceased, and after that the Israelites did not pray in their Houses.

Why will you speak without Book? Show me this either. Answ.
I have proved an obligation by God's institution; show me where it is nulled
and made void, even after the Aaronical Priesthood was instituted.

But I say they did pray in their houses after this; for after the institution
Aaron's Priesthood, the Israelites celebrated the Passover in their own
Houses, and that was not done without Prayer. For though after the Priesthood
was settled, the Priests killed the Lamb, yet after the Lamb was killed, the
Master of the house caused it to be brought back to his own house, and did eat
it with his Family, Luke 22.7, 8.9, 10. And the Cup that was used at the
Passover (whether it were Sacramental or no is controverted) was blessed by
the Master of the Family; Weemes.
so that there was Prayer and Praise attending this celebration in their Houses
conjunctly after the Priesthood was settled: in which service they had also the
exp^ication of it, why they kept it, what was the meaning of the bitter herbs,
and why eaten with unleavened bread, done in form of Catechizing: Godw. Jew.
Antiq.
and in their Feasts the Master of the House prayed before and after; after he
gave thanks (1) For their present food. (2) For their deliverance from Egyptian
bondage. (3) For the Covenant of Circumcision. (4) For the Law given by the
ministry of Moses: then he prayed that God would have mercy (1) On his People
Israel. (2) On his own City Jerusalem. (3) On Sion the Tabernacle of his Glory.
(4) On the Kingdom of the House of David his anointed. (5) That he would send
Elias the Prophet. (6) That he would make them worthy of the days of the
Messiah, and of the life of the World to come. Do you not call this conjunct
Prayer and Praise, thus done by the Master of the Family? May we not now with
confidence of the truth from all, under this last Topic or Head of Argument,
frame this manner of reasoning?

Arg. 6. If serving of God and praying conjunctly to him in proper Families,
was commanded and appointed by God, and never yet revoked; then it is the duty
of proper Families so to do.

But serving of God and praying to him conjunctly in proper Families was
commanded and appointed by God, and never yet revoked.

Therefore it is the duty of proper Families so to do. Pareus Deorum cultor and
infrequem, Insanientis dum sapientiae Consultus erro, nunc retrorsum vela dare,
atque iterare cursus cogor relictos. Horat. lib. 1. Od. 34.


So much for the first Question.
Question Second.
Whether it be the duty of Families jointly to pray to God daily? Aff.

Some that are convinced that Family Prayer is a duty, will sometimes practice
it, and yet but seldom; some upon the Lord's Day, and yet but once then, in the
Evening, and that serves for all the week, till the evening of the Lord's day
next does come: Others pray once a day through the week, but omit it in the
morning, when yet the very same reasons which should move them to do it at all
should be cogent for more frequent performance of it, and are so. Though it be
not determined expressly in the Scripture that Christian Families should pray
together morning and evening every day, yet in the general it is required that
we should continue in Prayer, Col. 4.2. which seems to be meant of Family
Prayer: For the Apostle had been speaking to Family relations, Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, and treating of Family
relative duties, carrying on his speech still to the same persons, says,
continue in Prayer; but such as make such great gaps, as from one Lord's day to
another, cannot be said to continue therein. Praceptum est generale, ut
serviamus Deo cunctis vi^e nostr^e diebus. Luke 1.75. Ille igitur cultus, qui
commode possit quotidie frequenta^i, non debet ullo die omitti. Sed oration
[etiam cum domesii. is] est talis: Ergo. Ames. Cas. Consc.
We have general precepts to serve God all the days of our lives, Luke 1.75.
So that that worship for which we have opportunity every day, should no day be
omitted; but Families have, or may have such opportunities every day, if they
be well ordered, and wisely governed as they ought to be: particulars are
commanded under generals; God has commanded us to preserve our own lives and
the lives of others, and therein is included food and physic, etc. yet God
has not expressly commanded, that we shall eat once or twice or thrice a day,
nor how often we shall take physic, yet we do these as often as we find we
need them. Know your selves, feel your own spiritual wants, and do so as to
Prayer, and we need to say no more upon this subject. But because we are not so
sensible of the wants of our Souls, as of our Bodies, and are not so easily
brought with frequency to our knees in our Families together, as to sit down at
our Tables together, Quoad dispesitionem and preparationem cordis ad orandum,
debemus perpetuo illam retinere: quoad actum orationis, debemus occasionem
omnem capere and captare illius exercendi. Similis phraesis 2 Samuel 9.13.
Mephibosheth semper comedebat in mensa regis. Ames Cas. Cons.

Cum fenestras suas aperiret versus Jerusalem, hoc symbolo and sibi and
domesticis suis ostendere voluit, se perseverare in sp. and fiducia promissae
redemptionis. Calv. in loc.


something must be said to show the reasonableness, usefulness, and necessity
of daily praying to God in our Houses.

We are commanded 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. to pray without ceasing. Ephesians. 6.18 Praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance. We should always be habitually disposed to pray, and
should actually be engaged in it, as we have occasion and opportunity, and
watch for such praying seasons. Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every
thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known unto God: but can such be said to answer these commands, that do not pray
at all? Is praying always, and not at all, all one? or is continually and
seldom all one and the same? or does praying without ceasing, and ceasing to
pray all the week long, import and signify the same thing? nothing less.
Frequency then is expressly commanded.

Set before you the example of Daniel: Dan. 6.10. Now when Daniel knew that the
writing was signed, he went into his House, and his windows being open in his
Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and
prayed and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. Where may be
observed, (1) The place, He prayed in his own house, and why not with his
household? for if it had been in secret alone, Daniel might have found out in so
large an house, as such a great man as he was had, some retired Closet, where
the Nobles that waited to accuse him, might not have known that he did pray.
Mane orandum est -- recedente item sole, ac die cessante, necessario rursus
orandum est. Cyprian. in Orat. Dominic.
(2.) The circumstance of time, three times a day; in the morning before he
went to his employments, at noon, when he came home to eat meat, and at night,
before he went to sleep. These three times a day David observed for Prayer
also: Psalm. 55.17. Evening and morning and noon will I pray, and he shall hear
my voice. (3.) The danger he was in, if he prayed, of being cast into the Lions
Den, and yet he prayed thrice a day, even in hazard of his life. (4.) That this
was his usual practice; for he did thus afore-time. (5.) From the event we
might gather how pleasing this was to God, who did so miraculously deliver and
save him by stopping of the Lions mouths.

The Jews had their daily Sacrifices morning and evening. Number. 28.3. Thou shall
say unto them, this is the Offering made by fire, which ye shall offer unto the
Lord: two Lambs of the first year without spot day by day, for a continual
Burnt-offering: v. 4. The one Lamb shall thou offer in the morning, and the
other Lamb thou shall offer at even. By this daily Sacrifice they showed their
thankfulness to God, and expected from him a blessing upon themselves, upon
their labors and their rest. And is there not as much reason that Christians
under the Gospel should worship God morning and evening, and pray unto him?
Take these reasons for it,

Reason 1.
Because we receive every day Family mercies from the hand of God. 1. (1)
Alorationem statam quotidi: hibendam a Deo viriis beneficiis invitamur.

Commoda, quibus utimur, Luce^que qua fruimur, spiritu nque quem ducimus, ab co
[Deo] nobis dari atque impertiri vidimus. Cicero. pro Ros. Ameri.

Ante omnes actus seculi debemus actus habere pictatis, qui nos quiescentes and
dormientes in l^ctulis custodivit: quis enim nisi Deus dormientem custodit
hominem? qui ita resolutus in s^mnum, and oblitus sui vigoris humani, a se
alienus efficitur, ut ne sciat quid ipse sit, ubinam demoretur, adesse sibi
ipsi certe non p^ssit. Necessarius igitur Deus adest dormientibus, quia do
mientes sibi adess^ non possunt; and a nectu^nis insidiis genus hominum ipse
custodit; quia id temporis ad custodiendum alter nemo pervigilat: debeo ergo
illi gratiam* quia, ut ego securus dormiam, lie pe^vigilat -- Sed and cum
vespera diem claudit, ipsi debemus per Psalteriam laudem dicere, and gloriam
ejus modulata voce concinere. Ambros. lib. Sermon. Sermon. 23.


He loads us daily with his benefits, Psalm. 68.19. When you wake in the
morning, and find your dwelling safe, not consumed with fire, not broke through
by thieves, is not this a Family mercy? When you wake and find none dead in
their beds, that news is not brought you in the morning, there is one Child
dead in one bed, and another in another, and there is not a lodging room in the
house, but the last night one or other died in it; but on the contrary, you
find all well in the morning, and refreshed by the rest and sleep of the night;
are not these, and many more such mercies to the Family, that when you rise,
you should call them altogether jointly to bless God for? If it had been
otherwise, Master or Mistress dead, Children or Servants dead, would not the
rest say, It would have been a mercy to us all if God had spared him, her, or
them? if your house had been consumed by flames, and God had turned you all out
of doors before morning, would you not have said, It would have been a mercy if
God had safely preserved us and our dwellings? and caused us to rest and sleep
and rise in safety? Why Sirs, will you not acknowledge mercies to be mercies,
till God has taken them away from you? and if you do, should you not give the
praise daily unto God? Was it not God himself that watched over you, while you
did sleep, and could not, did not, watch your selves? When you all did sleep,
you knew not where you were, nor what dangers you were exposed unto, nor how
you might prevent them, but God then was good unto you; and should you not
conjunctly acknowledge this when you do wake and rise and see that God has kept
you, and do enjoy the comfort and the benefit of his watchful Providence over
you? Psalm. 127.1. -- Except the Lord keep, the City, the Watchman waketh but in
vain. 2. -- for so he gives his beloved sleep.

And as you have had many Family mercies in the night to bless God for in the
morning; so you have many Family mercies in the day, to give thanks to God for
at night before you go to bed. If you see not cause to acknowledge God's
goodness toward you, you are blind, if you do and have not hearts, you are
worse. Methinks you should not quietly sleep till you have been together on
your knees, least God should say, this Family that has not acknowledged my
mercy to them this day, nor given me the glory of those benefits, of which to
them I gave the comfort, shall never see the light of another day, nor have the
mercies of one day more to bless me for: When sleep does close their eyes, so
shall death too: they shall live no longer, and rise no more: this night they
shall go to their beds, and the day or two after shall be carried to their
graves. I wonder Sirs, that you do not dream of an angry God, because thus
slighted by you: I wonder that you do not dream of some sore judgment or other
that might overtake you before the Sun does rise. What if God should say unto
you when you are laid down in your beds, THIS NIGHT your Souls shall be
required of you, you that went to bed before you had given me the praise of the
mercies that I had given unto you all the day, and before you had prayed for my
protection over you in the night? and should send some sudden sickness to make
you feel that he is offended with you for this neglect? might not God say,
shall I keep and preserve that Family till the morning, that would not so much
as ask me so to do? and if I do, will not acknowledge it to be a mercy or a
kindness to them? Take heed, though God be patient, do not provoke him.

Reason 2.
You should pray to God daily in your Families, because there are sins
committed every day in your Families. 2. (2.) Ad candem a defectibus nostris
excitamur.
Do you indeed sin together, and will you not pray together, what if you should
be damned all together? Does not every member of your Family commit many sins
every day? How great is the number then of all, when considered or put
together? What! so many sins every day under your roof, within your walls,
committed against the glorious, blessed God, and not one Prayer? one sin should
be lamented with a thousand tears, but you have not one tear shed by one, and
another by another, in Prayer together for a thousand sins? Is this to repent
daily, when you do not confess them daily? Would you have God to pardon all the
sins of your Family? say, would you or no? If you would not, God might justly
let you go to your Graves and Hell too, with the guilt of sin upon your Souls.
If you would, is not pardon worth asking for? Would you have it, and not beg it
at the hands of God? would not all judge that man worthy of death, that being
justly condemned, might yet have life for asking for, and will not? How do you,
how can you quietly go to your beds, and sleep with the guilt of so many sins
upon your Souls? and have not prayed to have them blotted out? What do you take
to make you sleep? What is your pillow made of, that your heads can rest upon
it, under the weight and load of so much guilt? Is indeed your bed so soft, or
your heart so hard, that you can rest and sleep, when to all the sins of
commission in the day, you add this sin of omission in the evening? Lay to
heart your daily Family sins, and you will feel a reason why you should pray to
God in your Families daily.

Reason 3.
3. You should pray in your Families daily unto God, (3.) Ad eandem plerisque
tum cerporaelium, tum spiritualium bonorum indigentiis premimur.

(...) quia (...).

Indiget vir viro, sed omnes Deo, etiam Hercules. (...). Homer. Od. lib. 8.
Omne bonum Dei donum.


because you have many daily Family wants, which none can supply but God. God
wants not your Prayers, but you and yours want God's mercies, and if you will
have them, should you not pray for them? Can you supply your Families wants? If
they want health, can you give it them? If they want bread can you give it
them, except God first give it unto you? Why then did Christ direct us to pray,
Give us this day our daily bread? If they want grace, can you work it in them?
or do you not care though they die without it? Is not God the giver of every
good gift? Jam. 1.17. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the Father of lights -- Mercies are above, and good things are from
above, and prayer is a means appointed by God to fetch them down. Jam. 1.5. If
any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God. Do you think you do not want wisdom
to discharge your duties to God and man? that you do not want wisdom to manage
your family for their temporal, spiritual, and eternal good? If you think so,
you are fools, and if you think you want it not, by those very thoughts you may
discern your want of it. If you think you have enough, it is plain that you
have none, and should you not ask it of God if you would have it? If you and
yours want health in your Family, should you not ask it of God? Can you live
without dependence upon God, or can you say you have no need of God's help to
supply your wants? then you speak contradictions; for to be under wants, and
not to be dependent beings is a contradiction; to think you do not live in
dependence upon God, is to think you are not men, nor creatures: and if you do
depend on him, and want his help to supply your wants, your own indigency
should bring you upon your knees, to pray to him, as the Heathen Poet's Verse
(which Melancthon said was the best Verse in all Homer) does express.

(...). Hom. Od. l. 3.
All men need God, therefore should Prayers use.
Reason 4.
4. You should pray in your Families DAILY, because of your Families daily
employments and labors. Ad candem q o ^dianis operibus promovendis permovemur.
Every one that puts his hand to work, his head to contrive, should set his
heart to pray: for will not your trading be in vain, and your laboring and
working, your carking and projecting for the world, be to no purpose without
the blessing of God? Will you be convinced if God himself does tell you? Then
read Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house, Panis multis laboribus,
cu^isque conquisitus. Geierus.

Panis plenus aerumnarum, and maximis molestiis par^u. Vatablus.

Nec ita fidendum industriae, ut divinam opem negligamus; nec ita rursum
pendendum ab illa, ut nostrum praetermittam^^ officium. Erasmus.

(...). Hierocles in aureo comment. in aurea Pythagor. carmina, p. 233. etc.


they labor in vain that build it -- v. 2. It is in vain for you to rise up
early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows -- Bread of sorrows! What
bread is that? Bread gotten with much care and labor and toil, is bread of
sorrows. Without God you labor to get bread for your selves and Families in
vain; you might miss of it after all your labors: and without God's blessing,
if you eat it when you have got it with much toil and care, you eat it in vain;
for without him it cannot nourish your Bodies: And yet is it not necessary to
pray to God to prosper and succeed you in your Callings? Prayer and labor
should both promote what you aim at: To pray and not to do the works of your
Callings would be to expect supplies wh le you are negligent; to labor and
trade and not to pray, would be to hope for increase and provision without God.
Religion, that puts you upon holy duties, does not teach you to neglect your
Callings, nor yet to trust to your own endeavors without praying unto God; but
both are to keep their place and have a share of your time. Prayer is a middle
thing betwixt God's giving and our getting. How can you receive if God do not
give? And why do you expect that God will give, if you do not ask? Jam. 4. Ye
have not because ye ask not. What ye work for, pray f^r, and what ye pray for,
work and labor for; and this is the true conjunction of labor and prayer. Or
will you be like to them the Apostle speaks to, Jam. 4.13. Go to now ye that
say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue there a
year, and buy and sell and get gain: You will; but will you not ask leave from
God whether you shall or no? You will go: What! though God cast you upon a bed
of sickness, or into your graves? do if you can. You will continue there a
year: What! if death drag you out as soon as you come there? if death fetch
your bodies to the dust and grave, and Devils fetch your souls to Hell, after
this will you continue in such a City for a year? If one part of you be in the
grave, and the other part in Hell, what is left of you to continue in the City?
You will buy and sell, will you? What if God give you neither money nor credit?
With whom I wonder? And you will get gain, you are resolved upon it, you will
thrive and prosper and grow rich. What if God curse your endeavors and say you
shall not? You will all this, and you would have your Will, but your power is
not equal to your Will. Here is much Will but not a word of Prayer: A Heathen
will teach you a better lesson, and that is, that you should not go unto your
work, nor to your Shops and Callings, till you have first prayed unto God.

-- (...)
(...). Pythagoras.
Nullius est foelix conatus and utilis unquam
Consilium si non detque juvetque Deus.
Reason 5.
You should pray to God in your Families daily, Ad candem ab hostibus animarum
nostrarum, diabolique insidiis urgemur.
because you are all every day liable to temptations. As soon as you wake the
Devil will be striving for your first thoughts, and when you are risen, he will
be urgent with you to do him the first service, and attend you all the day to
draw you into some heinous sin before night: and is the Devil a subtle,
watchful, powerful enemy, and unwearied, and do you not all need to get
together in the morning, that Satan might not prevail against any of you
before night, till you come to God together again? How many temptations might
you meet with in your Callings, and your company, which without God you will
not be able to resist? And how might you fall and dishonor God, discredit your
profession, defile your souls, disturb your peace, and wound your consciences?
This Origin bewailed in his lamentation, for that day he omitted prayer he
hainously sinned. -- But I, O unhappy creature, skipping out of my bed at the
dawning of the day, could not finish my wonted devotion, neither accomplish my
usual prayer -- folded and wrapped my self in the snares of the Devil. Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 1.

Reason 6.
6. You should pray in your Families daily, Ad candem variis casibus
imminentibus instigamur.
because all in your Families are liable to daily hazards, casualties and
afflictions; and prayer might prevent them, or obtain strength to bear them,
and prepare you for them. Do you know what affliction might befall your Family
in a days time, or in a nights time? either in regard of sickness, death, or
outward losses in your estate? Might not you hear of one man's breaking in your
debt, and gone away with so much, and another gone away with so much: and are
you indeed so vveaned from the World, that this shall not put you into a
passion, and cause you to sin against God, or that you can bear it without
murmuring and discontent, that you need not pray for a composed frame of heart,
if such things befall you? Do you know if you go abroad your self, or send a
Son or Servant, that you or they may return alive again? though you go out
alive, you may be brought back again dead: had you not then need to pray to God
in the morning that he would keep you in your goings forth and comings in? and
bless him together in the evening, if he do? How many evils is man exposed to,
whether he be at home or abroad? Anacreon lost his life by the kernel of a
Raisin going wrong down his throat. (...) nihil firmum, nihil tutum, nec murus
ahenc^^, nec arx Adam^n^ina.
Fabius a Senator of Rome, in a draught of Milk swallowing a small hair, was
strangled. Plin. not. hist. Do not your daily sins cry aloud for daily
punishments, and should you not in daily Prayer cry as loud that God in mercy
would prevent them, or if they come upon you to sanctify them for your good,
or remove them, or if they remain, to support you under them? Know indeed that
you are no where safe without God's protection, night or day; If your houses
were built upon foundations of stone, and the Walls were made of brass or
adamant, and the doors of Iron, yet you would be no longer safe than God
protects you from all dangers: Pray then.

Reason 7.
7. You must pray to God in your Families daily, Ad candem Ethnicorum exemplis
provocamur.
or the very heathen will rise up against you Christians, and condemn you.
Those that never had the means of Grace, as you have had, nor a Bible to direct
and teach them, as you have, nor Ministers sent to them, as you have had in
abundance, do shame many that are called Christians, and go for great
Professors too. When I have read the sayings of some Heathen, showing what they
were wont to do, and consider and know the practice and negligence of many
Christians in their Families, I have been ready to conclude, the heathen to be
the better men. It was their manner to sacrifice to their Gods morning and
evening, that they might have the favor of them, and be successful in their
outward estates, as you may learn from their Poets.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
Hesiod. (...). l. 1. Which I render thus, With all thy might to God immortal
bring
Holy and pure the best Burnt-offering,
That he appeased might be by Sacrifice
When thou lie down, and when the Sun does rise.
In him to thee a pleased heart shall dwell,
And thou shall purchase, when shall others sell.


Another, (...) Homer. Odys. l. 3. Do not the Heathens shame many of you? they
were wont to say, now we have sacrificed, let us go to bed; you say, now we
have supped let us go to bed; or let us play a game or two at cards and go to
bed. Are you men, or swine in the shape of men? Mr. Perkins likened such to
swine that live without Prayer in their Families, which are always feeding upon
the mast with greediness, but never look up to the hand that beats it down, nor
to the tree from whence it falls. Christian oecono. So much for the second
Question.

Question III.
How Family Prayer might be so managed, that it might be for the spiritual
benefit of every one in the Family? For answer to this,

1. Something must be considered in reference to the Master of the Family, that
is the mouth of the rest to God: or Rules concerning this duty.

2. Something in reference to those who are to join: or Rules for them.

3. Something in reference to Governors and Governed conjunctly; or Rules
common to both for the better performance of Family Prayer, that it might be
for the good and benefit of all.

The directions that chiefly concern the Master of the Family are these.

Direction I.
1. Let the Master of the Family exercise his Authority in the good Government
of his household. He is to be the foreman in the worship of God in the Family.
Mr. Perkins writes thus, That the Master of the Family has the proper
government of the whole household, and he comes not to it by election -- but by
the Ordinance of God, settled even in the order of nature -- and by the light
of nature has the principality and sovereignty therein; he is Pater-Familias,
the father and chief head of the Family -- and ought therefore to bear the
chief stroke, and to be the principal agent, director and furtherer of the
worship of God in his Family, and to keep order, and to exercise discipline in
his house. Let him improve his Authority in commanding and causing every one in
his house under his charge to be present, and to attend upon God in Family
Prayer: God and Nature have made him the head of all the rest; and the head is
to govern, rule, direct, and influence the whole Body. Let him also take care
to purge his house from sin, and to his utmost power endeavor that none in his
house live in gross sins, that there be no swearers, drunkards, and openly
profane sinners under his roof.

Thus Jacob purged his house, when he was with them to worship God.
Family-Reformation tends much to the better and more profitable managing of
Family Prayer, Genesis 35.1. And God said unto Jacob, arise, go up to Bethel and
dwell there, and make there an Altar unto God. v. 2. Then Jacob said unto his
household, and to all that were with him, put away the strange Gods that are
among you, and be clean, and change your Garments. Ver. 3. And let us arise and
go up to Bethel, and I will make there an Altar unto God, This Text speaks of
conjunct Prayer. Allequitur quidem Petrus ma^num and uxorem, dum jubet
concordes esse, ut simul Deum uno animo precentur -- Haec ratio domesticas
omnes turbas and jurgia debet componere, ut in singulis familiis invocetur
Deus. Calvin in 1 Pet. 3.7. Rex est pater-familias (pater patriae) in suo
regno, and pater-familias est rex in sua domo.
-- 4. And they gave unto Jacob all the strange Gods that were in their hand
--. So David, Psalm. 101.6. He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me.
v. 7. He that works deceit shall not dwell with in my house, and he that
tells lies shall not tarry in my sight. Family disorders hinder Family
Prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7. where the Apostle gives directions to Family relations
that their conjunct Prayers might not be hindered, (...): the same word is used
Matthew. 3.10. and is translated, Hewn down, speaking of a tree that brings
not forth good fruit; and in the same sense, Matthew. 7.19. Luke 3.9. It
signifies also to be cut off, Romans 11.22. Unsuitable walking in our houses
strikes at the very root of Family Prayer; Family wickedness is hewing at this
duty, and if not remedied, will cut them short, if it do not cut them quite
down, quite cut them off.

Now this Family reformation lies much on the care of the Master of the
Family, who is to rule as King in his own house. Esther 1.22. Ahasuerus made a
Law, that every man should bear rule in his own house: and God has appointed
the Master of the Family to be (...), ruler of his own house. Kings are Fathers
of their own Countries, and Fathers are Kings in their own houses, in respect
of their rule and authority over them.

(...)
(...) -- Homer. Odys. lib. 1.
-- (...)
(...) -- Idem Odys. 9.
Direction II.
N c sibi, nec aliis utilis.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se

Crimen habet, quanto, qui peccat, major habetur.

Juven. Sat. 8.


2. That Prayer be managed to the spiritual benefit of the Family, the Master
thereof should make it his business to be accomplished with gifts and knowledge
suitable to the place where God has set him. Ignorance in a Master of a Family
renders him incapable of the discharge of the duties of his place, and is worse
than in a Child or Servant. Such a Family is lik a body that has a head
without eyes. It is a shame to see what little knowledge many Governors of
Families have in matters of Religion, that when they should instruct and
catechize their children and servants, need to be catechized themselves. The
Apostle requires this qualification in Masters of Families, that they should
be knowing men; so some interpret this place, 1 Pet. 3.7. as becomes knowing
men. Naturally men are endued with greater powers to understand than women are,
(...).

Viri similite^ una versentur ut scientes decet. Beza. Piscat.

Quid est stultius, quam, quia diu non didiceri^, non discere? Omnis aetatis
homines schola admittit. Tamdu^ d^scendum est, quamdiu nescias, Sen. Epist. 76.


and a Master of a Family has had more time to get knowledge than Children and
Servants have, and if he has not attained to more, it is his shame and
reproach, and renders him more contemptible in the eyes of those that are
subjected to him, who have not that reverent awe of him and his authority as
they would have, if authority were accompanied with knowledge; study then (you
Masters) the Scripture more, and the grounds of Religion more, that you might
be able to manage this duty to the greater profit of all in your Families.

Direction III.
3. It is necessary also to this purpose, that the Master of the Family
instruct each member of his house in the principles of Religion, that they may
be able to understand the matter of the Prayers that are put up to God. For if
the Governor have knowledge how to ask, and those that kneel down with him,
know not the meaning of his words (though commonly used, and plain to them that
have been instructed) how shall they concur in such requests or confessions, or
say Amen to what they do not understand? Or what spiritual profit can they get?
When you lament Original Sin, which you and they were guilty of, and defiled
with, if they know not what this means, nor how they are corrupted even from
their birth, how shall they in Prayer be humbled for it? If you pray that you
may be justified, sanctified, or have the Image of God engraven on your hearts,
that you may have Faith in Christ, repentance for sin, be converted, etc. how
shall they join with you, if they have no knowledge of these things? when they
are ignorant what is meant by the Image of God, by faith, repentance,
conversion, etc. and what benefit can they have by such Prayers, as to their
own concurrence with you, to make these things their own desire? when yet they
are the things you must daily beg of God. That Prayer then might be performed
to their spiritual edification, lay first the foundation, be knowing your
selves, and make them so too; and Prayer will be more advantageously done to
you and them. Nisi prius in nob^s ejusm^di^ affectus exsuscitamus, quos altorum
animis impressos volumus, frustra erit quicquld conamur. Bowl. past. Evang.


Direction IV.
4. That Prayer be managed to the spiritual profit of those in the Family, the
Master of the Family should get his own heart in good frame, and get his own
affections warmed in the duty. Do you come to Prayer with a lively heart, and
quickened affections your selves; your heat might warm them, Quod enim minister
Ecclesiae est in templo, id pius pater-familias esi indomo; ille publico
docendi munere fungitur, hic privatim suam instituit familiam, and ad pietatem
ac ho^^statem d^mesticos suos format. Gerhard. lo. com. de Conjug.
and your earnest importunity might stir them up unto the same: let them see
you are in good earnest by your fervent praying, as becomes men, that are
begging for such things as the life of their souls, the pardon of their sin,
the favor of God, deliverance from hell, and for everlasting happiness.
Whereas if you come to the duty with flat, dull and cold affections, this will
make them so too. As you find it with your selves when you are under a dull and
lukewarm Preacher, you have little workings of affections; so your Family will
find it under your Prayers, if they be such: for as a Minister should get
lively workings in his own breast of those affections, which he would raise in
the People; so should you in Family duties get those workings of love, joy and
sorrow for sin, which you would desire should be in those that join, with you;
for what a Minister is in the Church, that you are (proportionably) in your
house.

Direction V.
Orationis Lex, ut non aliter quam eos decet, qui ad Dei colloquium in
grediuntur, mente animoque compositi simu^. Calv. Inst. l. 3. cap. 20.
5. When you are to set actually on the duty, prepare your Family by some short
advice to carry themselves as becomes those that are going to speak to the
great eternal God: at least sometimes, and the oftener the better. Do not rashly
rush out of your worldly callings into the presence of the glorious God, say to
them to this, or the like purpose, The God we are going to pray unto, is a
holy, just, omniscient God, that looks into all our hearts, that sees and knows
the frame of our spirits, that will not be mocked, and cannot be deceived: All
we are sinful Creatures, that have broke his righteous Laws, and thereby have
deserved hell and everlasting torments; yet this gracious God holds forth his
golden Scepter, and gives us leave to approach his presence, to beg for pardon,
and for Christ, and grace, and heaven; Our wants are great and many too, and
yet our mercies are great and many too, come then, O come, let us with a holy
fear of God put up our joint Petitions, that God would supply our wants,
especially of our souls, and make joint confessions of our sins to God with
humble, broken, penitent hearts, and jointly bless him for the mercies we are
all partakers of; but let us do all, as those that would please God, while we
pray unto him, and not by our carelessness and sloth provoke him while we kneel
before him. Thus Job prepared his household, Solennis erat apud Ethnicos mos
l^vandi manus ante sacrificandum ^ut (...) idem ac (...) apud quosdam
significet.
when he with them did sacrifice to God, Job 1.5. Job sent and sanctified them,
and rose up early in the morning, and offered Burnt-offerings according to the
number of them all -- thus did Job continually. Could Job sanctify his
Children? could Job give them grace? Parents might give their Children
portions, but can they give them holiness too? they might put money into their
purses, but can they put goodness into their hearts? yea, they may advise and
exhort them to get grace, but can they work it too? (...) Hom. Iliad. l. 6.
Is not this bestowed by God, the Author of all Grace? How then did Job
sanctify his children? The meaning is, that Job did what he could to prepare
and dispose them for the religious duties they were entering upon: So the word
Sanctify is often used, Exodus 19.22. Let the Priests sanctify themselves: 2 Chronicles. 30.25. -- and the Priests and Levites were ashamed, and sanctified
themselves -- 17. -- many that were not sanctified: all is explained by
Hezekiah's prayer, v. 18. The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his
heart to seek the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according
to the purification of the Sanctuary.

Direction VI.
6. It will be useful to this purpose, Cui aliis in precando praecunaum, sedulo
perquirat, quae apud suos obtinent peccata; quibus maxim indigent, gratiae;
quibus exercentur, tentationes; quae illos cujuscu que generis premunt,
gr^vamina; quae illis imminent judicia, quae in illos indies confert Deus
beneficia hand aliter suis se inter orandum accomodabit qui non haec omnia in
numerato habet. Bowl. past. Evan.
that the Master of the Family understand the spiritual condition of every one
in the Family, that he may put up requests suitable to their condition. Let him
get a particular knowledge of their wants, doubts, fears, temptations,
afflictions of soul, of their sins, as far as is convenient, and the mercies of
God toward them: for as it is for the spiritual benefit of a people, that
their Minister understand the state of his flock, that so he might study for
them, and preach to them, pray for them, and with them, according as their case
requires; so it will be for the benefit of a Family to have their particular
cases spread before the Lord in Prayer.

Direction VII.
7. Keep seasonable hours for Family Prayer, and take the fittest time when all
might be most free from distraction and disturbance. In the morning put it not
off too long, lest by worldly occasions it be put quite by. Be not too late at
night, when the Family, after weariness by their Callings all the day, will be
more fit to sleep than to pray: Late Prayers are too commonly sleepy Prayers;
one asleep in one place, and another in another, and it may be the Master of
the Family himself prays between sleeping and waking. Be not clubbing abroad
when you should be praying at home; This is in the power of the Governor of
the house to remedy, the other being to be at the hour appointed by him.

Direction VIII.
8. Spend so much time in Family Prayer, that those that join might be
affected; but not so much as to be wearied with the duty. Be not too short, nor
yet too tedious: Not too short, for the heart is not easily tuned, nor the
affections warmed, nor the mind brought into frame; our wants are many, and our
sins are many, and some time must be spent to get the heart sensible of them,
and of God's mercies to us: To rise up from your knees, before these can be
probably done, is to come away no better than you went unto it. This overhasty
brevity argues but little delight in the duty, and shows you care not how
soon you get out of God's special presence; I doubt such as thus slubber over
Family Prayer with so much haste Vt canis e Nilo.
, do it because they may be said to do it, to stop the mouths of others, and
the mouth of their own Conscience, with the work done: And yet too much
prolixity and length of the duty may have its inconveniences also, (...) Pos.
and make it to some graceless persons in the Family, or to others that are
good, but wearied in their daily Callings before, to be burdensome, and they
more backward to it: But the most do not err on this hand, therefore to say
little here will be enough, and leave it to the prudence of the Governor to
consider the persons that join, and other concurring Circumstances, and to act
accordingly. So much for the Directions for the Master of the Family.

Secondly, The Directions for such as are to join in Family Prayer for their
greater benefit. Let them be careful,

Direction I.
1. Direct. That they be all present at the beginning of a duty, and continue
till it be ended. In some Families there is great disorder in this respect;
Servants, either by reason of the backwardness of their hearts, for want of
love to, and delight in Prayer, or by not wisely forecasting their business,
come when the Prayer is half over, or else go out before it is ended, or if at
the beginning and end, yet to look after one thing or other, make breaches and
interruptions in the Prayer, by going out and coming in once or twice or more
in the Prayer-time, which, if possible, should be carefully avoided: for Family
Prayer being ordinarily not very long, to lose any part of it cannot but be to
the detriment and disadvantage of such persons; for when their affections begin
to be warmed, by these interruptions they are cooled and damped again. You
should be more willing to go to your Prayer than to your meat when hungry, by
how much your Souls are better than your bodies, and serving God better than
feeding of the body. If business come when we are eating at our Table, we
commonly let it stay till we have done; what business shall wait upon you in
that case, let it do so also in the other, that you might not lose the benefit
of the Prayer. Numa Pompilius made a Law amongst the Romans, that men should
not serve the Gods as they passed by, or were in haste, or did any other
business; but that they should worship and pray to them, when they had time and
leisure, and all other business set apart. Plutarch.

Direction II.
2. Direct. When you are present at Family Prayer, give diligent attention, and
mind what confessions of sins are made, what petitions are put up, and what
praises are returned to God for mercies received. The Devil will be striving
that you may be absent in Prayer, when you are Cum isto milite praesens absens
ut si^s. Ter. Eu.
present at Prayer; absent in mind when present in body. God is not pleased
with the prostrating of the body, when your hearts join not in the work. Do not
so dissemble on your knees with God and man. Are you then desiring the mercies
prayed for, whether pardon of sin, strength against sin, love to God,
repentance for sin, an interest in Christ, and evidences thereof, when your
minds and thoughts are wandering about other things? Which if they do, let
Conscience call to thee to mind the Vt vivas igitur, vigila, HOC AGE. Hor. l.
2. Sat. 3.
work thou art about; for is not this to sin against God, when you pretend to
be serving of him? and to be provoking of him, when you should be praying to
him to be reconciled unto you, and turn away his anger from you? Conjunct
Prayer should be made with one mouth, and with one mind: Acts 1.14. They prayed
together with one accord (...) Qui recte orare cupit, debet necessario in se
esse collectus, von distractus, aut sensibus dissipatus, aut vagus. Ames. Cas.
Cons.

(...) est vox musica, significat concentum (concentus autem a cantu eo
differt, quod cantus unius sit, concentus non nisi plurium) hic vero concentum
animorum significat. Camer. prael.

Verbo Graeco elegans subest metaphora: (...) de musico vocum concentu,
harmonicoque sono dicitur, tanquam si diceretur, non minus gratam esse Deo
concordem pluriu^ erationem, quam concentus musicus hominum curibus sit gratus.
Novar. in loc. ex Crit. Sac.


: which word is translated Romans 15.6. one mind; that ye may with one mind and
one mouth glorify God: -- but where your thoughts are wandering in Family
Prayer, though there be but one mouth, there be many minds: these persons do
not accord in Prayer, which is great discord before God.

There should be a sympathy and agreement of hearts in conjunct Prayer: Matthew.
16:19. If two of you shall agree on Earth as touching any thing they shall ask
-- A harmony of hearts should be in Prayer: the word is borrowed from
Musicians, when several playing together do make an accord in Music, a consent
of many voices in one; thence translated to the mind, denotes a concent of more
hearts in one: such Prayers make sweet harmony in the ears of God. Keep your
minds fixed then, else though you do agree to go together into one Room to
pray, there will not be an agreement of hearts when you pray.

Direction III.
3. Direct. Those that join should not only attend, but also assent to the
matter of the Prayer, so far as it is agreeable to the Word of God. When the
corruption of the heart is acknowledged, believe that this is true: the misery
of an unregenerate state lamented, believe it to be true: when Grace is prayed
for as necessary to your salvation, and that you are undone without it, believe
this as a most certain truth; for if these things be spoken by him that
prays, and heard by you that join, and not believed, your hearts will not be
humbled when sin is confessed, nor earnest after Grace when it is prayed for,
and so you will lose the benefit of that Prayer.

Direction IV.
4. Direct. Do not only believe these things in Prayer, but make particular
application thereof unto your selves: When original sin is acknowledged, think
and say in your own hearts, Lord, this is my condition, my heart is thus
corrupt, loathsome and vile. When wants are expressed, and supplies begged, go
along with what is said, and apply it particularly to your selves, Lord, this
is my want; the want of Christ is my want, O that he may be given to me! the
want of love to God and delight in him is my want, O that I might love thee! O
that I could love thee! and so in other things, this is my sin, and these are
my doubts and my fears, this is my burden, and this is my temptation, according
as these are insisted on in prayer; and this will make the duty to be for your
spiritual benefit and profit.

These are the Directions for them that are to join with him that is your mouth
to God.

The Directions more common to all, that prayer might be managed to spiritual
profit, are these following.

Direction 1.
Sciamus non alios rite probeque se accingere ad orandum, nisi quos afficit Dei
Majestas. Calv. Inst.

Speculator adstat desuper,
Qui n^s diebus omnibus,
Actu^que nostros prospicit,
A luce prima in vesperam,
Hic testis, hic est arbit r,
Hic intuetur quicquid est
Humana quod men's concipit:
Hunc nemo fallit Judicem.
Aur. Prud. Cathemer. Him. 2. For further direction in this point, how you
should do all in the Name of Christ, see the Sermon. on Col. 3.17.


1. Direct. Get and keep upon all your hearts awful, lively impressions of the
perfection of that God that you pray unto. Take heed of coming with low,
irreverent, unsuitable thoughts of God; but conceive of him, and believe, and
work, and press it upon your hearts, that the God you kneel before is most
holy, most wise, most gracious and merciful, most just, eternal, unchangeable,
all-sufficient, true in his threatenings, righteous in his commands, faithful in
his promises, every where present and knowing all things, that he observes all
your words and ways, and looks into your hearts and thoughts, that this God you
cannot deceive, though you should deceive your selves and one another: Consider
and believe, that this God is present among you, and does know your ends, your
desires, and what you are, as well as who you are: Then think, is this that God
that we are to speak unto, to kneel before, and shall we not so manage this
duty that we might please this God? and if you do, you shall find it shall be
for your spiritual benefit.

Direction 2.
2. Direct. Put up your prayers to this great and glorious God in the name of
Jesus Christ. There is no access for sinners to God but by and through a
Mediator. You shall reap no benefit by praying, except you go in the name of
Christ. Joseph told his Brethren they should not see his face, except they
brought Benjamin with them, Genesis 43.5. nor we the face of God without Christ,
Ephesians. 3, 12. Heb. 7.25. Col. 3.17. Heb. 13.15. This praying in the name of
Christ does not consist in the bare mentioning of his Name with our tongues,
but to pray in obedience to his command, in his strength, for his Glory,
trusting his promises, resting on his merits, expecting audience and acceptance
only for his sake.

Direction 3.
Quid odiosius aut etiam Deo magis execrandum putamus hac fictione, ubi quis
veniam peccatorum postulat, interim aut se peccatorem non esse cogitans, aut
certe peccatorem esse non cogitans? quia Deus ludibrio habetur -- rogando
semper inopiam nostram vere sentiamus, ac serio cogitantes, omnibus, que
petimus, nos indigere -- Generalis quidem and confusus necessitatis suae
affectus illuc eos ducit: sed non cos sollicitat, quasi in re praesenti ut
egestatis suae le vamen petant. Calv. Inst.
3. Direct. Get and keep upon your hearts a true, real, lively sense of your
sins and wants and mercies. Hereby shall every part of prayer, confession,
petition and thanksgiving be more profitably managed, and you better disposed
for the work you have to do upon your knees. Know your sin in the intrinsecal
malignity of it, the vileness of it in its own nature, as it is sin; Know it
also and understand it as to the dreadful consequents of it, in its several
kinds, acts, and aggravations of them. Get also a sense of your wants, and of
the necessity of the things you are to pray for. If you want grace, know that
you want it, and are undone without it; and pray accordingly. Pray as persons
that believe you must be damned, if you are not sanctified, that you must
perish if you do not repent, and pray as men that do believe it. And if you
have grace already in truth, know how much you want of it in respect of growth;
that you love God but a little, which is your shame, and Oh what a blessed
thing were it to love him more! Pray as those that would get at least one
degree of love to God more by every prayer you make. Think seriously what a
little grace you have, (1.) to what you may have, (2.) to what you might have
had, (3.) to what you ought to have, (4.) to what others have, (5.) to what you
need: And that (1.) to fight against such strong corruptions, (2.) to resist
such strong temptations, (3.) to bear such afflictions that might befall you,
(4.) to perform such duties as are required from you, (5.) that you dye at last
with peace, comfort and joy. Know also your mercies: personal, to body, to
soul: relative, what mercy you have one in another, by being made mercies one
to another: Mercies for this life, and the life to come; think how many, how
great, how precious, how suitable, how durable, how sufficient, how satisfying
good, God has given you; himself, Son, Spirit, promises, privileges, much in
hand, and more in hope, and all undeserved. A real abiding sense of these
things will make you think and say, Why me? Lord, why me? and will wind up your
hearts to lively praises (too much neglected in Family duties) so that you
shall find the benefit and sweetness of drawing near to God in prayer.

Direction 4.
4. Direct. Realize invisible things to yourselves, Istuc est sapere, non quod
ante pedes modo est videre, sed etiam illa quae futura su^t prospicere. Ter.
Adelph. Act. 3.
by believing of them as certainly as if you saw them with your eyes. When you
are going to pray, look into the unseen world: stand and take a view of
departed souls, and seriously think what is their state, and what they are
enjoying or suffering, that are already gone into eternity, and from thence
fetch arguments to quicken your hearts when dull, and to be laborious when
slothful, and lively and fervent in your duty. O how would a believing view of
souls in Heaven and Hell help you to pray in prayer! Suppose then you saw the
glorious Saints in Heaven, and the happiness they there enjoy, in that they
shall sin no more, and suffer no more, and be tempted no more, and sigh and
sob, nor weep nor sorrow any more for ever: all sin is expelled from those
glorious souls, and all tears are wiped from their eyes, and now are full of
love to God, solacing themselves in the perfect, perpetual and immediate
suition of the chiefest good; and then think, this is the state that I am
hoping for, and looking, longing, waiting for, and that now I am going to beg
and pray I may be fitted and prepared for, and hereafter be possessed of: and
then pray as becomes such that unfeignedly desire to be partakers of their joy
and felicity.

Again stand and take a view of poor damned Souls, and suppose you saw them
with your eyes rolling in a lake of burning Brimstone, full of the fury of the
Lord: Suppose you heard their direful execrations, their doleful outcries,
their hideous roarings, and bitter lamentations ringing in your ears, saying,
Woe and alas, that ever we were born! that are come to this place of torment, to
this place of torment, Oh! it is, it is a place of torment: In scipsos furenter
exordescent damnati, and assidue sibi ipsis iugubrem hanc ca^tilenam occinent:
O tempus rerum omnium preci^sissimum! O dici! O horae plusquam aurcae! quo
evanuistis, aeterium non redi^urae! nos coeci and excordes, obstructis oculis
and auribus, libidine furebamus, and mutuis nosmet exemplis trahebamus ad
enteritum -- post longissima annorum spatia, nihil de poenis nostris accisum
erit, sed iterum quasi ab initio pati tormenta incipiemus, a^que ila sine
interruptione, sine fine, sine m^do, volvetur assidue nostrorum torment^rum
rota -- ibi erit calor ignis, and rigor frigoris: erunt ibi perpetuae t^nebrae,
e^it ibi fumus and perpetuae lachrymae, erit ibi aspectus terrificus daemonum,
erit clamor in perpetuum -- O aeternitas interminabilis! O aeternitas nullis
temporum spatiis mensurablis! -- Quam grave est in mollissimo lectu per
triginta annos immobilem ^^cere? quid erit in sulphureo isto lacu triginta
millia millium annorum ardere? O aeternitas, aeternitas! tu sola ultra omnem
modum supplicia damnatorum exaggeras. -- Mor, erit sine morte, finis erit sine
fine, defectus sine defectu, quia mors semper vivit, finis semper incipit, and
defectus deficere nescit. Quid gravius quam semper velle quod nunquam erit, and
semper n^llo quod nunquam non erit? In aeternum damnati non assequen^ur quod
volunt: and quod nolunt in aeternum pati cogentur. Gerhard. Meditat. [sparsim.]
Once we had praying time and hearing time, but we did not improve it for our
good, else we had not been now in this extremity of pain; no we had not, no we
had not. We did pray, but we did but triflle in our prayers, and did but dally
with that God, whom now we find and feel to be to us consuming fire, and yet we
burn and are not consumed: we were not in good earnest in those prayers we were
at, but now we suffer in good earnest, and are damned in good earnest. Oh! this
place is hot, it is hot, it is exceeding hot. Will not God pity us? will not
God have mercy on us? we once thought he would, but we did flatter and deceive
our selves, and thought it would be well because we lived in a praying Family,
and were frequent at the duty; but we did not pray as they should do, that were
to pray for the escaping of such dreadful torments; we did sleep often in our
prayers, but there is no sleeping here no ease, no resting here. O that God
would try us once more, once more, were it but for a month or two, and set us
out, and send us to a praying life again. O that we were in time again, in time
again, and in the same circumstances again, as once we were, and had the same
possibility, yea probability of escaping those restless torments. But this
cannot be, this must not be, this will not be; time is gone, is gone, and we
must pray no more for ever. O time, how did thou slip away! How swift was thy
motion! O that this eternity would hasten as fast as time did hasten. When we
had lived twenty years, our life was so much nearer expiration; but here we
have been a thousand years, and yet as far from an end as the first moment we
came into this dreadful place and dark and doleful dungeon: This then adds to
our misery, that here we are, and must be here for ever, here we are, woe be to
us that here we are, and that without all hopes of recovery, and possibility of
redemption and deliverance. Had our pain been extreme, yet if it had not been
eternal, it might, have been the better born; or if it were to be eternal, if
it had not been extreme, it might have been more easily endured; but to FEEL it
is EXTREME, and to THINK it is ETERNAL, makes our misery unexpressible. What! O
what! extreme and eternal too! extreme and eternal too! Cannot we dye? cannot
we dig into our own bowels, and take away our own beings? but must we live in
pain and torment extreme and eternal too? O miserable Caitiffs that we are!
those creatures that were Toads and Serpents feel none of this; as they are not
happy, so they are not miserable; but we are not happy: no, no, there is no
happiness here; misery is our portion. Oh cursed wretches! Oh foolish sinners
that we were! that prayed with no life to escape eternal death. Damnation is a
dreadful things we find, we feel, to our own confusion, that damnation is a
dreadful thing.

Thus realize the happiness and the misery of souls in the unseen world, and
take a believing view of them beyond this life; and try whether you shall not
find much benefit by such prayers, that after such a sight are put up unto God.

Direction 5.
5. Direct. Then next consider, Quemadmodum ^ovem mensibus no^ tenet maternus
uterus, and praepara^, non sibi, sed illi loco, in quem videmur emuti, jam
idonei Spiritum trahere and in ap^rto durare; sic per hoc spotium, quod ab
infantia patet in s^n^ctutem, in alium naturae sumimur partum; alia erigo nos
expectat, alius rerum status -- detrahetur tibi haec circumjecta, novissimum
vehimentum tui, cu^is: detrahetur care, and suffusus sanguis, discurrensque per
totum: detrahentur essa, nervique sirmamenta flu^dorum and labentium: dies
iste, quem tanquam extremum reformidas aeterni natalis est. Senec. Epist. p.
816, 817. Vigilandum est, nisi preperamus, relinquimur; agit nos, agitur velex
dies. Inscii rapimur: omnia in futurum disponimus, and inter praecipitia lenti
sumus, -- fugit des, fugere currendi genus concitatissimum est -- quid ergo
c^ssamus nos ipsi concitare, ut velocitatem rapid ssurae rei possia ^s aequare?
Idem. Epist. p. 834.
that one of these two places you must shortly, very shortly be in. When you
are going to prayer, look behind you, and you shall see death hastening after
you, that death is at your backs; and look forward, and you shall see Heaven
and Hell before you, your selves standing upon the very brink of time, and the
next step might be into eternity of joy or sorrow; where you did but now by
faith see others were, there you your selves must quickly really be, where you
shall rejoice with them, or suffer and sorrow with them: Do but look a little,
before you fall down upon your knees, and you might see your selves cast down
upon a bed of sickness, your friends weeping and fearing you will die, the
Physicians are puzzled and at a loss, giving you over for the grave, and your
self gasping for life, and breathing out your last. Look but a little before
you, and you might as it were hear your friends saying, he is dead, he is dead,
he is gone, he is departed, and then (as it were) you might see them haling you
out of your bed, and wrapping you in your winding sheet, and nailing you up in
your Coffin, you might see your Grave a digging, and men hired to carry you on
their shoulders from your house to your grave, Relations and Neighbors
following after to see you lodged in the dust, to lie and rot among the dead.

Then think, before all this can be done unto your body, your Soul has taken
its flight into eternity, where it is, without change and alteration for ever,
to be with God or Devils. Work it on your hearts that you must quickly (and O
how quickly will it be that you must!) be in Heaven or Hell, that when you die,
Heaven must be won or lost for ever, and everlasting torments escaped or
endured for ever. Try whether such believing thoughts as these will not stir
you up to manage all your praying together (as well as apart) in that manner,
that you shall find great benefit thereby.

Direction 6.
Id ago, ut mihi instar totius vitae sit dies, nec mehercule tanquam ultimum
rapie, sed sic illum aspici^ tanquam esse vel ultimus possit: hoc animo tibi
hanc Epistolam scribo, tanquam cum maxim scribentem more ea o^atura sit. Son.
Epist. p. 634, 6, 5.
6. Direct. Since this is so, consider next that you do not know, but now you
are going to make your last Family Prayer together. You do not know, but God
and death might seize upon some of you before the next time of prayer do come
again, that God might single out the Master or Mistress of the house, this Child
or that Servant, and every one think, I might be the first, that you may never
pray all together again: Pray then as if you were to pray no more, and see if
you shall not find real spiritual benefit by such a Prayer. A Heathen writing a
Letter to his Friend did say, I write unto you, not knowing but death might
call me away, whilst the pen is in my hand; and should not Christians pray as
such as do not know but death might seiz upon them with their prayers in their
mouths?

Direction 7.
(...) Anton. lib. 2.. 5.

(...). Vehementer and assidue incumbere rei alicui difficili and labori^sae,
donec eum ad oplatum finem perduxeris and quasi victoriam obtinueris
[significat] (...) igitur haec duo involvit, and vehementem quandam animi
intentionem, and quasi pugnam, dum ve^satur in actu orandi, and assiduam
frequentationem orationis. Davenant. in loc.


7. Direct. Be laborious and importunate in your prayers. If your thoughts do
wander call them in, if your thoughts be dull stir them up. An Heathen advised
to do as becomes a man, like a Roman; and should not you pray as becomes
Christians to do? but that is not in a dull and sluggish manner. Labor at your
prayers together, as you use to do at your worldly work together, and more too;
for in this you are concerned more. Strive and wrestle with joint fervency and
faith, as becomes a society to do that are all a praying for their lives, for
their souls, for the pardon of their sin, for the favor and the love of God,
as becomes those that are praying against everlasting flames and for eternal
happiness. Pray together as persons desirous that you may live in Heaven all
together, and praise God in Heaven for his love and mercy to you all together.
But pray not coldly and lukewarmly together, lest you be damned and hereafter
lie in scorching flames all together. You must be instant in this work: You
will meet with opposition from the Devil, and the world, and your own hearts:
You must then strive, and tug, and labor hard, or else your prayer will be
spoiled, Col. 4.2. the word there is very significant: Be present at your work
in heart as well as body, attend your work and stand to it, continue in prayer,
not only with continuance of time, but of earnest importunity, till you prevail
with God, and get the victory over sin and Satan.

Let me therefore warn praying Families, as you love your Souls, Defunctiore
multi preces ex formula recitant, ac si pensum Deo solverent -- apparet hoc
officio ipsos defungi ex more, quia interim frigent animi, neque expendant,
quid postulent. Galv. Inst.

(...). Ignat. ad Magnes.


as you would have God incline his ear to what you say, take heed of
customariness and formalities. Do not rest in the work done, in pouring our
words before God. This is your great danger. It must be a fervent Prayer that
pleases God and profits you, Jam. 5.16. Be praying Christians indeed, and do
not seem only to be so, that you might all be happy indeed, and saved indeed,
and not only to be thought to be so.

And because we are apt to slide into such formality and lukewarmness (when we
use constant Family Prayer) which eats out the very heart and life thereof, and
hinders our benefit thereby, I shall propose twenty five Questions, some of
which at one time, and some at another, you may put unto your selves to make
you lively in your duty. But I shall, I must but name them, because I would not
willingly take up more paper than comes unto my share, as also that lying close
together, you may the better have them in your eye.

When thou art called to Family Prayer, put some of these Questions to thy self.

WHAT AM I? A sinful Sinner, Dust, Ashes, Guilty. Oh how should

WHERE AM I? In whose presence do I kneel? is it not before God?

Where might I NOW have been? In Hell among Devils and damned

Whither am I going? To eternity. Where shall I shortly be? In eternity;

What am I come about? What is now my business? About the highest

What if this were to be my last Prayer before I dye? Should I then fall

What if my everlasting state should be determined according to my sincerity
Should I dally then with God?

What if God should tell me, if I trifle with his Majesty, he would strike
Should I not then watch my heart in Prayer?

What if I were to speak to an earthly King? or were to see some glorious
Should I not be filled with fear and reverence? and is not God infinitely above
these?

What if I were to give an account to God immediately how I pray, and Should I
then be formal and lukewarm?

Am I come to have communion with God? to pray down my sin? to please Will
careless praying do it?

What if those that join in Prayer with me could look into my heart, and Should
I not be ashamed of many of my thoughts, and of the deadness of my heart? and
is not the eye of God ten thousand times more to awe my heart than the knowledge
of a fellow Creature?

Will dead and careless praying yield me comfort, when I review it when I come
to die? Or should I not so pray now, that I might have comfort then?

Should I cozen and deceive my self in matters of the greatest weight? Shall I
crawl to Hell upon my knees? What! pray now and be damned hereafter! Awake my
heart, and mind thy business.

Will God be mocked? And is not heartless praying a mocking of God?

Should I not do more than Hypocrites do? Or shall I not be damned if I do not?
But may not an Hypocrite pray at that rate, as I have too often done?

Does not the same God that commands me to pray, command me also to give him my
heart in Prayer? and to do it with life and fervency? Do I obey him in the one,
and shall I not in the other? in the lesser, and not in the greater? and if I
do not, do I not rebel upon my knees?

If dead and dull and formal praying stops the mouth of my Conscience now, will
it do so at the Bar of God? And should I not endeavor now, to have the witness
of my Conscience for me then?

Will it do me any good to have a name to live among men, if I be dead in the
sight of God? and if others think and say when I am dead, my Soul is gone to
Heaven, but is indeed cast down to Hell? Will it lessen my torments, that I was
applauded die men, and condemned by God? Will it ease my pain to be an applauded
damned man?

Should I so pray as to make Prayer a burden to me? Liveless, heartless Prayer
is a burden, when lively Prayer is delightful, and has its sweetness in it.

Have I not sinned indeed? has not my heart been in my sins? are not my sins
really sins? And shall I not now pray indeed? shall not my heart be in duty?
and my Prayers be really Prayers? What! real sinning and counterfeit praying?
and is not counterfeit praying real sinning? Awake, o my Soul, unto thy work.

Are not my wants real wants? Do I not want grace indeed, or at least really
want more of it? And should not my Prayers be as real as my wants?

Would I have God to put me off with seeming mercy? Should I then put God off
with seeming duty?

Are not my temptations real temptations? and strong and powerful? And should
not then my Prayers be so too?

Am I not real and lively in my worldly business? am I not in good earnest in
my Shop, in the Market, and at the Exchange? And should I not be so in the
matters of another world? in the business of my Soul?

Thus take some of these Questions, lay them warm unto your hearts, and propose
them to your selves in the fear of God, and they will heat you when you are
cold, and quicken you when you are dull, if God set them home upon your hearts,
that you shall manage your Family Prayers to your spiritual benefit; which was
the third part of my work to direct you in. The fourth follows,

Question 4.
With what considerations may Masters of Families be urged to the constant
performance of Family Prayer?

Notwithstanding it be a certain duty to pray in your Families, yet I doubt,
when death shall come to drag you out of your houses, it will find some of you
guilty of neglecting of it to your dying day; but yet I hope some may be
Prevailed with. What! have you neglected it? and will you all do so still? God
forbid. When you sin, you act like men; but when you go on in sin, you act like
Devils Humanum est errare, perseverare diabolicum.
. I shall propound a few considerations to urge you to it; and I entreat you in
the name of the great eternal God, before whom you and I must shortly stand,
and be judged, to weigh them seriously, and if you find there is no reason in
them, throw them by, and look for, and enquire after, better; but if there be,
resolve in the fear of God to buckle to your duty. It is time -- fecimus and nos
Haec juvenes, esto, desisti, nempe nec ulira
Fovisti errorem; breve sit quod turpiter cud^s.
Quaedam cum prima resecen ur crimina barba.
Juven. Sat. 8.
, it is high time to reform. Did you sin when you were young? and will you go
on in riper years? What do you come to Sermons for? to hear what Ministers can
say upon such a Question? to discern their parts? or to mend your own hearts
and lives? Do you come to hear, that you may hear? So you may, and go to Hell
when you have done; or do you come to hear, that you may practice and obey? so
you must, if you are men for Heaven. I charge you therefore here before the
Lord, and by Jesus Christ that shall shortly judge both you and me, that your
Families be no longer prayerless Families. If I put you upon work that God does
not require from you, then tell me so when you and I shall meet and stand at
God's Judgment Bar: But if it be no more than what you owe to God, neglect it
at your peril. Sirs, the day is coming, and it hastens, when you will, you must
be serious. If thou die within a week or two, within a day or two, or
whenever thou shall leave this world, if the next hour after thou art not of
this mind Res ipsa fidem dictis dabit. Sero sapiunt ^h^yges.
, that thou should have prayed in thy Family, then say I did needlessly call
thee to it; but if thou shall then see it was thy duty, thou shall also see
(when it is too late) that thou did befool thy self, and make thy self guilty
before God in thy neglecting of it. Be wise therefore, before it be too late,
and mind this work while thou have time and opportunity. To this purpose, press
your backward hearts with these things following.

MOTIVE I. (...).

1. Consider, The Souls that live in your Families are precious and immortal
Souls. The Soul of the meanest Servant in your house is more precious than all
the silks and wares in your Shop, than all the Gold in your bags, yea, than all
the riches in the world, Mat. 16.26. And as they be of great worth, so they be
immortal too, that must be damned or saved for ever. And are these the Souls
that you do not pray with, that you thus neglect and slight? must they live for
ever? and will not you call them to pray with you, that they may live happily
for ever?

(...). Phocylid. MOTIVE II.
Quomodo ed nos pertinet in Ecclesia loqui vobis, s^c ad vos pertinet in
d^mibus v^stris agere, ut bonam rationem reddatis de his, qui vebis sunt
subditi. Aug. in Psalm. 50.

Cum diserta mentio fiat librorum, servorum -- ex eo c^lligitur a parentibus
patribus-familias -- exigi, ut non ipsi solum sabbatum sanctificent, sed etiam
a filiis, servis -- curae ac fides su e commissis illud sanctificari curent.
Gerhar. loc. com. de decalog.

Damnati seipsos, omnesque sceleris socios assiduis execrationibus devovebunt,
parentem filius, matrem filia execrabitur.


2. These precious and immortal Souls in your Families are committed to your
charge and care. You Masters of Families have a charge of Souls as well as
Ministers. When you have a child born and continued to you, there is one
immortal Soul that God intrusts you with to bring up for him and Heaven. When
you take a Servant into your Family, there is another Soul committed to your
care. Do you question this? Study well the meaning of the fourth Commandment,
and you shall see that this is true. And is it so? And shall not the blood of
those that go to Hell out of your Families, through your neglect, be required
at your hands? Have you done your duty, when a Servant that has served you
seven years, and you make him free, can truly say, My Master taught me my
trade, but he taught me not to serve God; he often called me up unto my work,
but he never called me to Prayer? Are you not afraid that your very Children
and Servants will rise up in judgment against you, and accuse you at the Bar of
God? Lord, my Father, says the Son, no nor my Master, says the Servant, never
prayed with us, and we both Children and Servants being so brought up, and
having such Examples before us, did not mind thy service neither, Lord, we are
jastly condemned; but yet we perish much through our Parents and Masters
neglect. There stands my Father, says the Son, and there stands my Master,
says the Servant, that never prayed with us; we do accuse them, they never
did, and they cannot say they did. Will you not then wish you had never been
Parents to such Children, nor Masters to such Servants? As you would avoid
this, be faithful to your trust, and mindful of your duty, lest thou wish O
Vtinam coelebs mansissem, ac prole carerem.

MOTIVE III.
3. Consider, You have but a little time before you for the performance of this
trust. You and your Families shall live together but a while, and if once you
are parted by death, it will be too late, whether you die first, or some of
them. (...) Theoc. S^es est in vivis, non est spes ulla sepulti^.


1. Suppose some of them dye before you, if your Conscience be not feared, and
your hearts past feeling, will you not be almost distracted, when you follow
them to their Graves, to reflect and consider, here is one dead out of my house
with whom I never prayed; we did dwell together, and eat together, and work
together many years, but we never prayed together: Oh! what if his Soul be gone
to Hell through my neglect? What if he be damned, and I be found guilty of his
damnation? Prayer was a means appointed by God to have done him good, but I did
not do it; who knows, if I had called him to Prayer, and I had been confessing
sin, but God might have broke his heart for sin, and given him repentance, of
which I saw no sign before he died? And now, Oh! what now, if there be one Soul
the less in my house, and one the more in Hell? Oh! this is that which wounds
my Soul, this is that for which my Conscience now does sting me, that when I
had him with me, I did not do my duty, and now he is gone, he is gone, and now
it is too late: O my child, my child, whither art thou gone? whither art thou
gone? O that he may live with me again, were it but for a year or two, a month
or two, that we might do together our before neglected duty! If you be wise,
timely prevent such uncomfortable reviews.

2. Suppose you die before them; for if they do not die and leave you, you must
die and leave them: and can you die, without trembling for anguish of your
heart, without terrors in your Souls, and fearful gripes in your Consciences,
more bitter than the pangs of Death, to consider, you leave a wicked,
prayerless Family behind you, through your own neglect? Would it not trouble
you to leave them poor, Wife and Children nothing to live upon, if this has
been through your sloth? and will it not, should it not, much more trouble you
to leave an ignorant Wife, Children and Servants, unacquainted with God,
unaccustomed to prayer, and all through your neglect? Might you not then say,
if I had left them poor, yet if I had left them good, and fearing God, and
given to prayer by my example, I could now have died with joy, and left them
all with comfort; but now I lie a dying, it is the wounding of my Soul to take
so sad a farewell of my Family. If I do live, it shall be otherwise, if I
recover, and God trust me with life, and time yet further, I will hereafter do
it: but my heart is sick, my Spirits fail me, and I perceive the symptoms of
death are upon me, and though I am loath to take my leave of my Wife and
Children, because I have been no more careful of the good of their Souls; yet I
see I must, I must bid farewell unto them. Come then, dear Wife, farewell, --
Gemituquo haec addidit alio:
Non alias hinc ad lacrymas --
-- Fata vocant:
Salve aeternum --
-- aeternumque v^le --
Virg. Aeneid. l.xi.
farewell, I shall now be no longer thine, and thou shall be no longer mine: but
this had been no matter, if I and thou had both been his, whom we should have
prayed unto together, but we did not: Woe is me poor dying man that we did not!
Farewell dear Children, now farewell, adieu, adieu for ever: but oh! how shall I
take my leave of you, with whom I have not done what God required? But yet I
must, whether I will or no, I must now leave you. But let me give among you
what I have gotten for you: Therefore to you my Wife I give so much, and to
this Child so much, and to that so much. But when I think I worked for you, but
never prayed with you, this does trouble me; Oh! this does trouble my departing
Soul. However, you will have my Goods, the grave and worms shall have my body;
but who, oh! who must now have my Soul? This will be a sad parting, when ever
it shall come; and yet this parting hour is a coming: Pray now with them, and
in that manner too, that then you may be comforted. On the contrary, if you
discharge your duty faithfully and unfeignedly, whether your Family be good or
bad, when you shall die, you might take comfort that you did your duty. So Mr.
Bolton, that was abundant in conjunct Prayers in his Family, could comfort
himself, and did say on his Deathbed to his Children, I think verily none of
you dare think to meet me at the great Tribunal in an unregenerate condition.

MOTIVE IV.
4. The love that you should bear unto your Families should engage you often to
pray together with them. Diligatur Proles, non ut nascatur tantum, verum-etiam
ut renascatur: nascitur enim ad paenam, nisi renascatur ad vitam. Aug. de nupt.
and conc. l. 1. cap. 17

Ipsae ferae, saevae and immanes bestiae prolem nutrire solent -- at non tantum
curare debent parents ut liberi sui vivant, sed etiam ut Deo been vivant.
Ames. Cas. Cons.


Will you show your love unto your Children in providing Portions for them,
that they may live in credit in this life? and will you not so much as pray
with them, that they may live in glory in the life to come? Will you do much
for their Bodies, and nothing for their Souls? You that are fondest Husbands
and Fathers, never love Wife and Children as you ought, till you love their
Souls. The Soul is the best and more noble part, and love to the Soul is the
best and more noble Love: But to love the Body and neglect the Soul is but
cruel brutish Love. What do you more for your young ones, than the birds and
beasts do for theirs? Do you feed their bodies? do not birds and beasts do the
same for theirs? Love your Wife, Children and Servants as you ought, and this
will provok you to pray together with them.

MOTIVE V.
Oeconomia est veluti paradisus, in quo plantantur arbores, quarum fructus
odore and dulcore suo imbuunt omnes vitae ordines. Alsted.

Qualis est enjus. quo domus, talis est universa civitas.


5. Consider that Family Reformation is a necessary means to public
Reformation, and to hand down Religion from one generation to another.
Reformation begins with Persons, thence is carried on to Families, thence to
Parishes, thence to Towns, and so to Cities and to Kingdoms; but when these
consist of Families, how can there be a reformation of Cities and Kingdoms
without a Reformation of Persons and Families? You complain of the badness of
the times and age in which you live, and that no more care is taken to mend
what is amiss, why do you not reform your own houses? Why do you not amend what
is amiss in your own Families? If you have not power to reform a Parish, City,
or Kingdom, yet you have a power to reform your own houses. If Religion die in
Families, will it not die in Cities too, and in Kingdoms too? Will not you do
your utmost to keep Religion alive? to recover it, when decaying? or shall it
be extinguished with this Generation? God forbid. Or do you see nothing amiss
in your houses to be reformed? what! no praying there, and yet nothing amiss
there? Certainly there is. Let yours then have a pattern and example of
Family Prayer from you, to do the same in their houses, and their Children from
them, and so let it pass from one age to another. An effectual way to keep the
City clean will be for every house to sweep before their own door.

MOTIVE VI.
6. If Religious Duties are not set up in your Families, Neglectis urenda filix
innascitur agris. Horat. Sermo. lib. 1. Satyr. 3.
there will be the more sinning there, and wickedness abounding in them. How
much cursing is there in many Families, where there is no praying? The field
that is not dressed and manured is full of weeds and thorns. Where God is not
served, the Devil is. If in your houses God has not a Church, the Devil will
have a Chapel: What hopes will the Devil have, Da mihi, quaeso, animas,
caetera sum tibi.
that he shall have Souls out of those Families, where there is much sinning
and no praying? And if he might have their Souls, he will be content that you
may have all the rest: If your houses be not nurseries for Heaven, they will be
breeding places for Hell. If Souls under your roof are not prepared for
Salvation, they will there be fitted for Damnation; and is this nothing to you?
Awake, arise you drousie Governers of Families to your work and duty.

MOTIVE VII.
7. It would be an effectual way and means to make those in your Families more
obedient and better toward you, if you would call on them to serve the Lord,
and you were more in Prayer with them. You cry out of stubborn ann disobedient
Children: They grieve and break my heart says one; I have a Child that is my
daily wound and sorrow, says another; and Servants never worse, is your often
complaint: Who is all this long of? do not you read your sin in your
punishment. If you had taught them better their duty toward God, they would
have made more Conscience of their duty toward you; if you had prayed with
them, God might have bowed their hearts, as a return to your Prayers, to have
walked more suitable to their relative duties. I have read of a young man going
to the Gallows desired to speak with his Mother in her ear, who bit off her ear
with his teeth, crying out against her as the cause of his death; by your
negligence, says he, I am come to this woeful end: If you are alike careless of
your Families, if you do not lose your ears by your own Children, yet you might
lose something that is better.

MOTIVE VIII.
8. If you make profession of Religion, Aliud in titulo, aliud in ptxide.
Pelliculam veterem retines, and front politus
Astutam rapido servas sub pectore vulpem.
Pers. Sat. 5.
and yet do not pray in your Families, it is base and cursed hypocrisy. When
you hear with God's people, and pray with them, and receive with them, and seem
to be devout abroad, and do not pray with your Families at home, is not this to
make others believe you are what you are not? Do you not profess, by your joint
duties with God's people in all Ordinances, that you are devoted unto God? and
does not he that sincerely devotes himself to God, devote also all he has to
him? but is your Family devoted to God, when there is no worship there? It
would be well if you were found out, that you were denied the Supper of the
Lord for want of a sufficient credibility of a sound Profession. But is it your
way to be zealous abroad and negligent at home? Let your house speak for you,
Sed videt hunc omnis domus --
Introsum turpem, speciosum pelle decora.


MOTIVE IX.
Plus valet humanis viribus ira Dei. Ovid. Trist. Anno 1584 terra motu mons
quidam in ditione Bernatum ultra alios montes violenter latus. pagum qu^ndam
nonaginta familias habentem contexit totum, dimidia domo excepta, in qua
pater-familias cum uxore and liberis in genua provolutus Deum invocabat. Polan.
Syntagm. de terrae mot.
9. The neglect of calling upon God in your Families, will bring the curse of
God upon them. Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the -- Families that call not
upon thy Name: (1.) The persons threatened, are Families: which if in this Text
comprehends many households, or yet more largely taken, yet there is the same
parity of reason to a proper Family: (2.) Their crime is, not calling upon the
name of God: (3.) The thing threatened, the fury of the Lord; fury is fervent
anger, anger in it is height and rage: (4.) The abundance of it; it shall not
fall drop by drop upon prayerless Families, but pour down in great showrs upon
them. Whereas the way to have God's blessing and protection over you and your
household is to set up the worship of God therein. There is a passage in a
worthy Divine of a remarkable Providence of God to this purpose, concerning a
Town consisting of ninety houses, that was in the year 1584. destroyed by an
Earthquake, except the half of one house, where the Master of the Family was
earnestly praying with his Wife and Children upon their bended knees to God.

Obj. But we see no such thing, we perceive not but those Families prosper,
that have no Prayer in them, as much as those that do.

Answ. God is often angry, when he does not strike and punish presently the
Offender: but his wrath hangs over your house, and you are never safe in your
greatest prosperity. N n est quare cuiquam, quem dignum poena putaveris, optes,
ut infestos habeat Deos; habet, inquam, etiamsi videtur eorum favore produci.
Senec. Epist.
An Heathen could say, If a wicked man prosper, you need not wish that God were
angry with him; for he is angry with him, though for the present he do prosper:
but when it comes, it will be the heavier: The Poet gives a full answer to this
Objection, (...),
(...)
(...).


The sense I give thus, Though wicked men feel not th'Almightie's blow
Forthwith; his wrath is sure, when it is slow.
At length his plagues in greater loads shall lie
On them, their Wives, and all their Progeny.


Question
The last thing only now remains (wherein I must be short) What excuses are
often brought for the nonperformance of Family Prayer; How answered.

Obj. All this while you do not give us any one express Scripture in so many
words: show that, and we will do it.

Answ. This is objected, either by openly profane, or more sober men. To the
first I answer,

1. Will thou do nothing but what thou have an express command for in so many
syllables? Why then art thou so often drunk? and do thou so often swear and
lie and take Gods Name in vain? Where is thy command? Nay, is not all this
against express command?

2. Why do thou not do that for which thou have express commands? Will thou
repent, be holy and believe in Christ, and forsake thy sin, if I can show
express commands from God for these? Then read Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. Acts 2.38. and
17.30. 1 John 3.23. Go thy way now, and do these things sincerely, and I shall
not doubt but thou will see reason from what has been said to set up Prayer in
thy Family, nor question but thou will do it. But if thou will not repent, and
leave thy manifest and apparent sins, when thou art expressly commanded to do
so, why should any man think thou would do this, if this were showed to
thee? Yet know, there is enough said to render thee inexcusable, if thou will
not do it.

Secondly, to the more sober I answer, Dum scripturam dicimus perf ctam, non
intelligimus, ac si ad literam omnia quae ad salutem sunt necessaria,
continerentur; sed quod quaedam per certam consequentiam, ex illis quae clare
dicta sunt, deduci debeant. Maccov. distin. p. 9.

Quicquid per bonam consequentiam ex scriptura deducitur, illud ipsum est
scriptura -- Quod elicitur ex Mose and Davide, dicuntur Moses and David
dixisse. idem p 21. Scripturae ^im consistere non in verbis sed in sensu
communiter dicitur -- sunt autem conclusiones in scriptura, vel totidem verbis
and (...), vel habent praemissas suas in scriptura expressas, ex quibus
evidenter deducuntur; vel una tantum posita praemissa in scriptura, addita alia
ex rationis principiis, aut ex evidentia sensus, conclusio etiam eruitur
necessaria, quae vim eandem habet cum propositionibus, quae totidem verbis
leguntur. -- juxta regulam, Quaedam in Scripturis sunt, and dicuntur; quaedam
in iisdem sunt, etsi non dicuntur (nempe totidem verbis.) Rivet. Isag. ad
Scrip. cap. 17.


That what is drawn from the word of God by just, necessary, and immediate
consequence, is the mind of God: The sense of the Scripture is God's revealed
Will. And you your selves allow some things to be a duty, that are not expressly
commanded in the Word of God. I could give you instances in many particulars,
but because I am straightened for room, and for plainness of the case, I will
instance but in this one, which is a Woman's receiving of the Lord's Supper. Is
it the duty of some Women so to do? No doubt: But where is your express
command? or any express example that ever they did? Look for it, and produce
it: Will you say the word (...) used 1 Cor. 11.28. signifying both man and
woman, shows the command for Women's eating at the Lord's Table? but what if it
be sometimes in Scripture used for the man only, and the woman excluded, as it
is Joh. 7.22. ye circumcise, (...), a man; being taken in one place for the man
only, how will you prove it is not so in the other; but by Consequence? True
but where then is your express command? Consequence must be allowed in this
case, and is abundantly sufficient. For validity of Scripture-consequence much
may be said; but my length already commands me to forbear, seeing there is as
much Scripture and firm immediate consequence for your praying in your Family,
as a woman's receiving the Lord's Supper, which is an acknowledged duty.

Object. 2. But I pray alone in secret, and that is sufficient.

Answ. But it is not. (1.) One duty done does not excuse you from the
performance of another. It has been proved before to be your duty; you ought
then to do the one, and not to leave the other undone.

(2.) But do all in thy Family pray in secret every day? do thou watch them
daily so narrowly, as thou art sure they do? every one? So they should; but yet
notwithstanding conjunct Prayer is a duty also, as has before been shown.

(3.) Do thou pray in secret? So thou might have done, if God had struck
all thy Family dead in the night besides thy self: Take heed thou do not
hereby cause God to strip thee of thy Relations, and thy comfort in them with
whom thou will not pray, and send thee with a witness into a corner, to pray by
thy self alone.

(4.) Do thou pray alone? So thou might have done, if thou had lost thy
tongue: Have thou a tongue only to buy and sell, and talk of the world, or of
religion only? and not to employ it in conjunct praying to, and praising of
God, in thy Family? Read before.

(5.) Do thou pray alone? I doubt thou do; It may be thou speak more in
that word [alone] than thou think of. Infaelix and Iniqua lex amoris rerum,
nolle ut ament alii, nolle ut ament alios; non ita miserum and pressum eligas
amorem: superest Deo amor dilatatus; superest bonitas, ut amot and ametur; cum
abest a fell ut rivales optet, Zelotypia gaudet. Hoc interest inter Zelum
humani amoris and divini: Zelus amantis Deum, optat ut alii ament; Zelus a
mantis hominem, ne alius amet: ille socios quaerit, iste fugit, pro qualitate
nimirum amatorum. Socios ille quaerit, quia superest bonitas amato, cui amorem
suum aequalem non putat; coadjutores exoptat, ut suppleat votis alienis
proprium defectum; iste non admittit collegas, exiguum bonum timet, ne desit
sibi, distributum etiam aliis: perinde ac qui splendidum epulum paravit, cui
ipse non est satis, convivas quaerit, invitat plures, gavisus consortio
epulantium: At misellus and famelicus rusticus frustulum Hordeacei panis, quia
sibi non sufficit, non distribuit aliis, non palam come, ne alius, qui
appetat petat. O laetissimum affectum! O securissimum amorem Dei! quem Zelus
non excruciat, quem rivalis delectat, sine absynthio, sine aloe, sine fell,
totus dulcis and consentaneus cordi. Nieremb. de art. vol. p. 336, 337.
Do thou not pray alone without God? without meeting with God? Had thou
there had thy heart enflamed with the love of God, and tasted of the sweetness
in communion with God, would not this have filled thy heart with love to God,
and Souls in thy house, and burning zeal that they might be partakers of the
same Divine refreshments? could thou hold thy peace after such discoveries,
while thy poor Family are without? or would thou no time call them together,
that they also might experience the same delights that thou have found? As the
woman of Samaria called her Neighbors, Joh. 4.28, 29. If thou had got some
earthly Jewel, thou might be loath that others should share with thee in the
value of it; because in earthly things participation causes a diminution: if a
sum of money be divided amongst many, the more one has, the less will fall to
the others share. Art thou indeed afraid of this? Fear it not: There is enough
in God for thee, and thine too. Communication in spirituals causes
multiplication, even in him that does communicate to others: If thou be an
Instrument to draw thine to the Love of God, and to joy and delight in him,
this would fill thee with the greater joy. Methinks then, when thou have been
alone, and God has graciously been with thee, thou should go down into thy
Family with burning love to God and them, and say, Come my Wife, Children,
Servants, leave your work and business for a while; There is much sweetness in
communion with God: There is indeed delight which comes into the Soul by holy
fervent Prayer; I would not have you feed on husks, while there is not only
bread, but dainties too, in seeking God: I do not love to see you always
mudling in the world, and be strangers unto God. Come then, come away, for my
Soul does long that you should taste what I have found. Thus thou would think
surely with thy self, if thou speak not out to them, if thou did meet with
God in secret. When it is not so with thee, but thou can constantly neglect
Prayer in thy Family, reflect upon thy self, whether in this sense thou did
not pray alone, that thou did not find God with thee warming of thy heart.
Tell me, could thou be content to eat thy food constantly alone, without thy
Wife and Children? and can thou be content to pray alone only? As you eat
together, so pray together also.

Obj. 3. But I am ashamed to pray with others, and that hinders me.

Answ. 1. Ashamed to pray! ashamed to do thy duty! The more shame for thee. Be
ashamed to sin, and of this shame; for it is sinful, and is to be lamented, and
prayed against, and striven against, and overcome: Will thou tell God at the
Day of Judgment, that thou wast ashamed to pray in thy House and Family?

2. But why ashamed? when you are only with your own Family, and those you
daily converse withal, and are head and chief and governer of?

3. It is for want of use: set upon the work, and you will quickly overcome
this.

Obj. 4. But I am not ashamed of the duty, but of my own weakness; I have not
gifts and parts to manage this duty. If I were gifted as other men be, I would
perform it as other men do.

Answ. 1. Where do you live? in London? What! an old housekeeper in London, or
where there has been much means of Grace, and are you so ignorant, that you
are not qualified to pray in your Family? This is your sin; and will one sin be
pleadable to excuse you from another? One of the Ancients of the Parish, and
plead ignorance! are you not ashamed?

2. It is not parts and gifts and florid expressions that God looks at, but an
humble, penitent, broken, and believing heart. Have you not this neither? If
you have not, get it quickly, or you must to Hell: If you have, God will accept
of such a Sacrifice; bring it then.

3. Study your sins and wants, and mercies; and get a sense of all these upon
your heart, and you will be able to express them in your Family, in such a
manner as may be more for their profit, than the constant omission can be. If a
man feel himself sick or hungry, do you think he could not find words to make
his complaint, and ask for help? Study the Scripture and your own hearts, and
these will be good prayer-Books to furnish you for the duty: Besides by praying
you shall learn to pray.

4. Do not deceive your self, and say, it is for want of gifts; when it is more
for want of a heart and love to the duty. To discover this, Suppose a Law were
made by our Governors, that every Master of a Family that does not pray in his
house with his Family, shall be cast into the Lions Den: What would you do
then? Would you rather venture your life and be torn in pieces by Lions, than
set upon this duty, with that Knowledge, and those Gifts that now you have?
Would you not find something to say to save your Lives? And is not the Law of
God as binding as the Laws of men? and the Dungeon of Hell as dreadful as the
Lions Den? Go then, set upon your duty.

Obj. 5. But there are some graceless and wicked persons in my Family, that I
cannot say we desire this or that spiritual blessing, grace, Christ. etc. for I
see no ground to judge they desire any such thing.

Answ. 1. Have they no grace? and must they not pray that they may have some? O
cruelty! Is he exempted from duty, because he is not good? or will thou say,
that such must only pray alone? and be excluded (while such) from conjunct
prayers? Whither will this carry you? Even to the shutting of all graceless or
at least visibly wicked persons from all prayers in public Congregations, as
well as from Family duty; But this is so gross, that I suppose you will not own
it. You have no reason then for the other.

2. How do you know, when you are confessing sin and acknowledging the evil of
it, but God might affect and break their hearts, and they be changed on their
knees, and so be saved from damnation? and will you deny them that means that
God may bless for their conversion?

3. Do you indeed use all other means to your utmost power to have them better?
Do you reprove them, and show them the danger they are in? and persuade them to
turn from sin to God, and this with constancy and compassion to their Souls? Or
do you scruple this too? Will thou neither pray with them, nor speak to them,
when thou ought to do both? I doubt, it is thy sloth, that hinders thee, or
the wickedness of thy heart, and that thou pleadest the wickedness of another
to cover thine own.

4. Was not Judas graceless? Did he desire truly and sincerely spiritual
blessings? and did not Christ say and know he was a Devil? and yet did not
Christ pray with his Disciples, when Judas was among them? Luke 22.14, 17.

5. Your words might be so ordered, that you need not make a scruple to pray
with them.

6. By kneeling down with you do they not profess to join with you? and if they
do not that sincerely, which they profess to do, the sin is theirs and none of
yours.

7. But be really more careful that you do not pray to God with a reigning lust
in your own hearts, than fearful to pray with an unconverted person in your
house.

Obj. 6. But I cannot bring my Servants to the duty; they are so stubborn and
unwilling to it, that all that I can do, cannot prevail with them to yield
thereto; they will rather leave my house; and so I shall be left to do my work
my self.

Answ. 1. Are they not sometimes as backward to do what you set them about, as
they be to come to prayer? but yet do you not bring them to it? and make them
stoop and buckle to obedience? Deal plainly, if they did daily totally neglect
your work, would you bear it at their hands? would you not make them know your
power and authority over them? Can you use your power effectually to make them
do your work, though backward to it; and may you not, can you not, to bring
them to prayer, if you were as hearty and as in good earnest, for the glory of
God and the good of their souls, as you are in your own concernments?

2. Why did you take no more care whom you did receive for Servants into your
house? Why did you not make a better choice? Did you not look for one with most
money you could get, rather than one well educated and likely to conform to the
good government of an house? Servants enquire for places, where they might have
least work, and greatest wages and vails, but not where they might have a good
Master to help forward the good of their souls; and Parents put forth their
Children Apprentices, where it might be most for their outward advantage,
though there be no Religion in the house; a great evil: So, many Masters look
for greatest profit in taking Apprentices, that have been without all education
as to their souls, and then cry out, their Servants will not be brought to
Family Prayer.

3. But will they not? Integer vitae mihi sit minister, Tecta non intret mea
fraudulentus, Nemo mecum intra mea commoretur Limina mendax, Buchan.
and are they such that you may remove and put out of your Family, after you
have tried all other means you can? if they will not, you had better be without
them, than without the worship of God. David would Out with them, Psalm. 101.6,
7. But do you say, You must then do your work your self? so you had better. But
why so? Are young people generally so bad, that there are no better to be
found? God forbid; If they be, is it not high time, to be in good earnest, and
resolved to set up God's worship in our Families, that it might be remedied,
and not continue so from one age to another.

Obj. 7. But I have not time to spare, Quid de rerum natura querimur? illa se
benign gessit: vita si scias uti, longa est.
for my self and Family to spend time to pray twice every day; this would be a
hindrance to me in my Calling.

Answ. 1. Not time, man! What! not to pray! How justly might God say, Alium
insatiabilis tenet avaritia; al um in supervacuis laboribus ope^osa sedulitas;
al^us vino madet; inerti^ torpet; alium mercandi praeceps cupiditas circa omnes
terras, omnia maria, spe lucri ducit: nemo invenitu^, qui pecuniam suam
dividere velit; vitam unusquisque quam multis distribuit: astricti sunt in
continendo patrimonio; simul ad temporis j^ct^ram v^n um est, profus^ssi^i in
eo cujus unius honesta avaritia est. Senec. de brev^vit.
Thou shall die this day, and thou shall have no time to pray, no, nor to trade
neither; nor to sport and game neither. Thou have time; what do thou do with
it all? Twenty, forty years are a great deal of time, and much might be done
therein; but can thou find no time out of so many years to pray in thine
house? Thou find time to trade and work and eat and drink and sleep, yea and
to sin too; and yet have thou no time to pray? Does God give thee and thy
Family all the time that thou and they have, and shall God have none of it? Oh,
ungrateful sinner! Oh, unthankful wretch! let the heavens be astonished, and
the Earth amazed: the one, that they give light and influence to such a
monster; and the other to bear such a burden, a man so laden, with such
impiety.

2. Why do thou grips and grasp so much worldly business, and burden thy
self and Family with so many earthly Imploymenos, and then cry out thou have no
time? If thou can not trade so much, and pray in thy Family too; trade
something less, that thou may have time to pray. Cannot you get food and
raiment while you live, and a winding sheet and Coffin when you die, without so
great a trade that you have no time to pray? Or will you say, we must mind more
than food and raiment, and must you not mind Heaven too? and look after Christ
and Grace and your souls too? What if you be rich while you live, and damned
when you die? Is your heart so set upon the world, that you must have it,
though you have Hell and damnation with it? Well might the Poet cry out and
wish -- (...),
(...) Phocylid.


-- (...) Phocyl.

Transeundum est: excutit redeuntem natura, sicut intrantem; non licet plus
efferre quam intuleris; imo eti^as ex eo quod ^o vitam attulistipars magna
ponenda est. Sen. Epist.


3. What will you do with those worldly riches you are so eager to obtain? or
what can they do for you? Will you take them with you to your Graves? or carry
them with you to another world? You know you cannot: Job. 1. latter end. Eccl.
5.15. No not so much as to fill your hand. It was a ridiculous action of a rich
man, that Mr. Rogers in his Treatise of Love speaks of, that being very sick to
death called for his Gold, and being brought to him took a twenty shillings
piece and put it in his mouth, saying, Some are wiser than some; this I will
take with me however: If some were not wiser than he, they would all be fools;
for he and his gold might perish together: though it may be likely that when he
was dead, his gold was taken from him, and so in his own sense he was not wiser
than others. But will gold go in Heaven or in Hell? There it is nothing worth.
When you have got much by your trading, which keeps you from praying, will it
not make you loath to dye, having laid up no better treasure elsewhere? and vex
you to the heart, that for this you have lost God and Christ and Heaven and
your souls, and your riches too at last? As Mr. Latimer, in a Sermon before
King Edward the Sixth, relates of a rich man that was sick, and one coming to
him and seeing how he was, told him, he thought he could not recover, but was a
dead man; who presently flew into a rage, saying, Must I die? Send for the
Physician, wounds! sides! heart! Must I die? must I die? wounds! sides! heart!
Must I die, and leave all my riches? and so continued crying out in this
language, till he dyed: and are these the things you are so earnest for, that
you can find no time to pray for better? A like passage Mr. Jeremy Buroughs on
Psalm. 17.14. relates of one that once lived near to him, that being sick called
for his bags of silver, and hugging them in his arms said, Must I leave you?
must I leave you? Pray for an interest in God and Christ, and when you die,
being his and he yours, you shall not leave him, but be taken into fuller
enjoyment of him. Consider again, as you cannot take them with you when you
die, so these things cannot comfort you in your Sickness. As the same Author
mentions another, that on his sick bed called for his bags of gold, which being
brought he laid to his breast as near his heart as he could, but after a while
said, Here, take them again, take them again; these will not do, these will not
do. What will not bags of gold do? No: they are trash and dirt to a dying man.
What will they not do? They will not procure health to a sick man, nor prolong
life to a dying man, nor speak peace to a troubled man, nor procure Heaven for
a graceless man: No, no, it will not do, it will not do; and you shall find it
will not do. And are these the things you are so bent upon, that you have no
time for looking after these to pray to God for something that would do you
good, while you live, when you die, and after death? Consider, and be wiser.

4. -- (...). Theocrit. Epig.
It is a great mistake that Prayer will hinder you in your worldly Callings: To
drive a trade for Heaven, and on Earth, may both be done. You cannot love both
with a predominate love, nor serve both as principal Masters; but you may work
for one, and pray for the other. When you are in a Journey, does it hinder you
to stay and bait? If you were traveling far, if you bait daily, you may come
there in time; but if you did not bait at all, you would never get thither. It
is a true Proverb, Prayer and Provender hinder no man. Surely you forget that
the success of all your labors depends upon the blessing and providence of
God: Cannot God blast your endeavors, and blow upon your estates, and cause
you to put it into a bag with holes? Hag. 1.6. Nothing is more likely to
further you than Prayer.

5. Tell me in good earnest, and let thy Conscienee speak: Non exiguum temporis
habemus, sed multum perdi^us: s^tis longa vita and in maximarum rerum
consummationem large data est, si tota been collocaretur; sed ubi per luxum and
negligentiam defluit, ubi nulli rei bonae impenditur, ultima demum necessitate
cogente, quam ire non intelleximus, transisse sentimus: ita est, non accepimus
brevem vitam, sed fecimus; nec inopes ejus, sed prodigi sumus. Senec de brev.
vita
do thou not mispend more time every day, than this duty would take up? Art
thou not longer in some impertinent company, and longer in some unnecessary
business, or lingering and loytering at home, or abroad, or at some Club or
other, longer than Family Prayer may be profitably performed; and yet say, thou
have no time?

6. What if God should visit thy Family with some lasting sickness, and take
thee and thy Servants too from your work and callings, and make you spend that
time in sickness in your beds from your labor, which you would not spend in
Prayer? Must you find a time to be sick and dye, and yet find no time to pray?

Ab! quid respondere velit
Ch^isto venturo de coelis,
Cum a te poscet rationem
Ob boni remissionem,
Et mali commissionem?
Dies illa dies irae,
Quam conemur praevenire
Obvia^que deo ire.

7. Will thou tell God so, when thou stand at his Judgment Seat? Which of you
is the man (Stand forth) that shall be accused at the Bar of God, that he did
not pray to God in his Family, that will now say, he will give God this answer
then, Lord, I was so employed in the World and my Family too, that we had no
leisure for thy Service. No? not to look after Heaven? nor to seek my favor
and my love? nor to beg for pardon and salvation? Go get you gone, Go get you
down to a place of torment; though you could find no time to pray to me, I will
find an eternity to plague and punish you.

Quantus tremor esi futurus,
Quando Judex est venturus,
Cuncta stricte discussuru^?
Quid tum, miser, tum dicturus?
Quem patronum rogaturus
Quam vix justus sit securus?
(...). Epict. Enchir. cap. 66.
8. Are you the better for your riches, when you have by this labor got them?
or do you work so hard, and spend your time, even all your time, for such
things, that when you have them, you are no better? You account him the best
man in the Parish, that has the most riches, and is the greatest; but so does
not God, (no, the Heathens would not neither;) but he that is most holy, and
loves God best, and serves him most. Those are goods indeed, that make you good
indeed: but you are the worse, by how much you spend your time, more precious
than all in time you get, with the neglect of your duties unto God.

Nolo tollas cupiditatem, sed mutes; nolo perdas, sed lucreris: avarum
cupiditas argentei nummi incitat ad cupiendum aureum; pro quo relinquit
argenteum: namque ipse valor argentei est in aureo, ideo plures aereos atque
argenteos pro uno commutat aureo: O locupletissimum qui ita suas cupiditates
contrahit^! -- Commutanda omnia pro Deo sunt, and totum gaudium nostrum
latissimum in uno colligendum: Nolo aliquid nimis severum; nolo ut consumas
cupiditates omnes: sed ut resumas omnes, and in una sumas. Nieremb. de art.
volunt. p. 369.
9. What if thou should sometime sustain some loss in thy outward estate, if
it be made up with the favor of God, and true peace of Conscience in the way
of duty, and with the real advantage of thy own Soul, and the Souls of all thy
Family? Can thou be willing to lose nothing for the gaining of Heaven? or
had thou rather that thou and they should lose God and Christ and Glory and
Souls and all? Surely when you come to cast up your accounts, what you have
got, and what you have lost, your gains will prove your loss.

10. If God should bring back some from the Grave and Hell, and set them in
this world again, do thou think, that they would so follow the World, and run
up and down after money, that they would say, they could find no time to pray
that they might escape that dreadful place of Torment they had been in? If some
of those that have been in Hell but a Month or two, were now in thy
circumstances, do thou think they would not let their work stand still, or
rise the sooner, and sit up the later, or would deny themselves much of their
eating time and sleeping time, that they might have time to pray, Lord let us
not go down to Hell again: O let us not return to the place which we have found
to be so restless and so dreadful? And should not thou be as much and often,
and as earnest with thy Family, that neither thou nor any of thine be cast into
it?

I durst not let this pass (though I am sensible I have taken up too much room)
without endeavoring to remove this hindrance that lies in the way to keep many
Families from their knees in Holy Prayer. I beg for the Lord's sake, and for
your Soul's sake, that you would watch against it, and resolve against it, and
that your worldly Interest shall no longer keep you from Family Prayer.

In the close then of all that has been said, Let me in the Name of God exhort
you all to the practice of Family Prayer. You have heard it proved to be your
duty, you have been directed how you might manage it for the good of all in
your houses, you have had motives to press you to the performance of it, your
pretenses and excuses brought against it have been manifested to be frivolous
and vain; What say you Sirs? Will you resolve upon it here in the presence of
the Lord? or will you still neglect it? Shall I lose all my labor? or shall it
be in vain that I have preached, and you have heard this Doctrine? I tell you
to your faces, it shall not be in vain; the word of the blessed God shall
convince you and reform you, or condemn you. What come we hither for, but
faithfully to show you your duty, and earnestly to persuade you to obey? Do
Ministers study for you, when you are sleeping in your beds, and declare the
mind and will of God in the Congregation, and will you cast all our counsel
behind your back? I hope you will be wiser for your own everlasting happiness.
Say then, Are you convinced in this point, that it is your duty? If not, view
over again what has been said, and seriously consider it, and let me beg this
at your hands, that you would think of all Now, as you would do, if you were
with an awakened Conscience upon your dying bed, or if you were standing at
God's Judgment bar, and when this question is put to you (whether you ought to
pray in your Families?) Let Conscience say, Yes or No, according as its verdict
and dictate shall be at Death and Judgment, and then I am persuaded you will
say, you are convinced you ought to do it. And are you indeed? What! and yet go
on in the omission of it? Will you so sin against your Consciences? will you
dare so to do? You Parents, for God's sake consider in what a condition you
have brought your Children into the world; are they not by nature enemies to
God? dead in sin, children of wrath, unfit for Heaven, Such Parents are like
the Ostrich. You, negligent Parents, read Job. 39.13. to 19. and Lam 4.3. Look
your faces in that Glass: Do you not blush, Look, that you are so like to such
a foolish bird?

Struthio-camelus der^linquit ova sua in terra -- crudelis in prolem: nihil
praestupiditate, oblivione and crudelitate filiis suis timet. Vales. Phil. Sac.

Sicut haec avis non curat sua ova, ita insipientes non curant instrui liberos
in pietate. Franzius.

The Ostrich, if it thrust her neck or head into any shrub or bush, and get
that hidden, thinks her self safe, and that no man sees her. Plin. Not. Hist.
Such fools are these ungodly Parents, that, if they get their heads under their
roofs, remember not that God sees their great neglect there.


and in danger of damnation? and will you not so much as pray daily with them,
that they may be delivered out of this condition, and be saved from damnation?
is it nothing to you whether your Children are damned or saved? is it nothing
to you whether they live with the blessed glorious God, or with cursed Devils
and damned Souls? have you no pity nor compassion for them, that are flesh of
your flesh? where are the earnings of your hearts? where are the workings of
your bowels? if their bodies were a dying, would you not pray by their bed
sides, that they may be preserved from ^he grave? and will you not, that their
Souls might be saved from Hel^? Dare you not be guilty of the murder of their
bodies, and dare you of their Souls? do not the Laws of men justly hang those
that do the one, and will not the Laws of God righteously damn them that do the
other? You Fathers, and you Mothers, can you look upon your Graceless,
Christless Children, and not pity them, and weep over them, and call them to
you to come and pray with you? have you not a word to say to God for them in
their hearing? will you not call them to this duty, and let them be
eyewitnesses of the tears that you should shed in lamenting their sinful state
and misery thereby? and ear-witnesses of the requests you put up to God for
their conversion? and how might this work upon their hearts, if they were? But
what shall I say to you Fathers, and to you Mothers, that do neglect your duty,
which God requires for the good of your Children? the Father does not pray,
the Mother does not persuade him, nor entreat him so to do, and by the
negligence of both the Children are ungodly: Are they more wicked, or you more
cruel? They are full of Impiety, and you are full of cruelty; both Father and
Mother: because it is so much long of you that they are so bad.

Crudelis Matter magis, an puer Improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter. Virg. Eclog. 8.
Appendatur and hoc,
Crudelis pater es, per te puer Improbus ille.
But if the profane Parents and Masters amongst us will not reform and pray in
their houses; shall I not prevail with many of you Professors, that have been
shamefully guilty of this neglect? Then pluck off your visard of Profession
abroad, and tell us what you are: Do not deceive us any longer, and make the
world believe you are that which you are not, but let us know what you are.
What shall I say? Will nothing prevail? Then they that are for hell, are for
hell, and we cannot help it. But it will be more profitable for you, and your
Families, that you be really and indeed what you have with much zeal abroad
professed your selves to be. I pray you be better in your houses, and act as
men resolved for Heaven, and to have all your Family with you there: However if
any do miscarry, let it not be by your neglect. And as for you that have and do
make conscience of this duty, go on, and the Lord be with you: go on, Sirs,
hold out, it is but a little while, and your praying shall be turned into
perfect praising: go on, that your Children might bless God that they had such
Parents, and your Servants bless God that they had such Masters, and that ever
they came under your roof, and lived within the walls of your house: you will
have comfort when you come to dye in the review of holy diligence, and might
leave them with peace, which will be better to you than all the world; Keep
fast then your resolution, That while you live, you and your house will serve
the Lord.

What are the Duties of Husbands and Wives toward each other? Sermon. XVI.
Ephesians. 5.33. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular so love his Wife
as himself, and the Wife [see] that she reverence her Husband.


MY business is to declare from this Scripture, What are the Duties of Husbands
and Wives toward each other. A Subject of manifest Use and Need: For as this
Relation is the (...). Hieroc. de nupt. p. 210.
Foundation of all others in the world, so the right discharge of the Duties
hereof does greatly promote the like in all the rest. But here it is easier to
Direct, than to Persuade; and harder to please Man than God. And (you know) We
must be faithful to Him, and we must be faithful to you: and you must labor to
bring your Will to the Rule, and not to bring the Rule to your Will. And your
Rule is laid down in these words, Nevertheless, let every one of you in
particular so love his Wife as himself, and the Wife see that she reverence her
husband.

Wherein you have 1. The Connection [Nevertheless;] that is to say, So Zanch.
Musc. in loc.
leaving that mystery of the spiritual Marriage, let every one of you, etc. Or
(...) veruntamen. Trem. Vulg. caeterum. Gagn.
notwithstanding that the Copy proposed ver. 15. of Christ's love to his Church
is so superlative and above your reach, yet let every one of you so love his
Wife as himself: unless we understand it illatively, and read it So Dutch
Annot. Bez. Ham. in loc.
, So then or therefore; q. d. the sum and short of what is said, amounts to
this, that Non dicit verum vos, sed verum and vos, q.d. sicut Christus
Ecclesiam suam dilexit- Zanch Musc. in loc.
as Christ loved his Church, so every one of you, etc.

2. The Direction, in the rest of the verse, let every one of you, etc. Wherein
you see,

1. The Universal Obligation of it, [let every one of you,] which might with
some ordinary supplement to the Graecis and Latinis deest aliquid hic
supplendum, viz. vos singuli id praestate Gagn. So our old Translation.
Greek make a sentence of it self; thus, let every one of you (though you be
never so good, and though they be never Sive hae formosae sint, sive deformes,
sive divites, sive pauperes, sive morigerae, sive immorigerae, ad unum omnes.
Zanch. Musc. in loc.
so bad) look to this, do you this.

2. The particular Application of it [in particular;] what has been determined
in general, let it be applied by every one to themselves. For both these
passages may well respect both Husband and Wife, and do import that each of
them should study and practice their particular Duty.

3. The Summary Description of each of these their Duties. And

1. Here is the sum of every husband's Duty. [To love his Wife.] Indeed this is
not All, but this is the chief of All, this will fulfill All. And to this is
added an excellent Clause [as himself] which may pass both for a Rule and for a
Reason. 1. For a Rule, for he that may not know How our Savior loved his
Church, yet cannot but know (...) Chrysostom. in loc.
, how he should love himself; why, let him love his Wife as himself. 2. For a
Reason; for it being certain, that a man's wife is a great part of himself, that
they are but (...) Id. in Coloss. hom. 12.
Two in One, let every one of you love his wife as himself.

2. Here is the sum of every Wife's Duty. [And the Wife see that she reverence
her husband.] Where the word [see] is added in our Translation as a convenient
Ellipsis sub. (...) aut tale. Camer. in loc.
supplement to the sense, though it be not in the Letter of the Greek. But the
Substance of the Wife's Duty is here concluded to be Reverence (as we translate
it) though most others read it (...) So Dutch Annot. Vulg. Beza. etc.
Fear. And doubtless intends that inward Respect to the Place and Person of an
husband, which inclines them to a voluntary (...) doctrina de reverentiae
cultu, quo is qui inferior est, superiorem colit. Beza in loc.

Fear; i. e with respect and awe be subject to him. Dutch.

Nusquam erit volunta^ia subj^ctio nisi praecedat reverentia. Calv. in loc.


subjection, and an agreeable behavior. Which Reverence or Fear is so far from
excluding Love, that it both supposes it, and is an effect of it. For when we
love, we study to please, and fear to offend,

And though there be no express Explication of this Duty of the Wife, as there
was of the Husband's, who is charged to love his wife as himself; yet there is
an implicit Direction to the Wife in her duty to her Husband, namely, to
reverence him, and to be subject to him as unto her She to behave her self
reverently to her husband as to her Head. Ham. in loc.
Head.

So that our Lesson hence is plain, which is this:

DOCTR.
Doctr. That Every Husband should love his Wife as himself, and every Wife
should reverence her Husband.

This is the Dictate of our Creator both by the Light of Nature and of
Scripture. This is the constant language both of the Old Testament and of the
New. And is more purposely handled and pressed by the two great Apostles of the
Jews and Gentiles, that so all Christians, however descended, should submit
unto it. The Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 5.22. etc. Col. 3.18. etc. The Apostle Peter,
1 Pet. 3.1. etc.

Not that these are all their respective Duties; but these are specified either
1. Mr. Byfield on Col p. 111.
Because in these are the most frequent failings. Husbands too commonly being
defective in their Love, and Wives most defective in their Reverence and
Subjection. Or 2. Because these two are the sum of the rest, and no other
Duties are either Possible or Acceptable without them.

And my present Work is to digest and urge these in a solemn and impartial
manner, that it may appear, Our Religion does not only propound Rewards to make
us happy in the world to come, but does also direct the methods of settling our
quiet and comfort in this present world. For certainly, it is not the Having of
Husbands or Wives that brings contentment, but the mutual Discharge of both
their Duties; and this makes their Lives, though never so poor, an Heaven upon
Earth.

But herein I can but draw up an Abstract, and send you where you may be far
better provided. In the mean time, let us all in the prosecution hereof sadly
reflect on our former failings, and sincerely resolve on future amendment,
according to that whereof we shall be convinced by the word of Truth.

And here, I shall endeavor these Four things.

1. To propound the Mutual or Common Duties of Both.

2. The special Duty of every Husband.

3. The special duty of every Wife.

4. Directions how to accomplish them, That so they may most certaily be
Blessings to each oher.

Mutual Duties that lie common between Husband and Wife, wherein Both of them
are equally (at least according to the place and power of each) concerned and
obliged. And they are These following.

1. Mutual Cohabitation. For the man, he Genesis 2.24.
must leave father and mother, and cleave to his Wife: And the Woman, she Psalm.
45.10.
must forget her kindred and her fathers house. The Husband, 1 Pet. 3.7. (...)
he must dwell with the Wife: and the Wife, 1 Cor. 7 10.
she must not depart from the Husband, though he be an Infidel. And indeed the
Ends and Duties of marriage are such, as will not ordinarily dispense herewith.
For Example, 1 Cor. 7.3, 4.5. Let the husband render unto the Wife due
benevolence, and likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife has not
power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband has not
power of his own body, but the wife. Defraud you not the one the other, except
it he with consent for a time, that you may give your selves to fasting and
prayer, and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your
incontinency. Which plainly shows that even the sober use of the Marriage Bed
is such The wife of Galeac. Caracciola denying this debt (upon the direction of
her Confessor on pain of Excommunication) was judged a sufficient Reason of
Divorce. In vita.
a mutual debt, that it may not be intermitted long without Necessity and
Consent. Nay in the Deuteronomy. 24 5.
Old Law, the greatest necessity should not send the husband from his wife the
first year, that their affections might be thoroughly settled, and that he might
cheer up his Wife which he has taken. For the man is the head, the Woman is as
the body: for the head and body to be sundered it is present death to either.
Gataker Sermon. p. 203.
Neither indeed can any of the following Duties toward each others Souls or
Bodies be thoroughly performed, nor many grievous snares avoided, without
dwelling together.

And therefore neither desire of Gain; nor Fear of Trouble, no occasional
Distasts, nor pretense of Religion, should separate those from Conjugal
converse and Alibi fluctuare sese existimet; in domo autem apud uxorem suum,
tanquam in portu optat^ conquiescere. Daven in Col.
Cohabitation (unless with consent, and that but for a time) whom God has
joined together.

2. Mutual Love. This, though in a peculiar manner it be the Duty of the
Husband. Col. 3.18. Husbands, love your Wives; yet it is required also of the
Wife, Tit. 2.4. they must love their Husbands. Indeed this is the First you
must choose your Love, and then you must love your choice. Smith Sermon.
Conjugal Grace, the great Reason, and the great Comfort of Marriage. Not a
sensual or doting Passion; but genuine, conjugal, and constant, out of a pure
heart fervently. Not grounded on beauty, wealth, or interest; for these may
soon wither and fail: nor only upon Graoe and Piety; for this may decay to the
least degree, and in the opinion of both parties quite disappear: but it must
be grounded upon the Command and Ordinance of God, whereby of Two they are made
Vna caro, non nexu amoris, nec commixtione corporum, nec procreatione
liberorum, sed vinculo conjugii. Zanch.
One flesh. So that though either of them be poor, deformed, froward; though
unregenerate, wicked, Infidels; yet in Obedience to God, and in Conscience of
the Marriage-Vow, which obliges for better and for worse, they ought to love
each other with a (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 29.
superlative Love; and when the sacred knot is once tied, every man should
think his wife, and every wife her husband, the fittest for them of any in the
world. And hereupon the Cael. Rhodig. l. 28. p. 1575.
Heathens took the Gall from their nuptial Sacrifices, and cast it behind the
Altar: to intimate the removing of all bitterness from the Marriage-state;
there should be nothing but Love.

And this Love must be as durable and constant, as are the grounds of it, to
the Persons of each other until death; and to the memory and posterity of each
other, when they are dead and gone: and thus the good wife is understood (by
some) to do her husband good Prove. 31.12.
all the days of her life, not only of his life, but, when he is dead, to his
Posterity. What strange instances of this lasting love former Portia the wife
of Brutus. A ria the wife of Cecinna Pae us. In Valor. Max.
Ages has given, and some The Bannyon Wives among the Indians burn themselves
to ashes at the funeral of their husbands. Herbert in his Travels.
Pagans at this day, is in History both evident and admirable.

This true-hearted Love will bring true Content and constant Comfort into that
Condition, will make all counsels and reproofs acceptable, will keep out
Jealousy, that bane of marriage comfort, will keep the thoughts fixed, and the
heart chaste: for it is not the Having an Husband or Wife, but the Loving of
them, that preserves from Adultery. This will prevent or soon quiet those
storms within doors; as we see the Mother that dearly loves her Child, though
it cry all night and disturb her quiet, yet Love to it makes them very good
friends in the morning. If Love be eclipsed for a day or an hour between
husband and wife, they are Mr. Baxter's Direct. p. 520.
like a bone out of joint, there is no ease, nor order, nor work well done,
till it be restored again.

3. Mutual Fidelity, especially to the Marriage Bed, and also in each others
secrets. And this is directed 1 Cor. 7.2. Let every man have his [Own] wife,
and let every woman have her [Own] husband. By which Rule, the thoughts,
desires and actions of each of them are confined to their Choose whether Adam
thou will imitate, the Old or the New; the one has but one Wife, the other
has but one Church. Hierome cited by Gataker.
own lawful yoke fellow, as the dearest, sweetest, and best Object in the
world, and this by virtue of the Covenant of their God. The least Aberration
herein (if it be not speedily and sincerely mortified) will strangely get
ground and fester in the Soul, and never rest till it come to plain Adultery.
See of this, largely and excellently, Lud. Viv. de Christ. foemin. p. 699.
And then the Comfort of their lives, the quiet of their consciences, and the
credit of their families lie bleeding; and without true Repentance, their
eternal happiness shipwrack't. Yea, this virtually dissolves the Bond of
marriage, and (if the Deuteronomy. 22.22.
Divine Law were executed) brings the offender to a severe Death. And though
some greater Shame and other Inconveniences do follow the unfaithfulness of the
Wife; yet man and wife being One flesh, and equal power granted to them over
the bodies of each other, the guilt of this sin is equal: unless the wisdom and
strength of the man do make his fault the greater.

And therefore all possible care must be used to avoid all occasions and
incentives of wandering desires from home; and the rather, because he or she
that is not content with one, will not be content with more; for sin is
boundless, and nothing but Grace and the Grave can limit the desires of the
Heart.

The same Faithfulness is necessary in the wise concealment of each others
secrets, whether Natural, Moral, or Civil, unless in such cases wherein a
superior Obligation does release them. For there cannot be a more unnatural
treachery, than when Husband or Wife (the nearest of Friends) make one another
obnoxious to shame or harm. Bad, when it is done by Inadvertence; worse, when
in their Passion; worst of all, when it is through ill will and malice.

4. Mutual Helpfulness. Hence they are called Yokefollows. And of the Woman it
was said at her Creation, that she should be an Gen 2.18 (...)
Help meet for him, which may be rendered, an Help like him: for they should be
both of them Helps to each other. There are Three Yokes which they must jointly
carry, 1. The Yoke of Cares. This all people must expect to bear in a married
condition, and (for the most part) that of Labor also. And these lying always
on one shoulder will overload; but when some help comes in, the husband takes
care without, the wife takes care within; the husband travels abroad, the wife
is busy at home, then the burden is easier. To this end, it behooves the Wife
to read often the last Chapter of Proverbs, and the husband the rest of that
Book, for their quickening hereunto. 2. The Yoke of Crosses and troubles. For
such as are married, though they expect nothing but pleasure, yet 1 Cor. 7.28.
must have trouble in the flesh, losses in their estates, afflictions in their
children, crosses both from friends and enemies. Now every man and woman should
choose such yoke-fellows as may be Friends as well as Relations; and may
comfort, support and advise each other with all faithfulness and sympathy. 3.
The Yoke of Jesus Christ. For they should 1 Pet. 3.7.
live as heirs together of the Grace of Life. And it is the highest end of
their Relation, to promote one the others everlasting happiness. The Knowledge
of the husband must help the wife, and the Zeal of the wife must help the
husband. When Cael. Rhodig. l. 28.
the Sun shines, the Moon absconds; when that is set, this appears. When the
husband is at home, then it is his work to instruct and pray with his Family,
and sanctify the Sabbath; but in his absence, the wife is his stated Deputy,
and must look to it. And both must study both in Prudence and Conscience to be
of One mind, encouraging, reproving or correcting their Inferiors; lest their
Authority be weakened, their spirits distempered, and their endeavors
frustrate^.

5. Mutual Patience. etc. (...) Quomodo probabit homo animam suam? si p^ssit
tolerare uxorem malam. Buxt. ex Miphcah Happen.
This Grace we are bound to exercise toward all men, how much more to such
near and dear Relations? Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and
evil speaking be put away, with all malice. And be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God does for Christ's sake forgive
us, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Innumerable are the (l) Occasions that may minister
Contention in the daily affairs, wherein they are concerned, and Satan is ever
ready to blow the coal, and they have corrupt and froward Natures: and
therefore there is a flat necessity of this blessed Grace. Alas! a civil War
within doors is the most intolerable. The soul, the body, the worship of God,
the affairs, the Family are all disordered by it. No good can come of it;
passion reforms nothing, but Magis v^remur prud^ntes, quam i acundos: plus
cogit qu etum imperium, quam vehemens: imperiosior concitatione quies. Lu. Viv.
de Christ Foem p. 729.
patience may; the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

The married Couple therefore must study and pray for a meek and quiet spirit;
mortify pride, learn self-denial, and sometimes wisely Thus Albu^ us lived
with his Terentiana 25 years; and P. Rubrius Celer with his Ennia 44 years
without a quarrel. So Mr. Smith in his Sermons tells of a choleric couple that
kept the peace by each keeping silence, when the other was angry.
withdraw till the storm be over; and hold their peace, to keep the peace. They
must consider (as Holy Mr. Bolton says) that two Angels are not met together,
but too sinful children of Adam, from whom little can be expected but weakness
and waiwardness. They must reckon the greatest worth and honor to be first in
Overtures of Peace, and never suffer those unnatural heats to ferment. What
honor or comfort can any one have in falling out with Himself? What prize in
that Victory? Let some (...). Arist. de cura rei fam. l. 1.
lesser faults be winked at, and let the husband spy a Observanda sunt ^orro
admonendi tempora. Officium extra tempus molestia est: Quum pectus illius nulla
pertu^batione ^gitur, se^^sum and s^motis arbitri^, cum dexteritate and
suavitate sermonis. L. Viv p. 717.
season discreetly to admonish his Wife; and the wife respectfully to acquaint
the husband of things amiss. And if the faulty person would conscientiously
make an acknowledgment of their Error to the other, and both beg pardon of God
for it, it would be a good Antidote against the like folly, and bring glory to
God. This is certain, he or she that can without scruple injure the other, is
not kept from wronging others by any honest Principle. And lastly, let them
consider, that it is much better to give place to one another, than by
nourishing anger to give place to the Devil.

6. Mutual endeavors for each others Salvation. This is clearly inferred from 1
Cor. 7.16. For what know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy husband?
O how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife? q.d. This should
be your chief design, and if you can attain this, though with trouble, you are
Made. How Paganish, yea how brutish a thing is it, only to enjoy the comforts
of marriage together, and then to go together into Hell? If you suffer one
another to be damned, where is your Nunquam verus and perpetuus erit amor, nisi
in it is rebus collocetur, quae etiam sepulchro sunt superstites. Lu. Viv. de
oss. marit.
Love? Nay how can you lie (with comfort) with a limb of the Devil in your
bosom? It Is true, they must not pass uncharitable Censures on one another,
either in heart or in speech; nor condemn them in their everlasting estate for
every deviation, nor obtrude religions matters in a distastful manner; but they
ought affectionately to enquire into the spiritual estate of each other; and,
if need require, use all proper means incessantly to bring the ignorant or
vicious party into the good ways of God. And that by drawing them to the means
of Grace, and giving them no rest in the unsafe condition of unrenewed Nature.
(...). Chrysostom. in Ep. 5. hom. 20.
Let them both go to the Church (says Chrysostom) and afterward at home, let
the husband require of the wise, and the wife of the husband, those things
which were spoken and read, or at least some part thereof. And what know
thou, O man, but hereby thou may save thy wife? that is, thou know nothing
to the contrary. Nay, there is a Flavius Cl men's kinsman to Domitia, by his
Wife Domitia: Clodoverus King of France by Clotilda: Her ^ogillus King of the
Goths by his Wife Jugula, etc.
Cloud of witnesses to verify the blessed effects of these endeavors.

And if you be both married to Christ Jesus, your work is to build up one
another in your most holy faith, and in all wisdom and holiness. And to that
end you ought carefully to watch over each other, lest at any time you fall
into temptation. To study each others dispositions, consider each others
snares, observe each others decays in zeal and piety, that you may speedily
apply remedies, and exhort one another daily, lest either of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. Your Desinat paulatim in vobis sexus
discerni, and incipite ad coelestem illam vitam prae^ud^re, in qua nullus est
s^xus. Lud. Vives. de ^ff mar.
Curtain-talk should often be of God, and of your eternal estate, and you
should improve that Analogy which is between Jesus Christ and his Church, and
the married couple, to your comfort and direction. In short, you should in both
your carriages declare plainly, that you are going together to seek a Country.

7. Mutual Ce^^ nen^ia legem nuptiarum honorat. Tert. de monog.
marriage-Chastity. For marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled,
Heb. 13.4. And the great care both of husband and wife should be to be Neque
alibi magis quam apud uxorem maritus vereundiam adhibere debet, sentiens ci
thalamum scholam esse aut modestiae aut impudicitiae. Plutarch. praec. conjug.
Chaste in marriage, to abhor all wanton speeches, and unfit incentives of lust,
and to be sober, seasonable, and regular in the use of the marriage bed. They
should beware lest they make that Ordinance, which is the Vt qu^d sanis possit
esse officium, fit aegrotis remedium. Aug. de Genesis ad lit. l. 9. c. 7.
Remedy of impure affections, to be the Nurse and Exciter of them. They must
not think that their Relation does legitimate every folly which they can
perpetrate, or that inordinate or immoderate pleasures can ever agree with the
bed undefiled. See Bolton's Gener. dir. p. 243. at large.
A man may be a wicked Drunkard with his own drink, and a wretched Beast in his
own marriage bed. I might here bring in Divines of late, Fathers of old, yea
Philosophers themselves agreeing in their censures of these extravagances, and
telling us that the pleasures of Marriage should be Sapiens judicio amat
conjugem, non affectu. Lomb. ex Hieron.
serious, circumspect, and mixed with severity, and that an Adulter est uxoris
propriae amator ordentior, Sextus Pythag.
intemperate man in wedlock differs little from an Adulterer.

Let all married persons therefore remember, that the Holy eye of God is upon
them; that their bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and that they must
render a strict account unto the Lord of every secret thing. There is need,
even in a married estate, to crucify our fleshly Lusts; and to deny our
natural and lawful desires at such times as Natural Modesty or Quamvis munda
sint conjugia, tamen etiam a licitis abstinendum est, ut facilius ad effectum
dedacatur eratio. Ambr. to. 5.
Religion command Abstinence, and so make them unlawful. Keep therefore an
inviolable Decorum in your converse together; show Reverence to God, bear
reverence to one another, (...). Hierocl. in Car. Pyth.
reverence your selves. Be assured of this, that true love behaves not it self
unseemly, and that modesty is the best preserver of nuptial Chastity.

8. Mutual care of each others Health, Wealth, Credit and Contentment. This the
nature of their Relation, the Ordinance of God, and the sameness of their
Interests requires from them. They ought to be tender of each others Health,
and Qu^d si unus estis homo. non du^: aegrotare ille non potest, quin tu
aeg^otes: nec illa esse pauper, te divite: quodque inter amicos contingere non
potest, quomodo in tanta amoris and animorum copula continge^? Lud. Vives de
off. mar.
sick in one another sickness: The husband must improve all his skill and
strength to procure a competence of estate, and the wife all hers to help and
further it. The Reputation of the wife the husband must tender as the apple of
his eye, and the wife must every way advance the good name of her husband. And
in short, the Holy Ghost has determined, that he that is married cares for
the things of the world, how he may please his wife; and she that is married,
cares for the things of the world, Circa ejus lectum sunt sacra omnia, ibi
arae, ibi Deus, ubi pax and concordia and charitas. Deum facile tibi amicum
reddes, si hominem reddideris. Lud. Viv. de Christ. foem. p. 710.
how she may please her husband, 1 Cor. 7. 33, 34.

This will bring honor to Religion, comfort to their lives, and a blessing on
all they have. This will make them digest all the pains and troubles of that
condition, seeing they find two to be better than one, and do never miss of a
sweet and constant Summus autem amicitiae gradus est foedus conjugale. Melan.
l. c.
friend in their bosom. Without this care the one will be a perpetual burden to
the other, and a daily torment. When the one is unconcerned in the others
trials; when the one gathers and the other scatters; when the one blasts the
others reputation; when one perpetually crosses and vexes the other; There
follows a Hell of disquiet in the mind, ordinarily a blast upon the estate,
besides guilt and shame unspeakable.

Think therefore often, God has made us One; if my wife be sick, I am not half
well; if my husband be poor, I cannot be rich; if he be discontent, how can I
be content? we will laugh and weep together, nothing but Death shall separate our
Affections or Interests.

9. Mutual Prayer. Hence the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3.7. advises, that their
Prayers be not hindered; which implies that they should pray for and with one
another. Thus Isaac is said, Genesis 25.21. to (...) (h) Verba fudit magna copia:
ante, e regione, ante oculos.
multiply prayers with, or before his wife, and it follows how prevalent these
prayers were. This Common Debt we owe to all, much more to them that are so
nearly united to us. The purest love is written in Prayer. This Duty must
constantly be done for, and frequently with each other. No better preservative
of real love and peace, than praying together. There they must bewail their
failings in their conjugal Relations, the Cum vero non amor procreandae
sobolis, sed volu^tas dominatur in opere commixtionis, habeant conjuges etiam
de commixione sua, quod defleant. Lombard. l. 4. d. 31.
pollutions that cleave to the marriagebed. There they should beg the blessing
of Children, and blessings upon their Children, a blessing upon their Estates,
and especially all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ upon their
souls. Who knows but that God may touch the heart of the Wife, when the husband
is pouring out prayers for her? Certainly they are in the discharge of their
duty, to which God has annexed a promise.

And it will be the wisdom of them both to espy Fit times for their
joynt-Prayers, if they cannot keep Pace with Holy Mr. Bolton, who prayed twice
daily alone, twice with his Wife, and twice with his Family. And herein
consider, what particular grace or mercy your Relation wants; what sin and
temptation they are most liable to, and press God with an humble importunity in
the case, till your prayer be answered. You owe each other a spiritual as well
as as a matrimonial love: and if you only eat and drink together, what do you
more than others? do not the Beasts of the field so? If your love reach only to
the body and the things of this life, do not the Publicans the same? but if you
love one another souls, and be restless after the salvation thereof, you do
more than others, and your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

And thus you have heard a plain Breviate of these Common Duties, which
Husbands and Wives should discharge toward each other. I follow now the Order
of my Text, to declare in the Second place the special Duty of the Husband in
this Position, namely,

The great Duty of every Husband is to Love his own Wife. This is the
foundation of all the rest, this must be mixed with all the rest, this is the
Epitome of all the rest of his Duty. And hence this is expressly mentioned four
times in this Chapter, verse. 25, 28, 33. as being the great wheel, which by its
motion carries about all the other wheels of the affections that are within us,
and the actions that are without us. Fix but this blessed Habit in the heart,
and it will teach a man, yea it will enforce a man, to all that tenderness,
honor, care and kindness that is required of him. These are but the beams from
that Sun, they are but the fruits from that root of real Love that is within.
Love suffers long and is kind, it envies not, is not puffed up, seeks not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinks none evil, bears all things, 1 Cor.
13.4, 6.

It is here as it is in Love to God, which (you know) does both instruct and
thrust a man on to the utmost of his Duty, excluding those wary fears,
wherewith hypocrites abound, lest they should do too much. Even so Love to a
man's Wife suggests all fit expressions thereof, and carries a man to perform
the highest effects of it, when as the want of this causes him to dispute every
inch of God's command, and to be jealous of every prescription.

I shall trace this comprehensive Grace or Duty,

1. In its nature and property.

2. In its Pattern.

3. In its effects; which done, you will see that the greatest part, if not all
the Husbands Duty, is contained in Loving his Wife as himself.

1. For the First, The Nature and Property of this Love: It is Conjugal, true
aed genuine, such as is peculiar to this Relation: Not that fondness which is
proper in Children, nor the brutish lust which is peculiar to Beasts; but that
which is right and true.

1. For the ground of it; which is the near Relation which Gods Ordinance has
now brought him into, and his will revealed in his Word. Such was the Love of
Isaac to Rebeka, Genesis 24.67. She became his Wife, and he loved her. The
Ordinance of God has made her Not only by original creation, so she is part of
his flesh; but by nuptial co^junction, so she is one flesh. Gatak. Sermon. p. 200.
One Flesh with me, and the Law of Nature obliges me to love my own flesh; and
therefore though her Beauty be decayed, her Portion spent, her Weaknesses
great, and her Usefulness small, yet she is a piece of my Self, and here the
wise God has determined my affection. And when all is said; This is the only
Sure Foundation, and holds perpetually.

2. This Love must be right for the Extent of it; I mean it reaches the whole
Person, both Soul and Body. Every man should choose such an one, whose outward
features and proportion he can highly esteem and affect; and it speaks the
admirable Wisdom of God to frame such variety of fancies to answer the variety
of persons, and there being such choice, it is sottish folly to choose where a
man cannot love, and the greatest Injury possible to the wife, to ensnare her
heart, and bind her to one that shall afterward say, he cannot love her. But
besides this, true Conjugal Love to a Wife reaches her Soul; So as to see an
amiableness in her mind and disposition, so as to study how to polish her Soul
more and more with wisdom and piety, and to endeavor that her Soul may prosper
as her body prospers.

3. Right for the Degree of it. It must be transcendent, above your Love to
Parents: For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave to his Wife, Genesis 2.24. The Husband must honor his Parents, but he must
love his Wife as himself, and must (yet with all prudence) prefer her in his
respects, when ever they come in Competition; and those Parents have forgotten
the Relation and Duty of an husband that expect other from their Children, when
they are married: And so he must prefer her in his affection before his
Children, and (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 5.
rather love them for her sake, than her for theirs, and before all others in
the World. In short, he must so love her, as to delight in her company above
all others. Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe, let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love, Prove.
5.19, 20.

4. The Husbands love must be right for the Duration of it. And the last named
Scripture clears that; be thou always ravished with her love. Not only kind
before other folk, and then cold in private, but always: not for a week or
month or the first year, but while life lasts. Yea, as he has experience of
her virtue and sweetness, his love should daily Vbi uxo ^m magis fueris
expertus, tenerius est amauda -- Illud vero, ubi uxore ad satietatem fueris
potitu, refrigescere amorem, quem arder (ut videtur) libidiuis accenderat,
hominum est spurcorum and abj^ctissimorum, imo vero non hominum sed belluarum.
Lud. Vives de off mar.
increase: as you know we love any creature the more, by how much the longer we
have had them; and nothing more betrays the baseness of a man's spirit, then to
neglect his Wife, when his sensual appetite is once cloyed. For you have had
her beauty and strength, why should you not also have her wrinkles and
infirmities, yea and give the more respect to her tried fidelity? However this
is certain, still you are one Flesh, and every man continues kind to his own
flesh, how infirm and noysom soever it be. And if there be less comeliness in
the body, yet usually there is more beauty in the mind, more wisdom, humility,
and fear of the Lord; so that still there are sufficient Arguments in her, or
Arguments in the Bible to perpetuate your conjugal Affection.

2. Let us trace the Husbands Love to his Wife in its Pattern laid down in the
Scripture, and particularly in the Context and Words which I am handling. And

1. The Husband ought to love his Wife, as our Savior Christ loves his
Church. Ver. 25. Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved his
Church. He must nourish and cherish her, even as the Lord the Church, ver. 29.
Now these Texts direct us to the quality of our Love, though we cannot reach to
an equality with Christ herein.

How then does Jesus Christ love his Church? I shall search no farther into
this Depth, than so far as it is proposed in this Context for a Pattern
(surely) to all Husbands in their love. And this his Love is represented here
to be.

1. Hearty, without dissimulation. Ver. 25. He loved the Church and gave
himself for it. His Love was Real, for he Dyed of it. The Husband must write
after this Copy. Not to love his wife in word and tongue only, but in deed and
in truth; that if his heart were opened, her Name might be found written there.
Some vain complemental persons there are, that do outstrip in their overt
addresses many sincere and true-hearted husbands; but neither does God nor
should a discreet wife look only at the appearance, but at the heart.

2. Free, without being prevented before, or likely to be rewarded after. For
ver. 26. he gave himself that he might cleanse his Church, which implies that
she was in ill plight, when he began his motions. She was no beauty; no, we
loved him, because he loved us first. The Husband must precede, and by his love
draw out the love of his wife; for Ego tibi monstrabo amatorium sine
medicamento, sine herba -- Si vis amari, ama. Hec in Sen. Ep. 9.
Love is the whetstone of Love. And if she appear weak, as their sex by
constitution is, both in wisdom, strength, and courage, or prove unlovely, and
(...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 5. hom. 20.
negligent of her duty; yet he must love her: For love seeks not her own.
True love does more study to better the object beloved, than to advantage the
subject that loves. And to love a Wife only in hopes of some Advantages by
her, is unworthy the heart of an Husband, and no way like the example of Christ.

3. Holy without impurity. For ver. 26. He loved his Church, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word; that is, by the
use of the Word and Sacraments. The Husband cannot have a better Copy, and is
taught hereby to endeavor at any cost and pains whatsoever to further the
sanctification and salvation of his wife: Of which before.

4. Great without comparison. For greater love has no man than this, to lay
down his life for his friend; and so did our Savior, ver. 25. he (...)
Affectum indicat: (...) Effectum amoris demonstrat. Daven. in Col. p. 340.
gave himself for his Church. He took not on him the Nature of Angels, but
preferred the seed of Abraham. The Husband must herein imitate his Lord and
Master by preserving a singular and superlative respect for his wife, because
she is a member of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. But of this also
before.

5. Constant without alteration; even until he present his Church a glorious
Church without spot or wrinkle, ver. 27. many a weary day has he, and many an
unkind put off; yet he does not cast her off. Here is a copy for Husbands. They
must not for every fault repent their bargain, and curse the time of their
meeting; they must not be meditating a (...) (q) (...) Omnibus rebus est
permutatio, excepta uxore juventutis. Buxt. ex San^ed.
change upon any dislike, but bear and forbear; and overcome evil with good.

6. His is an active and fruitful Love; for ver. 29. he nourishes and
cherishes his Church. His poor Church is always wanting, he supplies her; she
is in trouble, he protects her; she is ready to sink, but he awakes to save
her. Such must be an Husbands Love. He must spare no cost, no pains to do his
Wife good; she now leans only upon him, he must not fail her; she has left all
her friends for him, he must not leave her: She has a Quae molestia per
singulos menses, cum velut sentina uteri purgatur? quae praegnantium fastidia?
quam praesentia enitentium discrimina? quanta enixarum jam and puerperarum?
quam illinc discedunt fractae? quot casibus and periculis obnoxiae? ut mirandum
sit, sanam ullam illarum unquam vivere. Vniversa autem vita quid aliud, quam
serviunt nobis, sive virgins parentibu, sive nuptae mari^is, sive liberis
matres? Lud. Viv. de off. mar.
succession of many infirmities; pains, and perils, he must nourish her; no
Nurse like a good Husband; he must cherish her, no Cordial, or Comforter like a
wise and loving Husband. Thus the Husband must love his Wife, as Christ loves
his Church. And again.

2. The husband ought to love his Wife as himself: So says my Text. The
Apostle had said ver. 28. so ought men to love their Wives as their own bodies:
and lest that should not be sufficient, he goes on in my Text, and says, let
every one of you in particular love his wife even as himself. And whereas it
might be said; why, so we are to love all the world; thou shall love thy
Neighbor [as thy self:] now says the Apostle, ver. 28. he that loves his
wife, he loves [himself,] which is more than as himself. Now though this Love
to a man's self is less, then that of Christ to his Church: yet it is more plain
and sensible to us: for (as was said at first) he that does not know with what
manner of Love Christ does love his Church, yet knows with what love he loves
himself. And that is (besides what was last instanced in)

1. Tenderly. No one can touch or handle a man's Innumera eveniunt cu^que
nostrum a corpore suo incommoda, nemo tamen corpus suum odit aut non diligit,
non indulget, quantum potest: and si aliquando illi irascitur, continuo post
tamen redit cum illo in gratiam. Lud. Vives de off. mar.
sores and griefs so tenderly as himself: ver. 29. No man ever yet hated his
own flesh (how unlovely soever) but nourishes and cherishes it. Such ought
the Husbands love to be toward his Wife, accompanied with the greatest
tenderness. For they are like Crystal Glasses, soon broken, if not tenderly
handled. Their Constitutions are such as inevitably make them liable to Est
etiam meticulosa, quandequidem calor animosos facu; ava^a, ^nctu ne d sit; and
tacito naturae admoni^s infirmam and invalidam se esse, cui multa sint oput.
Suspicax ex metu, querula, invida -- I qu^ei as illis partim ex varieta e
cogitationum affectionumque proficiscitur, partim ex suspitione, and m^tu. Id.
ib.
fears and passions and griefs innumerable; and therefore the Husband must deal
as tenderly with his Wife, as a man would deal with himself.

2. Cheerfully. No man is so ready to help a man as himself. His best friends
sometimes falter and are weary at length, but every man is next to himself. Let
the business be never so hard or hazardous, a man will venture when it is for
himself. So must the Husband most readily and cheerfully assist, comfort and
help his Wife. If a cloud arise between them, yet the Husbands Love must
dissolve it quickly; for no man is long angry with himself. In a word, she
should need, she should use no Mediator to her Husband in any case; for he
should have his ear open, his hand, his heart ready to pity, help, and gratify
her, even as he is ready to help himself.

3. And this brings us to the Effects of the Husbands Love to his Wife, which
is the third thing to be described. And they are 1. In Word, 2. In Deed.

1. In Word, and this more principally,

1. By diligent Instruction of his Wife, wherein she is ignorant. He ought to
dwell with his Wife according to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7. And she ought to ask her
Husband at home, when she would learn, and not speak in the Church, 1 Cor.
14.35. Yea, the Plutarch. p^aec. conjug who gives this Reason out of Homer,
Namque es ei pater and frater, verecundaque matter.
Heathen could tell the Husband, that he must gather (like a Be) wisdom and
knowledge abroad, and then communicate it to his wife at home. For this the
Husband has excellent opportunity, and woe to him if he want will or skill.
They should strive, whether she should be more ready to ask him questions, or
he to offer the occasion. This is certain, if he can do her Hoc maximum est
very amoris indicium, curare ut uxor una secum rite colat Deum in hac vita, quo
una frui Deo possint in futura. Dav. in Col. p 341.
Soul good, he lays an eternal obligation upon her to love and honor him; and
if he neglect his endeavors, she will be like to curse him for ever in Hell.

2. The Husband demonstrates his Love by gentle Reproof of his wife, when she
does amiss. He must indeed overlook many Infirmities, (...) Love covers a
multitude of sins: and as he that is always using his sword, will make it dull
at length; so he that is continually reproving, shall have the less regard
given to his reproofs. But yet he cannot love her, if he do not, when need is,
reprove her: but then, let it be with all the wisdom and tenderness imaginable.
Not before strangers, and rarely before the family; not for natural defects,
seldom for inadvertencies: and when he does it, let him make way for his
reproof by commending in her what is good; and when he has done, back it with
a Breven oportet esse mariti reprehensionem and velut ictui praeceleri
simillimum: addenda and reprehensionis ratio, etc. Lud. Viv. de off. mar.
Reason. He must be sure to mingle the oil of kindness with the myrrh of
reproof; for if he give her this potion too hot, the operation is hindered, and
his labor worse than lost. Admirable was the carriage of Job, Job 2.10. when
his wife had highly offended him with her words, yet hear how mildly he rebukes
her. Not thou wicked Caitiff, but thou speak like one of the foolish women.
Sooner or later (if she be not brutish) she will be thankful and amend.

3. The husbands Love must be demonstrated by ready encouragement of his wife,
when she does well. Prove. 31.28. Her Husband also, he praises her. He that is
discreet and faithful herein, perhaps takes the readiest way to do her good.
For such is the weakness of many, that they ever think that reproof proceeds
either from an ill Opinion or want of Affection in the husband; but when they
shall find that he is as ready to encourage them when they do well, they are
convinced and reformed.

4. The husbands Love is seen by seasonable comforting his wife in affliction;
whether it be in mind or body. So did Elkanah (1 Samuel 1.8.) Hannah: why weepest
thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am I not better to
thee then ten Sons? and this brought her to her meat, as you may see in the
next verse. And generally a kind word from an husbands mouth does good like a
medicine. And that Husband is worse than a Tigre, that supports not his poor
Wife at such a time. In her troubles of mind he must be her Casuist; in
weakness of body he must be her Comforter.

2. The Effects of an husbands Love to his wife must be in Deed also. And that
1. By making Provision for her; both of what is necessary, and also of what is
convenient for her, according to his ability. Exodus 21.10. Her food and her
raiment, and her duty of marriage he shall not diminish. Not that she has any
privilege to be maintained in Idleness, or like a Drone live upon the industry
of her husband without adding her helping hand. But the main care hereof must
lie upon her husband. And this is probably So Gataker, Hammond.
concluded to be at least a part of that honor 1 Pet. 3.7. due to the wife as
the weaker Vessel; the best kind of honor, to wit, maintenance: so that word
is frequently Matthew. 15.6. 1 Timothy 5 2.
taken: and the reason added carries it this way, namely, she is the weaker
Vessel, not able to support her self, but depends upon her husband, who must
therefore give her honor (that is, maintenance) as the weaker Vessel. She has
not that wisdom, forecast or strength for such purposes as he has: and
therefore as he has the strongest obligation upon him, and the greatest
advantages, he must lay about him by all lawful means to support and provide
for her. And that not only for her maintenance while he lives; but he ought to
make provision for her, as far as he is able, after his departure hence: for so
did Jesus Christ for his Church.

And the Husband ought to show his Love herein by the freedom and cheerfulness
of his Supplies to the wants of his wife; neither doing it grudgingly nor
niggardly; but rather, if he be able, intrusting her with some pittance in her
own disposal, that she may have occasion to exercise her charity, and to
encourage her Children or Servants in their duty.

2. This Conjugal Love is to be showed in the Tenderness of the husband toward
the wife. And this Duty is incumbent on him, as he is the Head of the wife, 1
Cor. 11.3. the head of every woman is the man. And hence the husband is bound
to Protect his wife from dangers, and to Sympathize with her in them. Thus
Abraham was a Covering to Sarah, Genesis 20.16. not only to confine her eye, but
to defend her person. And upon this account he must protect her Soul from
temptation, her Body from harm, her Name from reproach, and her Person from
contempt either of Children, Servants, or others: For as much as she has
forsaken all her friends, and cast her self upon his care and kindness; and it
would be unpardonable cruelty in him to desert or betray her. And then he ought
to sympathize with her in her troubles: but of this before. In short, his whole
carriage to her should be full of tenderness, and composed of Love and Pity.

5. The husbands Love is showed to his wife, in Giving her a good Example;
namely of Piety, Gravity, Charity, Wisdom, and Goodness, which will be the most
constant and effectual Lecture that he can read unto her. The (...). Arist. de
cura rei fam. l. 1.
Philosopher could say, That a well-bred wife, as soon as she is married,
accounts the way and course of her husband as a Law prescribed to her by God
himself. The good or evil Example of a Magistrate, Minister, or Husband, has a
more real, though insensible, influence upon the actions of their inferiors,
than all their Homines amplius oculis quam auribus eredunt: longumiter est per
praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla. Senec. Ep. 6.
Laws and Precepts. And as for the Husband, he is called the guide of her
youth, Prove. 2.17. If he be holy, quiet, and industrious; she cannot for shame,
be wicked, froward, and idle. His discourses will direct hers; his prayers will
teach her to pray; his justice, temperance and charity will be a law, a rule, a
motive to make her just, and sober, and charitable. If he be an Atheist, an
Epicure, a Pharisee, it undoes her. He is to go before her; and usually she
follows him either to Hell or Heaven.

4. An husbands Love is to be showed in his yielding to the reasonable requests
of his wife. So did David to Bathsheba, 1 Kings 1.28. So did Isaac to Rebeka,
Genesis 28.1. So did Abraham to Sarah, Genesis 16.6. though the thing it self was
grievous to him. So did Jesus Christ daily to his Church. He that loves, gives
and grants, and that readily. And the Husband should rather prevent his wife,
and give before she asks, than be difficult or hard to be entreated: she is to
take care that her requests be reasonable, and then she needs no Intercessor
for her. Famous is that instance in Story of Cleopatra, who after that her
Husband Meleager his Father, Mother, Neighbors, had all in vain solicited his
help to defend their City, they having disobliged him before, At length his
Wife runs to him, when the enemy was entering, and cries, Succurre quaeso, mi
vir: occidimus, nisi succurris. Plutarch.
Help, good Husband, else we are lost: And this charmed and roused him to their
rescue: One word from her prevailed more with him, than the cries and arguments
of all the rest. And to this may be referred, His taking her counsel in diverse
cases: So did 1 Samuel 1:23.
Elkanah; so did Genesis 21.12.
Abraham. For though you may not always perceive Judgment in her Counsel, yet
you may be always sure to find affection; and that her aim in shooting her bolt
is right, though her arm be not always with the strongest.

5. The husbands Love is to be showed in Trusting his wife in Domestic
affairs. Prove. 31.11. The heart of her husband does safely trust in her.
Especially she having, as she ought to have, a competent judgment to guide
them. It is below the gravity of an Husband to intermeddle with managing
household provisions, Maidservants, and such like affairs; but should leave
them to the discretion of his wife: unless she at fit times do discreetly
choose to advise with him; that so if the event should not answer his
expectation, she may be free from blame. But generally, he ought to move in his
own sphere, and encourage her to move in hers. He must fetch in honey, and she
must work it in the hive: For seldom does the Estate prosper, where the husband
busies himself within doors, and the wife without.

6. The Effects of an husbands Love to his wife are to be seen in his Behavior
toward her, that is in the mild use of his Authority. This God has in his
Wisdom invested him withal at his Gen 2.23.
Creation, and not divested him at his Genesis 3.16.
Fall. The Esth. 1.22.
Light of Nature gives it to him; and the Gospel has no where repealed, but 1
Cor. 11.3.
confirmed the same; And none but proud and ignorant women will ever dispute
it. But herein lies an Act of the husband's Love; 1. wisely to keep; 2. mildly
to use this Authority. 1. He must keep it by a religious, grave, and manly
carriage; this will be his chiefest Fort and Buttress to support it. It will be
hard for her (though doubtless her duty) to reverence him, who himself has
forgotten to reverence his God. If his behavior be light, she will be apt to
set lightly by him. If he be weak and effeminate, it loses him. But he ought to
answer his name; to be an Head for judgment and excellency of spirit, and to be
truly religious. This will maintain his Authority. But then 2. Herein shines
his Love, to use the same with all sweetness, remembering that though he be
Superior to his Wife, yet that their Souls are equal; that she is to be
treated as his Companion; that he is not to rule her as a (...). i. e. (...)
Arist. de cura rei fam. l. 1. Imperare maritus mulieri debet, non ut Dominus
rei quam possidet, sed ut animus corpori. Lud. Viv. de off. mar. Non es
Dominus, sed maritus: non ancillam forti^us es, sed uxorem. Read studio vicem,
read amori gratiam. Ambros. tom. 4. p. 55.
King does his Subjects, but as the head does the body; That though she was not
taken out of Adams head, so neither out of his foot, but out of his side near
his heart. And therefore his Countenance must be friendly, his ordinary (...).
Chrysostom. in Ephesians s hom. 20.
language to her mild and sweet, his behavior obliging, his commands sparing
and respectful, and his reproofs gentle. He must neither be Abject nor
Magisterial. If his Rule be too imperious, his love is destroyed; if his love
be not discreetly expressed, his Scepter's lost, and then he is disabled from
doing God Service, or his Family good. He should never imagine that a rude
insolency or perpetual bitterness is either the way to keep or use his
Authority aright. Yea, the Spirit of God expressly says, Col. 3.19. Husbands,
love your Wives, and be not bitter against them. If meekness of Wisdom will not
prevail with thy wife, thou art undone in this world, and she in the world to
come.

And so much for the heads of the husbands Duty to his wife: I now proceed to
the Third thing, namely to declare the Duty of the Wife in this Position.

The great Duty of every wife is to reverence her own husband. She stands
Duties, as you have heard, which lie common between them; but she is still
signalized by this. This is her peculiar qualification as she is a wife. Let
her have never so much wisdom, learning, grace; yet if she do not reverence her
husband, she cannot be a good Wife.

Look to her Creation; she was made after Man, he has some honor by his
seniority, 1 Timothy 2.13. For Adam was first formed, then Eve, She was made out
of Man: he was the rock whence she was hewn. 1 Cor. 11.8. For the man is not
of the woman, but the woman of the man. She was made for man, 1 Cor. 11.9.
Neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man. So that
it is not Man, that has set this Order, but God himself. Look again to the
Fall, and there you hear what God says, Genesis 3.16. Thy des^re shall be to thy
husband, and he shall rule over thee. See in the New Testament, lest Christ his
being made of a woman should seem to alter this inviolable Law. Coloss. 3.18.
Wives submit your selves to your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. 1 Pet.
3.1. Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your own Husbands. Ver. 2. your
chaste conversation must be coupled with fear. Ver. 5. The holy women of old
adorned themselves with this subjection to their own husbands: and so in my
Text. Let her be never so great, never so good; and though her husband be never
so mean, and never so bad: yet this is her indispensable Duty, to reverence her
husband. And this Principle must first be fixed in her heart, that she is an N^n
modo mores majorum and institu^a, sed leg^s omnes humanae ac divinae, ipsa
etiam natura clamat, mulierem debere esse subditam viro, ac es pa ere. L.
Vives. de Chr. foem p. 704.
Inferior, that her husband is a degree above her; that it is neither agreeable
to nature or decency to set the head below, or no higher than the Rib. And when
she is resolved in this, than will she with much delight and ease go through
her Duty. A wise God has ordered it thus, and therefore it is best.

Now I shall open this Duty according to my former Method, 1. In its Nature. 2.
In its Pattern. 3. In its Effects.


1. For the first, The nature of this reverence: It is a true cordial and
conjugal reverence, such as is peculiar to a good woman. And I conceive it is
made up of 1. Estimation, 2. Love, and 3. Fear.

1. The wife ought to honor and esteem her husband. Esth. 1.19. Then all the
Wives shall give to their husbands [honour] both to great and small. And to
this end, she ought to contemplate all the excellencies of his Person, whether
of Body or mind, and to set a due Sic Cornelia irata plerisque, qui honoris
gratia Scipionis cognominahant; maluit Cornelia Gracchi nominari. L. Vives.
value upon them; and not to think meanly of every thing in her husband. Thus
when the wife of Tigranes was asked by her husband, after a great solemnity,
what she thought of Cyrus, whom every one did commend as the most excellent
person in all that company, she answered roundly, Ita me dii ament, ut toto
convivio nunquam abs te ad alium vi u^ deflexerim oculos.
Truly I looked at no body there but at you my husband. And if the husband be
but meanly accomplished, yet she ought highly to value the excellency of his
Place, seeing the Holy Ghost has in this very respect styled him the Image and
Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. So that whatever he is in himself or to others, yet
to the wife he is a Nonesuch. Such you esteemed him, when you Sed horridus,
and incultus est. Semel placuit. Nunquid vir fr^quenter cligendus? comparem
suam and bos el^git and equus diligit, and si mutetur alius, trahere jugum
nescit compar alterius, and se non totum putat. Ambr. tom. 4. p. 55.
chose him, and so you ought still to esteem him. And you are to remember the
sin and punishment of Michal, 2 Samuel 6.16. She despised her husband in her
heart: and ver. 23. she had no child to the day of her death. The wife ought to
consider, that her honor and respect among her family and neighbors does very
much rise and fall according to that which she bears to her husband; so that in
honoring him she honors her self.

2. This Reverence is made up of Timet virum suum and adultera, verum non ideo
quod illum amet, sed quod sibi ipsi conscia est admissi delicti: timet verum
uxor virum suum fidelis and honesta, non ex mala conscientia sed ex conjugali
d^lectione Musc. in loc.
Love. Which though it be most pressed upon the Husband, yet is also the Duty of
the Wife. Tit. 2.4. Teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands,
to love their children. Thus Sarah, Rebecca, and Rachel left Parents, Friends,
and Country out of their entire love to their husbands. Thus those excellent
women being besieged together with their husbands in the Castle of Winsberg,
having liberty for themselves to go out and carry what they could with them,
took up each their husband, and so delivered them. But above all comparisons is
the Instance that L. Vives gives us of a generous Si deformis est maritus,
amandus animus, cui nupsisti. L. Vives, who gives a large narration hereof. p.
706. de Chr. foem.
young woman, by name Clara Cerventa, well known to him, that was married to
one Valdaura, that proved to be full of diseases and lothsom sores, whom yet
she attended with that care, cost, and love, dressing his sores, which no body
else would touch, selling all her attire and jewels to maintain him, and after
ten long years of languishment, when he was dead, and her friends came rather
to congratulate than condole her loss, she with great trouble told them, that
she could be willing to purchase her dear Valdaura again with the loss of her
five Children. It is not fond doting love, but such love as this, which begets
reverence in the heart of the wife to her own husband. And indeed there is no
better means to increase the husband's love than the (...) Chrysostom. in Col.
hom. 10.
wife's reverence, and that alone will make this sweet and easy.

3. Fear is the third ingredient into the reverence which the wife owes unto
her husband. And this I told you was the proper import of this Quo verbo talem
intelligit timorem, qui ex amore and reverentia erga mari^um pr^ficiscitur.
Zanch. in loc.
word in my Text. And this is required 1 Pet. 3.2. a chaste conversation coupled
with fear: the one is not sufficient without the other. And this the Vxor autem
honesta suum virum ita ut aequum est pudice (...) debet. Arist. ubi supra.
Philosopher saw and acknowledged, and thereupon distinguishes between a
servile dread, and an ingenuous fear; exploding the former as unsuitable to the
nearness and dearness of that Relation, and exacting the latter: which is no
more than a Subjecti^ ista consistit in hoc, ut mulier tanquam inferior virum
tanquam caput revereatur, observet, caveat ne off^ndat, sed ejus mandata laeto
animo praestet. Zanch. in loc.
cautious diligence to please him, and care lest she should offend him. A wife
must not sit down and say, If he be pleased, so it is; if not, let him help
himself how he can. No, but I will do my utmost to give my husband contentment:
For though I do not fear his hand, yet I fear his frown. Better I should
displease all the world, than my own husband. She ought rather to deny her
self, than make her Head, her dear Head to ache.

2. And now let us trace this Reverence of the wife to her husband in its
Pattern laid before her in the Context of these words. And here I affirm these
two things:

1. That the wife ought to Reverence her husband, as the Church does Jesus
Christ. So ver. 22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto
the Lord: and ver. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject to Christ, so let the
wives be to their own husbands in every thing. Examples are prevalent,
especially of wise and good people; here is the example of all the wise and
godly people in the world to persuade the wife to reverence her husband: and
the Apostle seems to say, that it is as much a duty in the wife to be Truncus
est vir and planc mortuus, cujus caput non est Christus: demens and temeraria
est mulier, cui vir non prae^st. L. Vives. de Chr. f. p. 704.
subject to the husband, as it is in the Church to be subject to Christ.

In pursuance of this I shall not expatiate, but keep near my Text. Two things
proclaim the Reverence that the Church bears to Christ.

1. The Matter of her Subjection, and that is in every thing: she does not
yield in great matters, and stick at small, nor yield in small things, and deny
in great: she does not yield to him only so far as her Interest or Appetite
permits her; but when he requires it, denies them both. So says the Apostle,
verse. 24. Let the wives be subject to their own husbands in [every thing] that
is, in every thing that is not forbidden by an higher power, even the Law of
God. Indeed, if a thing be only inconvenient, the wife may mildly reason and
show the inexpediency of it; but if she cannot convince and satisfy her
Husband, she must (if there be no sin in the case) submit her reason and her
will to his.

2. The Manner of her subjection speaks her Reverence; and that is free,
willing, cheerful. Thus the Church yields up her self to the will of her
husband; insomuch as it is made a kind of proverbial pattern, Ephesians. 6.7. with
good will, doing service as to the Lord; implying that the subjection and
service that we perform to the Lord is with a good will. And such ought to be
the subjection of the wife, most free and willing; so, as if there were but Nam
quae ita vivit, ut se ac maritum rem prorsus unam esse arbitretur, haec
absolvit numeros omnes sanctae uxoris. Lu. Vives de Chr. foem. page 678.
one will in two breasts. Thus Leah and Rachel, Genesis 31.16. followed Jacob like
his shadow; when he makes a motion, they consent; if he will go, they will follow
him. And was not Sarah's Reverence This submission must not be for worldly
respects, or for fear of wrath, but religious, and for conscience sake. Gatak.
Sermon. p. 198.
cordial, when within her self in her heart she called her husband Lord? Genesis
18.12. And therefore a contradicting or grudging spirit is very unsuitable to
the religious wife, and ever leaves a sting in his heart and guilt in hers: For
usually it is a sign of unmortified pride and self-conceit, and entails the
curse of unquietness upon the Family, and writes a dangerous example to
inferiors. If the husband's government be too heavy, yet it is better for you
to leave him to answer for his severity, than for you to answer for your She
ows her Duty not only or principally to her husband but to the Lord, so that
his neglect will not excuse hers. Id. p. 199.
contempt.

2. The wife ought to Reverence her husband, as the Members do the Head. So
verse. 23. For the husband is the head of the wife. He is an Head for influence
and sympathy, that is her privilege: he is an Head for eminence and rule, that
is his. And how should she expect benefit from her head, if she do not honor
her head? To 1 Cor. 11.4.
dishonor a man's head is always ranked among unnatural sins. All the members
are sensible of what use the Head is for their good. There are continual cares
and projects for the sustenance and comfort of the body, and therefore they are
willing to give the head its due honor. The hand will submit to a wound to
save the head: If the head resolve to rise up to work or pray, the whole body
is up presently; if the head design a journey, never so long, never so
dangerous, the body says not nay, but obeys as long as possibly it can. Why, so
should the wife show, honor to her head; she ought to honor him next unto her
Maker; she must be afraid by her frowardness or sullenness to break her own
head; she must not cross the purposes of her head; it is preposterous for the
Non secus ac miles suo imperato ri imperare si postulet, aut luna soli
praeesse, aut brachium capiti. L. Vives ubi supra.
head to go one way, and the rib another: She must readily follow the
directions and counsels of her head; for the members must not teach the head
which way to go; they support it, but they do not direct it. Indeed it is said
that the virtuous woman is the crown of her husband; but yet there is more Vxor
coruscat radiis mariti. Justinian.
worth in the head than in the crown. So that still (except always cases
wherein the head is The man has government in the house except he be verbum
anomalum, i. e. a fool. Luther.
craz d or notoriously distempered) it will be the wisdom and duty of the wife
to be subject to the husband as unto her Head.

And this has brought us to the Third thing, by which the Reverence of the
Wife is described, and that is by the Effects thereof; And they also are
either, 1. In word, or 2. In deed.

1. In word. For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And if
there be that inward fear and respect in the heart, which God requires, it will
be legible in the words of their mouths. The same Law that binds the heart in
this case, does also govern the tongue. In her tongue is the law of kindness,
Prove. 31.26. And here certainly a wholesome tongue is a tree of life; whereas
perverseness therein, is a breach in the spirit, Prove. 15.4.

Now this Reverence in the Wife is showed.

1. In her words of her husband. Which should always be composed of respect and
honor. Thus Sarah is brought in by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.6. Even as Sarah
obeyed Abraham calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well.
And this was the language of her heart, as you heard before out of Genesis 18.12.
And no wife is too great or good to imitate her example in the main, by giving
respectful titles and expressions of her husband; whereas on the contrary it is
observed of the naughty woman, Prove. 7.19. she only affords her husband in his
absence, the man (for so it is in the Hebrew) is not at home. And it were well
if this were the worst title and character which many wives do give their
husbands behind their backs. Whereas all the reproach and ignominy that they
pour out on their husband, does infallibly redound to their own shame; their
Nam and vir uxoris majestatem amere and benevolentia tuetur, and wulier viri
cultu and obedientia, -- Nihil genus, nihil opes, nihil fortuna proderunt;
honor carebis si caruerit vir. Lu. Vives ubi sup^a.
honor and respect standing and falling together.

2. The words of the wife to her husband ought to be full of Reverence. And
therefore she should beware, 1. Of an Excess in the quantity, not
preposterously interrupting her husband while he is speaking, nor answering ten
words for one. For Vxorium est ornam^ntum aut cum mari o aut per maritum loqui
Id. ibid.
silence does more commend the wisdom of a woman, than speech; and she that is
wise spares her words: and though she seem to be religious, yet if she do not
bridle her tongue, her religion is vain. And 2. She must beware of a Defect in
the quality of them, viz. of meekness and respect. For the great study of the
wife should be to get a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God (yea
and of man too) is of great price, 1 Pet. 3.4. When the heart is once meekened
by the grace of God; then her words will savor of it, and not till then. And
though they may think that this will invite and further the insolency of an
unkind husband; yet they may rest assured, that that which is most pleasing to
God, shall not tend to their prejudice any way. For has not God said, that a
soft tongue breaks the bone? which is more than any virulent tongue can do,
Prove. 25.15.

Let every godly woman therefore so frame the matter and manner of their words
to their husbands, as knowing that God stands by; to whom they must give
account of every idle word, much more of every irreverent and contemptuous
word, at the day of Judgment, Mat. 12.36. It will be an unspeakable comfort at
Death and Judgment to reflect upon the Victories which their Patience has
gotten; and how often their quiet silence, and mild answers have kept the peace.
In conjugal contests though each should be slow to passion, and swift to peace;
yet where (k) one must yield, it is most reasonably to be expected from the Sin
caeperit excandescere, noli contra niti, and ex uno insano duos facere, te and
illum. L. Vives de Chr. f. p. 709.
The Wife is bound rather to seek reconcilement, as is implied in that 1 Cor.
7.11. Let her be reconciled to her Husband. Gatak. Sermon. p. 188.
Inferior. No woman gets honor by the last word. Some will say, Their tongue
is their only weapon: But the wise do know, That their tongues are not their
own; That when they Jam 3.6.
are set on fire of hell, they set on fire the course of nature; and that by
ones very words they may be condemned. Look into the Scripture, and dress your
selves by that glass. What did Rachel get by her passionate terms, Genesis 30.1.
Give me children, or else I die: and as soon as ever she had children, lo she
died, chap. 34.19. Whereas on the contrary, the discreet and mild behavior of
Abigail to her husband (though he were a Churl) gained her both quiet, comfort
and honor. This is certain, if meekness and respect will not prevail as the
Captains of Cyrus commanded their Soldiers to receive their shouting enemy
with silence, and when they had ended, then to set up a shout: so husband and
wife must agree not to shout together. Plutarch. Col. 3.18.
anger and passion never can; if Duty work not our quiet, how should sin?

2. The Effects of a Wife's reverence to her Husband must be in Deed also. And
that

1. By Obedience to his Directions and Restraints. If he be to rule over her,
Genesis 3.19. then she is to obey. And the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.6. tells us that
Sarah obeyed Abraham: He bids her, Genesis 18.6. make ready quickly three measures
of meal, etc. and it was done presently, though she knew not what guests her
husband had brought. And the Apostle Paul says, it must be in every thing,
Ephesians. 5.24. which he both urges and explains by this, as it is fit in the Lord.
So that the wife is bound in conscience to obey her husband in every thing
that is not contrary to the will of God. Indeed, if he command her to do any
thing that is sinful by the Law of God, as if he should bid her tell a lie,
bear false witness, or the like; she must modestly and resolvedly refuse it. If
he forbid her to do any thing, that is by God's command made an undispensable
Sic placeat uxor voluntati conjugis, ut non displiceat voluntati conditoris.
Daven. ex Gregor.
duty unto her; as if he should absolutely forbid her to pray, to read the
Scripture, to sanctify the Lord's day, or the like; then she must rather obey
God than Man. But in all other cases, though she may respectfully persuade with
him, yet if he insist upon it, her obedience will be her best sacrifice, and
her compliance will be the means to make her yoke the more easy. If the
husband will have her to stay at home, she must not run abroad without his
consent; but as that good Shunamite, 2 King. 4.22. She called to her husband,
and said, Send me I pray thee one of the young men, and one of the Asses, that
I may run to the man of God and come again. And indeed the house is her proper
place, for she is the She that tarried at home, Psalm. 68.8. Hebr. (...) decus
domus
beauty of the house, there her business lies, there she is safe. The Ancients
painting them with a Snail under their feet, and the Egyptians denying their
women Egyptiae mulieres majorum instituto calceis non u^ebantur, ut domi
meminissent tempus exigendum. Plutarch. praecept. conjug.
Shoes, and the Scythians burning the Brides Chariot axle-tree at her door,
when she was brought to her husband's house, and the Angel's asking Abraham
where Sarah was, though he knew well enough, that it might be observed, Ante
tabernaculum Vir hospitum explorat adventus, intra talernaculum Sara tuetur
foeminae verecundiam and opera muliebria tuto exercet pudore. Foris maritus
invitat, intus Sara convivium adornat. Ambros. tom. 4. p. 180.
she was in the tent, Genesis 18.9. do all intimate, that by the Law of Nature,
and by the Rules of Religion, the wife ought to keep at The Apostle Tit. 2.5.
joyneth chastity and home-keeping together. Gatak. Sermon. p. 195.
home, unless urgent necessity do call her abroad. When Sun and Moon both
disappear, the Sky is dark; and when both husband and wife are abroad, many
disorders breed at home: and you know whose Character it is, Prove. 7.11. She is
loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house, etc.

So also where the husband judges most convenient to dwell, there the wife
must cheerfully consent to dwell with him, though it may be, either in respect
of her friends, or of his, more uncomfortable to her. Thus when Jacob was
resolved to carry his Wives from their friends to his Country, they readily
yielded, Genesis 31.16. Thus when Ahasuerus sent for Vasthi, though his command
seemed inconvenient; yet she had been truer to her Duty, as well as to her
Interest, had she come to him: for the husband is the Head of his wife, and she
must obey him. He that appoints them to love their husbands, Tit. 2.4. does in
the next verse enjoin them to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good,
obedient to their own husbands, that the Word of God be not blasphemed. For
though even good women be put to silence, yet good works never can

2. Her Real Reverence is required and showed in asking and hearkening to his
Counsel, and Reproofs. The Husband has been taught wisdom in his counsels, and
mildness in his reproofs; and the Wife must be taught to express her Reverence
in Aequum autem, ut deinceps uxor auscultet marito, quia maritus periit
auscultando uxori. Daven. in Col. p. 538.
Hearkening to them. In the Disposal of Children: Rebecca would not send Jacob
to her Brother Laban without consulting Isaac, Genesis 27.46. So Hannah in the
case of Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.11. In the disposal of a Servant: Sarah would not
discard Hagar without consulting Abraham, Genesis 21.10. In entertaining
Strangers: The Shunamite would not receive a Prophet into the House, without
advising with her Husband, 2 King. 4.10. In disposing of her Husband's Goods,
we find still the man's hand in it: the propriety is in him, and the use is to
her. So that unless there be a notorious Impotency in him, or some Tacit or
General Consent, or some case of present and absolute Necessity, as in the case
of Abagail, she ought not to dispose her Husbands Goods. Indeed, he ought
according to the general Obligation of their Relation, and according to the
particular Discretion of his Wife entrust her in the ordinary affairs of her
sphere, and by his Bounty enable her to do good, where there is need, and not
to put her by his penuriousness upon the temptation of purloining from him: but
if he do forget his duty, let not her forget hers, which is to do him good and
not evil all the days of her life, Prove. 31.12.

But her hardest task is in the loving and thankful bearing of Reproof, which
is a bitter pill to flesh and blood, especially when there is a proud and
contentious spirit. But herein she ought to consider, that she is not without
infirmities; which as none has so much opportunity to see, so none is so much
obliged to represent unto her, as her Husband. And to answer him with a froward
tongue, or a cloudy brow, or a careless negligence, is the greatest ingratitude
and discouragement in the world. But if her heart be full of Reverence to him,
and especially if she believe his heart to be full of love to her, this pill
will be well digested, and by the blessing of God work a real amendment in her.

3. The Real effects of the Wife's Reverence to her Husband is seen in her
Bebaviour toward him, which ought always to be cheerful and respectful. She
must not allow or nourish that crossness of humor to be sullen or dumpish,
when he is pleasant; or on the contrary contemptuously frolic, when he is sad:
but must Omnes illius vultus sumet, ridenti arrid^bit^ moesto se praebebit
m^stam; servata semper authoritate matronalis integritatis and virtutis: ut
magis illa ex amico proveniant animo quam adulterino. L. Vives ubi supra.
compose her carriage, her garments, her converse to give him content, and to
increase his delight in her. For if his heart be once estranged from her,
unless the fear of God withold him, he may quickly render her condition
unspeakably miserable. She ought therefore always to express Contentedness in
her estate, and that will help and move him to be content in his. She must
entertain him into his House with a Magna amaritudo est in domo uxor tristis.
Ambr. to. 5. p. 265.
cheerful countenance, that he may delight to be at home: and study the arts
how to pacify him, if ought have provoked him: or how to convince and reform
him, if ought have ensnared him. She must observe when and how his meals, his
clothes, his lodging do please him, and show the greatness of her respect in
these lesser things. For even about such things arise the most frequent and
sharp contests; which a discreet and godly woman will labor to prevent, not
only because disquiets do Nec aliquid est, quod ita alienet virum ab uxore. ut
crebra rixa and uxoris lingua omarule^a Compared to a continual dropping, which
drives a man out of his house. Prove. 27.15. Lu. Vives ubi supra.
alienate the heart, but because she cannot live under his frown, nor eat nor
sleep contentedly while he is angry. And notwithstanding the freedom and
familiarity of their converse together, yet she must still behave her self with
all respect toward him, and that familiarity must not beget contempt. His love
must not make her to forget her (...). Chrysostom. in Col. hom. 10.
duty, nor his fondness her respect. The more he condescends to her, the more
she must descend into her place, and thus oblige him by her demeanor. She must
consider, that it is better to Quae malunt fatuis imperare viris quam
obtemperare prudentibus, eorum sunt similes, qui in via coecos ducere malunt,
quam videntes and itineris peritos sequi. Plutarch. praec. conj.
obey a wise man, than to rule a fool, as it is better to follow a skilful
guide, than to lead one that is blind. Few Husbands so bad, but the discretion
and respect of a Wife would reform them; and few Wives so ill-temper'd, but the
wisdom and affection of a Husband would make them better. And so much for their
particular Duties to each other.

I know that many will turn off all this by saying, We all fall short of our
Duty in these things; we ever did, and ever shall: and so they neither grieve
for their miscarriages past, nor seriously endeavor to reform them; and so
leave the cure desperate, because the Disease is common.

But a just and holy God will not be so mocked. He gives not his sacred Laws to
be so lightly put off. If we make not conscience here, we make a conscience no
where; yea (though the best will fail) unless we study with all our skill, and
strive with all our strength to be faithful in all these things, our other
Duties will be abhorred. He that regards not all, regards not at all in God's
account. And if Divine Vengeance do not meet with them in this life, as it
often does; yet without doubt it waits for them in another. But I hope better
things of you, and things that accompany salvation, though I thus speak.

I come at last in the Fourth place to present you with some Directions Duties,
that so husbands and wives may most certainly be blessings to each other. And
they are these.

1. Maintain Purity in Soul and Body in Single-age. This will greatly dispose
you for the Duties of a Married life; and also lay up a Blessing for it. Let
every one of you know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. He that gives the reins to his vicious affections before Marriage,
will find them as impetuous after Marriage. For Marriage (as Mr. Whately.
One well says) is like Salt, which will keep sweet that which is untainted,
but restores not that which is already unsavory. A chaste and honest heart will
(with the blessing of God) by marriage be preserved; but a filthy heart will
find occasion to be naught in any condition. Beware therefore of the beginnings
of Lust, flee them like poison; forbear such La^aena quaedam marita juveni rem
foedam roganti, Darem (inquit) si meum peteres: nam quod petis, patris erat,
dum essem virgo: nunc mariti, postquam nups^. Lu. Viv. de Cr foem. p. 699.
company and discourse as debauch the heart; avoid speculative uncleanness, snd
keep the heart stored with religious thoughts, and the body employed in a
constant calling. Consider that the greatest flames begin with a spark, and
therefore tamper not with the pleasant motions of original concupiscence.
Subject not the soul of a Man to the pleasures of a Brute; this is sure, that
they perish in the using, and leave nothing but a sting behind: and foolish is
that pleasure, where that which delights, instantly Verum nimium miserandi and
plangenda conditio est; ubi cito praeterit, quod delectat, and permanet sine
fine quod cruciat. Id. p. 725.
vanishes; and that which remains, perpetually torments. If you have been
overtaken with these faults, O cleanse your hearts and hands by the merits of
Christ's blood in the use of Fasting and Prayer; that God may not visit upon
you your Old sins by giving you up to New ones, or by bringing some signal
curse upon you, in husband, wife, or children. And get a blessed taste of those
more sirm, safe, and ravishing delights, which are to be found in the favor
and promises of God, in the pardon of sin, and assured hopes of life and
immortality. These will sufficiently disgrace those gross and base absurdities,
and make you to take no delight in the muddy stream, that have drunk of the
Spring.

2. Be (...) (e) (...) festina, eme ag. u n: expecta ducturus uxorem. Buxtorf.
ex Jevam.
considerate in your choice. You see how severe the Rules of that Condition
are, when you are once engaged in it; And therefore, when you find that you are
called to it, be sure to recommend it earnestly to God by (...) C^rys. de uxore
duo.
Prayer, as Abraham's servant did, Genesis 24.12. In this way be sure to
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. No business so critical, none so
weighty, and therefore no business so calls for (...) Id. in Col.
solemn and earnest Prayer. And let Reason and For Fitness in special, as well
as Goodness in general, must be one main ground of our choice. Gatak. Sermon. p.
176.
Judgment have some stroke in your choice. Do not first love, and then
consider; but first consider, and then love. Chiefly fix your observation on
the Soul of the party: many marry to lay lands to lands, or money to money; but
see you that his or her In the life of the lady Falkland.
Soul lie well for yours. For no Florem decoris singuli carpunt dies. Senec.
Beauty, Friends, or Quicunque ducit uxorem propter divitias, ei erunt liberi
non probi. Buxt. ex Prove. in Kiddusch.
Portion will settle upon you a comfortable life, if pride, passion, or any
other lust predominate in the Soul. And why will ye espouse a perpetual cross
for some present profit or delight?

It concerns therefore the man, and especially the woman, to endeavor to marry
a member of Christ, a religious person; where they may most rationally expect
the conscionable discharge of their respective duties. If such be not the best
husbands and wives, it is not by reason of their piety, but their defect of it.
Add to this a Discovery of the If thou were to take an house, thou would
enquire what commodities or inconveniences, what neighbors, etc. and yet that
thou may sell upon a dislike; how much more, etc. Chrysostom. tom. 8. de uxore
ducenda.
natural tempers of those you mean to marry. If they be proud and imperious to
others, ten to one they will be so to you; if they be choleric, sour or
sullen, you will hardly find an Heaven upon Earth. And you ought to deal
plainly with one another, both concerning your natural Defects, concerning your
moral Dispositions, and concerning your civil Condition, that you may not give,
and that Satan may not take an advantage, whereby to cause disquiet or
repinings afterward. You count it a cheat to have an unfound, ill-condition'd
decrepid beast put upon you, for a sound, young, and towardly one; certainly it
is the greatest injury in the world to defraud one whom you pretend to love;
and to wrong them in that wherein you can never make them reparation.

3. Study the Duties of Marriage before you enter into it, Leap not into this
solemn condition at adventures. There are crosses to be born, there are snares
to be avoided, there are Duties to be done, and do you make no provision? Hence
slow the frequent miscarriages in that honorable estate; Hence that Repentance
that is both too soon, and too late. The Husband knows not how to Rule; and the
Wife knows not how to obey. Both ignorant, both conceited, and both miserable.

And therefore Parents ought to teach their children the Duties of Wedlock,
before they enter into the State of Wedlock: neither can they be ever acquitted
before God, that hurry young people, ready or unready, willing or Hostis uxor
est, ubi invita ad virum venit. Plaut.
unwilling, yea sometimes very Hoc etiam sciendum est, quod pueri ante 13 annos
and puellae ante 12. annos secundum leges matrimonium inire nequeunt. Quod si
ante predicta tempora copulam inierint, separari possunt, quam vis assensu
parentum juncti fuerunt. Lombard. lib. 4. dest. 36.
children, for secular advantages into this Relation. A course that has been
signalized by infinite disastrous consequenees. And most people step into that
estate merely to obtain pleasure and gain, but as ignorant of their Duty, as
the Beasts that perish: and so families that should be the Nurseries of the
Church and Commonwealth, prove to be the very Seed-plots of disorder and
debauchery.

Endeavor therefore to read over, besides the Scripture (which is the Book of
all Books) Dr. Gouge his Treatise of Domestical Duties, or Mr. Bolton, or Mr.
Gataker, or Mr. Whately on the same Subject; And the learned will lose no
labor in reading Ludovicus Vives de officio Mariti and de Christiana foemina,
fron each of whose Garden I have made up this small Posie, and wherein you will
find, especially in the first and last, a more full and clear stating and
proving these things, then can be expected from so simple a man in so small a
time.

4. Resign up your selves both of you unfeignedly unto God, and to his will;
until you be savingly regenerated and sanctified, you cannot If he be pleased,
he will turn thy water into wine; if he be displeased, he will turn thy wine
into vinegar Gataker Sermon. p. 141.
please God, nor be entire blessings to one another. You may indeed live
together like civil Pagans; but what is this to the life of Christians? Religion
will most firmly bind you to God, Religion will most firmly bind you to one
another. A good temper may do much, but a new nature superadded to it will do
more. The Husband that truly, I say that truly fears God, dares not be bitter
to his wife; the wife that truly fears God, dares not be cross with her
husband. A Bible placed between you will take up many a difference, comfort you
under many a cross and pang, guide you in many a strait, wherein flesh and
blood will be confounded, and at a loss. And then in those critical cases
wherein Duty and Passion strive for mastery, resolve with your selves, that it
is much better for either of you to obey God's will, than to have your own;
That as there is the highest Reason in his Commands, so there is the greatest
Sweetness in obeying them. Set often before you that golden Rule, Matthew. 7.12.
and calmly consider whether you behave your self to your yoke fellow, as you
your self would be dealt with, if you were in their condition. And though you
be never so just and good other ways, yet believe that, Jam. 2.10. he or she
that keeps the whole law, and yet offends knowingly (and commonly) in one
point, is guilty of all. Your Righteousness abroad will not excuse your
crossness at home, nor her zeal in prayer make any amends for her heat in
passion. But when you are both resolved to study your own duties, and sincerely
to do them, how hard soever, you will live together as heirs of the grace of
life, and as heirs of the life of glory.

5. Settle your affections well at the beginning. It was a wise and true
Observation Plutacch prae^. conjug.
, that vessels which are compacted of diverse parts, or glued together of diverse
pieces, at first will easily with every bruise or fall be broke in pieces; but
when they are strengthened by tract of time, it will be very hard, yea scarce
possible, to separate them: So it is in marriage, at first the union is raw and
green; an unkindness then, a cross word or look will quickly alienate, but when
time and experience have consolidated this new sprung affection, then it will
be much harder to dissolve it.

And being once assured of a conjugal love in each other, give no way to cursed
Jealousy, which very often has no other ground, than the Weakness or
Wickedness of them that are sick of it: and to be sure, when once it is
admitted, all the joy and comfort of this life is gone; it is a bitter-sweet
Poison, and miserable are they, that either give or take occasion for it. Stop
your ears therefore, and knit your brow upon tale-bearers and whisperers, that
under pretense of great love and secrecy tell you just Nothing: and remember,
that Love thinks no evil, but puts the best interpretation possible upon the
doubful words, looks and carriage of a stranger, much more of so near a
Liberiores sunt viri, quam foeminae, vitae totius rationis, Viris curanda esse
mutla, foeminis solam pudicitiam. Claudendae, aures iis, qui sinistrum quid de
marito volunt defer. Lu. Vives de Chr. foem. p. 720.
Relation. And this I mention here, because most commonly Jealousy takes place
there, where true Affection was never fixed and rooted in the beginning.

6. Lastly (to speak all in one) Pray for Wisdom, Humility and Vprightness. 1.
Wisdom; for we owe many of our Domestic distempers to our weakness and
indiscretion, not wisely preventing or removing things that cause offense. How
easily would a wise man avoid distasting words or looks or actions? How easily
might he keep his Authority, and never forfeit it, and she submit and never
dispute it? wisdom would pick and choose the fittest opportunities to instruct,
advise, reprove, and comfort; and would direct to the best manner and method
wherein to do it. Wisdom will consider, that either party might have found
the same or greater crosses in another condition, as in this, or in another
person as in this; and therefore things are well in that they are not worse:
and however, that marriage which is God's Ordinance must not be charged with
their disquiets but themselves. And 2. Humility, that is a singular help for
them both, in the discharging of their Duties. This will keep the Husband from
the intemperate use of his power, and the wife in a ready subjection to her
Husband: For only by pride comes contention, but with the well-advised is
wisdom, Prove. 13.10. A proud Spirit could not agree with an Angel, but the
humble will agree with any body. This also will greatly help them to
contentment in their Condition: For (says Humility) my Husband, my Wife is a
great deal too good for such a sinful creature as I am, my condition is too
good for me; these straits and troubles are great, but I deserve greater; this
was a sharp reproof, but alas! I deserve hell, and what is a harsh word to hell?
That man or woman will sit down quietly with great trials, that know they are
not worthy the least of mercies. And besides Humility will suggest such a
carriage and behavior in word and deed, as will infallibly oblige each other,
and force respect from them. And lastly Vprightness is necessary to the doing
of these Duties well: For there is written a conclusive law in an upright heart
to do the whole will of God, whether it appear to be with them or against them;
it will teach them rather to obey than to dispute; and in obedience to do each
more than their part, rather than less. In doubtful cases the upright heart
will choose the safest course, though it prove the hardest; and resolves to
suffer the greatest injury, rather than offer the least: An upright heart
watches against sinful self, which is the great root of injuries and mischiefs
in every relation, and prompts us to keep on in the way of our duty
notwithstanding all discouragments. In a word; the upright Husband and Wife do
chiefly study each their (...). Chrysostom. in Col. Hom. 10.
own Duty in their Relations, and are most severe against their own particular
failings.

What are the Duties of Parents and Children; and how are they to be managed
according to Scripture? Sermon. XVII.
Colos. III. 20, 21. Children, obey your Parents in all things, for this is
well pleasing unto the Lord.

Fathers, provoke not your Children to anger, lest they be discouraged.


MY business is not to discuss the Entity of Relations, in their foundation and
terms; which the Philosopher is conversant about: but to discourse the Efficacy
of the chiefest in Christian practice, Relationes etsi minimae e^titatis, sunt
maximae efficaciae.
i. e. to enquire into the nature and management of those reciprocal offices
betwixt Parents and Children, which, if well discharged according to the sense
of the Divine Oracles, do contribute most to the happiness of humane Society;
and give reputation to the Communion of Saints. The Subject I know is common,
and the Scriptures copious upon it, which some (who it may be are not the most
accurate in their own relative station) think a very easy task to treat on;
but to do it distinctly and fully, within the time allotted to this exercise,
is a thing of greater difficulty to me, than such easy Undertakers are aware
of: and really to perform all the Duties I am to enquire into, in a manner
well-pleasing to our heavenly Father, will cost them and us all more pains than
only to read or preach an hour or two upon them: which yet might lead into many
important concerns of government and obedience. Believe it herein we have all
need enough of serious and frequent teacbing again and again Heb. 5.12.
for our conduct in the Relations whereunto God has cast us. In order then
both to my preaching at present, and all our future practice, as a ground for
the Resolution of this Question; What are the Duties of Parents and Children;
and how are they to be managed according to Scripture? I am directed to the
words read.

Wherein we have the mutual offices of Children and Parents required, and
virtually at least prescribed, with annexed reasons to enforce them severally
upon each Relatives: which afford this Proposition. That God's pleasure and
Childrens encouragement should move Christian Children to obedience, and
Parents to a moderate government, in all things.

Here is a large theme, but I shall endeavor as nigh as I can to speak much in
a little, hoping I shall obtain your pardon, though I let slip some
considerable Particulars; if by some general anticipations and cautions I do in
a Sermon decline those numerous special Cases, which in a larger Treatise on
this Subject might fairly step in, and lay claim to some special satisfaction.
It were an excursion for me now to speak of Children and Parents in any other
than the most famous signification Analogum per se positam stat pro famostore
analogato.
of the words, taken not figuratively, but properly; not for those in a
political, but natural Relation: yet as under the Christian Institution, where
we are ever to have regard to our blessed Lord and Master.

Indeed Children comprehend both sons and daughters, (...) Gen 46 29.
the fruit of the body (not excluding grandchildren) of what age or quality
soever, as indissolubly bound in duty to those who begot and brought them forth
of both sexes Father and Mother, the Parents of their flesh Heb. 12.9.
, (...) Prove. 23.22.
from whom they were originally derived. And that the Apostle does here direct
the command to Inferiors before Superiors, as in the 18. verse and elsewhere
Ephesians 5.22. -- 6.1, 5.
to Children before Parents, is not that Children and their duties are first in
order of nature or time (for there are offices of inbred parental love and care
before they can be known or observed by children); (...).
but writing chiefly to children come to the use of reason, he begins with them
who are subject, and ought first to perform duty. The anticipation of time here
connoting the honor due to Superiors, he does in the first place put those in
mind of their duty, who are to obey, as usually more defective, rather than
those that have authority over them in this oeconomical conjunction: Either in
that this office of obedience is less easy and pleasing to our nature than
that of parental love, which is allured to exert it self readily by the right
discharge of the former: or in that the subjection of children is the
foundation on which the good government of Parents does depend, and a means to
make themselves ready for that authority, which else they will be unfit for: as
Antoninus lays down the axiom which many of the moralists used, viz. You cannot
well govern others, unless first governed (...).
.

For my method then in answering the complicated enquiry before me, whiles I
follow the Apostle in my Text, I shall need no Apology to insist on.

I. The Duty of Children, with the extent thereof, urged from that which is
most cogent to persuade to it, and dissuade from the neglect of it. II. The
Office of Parents, enforced from the special consideration of that the Apostle
suggests to move to it. III. The manner and means of managing both offices, or
discharging both duties more generally and particularly, according to the mind
of God in his word.
The two former may be looked upon as the explication of my Text and
Proposition, and an exhortation pressed with reasons or motives to the Duties:
and the last as Directions to perform them.

Duty of Children with the extent thereof, urged from that which is most cogent
to persuade to it, and dissuade from the neglect of it. This is expressed and
implied in the former of the verses I have read to you: wherein we have three
Particulars to be spoken to. 1. The Duty: 2. Extent or latitude of it: 3.
Motive to it.

1. (...)
1. The Duty of Children from the precept. Children obey your Parents. The word
imports an humble subjection to their authority and government, with a ready
performance of what they require: it being an explanation of that which in the
law is engraved with God's own hand; honor Exodus 20.12. (...)
importing how highly they are to be valued, and not lightly esteemed. In
another place it is, ye shall fear every man his mother and his father Lev.
19.3, with 14. (...)
, awful fear being no other than a deep veneration; both which are to be fairly
read in the acts of genuine obedience: for that does flow forth from a compound
disposition of love and fear mixed in an ingenuous child, who is readily moved
to obey, in contemplation of that authority and affection implanted in the
Parent toward it

To speak more distinctly, this obedience to Parents may contain in it these
four things, 1. Reverence, 2. Obedience, 3. Pious regards, 4. Submission. The
three first of these may be reducible to active, and the last to passive
obedience.

Reverence, which is a due and awful estimation of their persons, as to this
relation, placed in eminency above their children, to acknowledge them from God
himself (the Supreme Parent of us all) Acts 17.28.
the authors, preservers, and governors of their lives: and upon that account
to honor them in their hearts, speeches, and behaviors, from an honest desire
to please, and filial fear to offend them, whose children they are, of what
rank soever they now appear in the world: and therefore to comport themselves
so in all the actions of their lives before God and men, that they render
themselves acceptable to their Parents: Yea, to both of them; the law requires
reverence to the Mother as well as the Father Levit. 19.3. with 30.
: the word which is in one verse fear, is in another translated reverence; to
the claim of which the Mother there seems to be favored with some kind of
priority: because Children, who have most needed their Mothers, in their tender
years are apt many times to despise them, as more subject to infirmities, and
as looking for less of respect from their hands. So that really to give them
honor, is a fuller evidence of cordial performance. The Lord is pleased to
begin there, where the duty is most tried, Reverence thy Mother and thy Father.
de leg. l. 4. Ethic. l. 9. l. 2. Spizel. de re literar. Sineas. p. 243.
Both are to be had in a just veneration. Plato and Aristotle could by Nature's
light teach thus: (...). This as the prime law of Nature, the Spartans, and
generally all Nations of old did, and Chinoises at this day do maintain with
admirable care. Now doing reverence to the Fathers of our flesh Heb. 9.12.
in Scripture may comprehend what Children owe to their Parents, both with
reference to their speech and behavior: (1) With respect to their speech, that
it be seasonable, and agreeable to the relation, graced with humility 1 Pet.
5.5.
and modesty in all converse with them in presence, and discourse of them in
absence. They should give them honorable titles, as that of Father and Mother
do connote dignity Jer. 31.9. Gal. 4.6.
: and so, Sir, or Lord Mat. 21.30. (...)
; thus we have good Children in the Book of God saluting their Parents: as
Isaac his Father Abraham Genesis 22.11.
; Jacob Isaac -- 17.18.
; David Saul his Father in law 1 Samuel 24.28.
; Solomon Bathsheba, my Mother 1 King 2.20, 21.
; Rachel Laban, making her Apology, My Lord Genesis 31.35.
; David again Saul 1 Samuel 26.18.
; and that with all meekness, at a sit season, in a few words, with freedom and
readiness Genesis 22 7. and 27.12.
, giving pleasing answers when spoken to, in a becoming civility 1 Samuel 12.4,
6.18.
, waiting with contentment to hear them speak first Prove 4.1.
, laying their hands on their mouths, and refraining to talk in their presence
without just occasion Job. 29.9, 10, 21. -- 32.5 6.
. And in their absence by speaking so of them amongst those they do converse,
that by the commendable reports they make of them, or prudent apologies for
them, it may be understood what venerable respects they have for their Parents.
Thus it is said of the Children of the prudent Mother; they rise up (as those
who speak pathetically) and call her blessed Prove. 31.28.
in that laudable discourse they have of her. Hereby Children will prove
themselves to be of a virtuous temper, and not like that elder brother of the
penitent Prodigal, who spoke undecently in a surly manner to his Father Luke
15, 29, 30.
; and sometime some of Jacob's sons to theirs Genesis 34.31.
, and such like: who by their rude and malapert prating disparage and aggrieve
their parents -- 26.35. -- 27.46.
. Yet of a more untoward generation are they, whom the Wiseman took notice of,
that curse their Father, and do not bless their Mother: but says he, their
lamp shall go out in obscurity Prove. 20.20.
. Neither can there be a better end of those who are under the Almighty's curse
devoted to death Lev. 20.9. Exodus 21.17.
: neither can they, who do any way set light by their Father or Mother, avoid a
much easier censure Deuteronomy. 27:16, Lib. 44. de Rep.
, since by interpretation it is a dishonor to God himself. Plato in his
Commonwealth orders that Children should in their words through their whole
life revere their Parents, there being a great punishment imminent for light
and idle discourse. Further; (2) The hehaviour and carriage of Children should
ever be significative and expressive of reverence to their Parents in all their
addresses: the countenance so composed in their presence, as may argue
awfulness and respect; the deportment lowly, rising up before those they honor
for relation, as well as those venerable for age Lev. 19.32.
: and at meeting; thus Solomon, though a King, did to his Mother Bathsheba 1
Kings 2.19.
; hasting to attend them in a lowly posture; thus Joseph, who lived as a
Prince, made ready to meet, and presented himself to his Father, whom he had
maintained. Genesis 46.29.
; so Achsah, Caleb's daughter (who was married to her Cousin German) when she
addressed her self to her Father, she alighted from her beast before she spoke
to him Judge. 1.14.5^
: and again Joseph thought it no disparagement to prostrate himself to his aged
father Jacob, whose eyes were then dim, that he could not see his behavior;
when he also gave his own Children an example in praying for his Father's
blessing Genesis 43.12.
, which Esau, though he came tarde, did passionately beg for -- 27.19, 34.
. And though Parents now have not a Prophetic spirit as the Patriarch's had,
yet it seems still very equitable, that Christian Children considering their
Parents Superiority in the Lord, should frequently upon occasion in an Heb. 7
7. Mar. 10.17.
humble manner crave their Parents prayers for God's blessing. The rude and
haughty looks, which are in many Children before their Parents, cannot comport
with this duty, which discards a dogged and supercilious countenance, that
betokens scorn and derision, opposite to this filial reverence. The Wise man
makes a smart remark upon such odious insolent behavior, which might deter any
of understanding from it, when he says Prove. 30.17.
, The eye that mocketh his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens
of the Valley shall pick it out; and the young Eagles shall eat it. Here is a
signal retaliation to those who in speech or behavior deride the persons, or
despise the counsels of their Parents, whether yet alive or deceased. 'Twere to
be wished it had been better studied by some Children in this Generation: I
mean some late and present Preachers of our Age; who do not parentare manibus,
but indeed upbraid the Ghosts of their reverend and pious Parents (who warmly
argued the necessity of regeneration) either by reckoning them amongst the herd
of Divines or with an harangue of lame sequels perch up to vent their callow
notions, and bespatter their own nest in complacence with the lax humor of the
times: when many for the bags cry, Hail Master, but betray the Son of Man with
a kiss Mat. 26.49. wic. Luke 22.48:
: yet I would hope there are but a few of this feather. I proceed to mind
Children of another duty, and that is

2. Observance, whereby their Parents pleasure with fit subjection is
performed, out of a real desire to promote their honor; which is more than in
countenance and ceremonies to express obedience Mat. 21.30.
. It is very requisite Christian Children should with an heedful circumspection
observe the holy and wise prescripts and practices of their Parents by
acknowledging subjection to their government. Our blessed Lord himself set a
pattern herein; for he went down with his Mother and her Husband, and came to
Nazareth, and was subject to them Luke 2.51. Mar 6.3. Mat 13.55. Jo^. 6.42.
, Quis quibus? Deus hominibus, etc. says Bernard Homil 1. Super missus est.
. He to whom Angels are subject, whom Principalities and Powers do obey, was
observant of his Mother Mary and her espoused Husband Joseph, yea most likely
in the business of Joseph's calling. More particularly, this filial observance
shows it self in 1. Attending to their instructions: 2. Executing their
commands: 3. Depending on their counsels: And 4. Following their examples. (1.)
We ought to attend seriously to our Parents instructions, and learn what they
teach us for good, receiving their djctates with humility, and laying them up
in our hearts; those especially of spiritual advantage, out of a love to
wisdom, and our Parents joys Prove. 29.3. -- (...).
. Solomon bids from his own experience, My Son, hear the instruction of thy
father, and forsake not the law of thy mother -- 1.10.
Again, Hearken unto thy father which begat thee, and despise not thy mother
when she is old. And then that Daughters might not think themselves exempted,
Hearken ye Children to the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding and good doctrine -- 4.1, 2, 3.
, which if heedfully observed, makes a wise child, when the contrary bewrays
folly -- 13.1.
, which is a grief and discouragement to the father: as was that of Eli's Sons
1 Samuel 2-25.
, and Lot's Sons in law Genesis 19.14.
, who slighted their fathers documents: as the Prodigal also did his, before
he felt the smart of it, and came to his wits again Luke 15.2.13, 17.
. Yet this is dissonant to the voice of Nature, which has taught the very
Chickens to hearken unto the clocking of the Hen; has been ever distastful to
the wiser Heathens, and would bring a disparagement upon the Christian
institution. So that Christian Children should be very heedful of their Parents
teachings, especially in the concerns of their souls. Hence (2.) Children
should execute their Parents commands and dispatch readily what they order them
to do without whartling disputes: this is the most special duty required in my
Text, (the extent of it will come under consideration anon.) They should be as
those under the Centurions authority, go and come and do at his command Mat. 8
9.
. Samuel came at the supposed call of his pro-Parent once and again 1 Samuel 3.5.
etc.
. David when his Father Jesse had sent for him out of the field, e're he knew
what it was for -- 16.12.
, and so went as he commanded, him -- 17.17, 20.
. So Jacob, when Isaac sent him Genesis 28.5.
, and Joseph, when Jacob sent him -- 37.14.
, yea the other ten Sons also upon their Fathers order -- 42.2, 3.
. Isaac attended in carrying the wood, when the servants were free from the
burden, at his Father's pleasure -- 22 6.
. Joseph and the Rechabites are famous instances of observing faithfully the
charge of their Parents, even when they were dead and gone -- 50.20. Jer ^5.8.
etc.
, out of conscience, in a respectful manner, with reference to the divine
authority. Abraham's Children walked in the way of the Lord, as their Father
commanded them Genesis 8.9.
. Solomon did not only command his own Son Prove. 6 1^.
, (though he proved disobedient) but he observed his Father David's charge to
walk in the Lord's statutes 1 King. 2.3. and ^ 3.
(though drawn aside after with temptations) and to build the Temple 1 C^ro.
2^.11. 2 Chronicles 5, and 6.
. God takes it for granted, a good Child will serve his Father Mal. 3 17.
, yea and when put to pain, in things not only necessary, but of no reputation,
supposing, in things purely indifferent both in their nature and use, their
Parents to be more judicious to determine what is expedient and decent; yet not
without the use of their own discerning faculty, nor without any examination in
a blind irrational obsequ^ousness Pr^v. 14.15. Ne p^c^u^ ritis s^qu^mur
amecedentiam gr^^em, p^^^n^^s nonqua (...) e^^, se^ qua ^^r. Senec.
, like the brutish obedience of the Jesuits Novic^s. For though I should grant
that Parents have in some sort a power over the consciences of their Children,
whiles they are as in God's stead 1 Samuel 2.30. (...)
, swaying their apprehentions in their tenderest years, before they come to the
use of their ripened reason: yet when there is a judgment of discerning betwixt
good and evil, their obedience ought to be reas ^^bl^, such as God requires to
his own service, (...), such as is according to his Word, not merely childish,
(though the obedience of Children) but acceptable Romans 12.1.
and well-pleasing unto him, as in my Text, and in the fear of God, verse. 22.
Again, (3.) Children ought to depend upon their Parents counsels, and take
their good and wholesome advice, giving them the honor of being in an ordinary
course, more prudent and sagacious than themselves, as having greater
experience, ability, and a call to govern in affairs of importance. For to
disregard them herein were to slight the paternal authority which God would
have kept in reputation. He was a Prodigal, who would not be advised, till he
was bitten with the ill effect of that extravagant course, which grieved his
Father Luke 15.12, 13.
: but the docible Child who is righteous and wise, rejoices the heart of both
his Parents Pro 23.22, 24. -- 15.20.
Here I might enter on particulars, to show that Children have no power, being
under government, to dispose of their Parents goods without their advice or
allowance Gal. 4.1, 2. with Genesis 31.36, 37, with 19. -- 32.10. Prove 28.24. --
19 26.
; for faultiness here is aggravated by the relation: nor to choose their
company disagreeable to their Parents minds -- 1.10, 15. 1 Cor 5.9.
; but to take their advice, and be content with that suitable dress their
Parents do order them to appear in Genesis 27.15. -- 37.3. 2 Samuel 13 8.
, and not in strange apparel Zeph 1.8.
. But I shall only suggest two more eminent instances, wherein Children are
more especially to consult their Parents, and observe their advice, viz. as to
a particular Calling and Marriage. [1] It Is fit to he advised by Parents in the
choice of a Calling, or lasting course of life. Jacob and David moved and lived
according to their Parents disposal Genesis 28.2. 1 Samuel 16.11, 19. -- 17.17.
, as was hinted before; and so did Jonadab's Children Jer. 35.6, 7.
. It being unfit they should carve for themselves without leave; but follow the
parental conduct, unless that leads them into an unlawful Calling. The
pretension of Religion in a Monastic life, which the Papists urge to cajol
their Votaries into their unscriptural Orders, as the Pharisees did Corban Mark
7.1, 113.
, saying it is a gift devoted to God (which hypocritical allegation our Savior
disproved, because they vacated the Commandments of God for their own
traditions) can be no warrant to invade the rights of Parents: for Religion
toward God does not interfere with the necessary duties of our Relation. And
to do that under a notion of Religion not enjoined by God, against that too
which he has required, is impious; and to offer that to him which is
another's, he likes not. He is for equity, and not for division or confusion.
Charlemaign made a decree against this dishonor to Parents under the vail and
disguise of Religion. [2.] In the great business of Marriage, it is very
requisite to observe their counsel and advice. Parents certainly should sway
much in this weighty matter, as they did in Isaac's matching with Rebekah Genesis
24.6, 7, 63, 67.
, and Jacob's with Laban's daughter -- 28.1, 2, 3. with 29 11, 18, 19.
. Ruth, though a daughter in law, was willing to be disposed of by Naomi in the
change of her condition, observing her orders in that affair Ruth 2.21. and
3.1, etc.
: yea, even Ishmael would take his Mother's advice for a wife Genesis 21 21.
: and Sampson moved for his Parents consent Judge. 14 2.
: Thamar's words in striving with her lustful brother, imply the gaining of her
Father's consent requisite 2 Samuel 13.13.
: and Sechem's words to his Father, when he had wickedly defloured Dinah (whom
he met with in her idling visit) do import he was convinced it was equitable to
have her Father's consent to marry her Genesis 34.3, etc
. For Children ought in reason to think their Parents wiser, and better able
for the most part to provide for them, than they themselves are: because likely
as they have more experimental knowledge, so, if Parents be not cankered with
the love of this world, their affections are more governable, and not so easily
biased from moving in the fairest way; as Childrens often are in their
youthful and spritely age, when their inward emotions are apt to be more
turbulent, unless sanctified with grace, and moderated with virtue. And
further, here it may be considered that Parents, who brought forth, and bred up
their Children, should by no means be bereft of them without their consent:
since they are so much their goods and possessions, that it were a kind of
purloining to give themselves away without their Parents leave. The maid under
the law, that had made a vow out of her Father's cognizance, could not perform
it without his consent Numb. 30.4, 5. Terent.
. In the Comoedian it was accounted a disparagement, to take a wise against
the will of her Father. So that compliance with Parents advice here is a
business of great effect. As one says ingenuously, Mr. Fuller.
The Child in this case bowls best at the mark of his own contentment, who
besides the aim of his own eye, is directed by his Father, who is to give the
ground. To which may correspond a passage of Cyrus, who, when a match was
proposed to him, said, I like the Lady, her Dowry, and her Family: but I must
have these agree with my Parents, and then I will marry her. He belike thought
it injurious in finally bestowing himself to neglect his Parents, and disregard
their counsel, in the main business of his life. But if Children except, and
say, Exception. Answer.
What if after our real desires to take their counsel, they urge us to marry
such as we cannot affect? I confess your circumstances may be such in this
instance, as may render the case very intricate, and 'twould require a
discourse by it self to give satisfaction to it. All I shall say now is, 1. Be
sure your non-affection or aversion to the Person proposed be not without
reason: remember you are unperienc'd; suspect your own judgment, and take heed
lest some impotent passion, or amorous inclination to another person,
discompose you from attaining to a right opinion of things: persuade your
selves, that as your Parents have experience, likely their affections lead them
to be careful for your welfare. Be therefore earnest in Prayer with God (who
turns the heart at his pleasure Prove. 21.1.
that he would incline your affection to the party proposed, all the while
there is no disallowance from above, Non amo te Sabide non passum dicere quare,
etc.
and you can see no just cause to the contrary, having only the mere plea that
you cannot love; and be importunate with him to rectify such untowardness of
mind (lest you at least seem wilful) as leads you without good reason to
reject an offer of his Providence to you for the promoting of your temporal
vvelfare in an hopeful prospect of the Divine blessing. But if after this
humble and unfeigned address to God, you still find your heart altogether
averse; you may in a reverent way entreat your Parents not to press that match,
and think of some other, wherein you may be better satisfied. For my part, I do
not conceive you are obliged to marry those you cannot really affect: unless I
could see how you might with a good conscience in the presence of God enter
into a solemn Covenant of Love Mal. 2.14.
with a patty you cannot but upon deliberation at the same instant dislike. My
reason is, not only because it would be an utter frustration of the end of
marriage; which should be mutual satisfaction: but also the beginning of that
estate, in a kind of perjury, or at least with a doubting conscience Romans
14.13, 23.
. Since as Q^intilian Declam. 376.
observed Affectus nostri nobis non serviunt, we cannot still keep our
affections in a subserviency to our own, be sure not to another's reason: My
wise is to dwell with me for ever, the half of my lasting joy, or my lasting
sorrow, and if I do not love her, we cannot live comfortably together, etc. 2.
If Parents should counsel you to join your self to an ungodly person, and
enforce you to fix there; the best Casuijis of our own Bishop Hall, Sanderson,
Taylou^, Mr. Baxter.
will easily resolve you, that in such a case you have a negative voice, and
may humbly refuse to comply with such a motion: for though you have not a
judgment of positive decision, to determine whom you would have; yet you have a
judgment of discretion, and you may with all reverence to your Parents
proposing refuse an unworthy person, who is like to make your life either
sinful or miserable. This may be further cleared, in considering the extent of
Childrens obedience. There is another particular yet, which concerns Children
in this duty of observance, and that is (4.) To follow their good examples; we
should take notice of those fair copies they have set us, and imitate
whatsoever is good, commendable and virtuous in our Parents. This the Wise man
gave his Son in charge, that he should with all his heart set his eyes to
observe his ways Prove. 23.26.
i. e. take him for his pattern in all those practices which were consonant to
the pleasure of his Heavenly Father: we should follow them as they do our Lord
and Master 1 Cor. 11.1.
. But not in their errors and miscarriages; for fear of Jeroboam's dreadful
entail, which some choose rather than leave the crooked paths of their
Progenitors 1 King. 22.58. 2 Kings 3.3, 2 Chronicles. 22.4.
, as the idolatrous Jews of old Jer. 44.17.
, and the Papists at this day. For Marc Antonine the Emperor (as the learned
Gataker expounds him Mr Anton. l. 4. Sect. 46. id quod Origin adv. Cells. l. 1.
(...).
) could teach us, that we should not be so childish as to do any thing without
consideration, (...), upon the mere account of tradition, as we had it from our
Parents. When Frederick IV. Elector Palatine of the Rhine was by a certain
Prince advised to follow the example of his Father Lewis, he answered well; In
Religione non paren^um, non majorum exempla sequendo, sed tantum voluntatem Dei.
In the business of Religion, we must not follow the examples of Parents and
Ancestors; but only as they are agreeable to the will of God. God himself
stated this case to the Jewish Children in the wilderness by the Prophet
Ezekiel Ezekiel. 20.18, 19.
; and the Apostle Peter shows Christian Children should behave themselves as
those who are redeemed from a vain conversation 1 Pet. 1.18.
. But the good carriage of Parents in their piety toward God, righteousness
and charity toward man, should have a great influence upon those that descend
from them. Solomon is commended for his dutifulness so far as he walked in the
good ways of David his Father 1 Kings 3.3.
, expressing the like good qualities and actions in that which was right 2
Kings 23.2.
: and so Asa 1 Kings 15.11.
raising up monuments of David's piety, honesty, and virtue. It Is reported
Justin Martyr became Christian, by following the good examples of the primitive
Fathers Eusebius. l. 4. c. 4.
. The famous Emperor but now praised, determined when in the Empire, not to
follow the Caesarian mode which then obtained at the imperial Court, but to do
all (...) as a disciple of pious Antonine Gatak. in lib. 4. Sect. 30.
, to be dressed by his Fathers glass, as Julius Capitolinus notes, to act, and
speak, and think, as his Father did: or as he tells us himself, to imitate his
constant tenor in things well managed, his evenness of temper in all things,
the cheerfulness of his countenance, his courteousness, contempt of vainglory,
and studiousness to find out things. He had set before himself the virtues of
both his Parents and Pro-parents, yea, his adoptive Father, and copied out the
most singular things in them all l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 1. 2* 16.
. Which may the more incite us Christians, as Paul did Timothy from the
remembrance of the Faith in his Grandmother Lois, and Mother Eunice 2 Timothy 1.5.
, to learn that Parents good actions should make impressions on their Children;
as the Seal upon the wax, that they may represent them both while living and
dead. These cannot be a better resemblance of a Child to a good Father than in
this observance Prove. 27.11.
which I have touched on in these four Particulars, hastening to the next Duty;
viz.

3 Pious regards, Christian Children owe their Parents both in respect of their
benevolence and indigence; from a real desire of humble thankfulness (if it
were possible) to make some kind of compensation unto them, by whom under God
they subsist. (1.) With respect to their benevolence, a grateful resentment of
their kindnesses; which ought to be manifested in an affectionate
acknowledgment of their Parental love and care. This is so good and acceptable
unto God, that to requite our Parents in Paul's language, is to show piety and
kindness at home 1 Timothy 5.4. (...).
, when by way of commutation we are solicitous to take our turn as it were, in
a sort of retaliation to make some kind of retribution to those who begat us,
either immediately or mediately. This ingenuous skill the Apostle would have
learned, as a commendable Christian Art, by an exercise in such grateful
offices, as may prove Children do delight to be much in those services Mal. 3
17. with Phil. 2.22.
which express the esteem they have of their Parents good will to them. Hence
we should with great complacence entertain all our Parens favors, as ingenuous
Servants, waiting to express the sense of our love readily and heartily Ephesians.
6.7. Col. 3.23.
: since our most pathetick acknowledgments of Parental love and care are but
easy returns for their unvaluable kindnesses: so that without this resentment,
Children cannot indeed be pious: For as Cicero C m omnibus virtutibus me
affectum esse cupiam, tum nihil est quod malim, etc. Quid est pietas nisi
voluntas grata in parents, etc. pro Cn. Plancio.
in an Oration argues; When I shall desire that I may be affected with all the
virtues, then there is nothing I more wish, than that I may be thankful, and
seem to be so: for this one virtue is not only the greatest, but the mother of
all the rest. What is Piety, but a grateful will toward our Parents? etc. who
of us (says he) is liberally educated, but thinks of our Educators, etc. with
a thankful remembrance? which may be, by treasuring up their good speeches and
wise sayings of remark Job 15.18. Psalm. 44.1, 2. -- 78.3.
; rehearsing with delight their praiseworthy acts Prove. 31.28.
; expounding all they do heartily, as Ruth did Naomi's carriage, honoring all
that was honorable in her, choosing her Religion, and admiring all her
virtues, Thy God shall be my God, said she, and thy people my people Ruth. 1.16.
; comforting them under every Providence -- 4 15. Gen 5.29.
, and providing as much as may be for them Jos. 2.13.
. Hence (2.) with respect to their indigence, be it what it will, either in
regard to internal or external defects, natural, moral, or providential; both
living and dead, Children are to show themselves concerned: by covering, or
bearing their infirmities, supplying their necessities, defending their persons
and honor against the rude and injurious attaques of those who would
disparage and defame them. Noah and Lot, Isaac and Jacob had their infirmities
under temptations; and their Children covered them Genesis 9.21, 23. -- 27.12. --
28.5. -- 37.10.
; so did Jonathan his Father Readiness 1 Samuel 31.2.
; Mary was inconsiderate in speaking to our Lord, yet he went down with her
and Joseph Luke 2.51.
. Love will cover many faults 1 Pet. 4.8.
: Isaac was blind, yet Jacob religiously paid respects to him Genesis 27 1. with
Lev. 19.14.
: Naomi was poor, yet her daughter in law continued child-like obedience Ruth
1.16, 17.
: when Jacob and his Family were poor, and in straits, Joseph did support and
comfort them, ministering to their necessities Genesis 48.1. -- 37.35. -- 42.3. --
47.12.
: yea, and pious Children should have a special regard to supply their Parents
spiritual necessities, for the good estate of their souls; in case they are
unacquainted with the great business of Religion, or negligent about the
concerns of another world, then with all humility and prudence to insinuate
such things, as by the influence of Heaven may be effectual to work a real
change in them, by whom they themselves came into this world, or to revive that
which is ready to dye, will greatly adorn the part of Christian Children. Since
we are to pray for political, much more for natural Parents, because of the
goodness and acceptableness of it in the sight of God and our Savior 1 Timothy
2.2.
. All that the best can do, in one respect and another, will be recompense
little enough for Parents care, love, and kindness. Ruth took pains to supply
her mother in law's necessities Ruth. 2.18.
; David in perils was solicitous for his Parents safety 1 Samuel 22.3, 4.
: and if Children are taken away before their Parents, they are obliged after
Christ's example in taking care of his mother, to endeavor provision may be
made for them Joh. 19.26, 27.
; when their Parents are dead, they should see to the honorable interment of
their bodies, in a deccent Christian manner, agreeable to the port and quality
of both in the world, and the laudable custom of the place Acts 8.2.
, as Isaac Genesis 25.9.
, Jacob -- 35.29.
, and Joseph did -- 50.7, 8.
: So to the preservation of their good name and reputation, by paying of their
debts in due circumstances (especially if justly contracted for the childrens
sake) according to abilities, for they are the wicked who borrow and pay not
again Psalm. 37.2^
: good Christians are charged to owe no man any thing but love Romans 13.8.
; and to the vindicating of them from unjust aspersions, yet without malice or
revenge Mat. 5.39. Romans 12.17, 19.
but with justice, so far as lies within the compass of the Childrens calls and
places: so did Amaziah 2 King. 14.5.
: what Solomon did in this regard was only the public execution of Justice,
not act of private revenge 2 King. 2.8, 9. with 2 Samuel 3.39. -- 19.23.
. But still in paying honor to our deceased Parents, we must ever avoid the
superstition of the Heathens and Papists, and take care we go on in all our
Parents good ways, as did Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah 1
King 3.3. Prove. 4.3, 4. -- 31.1, 2. 2 King 22 2. 1 King. 15.11.
. Quite contrary hereunto was the impious practice of Cham, odious to God and
man Genesis 9.22.25.
: So of Absalom 2 Samuel 15.3. -- 18 9.
, Jeroboam's race 2 King. 3.3.
, and the greedy Pharisees Mar. 7 11.13.
, with others, who had no compassion, or none in proportion to their indigent
Parents necessity and superiority; when yet they are amply provided for 1 John
3.17.
; whereas this grateful recompense of Parents is required and celebrated
amongst the Heathens of old, as appears by their proverbial expression (...),
Whence their Lex Pelargica: Because says Philo (...) etc. de Decal. p. 761.
mihi.
, The old Storks disabled to fly abroad, stay in their nest, till those of
their brood do fly over sea and land, and bring food to their dams, (though
possibly some may have been observed to degenerate Neander in Franz. Hist.
animal.
). And so we Birds (says Aristophanes pleasantly) should return our Parents
thanks in all offices of endearing kindness, etc. Aeneas was denominated pious,
from that Heroic act of saving his decrepit Father out of flaming Troy, and
the hands of raging enemies, by carrying him out on his shoulders. And the
Children of Catania of old, in a sudden eruption of Aetna, for the exportation
of their aged Parents were celebrated with much honor Pausanius l. 10.
, (what they of the same place did in the late one, I have not heard). They who
would see among the Heathens greater variety of Instances for pious regards and
impious ingratitude, may consult Valerius Maximus Lib. 5. c. 4.
. I Will only mind you of two of the former sort; one (which Pliny Not. Hist. l.
7.
counts most remarkable) of a woman giving suck, who, when her mother was
condemned by the Praetor, had got from the Keeper liberty to visit her in
Prison, upon daily search made to see she brought no victuals to her, whom the
Keeper thought to have famished, but found alive after many days, sustained by
her affectionate daughter's milk; which so affected the Governors, that they
spared the Mother's life, and raised a monument of the daughter's ingenuous
piety. The other of one Perns (for that seems to be her name) who in the same
manner relieved her Father Cymon, and renewed his age the same way, in the same
case, which it seems was so taking, that it was represented in a Picture when
the Historian wrote, and that in Tiberius his time; so ancient was that Table
which our modern Painters copy. And this was the more notable, because this now
old Cymon did by his own bonds purchase his Father's freedom. The Chinoises in
their natural Religion do to this day pay their gratitude to their Parents with
the greatest strictness, as I learn from Spizelius in a late learned Tract De
re literaria sinensium, p. 243.
, wherein he shows, they persuade themselves the perfection of man does consist
in this, both with respect to the surviving Parents and the deceased, for whom
they are longer in solemn mourning than any other people. Before I leave this
head, I cannot pass over a prodigious Instance Luth. l. c. com. de amore ergo
paren. cum alii^.
of the contrary vice, I mean monstrous ingratitude to Parents. It Is the
unthankful Son of a more kind Father, who had made over his estate to all his
Sons, with a reserve of a right by turns to come and take his diet ac their
Tables. This unnatural wretch being at dinner, and having a Goose before him,
espied his Father coming, and set the Goose underneath the Table till his
Father, was gone again: then (as is related) going to take up the hidden Goose,
found it wonderfully turned into a great Toad, which leaped upon his face, and
notwithstanding all his striving could not be removed, till it had stifled him.
Let Children learn hence, to take heed of being ungrateful to their Patents for
fear of the dreadful consequence thereof. Thus we have seen three particulars
of Childrens active obedience, there is yet another which is more passive, and
that is,

4. Submission or subjection to Parental discipline, with all lowliness of mind
Phil. 2 3.
, acknowledging their coercive authority: and therefore are Children obliged
with patience to bear their Parents rebukes; whether verbal or real;
considering in charity they design good. The ignorance, imperfection, and
corrupt inclinations of Children born in sin require Parents animadversion, and
the Childrens submission both to their Admonitions and Corrections. (1.) Their
Admonitions; when in their watchful inspection they give check unto exorbitant
behavior, and lay restraints upon their Children, who should indeed stand in
great awe of those reproofs and threats, which do arise from Parents
displeasure. When Jonadah's posterity were tempted to act in complaisance with
others, their Fathers forewarning kept them in awe, that they did not violate
his appointment Jos. 35.6.
; and so upon doing amiss, an ingenuous Child will amend. There should be shame
upon a Father's frown and discountenance Numb. 12.14.
: yea, though Parents should be out in the matter, as well as manner, and be
too quick in their rebukes, as it should seem Jacob was with Joseph for his
dreams, not considering what signal motion of God was in them; yet the Children
should bear it as Joseph did Genesis 37.10.
, and as Jonathan did his Father's unkind exprobation 1 Samuel 20.30, etc.
. It is true; Jesus took up his Mother in one instance, but it was in his
Heavenly Father's cause, which he was concerned in as God-man Luke 2.49.
: Yet in other cases, they should not only bear, but amend upon admonition: as
Moses did upon his Father in law's dislike of that task he took upon himself
alone Exodus 18.13, 17.24.
; whereas on the other hand Ely's Sons slighted their Father's reproof 1 Samuel
2.25.
; and such others there are who scorn to be told of their faults Prove. 13.1.
, though they loose God's favor by it, and are accounted fools by him, who is
never out in his censure: when the submiss are prudent, going on in the way of
life -- 3.34, 35. -- 15.5. -- 3.23.
. Many Children are impatient of just restraints in their meats, drinks,
apparel, and recreations; not considering the advantage of self-denial, and
patience learned betimes; when as others can say experimentally, they had been
undone if they had not been early curbed. Monica, Austin's Mother Aug. Conf. l.
8. c. 9.
, having in her minority been educated to temperance, when growing up, and
getting from under that severer tuition, by the insinuation of a jocund
companion was drawn to drink her whole draughts; till upon the upbraiding of
her associate, she reformed her self, and observed her former rules of
temperance. Reverend Mr. Greenham used to say, Be most moderate in those things
which thine appetite likes best, and check thy too much greediness of them.
And another said well Citante Steph. Guazi de civili convers p. 376. maluisse
se infirmum, quam delicatum esse, etc.
, That he had rather be infirm, than delicate; since weakness only can hurt the
body alone: but delicacies may at once corrupt both body and mind: and more
than that, may also render any one unjust; by reason they make him covetous to
get that which may maintain them, and also dull and regardless of the Word of
God, and the service of his friends and country. I have in my own observation
seen Children prove well, who have submitted to the prudent restraints and
admonitions of their watchful Parents and Guides as to these things; and others
ruined, who, when they have been told of their faults, have swelled and raged
against those that have loved them best, yea in a most unchristian manner: So
necessary it is to submit to Parents admonitions. So also to (2.) Their
corrections or real chastisements, whether by stripes, or other punishments
inflicted: since we should imagine Parents come to this sharp and unpleasant
work, out of a principle of love Prove. 13.24.
, with an aim at their Childrens good -- 22.15.
; and it is looked upon in Scripture a Ruled Case, that reverence with
submission is paid to the Parents of our flesh Hebr. 12.9.
, when under their rod, which we are to bear, and upon the feeling of it, to
amend what is amiss, as some kind of satisfaction Prove. 29.17.
; whereas disdain and stubbornness spoils all, and if it be persisted in, may
sometimes occasion Parents to call in the posse magistratus Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19,
etc.
. The Greek word (...) in the Epistle to the Hebrews translated, We gave them
reverence, does import that we Children, when faulty, under our Fathers frowns
and stripes turned our faces with shame and blushing at our unworthy acts, not
able to look them in the face; as the Prodigal upon his return Luke 15.21. with
Tit. 2.8.
, which accords (as some have noted Laws on Hebr. (...)
) to the Hebrew word, which is in this case to submit with humility to them in
this Relation. Because, though we cannot bear that others should beat and
scourge us, yet our Parents, as having power upon a just cause to punish by
virtue of their Superiority, and our dependence upon them, whose end is, or
should be, their Childrens reformation, and therefore is in mercy to prevent
further sin and misery; in compliance with God's command they correct their
offspring, to save it from hell: though many an inconsiderate Child, may at
present conceive the Father correcting to be a severe Judge, when as to
intended amendment, he is indeed a loving Father: So that though it seem to be
jarring and harsh music, disagreeable to the faulty Patient, yet it will sound
sweeter to the judicious ear, than the melody of a luscious and disorderly
indulgence. Ingenuous Children have acknowledged the benefit of Paternal
correction, especially after they have sought to God by Prayer, that God would
sanctify the rod to their good. That was a good practical answer of one of
Zeno's Scholars, Citante Steph. Gua2zi de civil. Convers.
who to his Father, asking what wisdom he had learned by being so long abroad,
said, He was able to show it at any time: which he did to the purpose not long
after, when, his Father chastising him with strokes, he took it quietly and
patiently; showing that he could sustain the displeasure of his Parent without
any untoward reparties. In short, Children should in all these duties deport
themselves with piety toward their Parents, being in that relation they bear
the image of God, as Creator, Upholder, and Governor of the World. So that
resistance, yea, surly and rude replies, are a token of ill behavior under
Government, and do disguise Children of the most comely structure in the world.
Thus of the first general in Childrens duties.

second is concerning the Latitude and extent of Childrens obedience, in all
things, (...) in my Text. We cannot imagine this is so universal and absolute
as Obedience to God; or that the obligation lies in any thing beside the mind
of the supreme Governor of Heaven and Earth, or dissonant to the holy will of
our Lord; for only that obedience is required which is well-pleasing and
grateful unto him. So that the Power demanding it must have a warrant from him:
unless we should embrace the horrid opinion of the daring Atheist in his
Leviathan c. 42 p. 234.
, who impiously affirms, that if a Christian be commanded by his lawful Prince
or Sovereign (whose authority was first paternal) to say he does not believe in
Christ, it is lawful to obey: which atheistical tenet does either post-pone the
command of God to the command of man, which is most abominable: or, without
further enquiry does account it a divine precept, which would prefer an hellish
error to the Heavenly verity, overturn the whole Christian institution, and set
up diabolical adoration Dr Templar Idea Theol. Levia. p. 96, 97, 251. 101, 102.
. 'Twould introduce an infallible spirit in all Civil, as the Papists pretend
to have in their Ecclesiastical Government, yea, quite exterminate all regards
of Conscience, and raze out the common notions of good and evil: whereas all
subjection which is not of faith, i. e. agrees not with the judgment of
Conscience, propounding it is dictates under the reason of the Divine will, is
sin Romans 13.1, 4.5. with -- 14.23,
. God is only arbitrary and absolute Lawgiver Jam 4.12.
. And as Constant. the Father of Constantine the Emperor affirmed, they could
not be faithful Subjects unto him, who easily contemned God and their
Conscience: neither Children be truly obedient to their Parents, who do so. Our
obedience then ought to be only in all things acceptable to our supreme Lord
and Master. And therefore the Apostle has elsewhere expressed the command to
obey in the Lord Ephesians. 6.1, 5, 6.
, which is the same, as unto the Lord, and unto Christ, fearing God Colos.
3.22, 23.
in opposition to the pleasing of men. This does moderate the commands of
Parents; and regulate the obedience of Children, Wives, and Servants. It Is
true, had Parents kept their original rectitude, their commands would never
have been other than consonant to the Divine pleasure, and Law of Nature: but
the fall, that disordered that harmonious and happy constitution; and now their
precepts do often thwart or jar with the will of him who is Sovereign Lord,
whom to please is the determination or limit, as well as motive to Childrens
obedience. This agrees with the sense of Archbishop Anselm. Comment, in Colos.
-- in his tantummodo quae pra^eptum Domini non excedunt, etc.
580 years ago expounding my Text. How it will relish now with those of his
order in an Hypothesis of theirs, I determine not: But he says, that Natural
and Ecclesiastical, Carnal and Spiritual Parents are to be obeyed in all things
only in the Lord: i. e. (says he) in those things only which are not beside,
or Do not exceed the precept of the Lord: because it is pleasing unto God, that
in such a manner we should obey them. It should seem he held then according to
truth, that if a Superior should exceed his commission by imposing any
preter-evangelical Canon for Doctrine or practice, the Inferiors nonconformity
thereunto was no transgression: For in obeying the commands of a subordinate
power Acts 4.19. -- 5.29. Exodus 1.17.
we are primarily to take care, that the rights of the absolute Sovereign
remain inviolable: seeing God gave the Parent that Authority he has, in
requiring that which is displeasing to God he has none. And as the Child is to
obey him, so he is to obey God, without whose warrant his child is not obliged
to active obedience, but passive, or submission by suffering the penalty with
cheerfulness: that is pleasing to God in such a case. For the truth is, It is
thank-worthy, if one for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully 1 Pet. 2.19, 20. (...).
: this is acceptable with God, whatever acceptance it find among men; there is
a grace in this behavior before God. Now the great thing Children are to look
at in their obedience to Parents is, that it be well-pleasing to God (so says
my Text); and if they obey without his warrant, who can secure them they shall
do what is acceptable with him? God is to have an affection predominant to that
we have for our Parents Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.26.9.59, 60, 61.
: We must not dishonor him in pretension to honor them. In things impious or
dishonest Parents have no authority; herein disobedience would be just, and
obsequiousness criminal. Hence we find Acrotatus commended amongst the
Ancients, because, when his Parents had required of him to do an unjust thing,
he answered, I know you are willing I should do that which is just, for so you
taught me to do: I will therefore do that which you desire I should, but what
you bid me I will not do. A denial in this case is to be expressed in all
humble language. Hierocles, though no Christian, has notable things about the
extent of Childrens obedience: for he arguing in this case, (...), etc.
Comment. in C^rm. Pytbag. p. 53, etc.
If in all things we must obey our Parents, how shall we go astray from piety,
and other virtues, if through the pravity of their manners they lead us into
those things which are not altogether honest and commendable? If sometime their
will be not consonant to the Divine Laws? He gives this answer amongst others
(...), etc.
; If indeed the Divine Law draw you to one thing, and your Parents to another,
in this disagreement of wills it is more excellent to choose those things which
are better, and in those only to be inobservant of the commands of Parents,
wherein even they themselves obey not the Divine Laws; for it cannot be, that
he, who is resolved to observe the rules of virtue, can consent to them, by
whom they are neglected: but in all other things we ought as much as we can to
honor our Parents; viz. in bodily observance, and a most ready and free supply
of things necessary, since they have right to use those they have brought forth
and nourished, etc. Neither will the Parents unkindness be enough to discharge
the Child from obedience, which is to be yielded in all the circumstances of
their lives: And that considering,

great reason to engage in the duties of Childrens obedience in the Lord, is
undoubtedly the most cogent Motive can be urged to the performance of all
generous actions, viz. because it is well-pleasing to the Lord. So it is
express: God himself in Covenant is taken with it, with this Chain on a Child's
neck (as I may allude to that of Christ to his Spouse) Cant. 4.9.
, because it sets forth the beauty and loveliness of a Child, as a Child. The
Lord has given it in charge to all Christian Children here in my Text, and
elsewhere Ephesians. 6.1.
, as a vigorous enforcement of the fifth Commandment. The supreme authority of
our Heavenly Father, who has an uncontrollable dominion over us, makes any
duties which he requires highly reasonable. But he who is a rewarder of those
that diligently seek him Heb. 11.6.
, assures the dutiful, he takes much pleasure in these Relative duties, that
they are not only pleasing, but well-pleasing to him: Certainly it should
hugely raise the spirits of all ingenuous Children, to be most solicitous in
filling up their Relation. Dear Children, I am hemmed in, as it were, by what I
am yet to say for Parents duties, that I cannot here dilate my self by
descending into particulars to persuade the embracing of an exhortation to
these duties: But if you be Christians indeed who understand your interest, I
can give you the quintessence of all Motives within the bounds of my Text.
Consider it well, I beseech you, it is this: By your accurateness in these
duties you do that which is (...), well-pleasing to the Lord, to your and my
Lord and Master. Do this, please the Lord, and you do all; this is right Ephesians.
6.1. (...).
; whether present or absent, that you may be accepted of him 2 Cor. 5 9. (...).
, or wellpleasing to him, is the highest you can attain to. What can I? What
need I say more? I could tell you, in pleasing of God you do that which does,
or should, please your Parents, and will be most pleasant to your selves; and
then you must needs be happy, when God and you are pleased. As in the keeping
all God's Commandments there is an exceeding great reward Psalm. 19.11. Genesis
15.1.
; so this has a Primacy in the Promise Ephesians. 6.1. Prove. 4.10, 22.
. Upon that account it is profitable and beneficial, yea it is honest and
honorable before God 1 Timothy 5.4. (...).
, every way right agreeable to God's positive Law, the Law of Nature, and the
Law of Nations. It is the Parents due as in the place of God; they bear his
Image in their Parental authority and relation Mal, 1.6. with 1 Samuel 2.30.
; they deserve it, we owe it to them as a debt: So that disobedience to Parents
is against Scripture, the light of Nature, the common equity of all Nations,
and renders such persons unworthy the Christian Name, and worse than Infidels
and Brutes: Such were Hophni and Phineas 1 Samuel 2.25.34.
, Absalom 2 Samuel 18.9
and Adonijah 1 Kings 2.25.
. Have you then, my beloved Children, any respect to God, his good pleasure, or
displeasure? to your Parents their right or wrong, their blessing or cursing?
to your selves, looking for recompense, or fearing vengeance? Consider then I
pray you, what you have to do. It Is no arbitrary thing I am persuading to, but
that which is required by an eternal, indispensable Law, fortified with the
most signal rewards and punishments; yea even in this state, as you may find in
the Annals of most Dominions. Yet further, you Christian Children are now took
into a Covenant Relation with God, as the Jewish Children were under that
Paedagogy Romans 9.4. compared with Deuteronomy 4.2. Ephesians 6 1, 2. Mic. 7.20. Deuteronomy. 32.13,
14. 2 Chro. 1.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 86.6.
. Consider, I beseech you, how much you are indebted to your Parents for
pleading the Covenant and Promises on your behalf Psalm. 112.1, 2. Prove 20.7.
Genesis 49.26 Psalm. 115.13, 14.
. This obedience to Parents is commended in Scripture; you will get a lasting
reputation by it Ruth 4.15, 16.
; God and men honor the obedient graced with this ornament 1 Samuel 2.30. Prove.
1.9. and 13.18. Jer. 35.18, 19.
. The examples of Sem and Japhet, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, etc. are in Scripture
recorded to their perpetual honor. In Heathen Story, the Piety of Aenaeas to
his aged Father, and the obedience of others is celebrated. This is the way to
have the good things of this and a better life entailed upon posterity Genesis
9.23, 26, 27.
. It Is equity you should do, as you would have them to do to you in the like
circumstances. The Philosopher Arist. Ethic. l. 8. c. 16.14.
thought none could ever give Parents honor answerable to their merit; that
there is no equalizing their descending, growing love: they were the
instruments of Childrens having affections, because of their being: They may
then claim your best affections and actions. Upon which account it is that want
of natural affection, as it is the most monstrous, so it is the most dreadfully
punished by God 1 Samuel 4.11. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Senec. l. 5. contra 4. in fine.
Instit. 6 de pub. judicio.
. Yea and for Parricides the old Romans had a strange and unusual punishment,
in culeum dejicere, to put them alive into a great leather Sack, made of an
Ox-Hide, with a live Dog, a Cock, a Viper, and an Ape, at first it was with
Serpents, (after the murderers of Parents had been made bloody with scourging)
then sewed up close, and cast into Tiber, or the next River, that whiles alive
they might begin to want the use of all the Elements, not having the benefit of
the Heavens while they lived, nor the burial of the Earth when dead. This shows
how odious this crime was in the height of it to mere Heathen men also. Be sure
the beginning of it in the want of natural affection is very displeasing to God
Genesis 6.3. with Judge. 14, 3.
; but the obedience I have been describing is very amiable to his eye: It keeps
from evil: and disposes to reverence God himself Lev. 19.4. with 2, 3.
: It helps to be good Subjects, and conduces to the vvelfare of our Country.
God makes choice discoveries of himself to obedient ones in filial duties, as
he did eminently to Jacob Genesis 28.7, 10.11.
, being peculiarly present with them, who do choose the things that please
him, and lay hold of his Covenant Isa. 56.4.
, as those Children do, who obey their Parents in all things in the Lord. All
encouragement lies in this; obedience is well-pleasing to the Lord. But it is
more than time, now I have put Children upon their duties following the
Apostle, that I come to

II. My next General proposed, which is the office of Parents, enforced that
the Apostle suggests to move to it. I shall 1. speak to the office; and then 2.
a little to the enforcement of it here.

1. Concerning the office, we may by an affection of a Trope so expound the
provocation in my Text forbidden Christian Parents, 1. (...).
that in a short manner of speech the Negative does emphatically intend more
than is expressed, as including the Positive, wherein the office of Parents
provident care, and well treating of their Children, being of great weight and
extent, is connoted to us. (...),
The charge which the Apostle gives here to all the Fathers of our flesh from
the Father of mercies according to the original word is not to irritate their
Children; which is somewhat different from the prohibition to the Ephesians
Ephesians. 6.4. (...).
, provoke not your Children to wrath, this in my Text seeming to deny more
generally. So that he allows not of any kind of abuse of the paternal
authority, which may justly irritate or provoke the passions of Children, an
ill effect produced in their hearts, and proceeding from any
maladministration of the Father's power, which in rigor is more apt to exceed
its bounds than the Mothers; either in substracting a fit allowance for
nourishment and nurture, not a usual fault, which yet the Apostle taxes 1 Timothy
5.8.
, (and Quintilian complained of Lib. 1. c. 2.
); or loading them with impious Mat. 14 8.
and inhumane commands 1 Samuel 20.31.
without necessity, compelling to sordid and servile works not fit for
ingenuous Children, but slaves; or treating them for not just hitting their
humor with contumelious words, -- 30.
, pouring forth curses out of that mouth that should bless: since the name of
Father breathes sweetness and benignity; bitter words, and the language of a
barbarous enemy, will be apt to exasperate: when upon any little enormities a
Father shows himself morose and sharp, it may be beating his Children to
gratify his own lust and rage, or inflicting other penalties no way
proportioned to the fault, (if any) -- 33. compared with Deuteronomy. 25 1, 2.
, chastening not with the rod of men, or the stripes of the children of men, i.
e. not in a humane way with gentleness and moderation 2 Samuel 7.14.
, or by imperiousness for some self-respects, as wordlings impose upon their
Children in the great concern of changing their condition, etc. be sure it is
contrary to the prohibition, which imports that the Parents conduct should be
moderated betwixt the extremes of an unwarrantable indulgence and rigor, that
it may tend to their Childrens benefit, and their own satisfaction. They should
so deport themselves in this good government, that their Children may both love
and honor their presence, not being too fond, lest their Children should not
fear them, nor too stern, lest they should fear them too much. The moving
Principle to be premised, which influenceth Parents, and enclineth them
effectually to exert a provident care in all the branches of it, is an imbred
natural affection of love, which did act Abraham Genesis 22.2.
, Isaac, and Rebekah -- 25.28.
, in the Old Testament, and is called forth in the New (m), Tit. 2.3. Romans 1.31.
, as the fundamental requisite to sway Parents in the exercise of their
authority, and a due performance of their Relative office in all the severals
of it, so that they may indeed adorn the Gospel. Out of this inward Principle
arise Dues from Parents to their Children more general, viz. 1. Prayer, and 2.
Good Behavior; and more particular, with respect to the 1. Birth, 2.
Nourishment, 3. Education, 4. Disposal, and 5. Maintenance of their Children,
and 6. their own departure from them: all according to the dictates of humane
and Christian prudence.

1. The more general and previous duties, wherein Parents are concerned for the
sake of their Children as well as themselves, are Prayer, and good Behavior;
which give success to all the following particular ones respectively, and
without which they will not be well discharged, so as they should be, by a
Christian Parent, who is obliged to rule his own house well, having his
Children in subjection with all honesty, (or as we render it) with all gravity
1 Timothy 3.4, 5. (...).
. I know not well how to omit, yet can but touch on these. [1] Prayer. Parents
are to make their requests known to God without ceasing 1 These. 5.17.
, upon all occasions, for all things, throughout the whole course of their
Childrens lives: they are concerned to be daily Orators at the Throne of grace,
that God would make their Children his Children, and confer upon them all
temporal and spiritual blessings: this is requisite to the having of Children,
and the having of them good. It Is a mercy to have them, as Isaac Hannah and
others had Gen 25.21. 1 Samuel 1 10.
, as a return to prayer; which is also a means to have them good Genesis 17.18,
20. 1 Chronicles. 22.12. -- 29.19. Ps. 72 per. totu^.
; since the sincere Parent's prayer may reach his Child in every particle of its
life, in the womb, as Rebekah did hers Gen 25.22.
; and in the world, at the ingress with Zachariah's Luke 1.64.
, progress with Job's Job 1.5.
, and egress with David's, who made his petition more fervent with fasting 2 Samuel 12.16.
; and when the Parent is leaving his Children as Isaac Genesis 27.4.
: all which show the benefit of paternal requests for the fruit of their
bodies. Monica, Augustin's Mother, was very earnest, frequent and pathetical in
her addresses to God for her Husband and Son, and she had gracious returns for
both. How wicked then are those Parents, who follow their Children (yea without
provocation too) with imprecations, and direful curses instead of prayers? [2.]
Good Behavior before God and man in love to their Children. To follow prayer
in upright walking is the best course Parents can take to entail a blessing
upon their Children, and make them good indeed. The seed of the just or
merciful man, who walks in his integrity, shall be blessed after him Prove.
20.7. -- 3.22.
. The generation of the righteous have certainly the surest Deed of entail for
inheriting of blessings that can be made Psalm. 112.2. Deuteronomy. 5.29. -- 4.8, 9.
, since God has given promises thereof unto gracious persons, who really walk
with him and before him according to his holy statutes Genesis 17.1, 7. Acts 2.39.
1 Kings 11, 12.
. It Is the Lord's usual way to confer his favors in this channel; so that
Parents are concerned to carry themselves well upon this account: And what
ifluence their good behavior has on their Children, as they set fair patterns
to them, may be touched on afterward. I hasten to speak to

2. The more particular duties of Parents, with their several respects, as (1.)
To the birth of the Child; whiles it is yet but an Embrio, there is not only
requisite Prayer, (which was presupposed) with thanksgiving, for the
sanctifying the fruit of the body 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
, as Jeremiah and John were Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.15.
, but also a tender care for the preservation of life. Both Parents are
concerned in order to a better observance of the fifth Commandment, to have
regard to what is implied and required in the sixth and seventh Commandment.
When God has curiously made the babe in secret, in the lower parts of the
earth Ps. 139.13, 15.
, it is to be regarded, even before it see the light. Manaoh's wife had a
positive order in this case for the safety of her self and child, when it was
conceived; and her good husband was desirous (as appears by his enquiry) to be
assistant to her therein Judge. 13, 4, 11, 12.
. The Rule given her by the Angel of the Lord r spected temperance; forbearance
of wine was ordered both for her own and the child's good. Upon such an
account the Philosopher Arist. Folitic. l. 7. and de Rep. l. 8. c. 17. (...)
determined in his Politic, that pregnant women should be careful as to their
aliment; and elsewhere particularly commends milk, and not wine, as more fit
nourishment for many bodies, wherein he conceits the latter may occasion
diseases. As for nourishment, the Mother should be prudently careful; and the
Father in special case of a real longing appetite should endeavor seasonable
supplies: so there should be a joint care for a provision of things necessary
and convenient to entertain the Babe into the world, when brought forth. Though
the Virgin Mary was in a low estate, and necessitated to travel at the
Emperor's command, yet she was not unprovided of swaddling clothes Luke 2.7.
. All this gives check to those Mothers, who without a call frisk and jantle
about any how at their pleasure, and are intemperate: yea, against the
Apostle's charge, and to the disparagement of their Christian Profession Tit.
2.4.5.
; for he would have the Matrons by good example to teach the young women to be
sober, to love their husbands and their children, to be discreet, chaste,
keepers at home, good, etc. And this is more especially requisite for
Childbearing women; since the Romans observed that Coriolanus's Niece
miscarried by being too strait laced; the Sister of Curious by much dancing; and
the Sister of C. Duilius by immoderate eating of various dainties. It Is indeed
granted, that carelessness of making provision of necessaries for clothing
their newborn Infants is the fault of a few in our Age; wherein under the
notion of clouts (or clothtrenchers) things of the greatest value by some of
mean quality are found out to such an height of curiosity sometimes, as appears
not very consonant to the simplicity and humility of the Gospel. 'Twere, I
confess, Ostrich-like to suffer these sure pledges of nature to be without
conveniences, or to expose them, (like some of the ancient Greeks) as they are
sometimes in this great City, at the doors in the street: but to make them
Peacock-like to surpass in finery above their rank can be no symptom of
humility; and then too, when the Parents would have it thought, they engage
them to forsake all the pomps and vanities of the world. But this may respect
the next duty, viz. (2.) To give the Child nourishment, when it appears in the
world, for the preservation of it is natural life; and to seek that it may be
spiritually alive, Parents should use the best means nature and grace do prompt
to them. For the former, that breast-milk is ordinarily the most proper aliment
Nature teaches; as also for the most part that the Mother's is most agreeable:
likewise that she is obliged to nurse her own Babe (whatever softnesses many
delicate Dames do now cherish) the Scriptures, as well as Principles of Reason,
do evince: unless she be excused in some few instances; as in case of
necessity; or greater charity; namely, when the impediment to her giving suck
is natural disability, a really great weakness, or an affliction with a
disease, which might be transmitted with the milk, or in case of the public
concerns of a Kingdom, for securing of succession in the Royal Throne: or etc.
For natural instinct, which is seen in these springing fontinels, the breasts
Cantic. 4.5.
, unto this end, for giving that food better digested unto the child when come
out, with which it was fed in the womb, has reason super-added in man. As
marriage to him (especially under the Christian constitution) becomes an
ordinance of God, which in the mixture of other creatures is merely natural
Dr. Jer. Taylor's Great Exempl. p. 1. Sect. 3.
. Now to pervert the end and designation of Nature, with the necessities
thereof, is in effect to violate those reasonable inducements, which do oblige
conscience in that which is comely, and not to correspond with the design of
justice, charity, and sohriety. A matter certainly very inaccountable for
those, who are bound seriously to think on (so as to do) whatsoever things are
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report: or if there be any other virtue Phil. 4.8.
. Certainly the thing can be no disparagement to them of the best quality, but
a credit, only because it agrees not with the modern mode of the Italian and
French; amongst whom, the great ones often suckle their Children upon vile
women, and sometimes upon Strumpets, whose manners are drawn in with their
milk. Chrysostom Homil. in Psalm.
thought it a reproach that any women should blush to be Nurses, who were
become Mothers. The Spartan law was, that the Noblest, even the Kings wives
should nurse the first child. Historians Herodotus, etc.
show Queens have done it. The Noblest amongst the ancient Romans and Germans
did it. And one of the Caesar's thought it a prodigy in those days, that a
Roman Lady refused to suckle her own Infant, and yet gave suck to a Puppy, that
her milk might be more artificially dried up. But I fear the wantonness and
pride of some Mothers, and the ill nature of some Fathers, who love their ease
and quiet, may render this discourse unpleasing to them: yet had I time to
enlarge, for that reason it would be the more necessary in the cases not
excepted. However, the blessed Virgin giving Jesus milk from the bottles of his
own filling, may commend it with reputation enough to any Christian Mother, who
seriously desires to practice the choice lesson of Self-denial. For the
Scriptures consonant to the common prinicples of right reason, do either take
this Duty for granted (where no just exceptions) of Mothers nursing their own
Children for a ruled case; as in the Father of the faithful's wife Sarah Genesis
21.7.
, who was a very honorable woman, and others Psalm. 22.9. Cant. 8.1. Luke 11.27.
; or else they give us examples of Mothers who were commendable patterns, as
were Hannah 1 Samuel 1.22.
, the Virgin Mary Luke 1.28. with 11 27.
, David's Mother Psalm. 22.9.
, and that affectionate one who stood before Solomon to plead for her child 1
Kings 3.21.
; or afford us such Texts as by consequence do infer it, as in Jacob's blessing
Gen 49.25.
, and a contrary curse on others Hos. 9.14.
, the charge to Manoah's wife to avoid things hurtful to her milk Judge. 13.4.
considering her constitution, and the climate she lived in: the Apostle gives
it as the character of good women, that they have nursed up Children 1 Timothy 5
10. (...).
, as Moses his Mother did him, awaiting Providence to perform this natural
office to her own child; and was not, as the weeping Prophet laments some in
his time, worse than Sea Monsters, like Ostriches of the wilderness Lam. 4.3.
. I do not remember in holy Writ that any Mother put forth her own child to
suck: and though there be mention made of Rebekah's nurse Genesis 24.59. -- 35.8.
, and others 2 Samuel 4 4. 2 Kings 11.2.
, yet in all probability they were common dry-nurses, or nurse-keeping women,
such as had skill to be about Childbearing women, fit to advise and attend
them. Be sure Rebekah had no child till about twenty years after she was
married: and if she, or any, had milch-nurses, it may be their own Mothers
might die in Childbed, or not be able to perform their office. But Naomi, when
old and past Childbearing, became a dry-nurse unto Ruth's child, being
assistant to her daughter at her lying-in Ruth 4 16. with -- 1.12.
. When though there be some pain in suckling, (however less I suppose in
following the natural way of laying the child to) yet there is also a pleasure
and benefit, which may well sweeten, and usually compensate in ordinary cases.
The careful Father should contribute his endeavors to promote all this, and
accommodate his wife in the nursery with all convenient requisites to preserve
the temporal life of the child. But then there is also a care with reference to
the spiritual life of the child to attend this, which Christian Parents are
obliged to by dedicating of their Infant seed unto the Lord, according to his
appointment for the solemn enrolling of his Disciples Mat. 28.19. Acts 21.5, 6.
-- 16.33. -- 10 47
: which matriculation of a child should not be unseasonably delayed, but
performed in a due Christian manner; since obedience in the Lord Ephesians. 6 1.
will be required of it, as soon as it is able to do any thing; which implies
that as Hannah dedicated her Samuel to the Lord in covenant under the Old
Testament dispensation 1 Samuel 1.28.
: so it is to be devoted to the Lord, and consecrated to his use, as he has
instituted under the New Testament dispensation, and that is a solemn
enrollment by Baptism amongst Christians, who by this Rite are signally
declared to be in covenant with him, his Disciples, and Members of his
spiritual household Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.13. Jo. 4.1, 2. Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11. Acts 16.33.
, who in that relation are to yield obedience unto their Parents, in him, and
as unto him. How else can we so easily imagine that Christian Children should
be obliged to obey their Parents in the Lord, but as they are by their Parents
(who have most right to them) devoted to his service? I confess I cannot
understand. Now it is highly reasonable that they who have been instruments to
bring a stain upon their Children Romans 5.12, 16, 17. Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
, should also be as instrumental as they can, even as Believers under the Old
Testament were, to bring them unto God in the use of the means he has now
prescribed, to get them washed with the blood of sprinkling, by giving them
unto God in the Covenant, as they then did Genesis 17.10, 11, 13. Romans 11.17, 20.
Mat. 18.13, 4. -- 19.13.14. Luke 18.15. Tit. 3.5. Favores sunt ampliandi.
. For undoubtedly under this gracious dispensation there is no abridgment of
any privilege to the Infant Seed of Believers, which they before enjoyed, so
that they should not now be brought to the Lord, that he may own and bless
them; and the promises be pleaded on their behalf whose Parents are heirs Gal.
3.14, 27, 29. 1 Cor. 7.14.
, for as much as the Father's right to the promises gives the Children some
kind of right to the same inheritance Acts 2.38, 39. Mat. 28.19. ^ C^r. 1.16.
(...) 2.12, 13. (...) 17.10, 11, Jer. 32.39. Isa. 44.3.
, yea, the promise and precept do answer each other as a deed and its
counterpart. There was no need of particularizing every subject to be baptized,
any other than those who were discipled; it being so well known who had the
Covenant-seal by the common practice of the Jews under the former dispensation
of the Covenant. And now the Lord Jesus Christ in commissioning his Ministers
to disciple and baptize all Nations (then all in them discipled) chiefly
designed to instruct them, in what manner and form they should baptize those
that belong to his Kingdom, viz. into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, which had not been before used, but now upon the discharging of
Circumcision, was every where to be observed. Thus Christian Parents are at
first to contribute their endeavors toward their Childrens spiritual life. And
for this temporal life, further they are also to provide food Genesis 42 2. Exodus
13.3. Mat. 7.9, 10, 11.
, and raiment Gen 37.3.21.15.
, and to allow fit and honest recreation for their Children Zach. 8 5.
to keep them in health; and physic when they are sick 1 Kings 14.2. 2 Kings
4.22. Jo. 4.47. Mat. 17.15.
equity and necessity oblige to it, with a solicitous care to preserve their
lives from dangers, as much as may be in their power Exodus 2.2, 3.
, and to see according to their quality and calling, that they be accommodated
with conveniences for body and mind Genesis 21.15. Deuteronomy. 1.31.
. Hence another particular of Parental care is (3.) Education of their
Children; which is a very comprehensive Duty, begins early, and lasts till
their Children be emancipated. Our Apostle in another Epistle Ephesians. 6.4.
, reduces this to two heads, 1. Nurture, and 2. Admonition of the Lord. Some
conceive the former does more respect manners or civility: the later Doctrine
or piety: though it is not necessary to take them so restrictively. [1.]
Christian Parents are charged to educate or bring up their Childrin in nurture,
(...). Ateneris assuesce^e multum.
i. e. such a kind of domestic learning as befitteth a child, according to
that of the Wise man Prove. 22.6.
, Train up a child in the way he should go: Sow the seed, and then expect the
fruit: the first impressions are like to abide, though at the very first not
understood. The Rule it seems is, Teach a child: neither can any one learn that
perfectly, which he begins late to learn, said the Orator Nec perf^cte illud
quisquim discet, quod sere discere incepit.
. Parents should timely inure their Children to good behavior, before they
degenerate more; they should consult their temper, observe their ingenuity and
humor, to find out their inclinations, and fit them for the service of their
generation in such a particular Calling as may be found most suitable to them.
And this nurturing of them is to be effected by giving them 1. Teaching
examples, 2. Rules of morality, and 3. Moderate Chastisements. 1. Teaching
examples; by which those who converse much with little ones may perceive, they
are capable of receiving good or harm before they are able to understand other
instructions. Christian Parents should be wary then, as to their own
deportment, Plus docent exempla quam praecepta.
before their little ones, that it may not be as a spotted, but a clear glass:
When they daily observe their Parents to perform actions decently, and with a
grace Romans 13.13. 1 These. 4.12. Phil, 4 8.
, it has a great force to form their manners. Seeing their Parents in all
Family duties to express reverence by their countenance, gesture, and
pronunciation, every one taking their place according to their quality and
degree, this does early instill a silent deportment, and a kind of devotion
into these little ones, before they can reach the reason of it. So that really,
Christian Parents are concerned for this purpose to stand in awe Maxima
reverentia debetur pucris.
as much of their little Children, as of any in the world; lest, because of
that love these bear to those from whom they do descend, judging what they do
to be right, they should come to have their judgment perverted by their ill
precedents. Hence it was, that the ancient Romans did with the greatest
diligence possibly take care to manage all their affairs in the presence of
their Children with all modesty and discretion. And it became a proverbial
saying, that the Temperance of the Parent was the greatest precept to the
Children. And indeed after, when they come to further use of Reason (I must
pack up things together) good or bad examples of parents have a very powerful
influence upon Children, as well as others, to breed them to a good or bad
behavior. The young Cock crows as he hears the old one. In blessing or
cursing, playing and blaspheming, we may perceive Children, even before they
can speak perfectly, or go strongly, forward enough to learn somewhat agreeable
to what they hear and see. As Titus then was in all things to show himself a
pattern of good works Tit. 2.7.
, so should Parents in their Families 2 Timothy 1 5. 1 Timothy 3 4.
. We find in Scripture that a decorum in actions has greatly affected lookers
on 1 Kings 10.5. Job 32.4, 6. Gen 43 33. -- 23.7.
, which evinceth, that in the eye of their Children Parents ought to be very
cautelous, not only in refraining sinful words and actions; but also such
things as are indifferent in their own nature, yet prove stumbling blocks,
being in some circumstances in a tendency to sin, or such as have at least an
appearance of evil in them to their Childrens weaker apprehensions in such a
conjuncture: So likewise they should forbear the repetition of their own
youthful failings with any kind of delight; and take special heed they do not
so much as seem to make a mock of sin Prove. 14.9.
in table-talk and company: yea, and they should beware of making promises to
others, or to their Children, which they never intend to perform, or at least
neglect to make good in due circumstances; for let me tell you, though it be
but in light and trivial matters (wherein yet a child may have as strong
affections, as a plodding man to gain a great estate) it will interpretatively
be a teaching them to lie, or be unfaithful, which natural pravity will easily
promote. Not only speeches, but gestures, fashions, and all kind of habits are
soon learned by example, because man is of all creatures the most mimical or
apt to imitate, especially what affects him in those he esteems; this being a
kind of adjunct to Reason: we know the little Children had learned to mock the
Prophet to their cost; Go up thou Bald-pate, Go up thou Bald-pate 2 Kings 2.23,
24, Dignoscitur socio, qui non noscitur e se.
. As many men are known by their Associates they much converse with and delight
in, who yet carry it so smoothly, they are not otherwise discovered; and so are
the ill-manners of some Parents by some of their Children. Wherefore all should
observe a good decorum, lest they should give occasion to any of their Children
to say as that evil one, who told his Father Si male feci; a te didici.
, If I have done ill, I learned it of you. It much behooves Parents to do all
things so, that they may not make themselves cheap and despicable Tit. 2.15.
, and cannot but be advantageous to a child's education, to have his Parents
keep a good port in all things: which put Pliny into that pathetick exclamation
in one of his Epistles, O te beatum Adolescentum! qui cum potissimum imitandum
habes, cui natura te simillimum esse voluit. Lib, 8. Epist. 13. Bod. in Ephesians.
O! you are an happy young man, who have him above all to imitate, to whom
nature would have you be most like. 2. Rules of morality, or necessary
documents of civility, which teach due respect to every one. These are
requisite to the formation and culture of manners, that Children may learn how
to behave themselves to Domestics, to those that are elder and younger, to
Ministers of the Gospel, to Schoolmasters, to Equals, Acquaintance, Friends,
Strangers, in all places, on all occasions, at home, abroad, in the School, in
the Church; business, recreations; company, solitude, in secret, public; in
mourning, joy; under benefits, injuries, in praise, dispraise; flatteries,
reproaches, jests, serious matters; various and uncertain changes of affairs,
wherein special Rules cannot be prescribed to reach every case, but general
precepts which may engage evermore to things lawful and honest: and instruct
them with their distance and relation. For all which Humility is most to be
commended to Children, as the great ornament of those in a state of subjection
1 Pet. 3.1, 4, 5, 6.
, though they be unacquainted with special modes and puntilios. Hence it is
good to teach that Rule of our Savior's, when he observed persons without any
consideration of their own rank to choose out the chief places at
entertainment; viz. Sit not down in the highest Room, lest it be the place of
one more honorable Luke 14.7, 8.
: Agreeing with the Old Law Lev. 19.32.
, Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man,
and fear thy God. And those of the Wise man Prove. 25.6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 20.
, Stand not in the place of great men; it is better it be said to thee, come up
hither, than that thou should be put lower; be not contentious; disclose not
secrets; speak as becomes, boast not, be temperate in diet, weary not thy
neighbor with thy company; be not rude and foolish before those in mourning,
be charitable, etc. to that purpose Solomon. It is expected that Parents give
prudent precepts to inform their Children how to speak and act in a decent,
orderly manner, with a becoming grace in their circumstances 1 Cor. 14.40.
; to use words and titles of respect and honor to their Superiors and Equals;
as he in the Gospel, I go Sir Mat. 21.30.
. And likewise a decent silence, suitable gestures, attention, modest looks,
and bowing: which though they may seem trivial, yet the neglect of them will
argue much rudeness, irreverence, and indecency; whereas Christian Children
should learn to do all things well Job 29.9, 11. Mark 7.^7 Mat. 5.47.
; yea, and to outdo any mere moralists in such civilities as are really
material, decent, and not fantastical. Parents should further give their
Children such rudiments early, as are indeed instructive to prepare them for a
particular vocation, or course of life agreeable to their temper and quality.
Here somewhat might be said of that; since man is born to trouble, or labor Job
5.7. Genesis 3.19.
in some special service, as they in the Scriptures have done -- 4.2. -- 37.2.
Exodus 29.9. -- 2.16.
. But I must not stay (yet shall touch of Parents placing their Children into
employments anon). The late Books about the Gentleman's Calling, and the
Lady's Calling, and Education, will show after, and with others*, the benefit
of these for those Children of the best, as well as meanest condition, Bp.
Sanderso^. Mr. Baxter's Christ. Ethic. etc.
whether males or females: where it may be observed, that different Rules in
some particulars for the education of Boys and Girls are to be given by
discreet Parents Guazz. de civil. conversat.
. God, who is severe against idleness, expects all should employ their talents
in such a professed way of life, as he will approve of. In order hereunto, and
for the attaining of the best gifts 1 Cor. 12.31.
, great care is to be took, and ingenious devices may be used to get Children
imbued with the principles of learning, and abilities to read, write, etc. But
I must haste on: Yet here I cannot but disallow the indoctrinating of Children
with superstitious notions, which nuzzle them up in vulgar errors that lead
unto unbelief; the affrighting of them with silly tales of Bugbears, stories
of Hobgoblins and Fairies, etc. profane and old wives Fables, not tending to
godliness 1 Timothy 1 4.6. -- 2.7.
, which occasion needless and groundless fears, that afterward, when they
should have more brains, are not easily corrected, or not without great
difficulty removed. And in my opinion, the teaching of Children to beat
inanimate Creatures is not to be allowed; both because it disposes their weak
understandings to misapprehensions of things, and also teaches them to inflict
punishment in some instances, when ordinarily they themselves do rather in some
little proportion deserve it; and then it stirs up in them a spirit of revenge;
whereas God has appropriated vengeance to himself as universal Judge Deuteronomy.
32.35. Romans 12.19. Heb. 10.30. Psalm. 49.1.
: And we smile at a little dog for snarling at a stone, yet see not the evil of
making level and distorted conceptions in Children, which may occasion a
spiteful heart Ezekiel. 25.15.
, a disposition very displeasing to God. 3. Moderate chastisements to accompany
the notices of good carriage. Correction in a due manner, and also suitable
rewards for well-doing, are necessary to check rudeness, and encourage an
ingenuous deportment. As good documents do put in wisdom: so due corrections do
drive out folly P^ov. 22.15. with 6.
. A child is not to be left to himself, lest he bring the Parent to shame; when
a rod and reproof may give wisdom to prevent it -- 29.15.
. Therefore God bids -- 17.
, Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight to
thy Soul. Elsewhere -- 23.13, 14.
, Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beat him with the rod, he
shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his Soul from
hell. Here is not only a precept, but promise of good fruit upon discharge of
the duty in a right manner: but it should be sued out by Prayer 2 Samuel 7.27, 28
, the rather because the neglect of this duty is very dangerous to root and
branch, parent and child 1 Samuel 3.13. 1 Kings 1.6.
: yea, and the greater need there is of Parents Prayer here, lest they should
fall into the extreme, which my Text emphatically forbids. Christian Parents,
whose Children are to obey them in the Lord, are concerned to chastise in the
fear of God; and therefore to seek that this appointment of his may be
sanctified 1 Timothy 4.5. Mich. 6 9.
, being joined with instruction, that it may be prevalent by the blessing of
God in Christ, whom the Heathen Philosophers have no regard to. And here
further, Parents are concerned to use much Christian prudence, that their
Children may understand 1. That they are from a Principle of love for their
Children amendment and welfare necessitated to this sharp work Rev. 3.19.
, which God has enjoined them in just circumstances, as he himself chasteneth
whom he loves Heb. 12.8. Deuteronomy. 8 5.
. And therefore, if they should spare the rod through fondness, God, who knows
the heart and affections best, might censure them for hating their children
Prove. 13.24. -- 3.12.
, whom they would not have been so severe with, if they could have reformed
them at a cheaper rate. Hence 2. That it is their childrens folly, not their
own passion, which has engaged them in this smarting exercise, wherein
overmuch heat would be like an over-hot medicine, that scalds rather than
cures. Some Parents are apt to go beyond just measures, and to chastise for
their own pleasure Heb. 12.10.
: but they must learn of God to aim at their childrens profit, and not correct
them but upon good reason. Even Plutarch could determine that punishment should
never be inflicted for flesh-pleasing. Parents should not take the rod to vent
their own anger, but to subdue their childrens sin; which a man may not suffer
upon his neighbor, without rebuke, lest he be guilty of hating him in his
heart Lev. 19.17.
; then certainly not upon his child, whom he is obliged, not only to admonish
verbally, but chastise really: but first he should do as God did with our first
Parents, convict him of his nakedness Genesis 3.11, etc.
, i. e. show him the evil of his lying, railing, idleness, or etc. faults, he
is chargeable with, as opposite to the Word of God Prove. 12.22.
, and prejudicial to his own Soul -- 8.36.
, and that he is made to smart for the cure of this evil. Which 3. Parents may
let their children know, they dare not suffer to remain longer uncorrected:
since delays may prove dangerous to the Patient, if the rod be withheld -- 23.13.
. The festering wound may rankle, and come to a gangrene, if not lanced in due
time. Parents love is seen in chastening betimes -- 13.24.
, both in respect of the age of the child, and of its fault. If it be not too
soon for children to sin, it should not be thought too soon for Parents to
correct, and that seasonably, before the sin grow strong, get head and sprout
forth. The child should be taken while there is hope -- 19.18.
. The twigg may be bent whiles it is young, and the sin mortified, if nipt in
the bud. God we find has been very severe in remarking the first violations of
his Statutes: as for gathering sticks on the Sabbath day Numb. 15.25.
, and Aaron's sons offering strange fire Levit. 10.2.
: so Parents should timely curb the first exorbitances of their children. Hence
4. They should let them see they are resolved after serious deliberation not to
be diverted by the pullings and passions of their unhumbled children from
inflicting due punishment, fith the Wise man charge, Let not thy Soul spare
for his crying Prove. 19.18.
, so that they may not remain fearless: yet it must then be in compassion, that
they may conceive, as the Father of Heaven is afflicted in the affliction of
his Isa. 63.9.
, so are they in the affliction of their children; and as the Lord does it in
measure, though he will not suffer them to go unpunished Jer. 30.11.
,so do they. My Text bounds the correction, that it may not exceed a just
proportion, to the discouraging of children, whose different tempers, as well
as different faults, are to be considered, so as no more be laid upon them than
they are able to bear 1 Cor. 10.13.
. There should therefore be a special care took, that the chastisement be no
other than what is meet. Physicians endeavor to apportion the Dose they give
to the strength of the Patient, and the peccant humor they would correct.
There must be a rational consideration of the age, sex, and disposition of the
child, the nature and circumstances of the fault, and what sati^faction is
offered by the delinquent upon ingenuous confession, or possibly some
interposition of another; so that the offended Parent may keep up his
authority, be victorious in his chastisements, and come off with honor and
good hopes of the child's amendment: For a Parent should be ever ready to
forgive, and to connive often at smaller failings, wherein there is no manifest
sin against God, in confidence of gaining the child's affections by tenderness
and kind forbearance toward the things that are most desirable. This pleasing
policy is, they say, much in request at this day in Japan Varen. Descript.
Regn. Japoriae c. xv.
, where Parents do educate their children with a great deal of softness, very
rarely punishing them with stripes, though they follow their diligent
informations with frequent admonttions. And they tell us among the Grecians,
the best means the Mother used, if a Boy was stubborn in committing a fault, to
persuade him to leave it, was to show him her breasts, as the most powerful
motive she had (...). Schol. in Scrip. (...).
. But the Fathers, it seems, amongst them were more sharp: and therefore
Prometheus in Menander is said to be tied like a Boy to the racks, where he
prettily pleads his cause, as if his punishment had not been proportioned to
his fault, but he had been too hardly dealt with. Be sure our Apostle, both in
my Text, and to the Ephesians, is altogether against any discouraging
chastisement, and requires moderation: Thus for nurture, the first branch of
Education. The [2.] is in the admonition of the Lord, without which the former
will not be effectually prosperous. This, according to the notation of the
original word (...). Ephesians 6.4. with 1 Cor. 10.11. Tit. 3.10.
, is a putting of things into their Childrens minds, an informing of the
judgment in, and pressing upon the will and affections, the principles of the
Christian institution, warning them to take heed of deviating from these
principles, which they are obliged to live up to, and is the principal thing
in the educating of Christian Children. So that Parents are mostly concerned to
get the fear of God planted in their Childrens tender souls, that they may know
and love, trust in, and obey their Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifier, and have
timely preservatives against the corruptions of an untoward generation. Under
this, we may speak of Parental Instruction and Watchfulness. 1. Instruction,
which is a timely instilling of conscientious principles, and seeds of Religon
into Children, taking them a part, and engaging them to receive the most
necessary points, as it were drop by drop, here a little, and there a little
Isa. 28.10.
, according to their narrow capacities, in a free and familiar Conference; by
putting Questions to them, and teaching them how to give Answers; and by
putting them upon asking Questions, and returning short and clear Answers
thereunto, not only concerning the Word, but Works of God, whose Spirit alone
makes all efficacious. The Lord has most strictly enjoined this by Moses Deuteronomy.
4.9.
, charging Parents to keep their souls diligently, and not to let the things
God has done to slip out of their hearts all their days, but teach their Sons,
and their Sons, who in after time did thankfully acknowledge the benefit of this
instruction Psalm. 44.1, 2.
: We have heard with our ears, O God, our Fathers have told us, the works that
thou did in their days, in the times of old. And for the Words and Ordinances
of God; they are commanded not only to have them in their own hearts Deuteronomy. 6.6,
7. -- 11.19,
, but to teach them diligently unto their children, (as one who whets and
sharpens a thing that is blunt) Eccles. 10 10.
by talking of them, when they sit down in their house, when they walk by the
way, when they lie down, and when they rise up, and elsewhere Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7.
Prove. 22.6, 20, 21.
; nor only so, but by Rites Exodus 12.26. -- 13.14.
, and setting up visible and extraordinary monuments Jos. 4.6, 7, 21.
whereby Children might take occasion to ask the meaning of them, and so
Parents might acquaint them with the Ordinances of God Deuteronomy. 6.20, 21.
. No doubt but religious Parents have been careful to observe this, for the
transmitting of pure Religion. Adam had taught his Sons to sacrifice, as well
as trained them up to business, though one of them did not worship God in an
acceptable manner Genesis 4.3, 4.5, 26. Heb. 11.4.
. He had acquainted them it seems with the fundamental promise concerning
remission of sin, which the Apostle says could not be without shedding of
blood Heb. 9.22.
, represented in the instituted Sacrifice, which Cain wanted faith to offer
acceptably, as Abel did, giving credit to the divine institution, and behaving
himself sincerely in this solemn worship as he was instructed. Noah also taught
his Children, though one of them did not observe the instructions Genesis 9 8, 22.
. But we have Abraham the Father of the faithful expressly commended with a
special approbation of God for effectually instructing, i. e. training or
catechizing his children and servants after his example to keep the way of the
Lord -- 18.19. with -- 14.14.
. And therefore they are called his initiated ones, or (...), whom the Rabbis
say Alting Hist. Acad. Heb^. p. 18, 19.
, he did no less instruct in the divine precepts and their observation, than
train up to war. Other memorable instances we have of David Prove. 4 3 4. with
Psalm. 7^. Titl.
, who seems kindly to call Children apart, to teach them the fear of the Lord
-- 34.11.
, (which Obadiah learned from his youth) 1 Kings 18.12.
. So of his Wife Bathsheba Prove. 31.1, 2, etc.
, and those good Women in the New Testament, Lois and Eunice 2 Timothy 1 5.
. And other persons there were, who did catechize in all good things Gal 6 6.
(...).
, i. e. the rudiments of the Gospel; wherein the most excellent Theophilus was
catechized or instructed Luke 1.4.
, as the Jewish children had been catechized in the Law Romans 2.18.
. But this part of Education, viz. Catechziing, being handled at this Exercise
in another distinct Query by one well versed in the practick part of this
necessary Duty, may fairly give me (who have so much on mine hands) a
Supersedeas from enlarging now upon it. Only let it be remembered, that since Man
is born like a wild Asse's colt Job 11 12.
, and the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom Prove 1.7. with Psalm.
111.10.
, Parents are concerned to be industrious, and not be discouraged from teaching
their offspring the words and terms of goodness, in confidence they will
afterward comprehend the sense, and practically hold fast the form of sound
words 2 Timothy 1.13.
, (the little Bibles, as Luther used to call orthodox Catechisms) gathered up
from the holy Scripture, which it seems Timothy had known from a child -- 3.^5.
(...).
, a little one indeed; yea and we have some late considerable examples of such
little ones Token and little Book for Chi^dren.
. And therefore Parents themselves, according to their different calls and
abilities, taking in convenient help, (and all to forward the Pastor's work)
should not through humor, indisposition, laziness, or an over-eager minding of
worldly business, neglect this affair of so great importance to the welfare of
their Children; but be solicitous to get the seeds sown in their tender hearts,
before the weeds of the world grow up therein, and canker the soil. Even
according to Natures dictates, Diotima timely instilled such notions of
prudence into Socrates, which rendered him famous. And Cato, though he kept a
Tutor for his Son, yet was frequent himself in teaching and examining of him in
learning, and natural Religion. Much more should Christians; as Theodosius the
Great, who was diligent in catechizing his Sons Arcadius and Honorius, with the
assistance of Arsenius. A notable means was Catechizing to propagate the
Reformed Religion, notwithstanding the contagion of Popery, (as Sir Edwyn
Sandys well observed Survey of Religion in Europe, 1593. page 113. mihi.
) and it will be so, to preserve it: Especially if Instruction be followed with
a 2. particular in Education, and that is Watchfulness or Inspection, which is
a daily putting children on exercise, to practice the things wherein they have
been instructed, by a prudent oversight of their behavior. This domestic
Episcopacy, or Family discipline, is of singular use for the edification of
children. Governors especially should watch unto al things 2 Timothy 4.5.
. This is the most proper means to preserve the good seed which is sown, from
being stolen away, and to guard it, lest the enemy come slily and sow tares
amongst the wheat, which he lays wait to do, if he can take Parents asleep or
inobservant Mat. 13.25.
, when they should be awake in this good government 1 Timothy 3.4.
, and intent upon it in their household P^al. 101.6, 7.
; taking special care that in practice their children be found faithful, and
not chargeable with riot and unruliness Tit. 1.6.
. It is not enough to teach children the rudiments of faith, worship and
obedience, but to bring them where the Ark is, to the acts of solemn worship,
both in the Family and Congregation. Our Savior's Parents brought him Luke
2.41, 42, 48, 49.
, (though he was born without sin, and had not need upon that account as others
have:) much more should others, who now are not required to go so far, bring
theirs to worship God, according to his appointment; see to their reverend
deportment there, examine them afterward, and observe their proficiency: carry
a jealous eye and hand over them, as Job did over his Job 1.5.
; and take care there be no connivance at palpable faults, but a seasonable
discountenancing of every sin, in the dearest of them Gen 49.6.
: no allowance of any practice dissonant to that which is right Deuteronomy. 33.9.
with -- 13.6. and Exodus 32.28. Zach. 13 6.
, but a solicitous care that they do not decline and apostatize, or be not
seduced from the pure worship of the holy God, and the good ways they have
acquainted them with Jos. 22.27, etc. Genesis 24.6, 7. -- 18.19.
. We know Abraham that Father of blessed memory, commanded his children (as was
noted before) and there was a positive Law after to command children, upon
their lives, to observe and do what God enjoined Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.
. This belongs to the training up of youth to a good habit, which will not
easily be removed Prove. 22.6.
. They that handle this matter wisely, will find good -- 16.20.
in their children; and to do it so as to avoid undue lenity and severity, is
great prudence: For it requires an insinuation into their affections, to engage
children to love and delight in their duties, by the sweetness of the lips, to
increase their learning -- 21.
, and encourage their honest endeavors with suitable rewards. And on the other
hand, seasonable admonitions and remembrances in case of failures; a frowning
on their laziness, and neglects of those offices wherein they should be
employed, which will keep them in awe; though this must be done with great skill
and vvariness, lest it produce a slavish fear, which slothful, disingenuous and
low spirits are apt to fall into, and then absurdly to plead Mat. 25.24, 25, 26.
; yet of the two it is better to fail on this hand, than for a Christian Parent
to omit warning of their children, because both Law and Gospel require (as was
partly hinted before) we should not let sin, either of omission or commission,
rest on our neighbor Lev. 19.17.
, but should warn a brother Gal. 6.1.
, much more a child, and set him in joint with a spirit of meekness. I grant
this duty of daily inspection is very difficult, but it is amiable and
excellent: it is of great latitude; for Parents are evermore concern^d to be
eying of their children, to see they do that which is necessary and comely, both
in religious and moral practice, according to what is really best esteemed in
civil behavior. They must continually be watching them, as to their praying,
reading, hearing, eating, drinking, playing, visiting, studying, working,
sleeping, etc. to see they be not vain or idle, because commonly there is but a
little distance in time, betwixt doing of nothing and doing of ill. Children
should be exercised with variety; taught to sing Psalms Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21. Psalm.
148 12, 13.
, as those good children were, who made that short prayer to our Savior,
Hosanna, in Greek, out of the Psalm -- 118.25.
, (...) Save O Lord I beseech thee, viz. blessed Messiah: to pray in secret
sometimes by and for themselves; to be constant, timely, and revered at Family
duties; to be charitable, respectful to the Ambassadors of Christ; to be
attentive to the reading of Chapters, and hearing of Sermons; and thereupon to
put Questions, and give some account of their understanding of things, and be
not as Parrats, that chatter without knowledge; to be observant of the Lord's
days, not left to themselves, to play and do what they list: for as Solomon
observes Prove. 29.15.
, A child left to himself brings his Mother to shame; she being either more
indulgent in suffering him to get head, or more affected with it, when she
sees the evil of his idleness, especiallly on the Lord's days. But on other
days, at fit seasons, such honest sports and recreations, agreeing with the
childrens temper, are to be allowed, as do not alienate their minds from duty,
but promote health and cheerfulness, admit they be not with ungodly
play-fellows, from whom ribaldry and profaneness are easily learned, but
nothing that is good. The Philosopher Arist. de Rep. l. 8. c. 17.
did advise the educators of children, to take heed they did not permit them to
accompany with such, of whom they would learn bad words, hear smutty fables,
or be brought to look upon indecent and deformed pictures; and that they did
converse as little as may be with Servants. And in eating and drinking, Parents
should with discretion lay restraints upon childrens appetites, both as to the
quantity and quality of food, consonant to the rules of right reason, that they
transgress not the wholesome Laws of Temperance, for the preservation of
strength, and activity of body and mind. So for their studying and working,
etc. a continued inspection is requisite, that they do not neglect their time,
or mispend their talents; which that they may not do, will usually need the
Parents best skill, and utmost diligence, because of inbred pravity and
untractableness. Yet as one P. Du. Moul.
has well observed, there be certain handles to take hold of these little
souls, in their tender years, since most of them are apt to be Shamefaced,
Fearful, Curious and Credulous; which dispositions are to be attended by
vigilant Parents with discretion, and laid hold on to lead to virtue. As on the
other hand, those hindr^nc^^ to good things, which soon bewray themselves in
little ones, are to be watched over and curbed, such as Pride, Wilfulness,
Lying, and Intemperance; that these evil inclinations may not be predominant.
Shame is to be managed to dissuade from things dishonest; Fear, to keep in awe,
from consideration of punishment, or loss of reward; Curiosity, to form in the
mind right notions of things; and Credulity, to gain the consent to things
honest and good, and to make a right tincture which may abide. Then on the
other side, vicious inclinations are to be timely curbed: As Pride arising from
corrupt self-love, to plant in young minds humility; Wilfulness, to engage unto
teachableness; Lying, to make way for justice and fidelity; and Imtemperance,
for the love of truth and sobriety, that the understanding may rule the
appetite. Upon which account the same person suggests, we should not promise
children Junkets, as the reward of their obedience, but honor and praise,
which they should be made to love; which is the great thing they of Japan
Gloriae studium and cupiditatem teneris animis implantare consucverunt, etc.
Varen. de Regn. Jap p. 102.
use to implant in the tender minds of their little ones, proposing glory as
the strong motive to persuade them unto obedience and good carriage. I should
not have insisted so long upon this, but that I dare be bold to say, it is
through default of this part of Education, I mean for want of watchfulness,
that the Children of many Parents amongst us fall so much short of the
instructions received: Their passions grow strong, and the things that gratify
sense luscious, their Parents heed not, and so the hopeful fruit is blasted and
spoiled for want of fence: or as in some gardens, where there be fine buds and
fruits coming on, that have been raised with great pains and charges; they
suffer Snails and Caterpillars to increase, which in a short time devour that
the Master's and Gardiner's eye and hand might easily at first have prevented,
by taking away the Caterpillars eggs, and killing of the Snails: So you may see
in some Families, where there were great hopes of children (as of the pleasant
fruits on a fair tree ripening) all lost for want of Parents and Governors
narrow inspection: or through a tender Mother's unlimited indulgence, where she
should keep a strict watch: and through the connivance Imberbis juvenis tandem
custode remoto.

Gaudet equis, cani^usque, and aprici gramine campi, and Horat.


, or misplaced kindnesses of some affectionate servants, who to ingratiate with
their young Masters or Mistresses, take upon them to be wiser, than those that
love them best, and secretly humor them with those things that may gratify
their sensual appetitites, though never so prejudicial in the consequence, and
in the present judgments of their Superiors, who would have their children
disciplined to self-denial and temperance, which the Gospel Mat. 16.24. Luke
21.34. 1 Cor. 9.25.
sets a great value upon. I speak this from my own, and others certain
experience of what I have seen and heard, both in Families of the Gentry (and
others) in the Country, and those of the best rank in the City. Oh! what cause
then have some of us with heartiest thankfulness to adore our Heavenly Father,
that our dear Parents have not only taught us the rudiments of goodness, but
called upon us to exercise self-denial and temperance, and to enure our selves
to hardship, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2.3. (...). Arist. de
Rep. l. 8. c. 17.
? So the Apostle enjoined, agreeable to the Philosopher, who determined it best
to accustom children in their tender years unto colds, as most advantageous to
good health and warlike actions. And to bless God that they kept a watchful eye
upon us in our minority, giving check to our inordinate appetites, that we can
now, in this luxurious and delicate age, in the midst of fullness, curb our
selves, and not hanker after every dainty and fine fashion we see, or repine
when it passes by us, whose Souls are made for better seize? But I
forget my self in this business of Education, being yet to speak to the
remaining offices of Parents. The next of which is 4. Disposal, or elocation of
children, growing up, or adult, either into some particular employment, or
marriage. [1] Into some fit way of employment, or particular calling. Christian
Parents are concerned not only to train up their children for business in the
world, but to do what they can to provide an honest, fit, and useful calling or
profession, wherein they may serve their own generation according to the will
of God Acts 13.36.
, and the abilities he has bestowed on them, and the inclinations he has
implanted in them, whereby they may mostly promote the Kingdom of Christ Mat.
6.33.
. To find out natural capacities in the obsequious part of age requires the
diligent consideration of a sagacious mind: So that Parents herein have really
need of the skill (were it attainable) of the boasting Spaniard* who (in his
Trial of wits) pretended to know what complexion was fittest for every
profession. For all dispositions and inclinations are not equally fit for every
affair Equolibet ligno non fit Mercurius.
. Some according to the temperament of the body and culture of the mind, are
for more ingenuous and liberal, others more mechanic Arts: some in a more
publiik, others more private station. Upon discerning of which Parents should
strain hard, proportionable to their estates, to choose such honest and
advantageous Callings, as their children are fittest for, so nigh as they can
judge. Daniel and his companions were for liberal Sciences Dan. 1.17.
, and so was Moses before them Acts 7.22.
, and Paul after them -- 22.3.
. These God made use of as eminent instruments of his honor in their
generation; one of them a Prophet, another a Prophet and Magistrate, the third
an Apostle, and all of them witnesses to the truth. Paul does gratefully
commemorate his Parents love in educating him at the best School, and
University, under the best Tutor, living far from the City of his birth; nor
without reason, for God's raising up Sons unto Parents for Prophets; and
placing them in the Ministry (however despised in this decrepit age) was
accounted a singular privilege Amos. 2.9, 10, 11. with 1 Timothy 1.12. Ephesians 4.8,
11, etc. 2 Cor. 5.20.
. Others in their circumstances, were disposed into other Callings, which their
Parents thought them fit for. In the morning of the world, the two first
children, Cain and Abel, were put into different employments Genesis 4.2.
; so were Isaac's Sons into the like -- 25.27.
; and Samuel's Sons into another 1 Samuel 8.3.
, though they very much misbehav'd themselves in it; Jacob's Sons Genesis 37.12.
, Laban's and Revel's daughters were employed about cattle -- 29.9. Exodus 2.16.
. None should be left to live idly, but if not disabled, all should be
ordinarily in some stated employ (wherein they have an Heavenly guard Psalm.
91.12.
for the public good, and the honor of God, who, where he gives most, will
not be content with the least, but requires either corporeal, or mental
employment from all. And therefore Parents having consulted their childrens
inclinations, and considered what breeding they have given them for the
bettering of their parts and improvement of their gifts, should not fail to
dispose of their so, that they may be able to maintain themselves 2 These. 3.6,
10.12.
, or use what they have honestly provided for them, to the doing of good in the
Church and State, and the training up of others in succeeding generations;
according as God has distributed gifts to every one for his Calling, wherein
he is to abide, till more clearly called to another 1 Cor. 7.17.
, whether for husbandry Genesis 47 6.
, or handy-crafts, in more substantial 1 Kings 5.6.
, or more curious works Exodus 35.30, 35.
, or yet more laudable employments Jer. 17.16.
, whereunto they are not to be intruded, but orderly called. All which gives
check to such Parents who are negligent herein, after primaeve education; and
those who either put their children into unfit Callings, or enter them not into
fit ones, in a fair way, but by some indirect means. There is another disposal
and placing out of children, wherein good Parents ought to be greatly
concerned, and that is [2.] Into the honorable estate of marriage Heb. 13.4.
when at a competent age, considering the temper and inclinations of the
children, upon a due expense of circumstances, in all Christian prudence,
sooner, or later, to avoid temptations on one hand and another; by endeavoring
to provide such matches, as they may have a good ground to hope for God's
blessing upon; which they may then do, when they are in the Lord 1 Cor. 7.39.
with 22.
: Because that is the great Canon for the Regulation of Christian marriages, and
should be the principal ponderation in this greatest affair of Parents and
Children, that the persons marrying be not unequally yoked 2 Cor. 6.13, 14.
, and that they do it in the Lord: (as the obedience of wives and children is
required to be Ephesians. 6.1. with 5 8.
and to please the Lord, in my Text: yea, this of marriage is to be only in the
Lord Col. 3.18.
. For not to please him, by marrying in him, is by consequence to incur the
displeasure of him, in whom alone a blessing is to be had. Wherefore professing
Parents, who are charged by the Prophet in the name of the Lord Jer. 29.6. 1
Cor. 7.36.
, to take wives to their sons, and give daughters to their husbands, should
with a good and serious conscience, without carnal glosses, study this prime
Canon, as they really design the promotion and spiritual advancement of their
offspring. Thus Abraham (so famous in his parental government Genesis 18.19.
was very careful with respect to the Lord in covenant, for the matching of his
son Isaac, that in a matter of so great importance, lest he should be tempted
to a failure in his trust, he took a most solemn oath, by the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, from his faithful Steward Eleazer -- 24.2, 4, 6, 8.
, upon serious seeking of God by Prayer, that he should take a wife for him out
of a religious Family, and by no means yield that Isaac should be brought into
a relation, communion, and residence, with any of those who might be an
occasion to alienate his affections from the service of the true God, in a true
manner: which had an excellent effect, since Isaac and Rebekah were the most
chaste pair of all those Patriarchal Worthies, their affections being entirely
united. And Isaac at his wife Rebekah's motion, when almost dead for fear of an
ungodly wife -- 27. ver.
, followed his Father's example in the disposal of his son Jacob -- 28.2, etc.
. We indeed live in an age wherein there is much complaint by many wealthy
Parents, that though they like well of this grand rule, yet they know not where
to have suitable matches for their children, especially of the female sex. I
confess there is too much ground for this lamentation: The Lord remove it! Yet
I may with submission, not being sollicitous to please man, but my Lord and
Master Gal. 1.10. Ephesians. 6.6. Mr. White.
put these complainants in mind of what has been observed by another before
me: That Persons of quality and estate, likely have in one respect a greater
advantage than others, in that they have a greater latitude of choice amongst
those who are in estate below them: So that of religious, prudent, and suitable
persons, they may choose almost whom they please. But the truth is, many
Parents who sit at the upper end of the world, though they profess Religion,
they are too often so biassed with the love of this world, that marrying to the
very height of their estate, has the casting vote, and so they bestow their
pious, hopeful children, upon persons in whom they have no probable positive
evidence of real godliness and sobriety; or on such who are not comparably so
virtuous, as others they might have more religious, prudent, and desirable, who
upon conjuncture of Estates, would be abundantly well accommodated for a
comfortable and cheerful livelihood: When alas! some of them are so swayed by
carnal motives, that (as one says Mr. Baxter pol. p. 484.
) they marry (their children to) a swine, for a golden trough; they prefer
temporals to spirituals and eternals; riches and honor, or comeliness, to
virtue and godliness, and take one that is at enmity with God Romans 8.7, 8.
, into the nearest and strictest league of amity with those they are obliged to
love best. And thence it comes to pass that in succeeding generations, by
unequal mixture of the holy seed with the profane Ezra. 9 2, 4.
, there is such a decay of piety (as at this day) amongst those sprung (on one
side) from worthy Progenitors; being much like those of the old world, who
defiled the face of the earth with an unblest generation, which so grieved the
Almighty, that after he had given the inhabitants fair warning by the preacher
of righteousness Genesis 6.2, 4. See more. Genesis 26.34, 35. -- 34 14. -- 38.2, 7,
8.9, 10.
, he swept them all away but eight persons, with an universal deluge. I know
upon the hearing of this, some professing Parents of our Age, will be touched
to the quick (though they do thereby a little shake their own title to the best
inheritance) but it concerns a watchman when called, to give them warning from
the Lord Ezekiel. 3.17.
to deal faithfully: Upon the remembrance of which, and an affecting
apprhension of this growing epidemical distemper, I do in the name of the Lord,
put all Christian Parents in mind, not too vehemently to seek after great
things to themselves Jer. 45.5.
, in bestowing of their children richly; but labor to link them with gracious
and suitable persons, where there may be mutual kindness and hearty liking of
each other, and with whom they may live religiously and contentedly: For the
truth is, without this mutual complacency and loving contentment each in other
(which the Scripture calls for Prove. 5.19. with Genesis 20.16. Ezekiel. 24.16, 18.
upon a good foundation, there cannot be an happy match. Wherefore in this
great office of Parents, which is a comfortable one for their Children, if
well done; but most uncomfortable if otherwise; they are mostly concerned to
look after the fear of the Lord. For the Wise man by the spirit of God has so
determined upon weighing of things, saying, Prove. 31.30. with 19.23.
, Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised: and so shall the man also. If things be tried at God's
balance, Religion will weigh most. Houses and riches are the inheritance of
Fathers, but a prudent wife is from the Lord -- 19.14.
: and so is a prudent husband too. Either is to be valued as a more blessed
gift, than any temporal portion left by Parents, who may, and ought to be
provident: but there is a more special finger of God, who gives wisdom, and
unites hearts in every happy match. Wherein goodnature or (as we now speak)
good humor does much sweeten society in a humane way, but I pray you, what
does it in a Christian way, wherein the married couple should live, as being
heirs together of the grace of life, that their prayers he not hindered 1 Pet.
3.7.
? Alas! my Friends! as to this, a good nature as one says Mr. Thomas Couns l
to married Couples.
) is but like the white of an egg, which as it offends not, so it relisheth
not. There may be a tolerable conversation as to temporals on the week day, but
what is pleasant in it, as to spirituals, especially on the Lord's day, and at
other seasons, when the Soul has need of quickening, direction, and comfort,
or a companion in Heavenly joys? Then real grace with all its faults, will be
better than refined nature Eccles. 2.13.
, as light than darkness. Discretion will set a luster on Religion, and is to
be looked after; else how troublesome will it be for wisdom to be subject to
folly? No one can live lovingly and comfortably with a Fool. Next an ungodly,
an unworthy yoke fellow (especially if in Husbands) is to be feared. And next
to a religious and prudent, a pleasing person should be chosen; amiableness
helps to root and settle amity, which gains reputation by an inheritance --
7.11.
. But in these things, especially the last, without regard to the former,
Parents should take heed of exercising Tyranny: and when God has given them
children, how they give them away: be careful herein they do not contrary to my
Text discourage their dutiful children by pressing them to marry where they
cannot love: Because herein one Mr. Fuller's Holy State.
characters the good Parent to be such, as draws arguments from his childrens
good, rather than his own authority; accounting it a style too princely, herein
to will and command, he rather chooses to will and desire: remembering the
Parental power is for edification, not destruction; and should not be exerted
to cast a child against its mind upon a disaffected (much less an unworthy)
match. In the treaty of marriage betwixt Isaac and Rebekah, when there was a
good agreement betwixt Abraham's Steward, and her Father and Brother, they
would not come to a conclusion, till the Maid was called and asked as to her
affection and consent Genesis 24 57. Hostis est ux^^ invita quae ad maritum nupta
dat r. Plaut.
: All was but complement till that was gained: Parents herein are to persuade
upon good reason, but it is too harsh to attempt the compelling of love. Some
rigorous ones are apt, for their own vvorldly advantage, to use their awful
authority, in matching to constrain their obedient children, contrary to their
affections and dispositions: but they should rather learn of their Heavenly
Father, who disposes all things sweetly, and would have them to do so too:
in the disposal of their children, he would have them do more with the sway of
love, than power; and to be rather affectionate, than imperious in their
Government. Grave and prudent Dr. Harris In his life.
condescended to his sons, saying, When you are youths, choose your Callings,
when men, choose your Wives, only take me along with you, it may be old men may
see further than you. Be sure then they see well, when they aim chiefly at
piety: As an ancient Hermit relates In Prato spirituali.
in his own life, the consultation of a principal inhabitant of Constantinople
with his Lady, about the disposal of their only child which was a daughter; the
result whereof was not to look at greatness and riches, lest marrying her to a
vicious person, they should make her miserable; but rather to one of a lower
rank fearing God, who from conscience of his duty would love and make much of
her, and so render her condition comfortable; in prosecution whereof, they
found out and bestowed her upon the honest son of a very charitable Father, who
had a small Estate, but great Virtue, with whom she lived very happily. But my
discourse swells, and I must shorten what remains. (5) Maintenance is another
part of the Parents office toward their children, unto whom they are to allow
a competency, according to their quality and estates to live upon. A just
allowance for subsistence is presupposed requisite to the right discharge of
the precedent duties from Parents to Children, both in their minority, and when
come to maturity, for the accommodating of them with necessaries according to
their birth: The neglect of which temporal provision would argue Christian
Parents worse than Infidels, who are not so enormous 1 Timothy 5.8.
: Since amongst the barbarous people, they spare not cost to provide suitably
for the fruit of their bodies, till at least they are able to carve for
themselves. Our blessed Savior takes for granted amongst the common notions of
mankind, that Earthly Parents will give good gifts unto their needy Children,
which are most proper for them Mat. 7.9, 11. Luke 11.11.
. But as a superaddition unto this general provision, there is also somewhat
more particular which even Nature it self teaches upon the disposal of
children, and Christian institution requires and commends: namely Parents, as
God has blessed them, should lay up for their children 2 Cor. 12 4.
: yea so, as that when they are placed in Callings, and married, they may by
some stock or competent portion be able to lay up for themselves, and be really
serviceable to God's glory, and others welfare with their substance Prove. 3 9.
-- 29.3.
. Abraham is commended for this devising of his Estate, and so Jacob in
providing for his Genesis 24.36. -- 25.5, 6. -- 30.30.
. God did under the Law direct to a double portion, real or personal, unto the
eldest, as an acknowledgment of the right of primogeniture; supposing no
manifest forfeiture by disobedience Deuteronomy. 21.16, 17. 1 Chronicles. 5.2. Genesis 49.3.
Exodus 13.2. Lev. 27.26.
: For in the exercise of Parental authority, there may be some special
consideration and rational regards had to the most dutiful, but still according
to equity. Daughters, according to that constitution were to be copartners and
share as coheirs in the inheritance Numb. 36.8.
. And how Parents without valuable reasons, can now disinherit them,
considering the prohibition in my Text, is not easy to conceive. But in laying
up for, and apportioning their children, Parents should have a care [1.] That
they be not delatory, as those who unseasonably put off the supplies of their
children with that God has given them, till they themselves be dead; or, so
long till it has occasioned an abatement of affections in their Children,
which is not to be excused in them; but the Parents should not tempt them; or
put them upon any sharking tricks, to supply necessities, by keeping all the
patrimony in their own hands, above an handsome reserve of conveniences for
their own food and raiment: Being of a different temper from that Prince's
Father Guaz Civ. Conv: p. 390. Psalm. 119.60.
, who coming into his son's Closet, and seeing there all the gold and silver
plate he had a long time before given to him, said, I see you have not a
generous mind enough; for with all the gifts you had from me, you have not
known hitherto how to make your self one friend. Or in any other respect, by
any avaritious detention of what is requisite to be bestowed on their Children,
lay them under the discouragement, which Parents are in my Text obliged to
avoid, as that which is displeasing to God. [2.] They should be sure they came
honestly by the portions they leave their Children, that they are goods well
gotten, and well used: For if they be treasures of iniquity, they will not long
abide Prove. 10.2. Jos. 7.24.
, having a curse attending them: yea, a little ill gotten, will be as a little
leaven, that will sour the whole lump: or, as the coal, which the Eagle carried
with the flesh she took from the Altar, that fired all: but if they are
well-gotten, then, as one said, of a small portion, they will wear like steel.
And though they have been justly gained, yet if they have been niggardly
hoarded up, and not put to good uses, but Parents have lived miserably and
basely, only to increase riches, they will prove not good, but rusty, though
lawful money, and they are kept to their owners disquiet and hurt, and to their
Childrens disappointment Eccles. 5.12, 13.
in the proof: after an age likely they find nothing, or nothing with the
blessing of God Prove. 10.22. -- 16.8.
, for that is entailed not on the Miser's seed, but on his that is all the day
merciful -- 20.7. Psalm. 37.26.
, when either the urgent necessities of the poor, or the interest of the Church
and State require a proportion: to the defrauding of which, under a pretext of
raising a portion for Children, were to cause a canker in what is raised. Thus
of Parents office whiles there be promising hopes of staying with their
Children upon earth. There remains somewhat yet (3.) At their departure, when
they are admonished to be thoughtful of leaving them, and have some prenotices
of death approaching to arrest, and carry them to their long home, then Parents
should set their house in order 2 Kings 20.1.
, by giving or leaving such lessons of wisdom to their Children, as by God's
blessing will make a deeper impression, being uttered by dying persons Genesis
15.16.
: Thus did Isaac and Jacob -- 28.2.3, 4. -- 49.1, 2.
. It Is true, there was something of an extraordinary Prophetic spirit in some
of them; but those things of ordinary use, which they gave in charge, will be
sufficient proof for our purpose: as Isaac's sending Jacob to Laban with his
blessing: David's advice to Solomon 1 Chronicles. 29.9. 1 Kings 2.2, 3, etc.
, and Jacob's about his funeral Genesis 50.16.
; and others making a Will or Testament, bequeathing and devising their Estate
-- 25.5. with Gal. 3.15. Lev. 25.23. 1 Kings 21.3. Hebr. 9:16, 17.
, seconding all with solemn parental warnings, and prayer to God for a blessing
Genesis 28.3. -- 24.60. -- 48.15. 1 Chronicles. 29.19.
, and advising them after their their death to consult such friends upon
emergencies, whom they have obliged to their assistance, as David did -- 22.17.
-- 28.2.
. The Reverend Mr. Robert Bolton In his life.
, and others, gave notable instances of this last duty. The above mentioned Dr.
Robert Harris, referred his dear Wife and Children, after several Heavenly and
savoury speeches, to the advice and counsel he had annexed to his Will, made by
him about 22 years before his departure. Therein he left his Children excellent
instructions for their Souls, their Bodies, their Callings (both as to the
choice and use of them) for their company, for their marriages, for their
Children, for themselves within themselves, for their Estates, and for the
Public. Things really worth the reading and observing, both by Parents and
Children. In imitation of which (but not published) I have likewise with
delight read very good advice left by a serious Citizen Mr. R. B. May 9. 1662.
Mr. T. H.
(as it should appear lying sick of a Consumption whereof he died) to be given
to his only Son and Child, then a little one, when he should come to the use of
his reason, which, I doubt not, but is faithfully performed by his Executor. It
might be of great advantage to their posterity, if Parents would have more
regard in due circumstances to this last office of theirs, which is much
slighted by many in our days, who seem unconcerned what shall become of their
posterity, when they are gone, as to the best of enjoyments. It Is true, there
be on another hand, Parents over solicitous to leave great Estates to their
Children, when they themselves leave the world (being loath to part with them
before); they think they can never make their Children rich enough in the
world, without any regard to the riches of grace, never considering that
conveniencie is really more eligible than abundance Prove. 30.8.
; and where there is much wealth, more grace and wisdom are needful to enjoy it
well: For if Children have not their hearts established with grace Hebr. 13.9.
, or want prudence to manage an Estate, they are but like a Ship that has more
sail than ballast, which is ready to be overset with any gust of vvind. A great
Estate without Virtue is but strong poison without an antidote: and earthly
minded Parents in this respect do with their Children, as the Ostrich with
her Eggs, leaves them in the dust, but takes no further care of them; so they
leave them rich in temporals, but for their spiritual and eternal vvelfare,
they are little or nothing concerned. That they may eat, drink, be merry, and
clothed with the best, they provide by setting their nest high, and making
their seed great on the earth Hab 2.9, 10.
; when alas! they do but consult shame to their house, and vvrong their own
souls: They do but observe lying vanities, and forsake their own mercies Jon.
2.8.
, since God usually turns the wheel, and disappoints them, when the riches of
the sinner are laid up for the just Prove. 13.22.
. Others become Masters of their Childrens Estate: whereas the good man
leaves an inheritance to his childrens children, who in after ages reap the
benefit of an Estate consecrated and blessed by their pious Parents prayers,
the gracious answer whereunto they are still receiving. It Is more then time I
should speak to

2. The enforcement of these great and important offices, mentioned in my Text,
which is the Father of Heaven's prohibition of provocation to the
discouragement of children. Provoke not your children, (...), that they be not
discouraged. Now, as I showed the positive injunction of the Lord was a
sufficient Reason to enforce the duties of children: so this inhibition or
negative precept is of equal strength to move Parents unto theirs; since it
plainly shows the Will of him who has an uncontrollable dominion, that Parents
conduct should be moderated according to those equitable positive, as well as
negative pr cepts that have been produced in the enumeration of the foregoing
particulars. And the special one in my Text carries with it a reason drawn from
the end, lest the Children should be consumed with sorrows, says the Syriack
version: others, lest they become pusillanimous and dispirited, pining away
with grief; which may be by any neglect or abuse of parental authority, either
in defect or excess; by omitting the duties required, or committing what God
has inhibited, and so falling into either extremes. Now what can be more
cogent with affectionate Parents to engage them unto the good government of
those God has put into subjection to them, than a care they be not
disheartened by any maladministration of theirs? Certainly to give any just
occasion of discouragement to the hopeful fruit of their own body, must needs
be very evil and unnatural; this puts them in (...), either such a stupid
dejection of spirit, as makes them fearful, dull, and unfit for any work, so
that they are like members stupefied with narcoticks, or such strong dolours of
mind, as even break their hearts, which bring diseases and immature death; or
else, as a sad and usual consequent, a certain desperate contumacie, when they
find themselves under an incapacity, through their Parents unusual indulgence
or serenity, of doing that which is right, or of pleasing in their Relation:
they take the wretched boldness of doing wrong and displeasing: yea, many times
they become like restive colts and winsing jades, which fling and kick; they do
all the mischief they can, and make head often times to irritate their Parents
passions, which is the height of impiety in Children, who when come to this,
seldom take up till they have destroyed them from whom they descended, and
ruined themselves soul and body. It Is most plain, if God has graciously given
children unto his servants Genesis 33.5.
, you Christian Parents who profess to be such, are obliged in gratitude to his
Heavenly Majesty for those favors, to do your utmost so to order and manage
these his gifts as he has directed, that they may indeed be fitted for the
Donor's use and service. They are not born with Bibles in their hands, neither
are the contents in their heads or hearts; neither can they put forth to Sea
without Card or Compass; but you are by your Relation obliged to indoctrinate
them, to acquaint them with God and themselves, to supply their wants as you
can every way, and no way to discountenance them, for this is in effect to
disparage the Divine favors, and trample upon the Almighty's blessings. It Is
to expose the tokens of his bounty, and put them to the vilest uses Lev. 19 29.
Judges 19.23, 24.
, to make them instruments of sin, and subjects of wrath, and bring shame to
your selves Genesis 19.8, 33.34.
. Believe it Parents, to neglect the Duties I have been insisting on, is to
throw away your crown and glory Prove. 17.6
, to pull down the stars in your own orb Genesis 37.9, 10.
, to despoil your own heritage, and burn up the olive plants about your own
table; to unfeather the arrows in your own quiver Psalm 127.4, 5.
; to cast into the rubbish the polished stones of your own Palace -- 144.22.
; to rob your selves of that should give you rest, and bereave your own souls
of delight Prove. 29.17.
; nay, it is to rob God; for your Children are more his than your own; they
stand in a Foederal Relation unto him, and you may not carry your selves
toward them as you list Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. with Mat. 28.19.
. So that your own interest in them, who are part of your selves, your interest
in their virtues, God's interest in them, as well as his will and pleasure,
should forcibly impel you to mind your office, and fill up your Relation; the
unconscionable neglect of which will be as a bloody Dagger stuck up to the hilt
in your own hearts: Wherefore I beseech you, endeavor all you can, that your
conduct of your Children be just and temperate, with all gravity and prudence,
that it may be like the Childrens obedience which the Scripture calls for,
well-pleasing to the Lord, so as they, you your selves likewise, may expect a
blessed prolongation of your days Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.
. I have at length dispathc'd, what I intend to say concerning the Duties
themselves; yet there remains something to be said to the

III. General proposed, in Answer to the Complex Query, viz. The and this both
more Generally and Particularly, according to the mind of God in his Word.

1. More Generally, wherein that has been already, implicitly at My Beloved,
Many we know are apt to be solicitous enough, and too much, as to their
conversation in this world, to observe the modes which obtain most at the
Court. It concerns us all, certainly much more Children and Parents, to
discharge their duties after that mode, which gains approbation in the Court of
Heaven: and therefore to take good heed to those helps, for their direction,
concerning the manner of performance, which we have in the Evangelical
Institutes, recorded in his Heavenly Majesty's Imperial Court, Therein both
the Relatives are taught to perform the Duties I have been discoursing of from
a principle of mutual love, with a design to please God, and comfort each other
respectively, in such a way, as may adorn the Gospel Col. 3.20. with Ephesians. 6.1.
Phil. 1.27. Tit. 2 10.
, and maintain that charity, which in this Relation should eminently proceed
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and faith unfeigned 1 Timothy 15.
. This charity or love the Apostle tells us in this Chapter, a little before my
Text Col. 3.14. Mat. 17.15.
, is the bond of perfectness, or perfect bond: and here if any where, it is to
meet at both ends, yea bud forth and flourish in reciprocal delights and
endearments Genesis 45.10. -- 46.29, 30. Ez k. 24.25. Luke 15.20, 22, 32.
. Christian Parents and Children, as much as may be, should still be joining in
consort to keep up a mutual harmony: yea, and upon better principles endeavor
to equal the most refined Moralists celebrated for this charity; as Pomponius
Atticus and his Mother, who never fell out in sixty seven years (as he himself
tells the story). To promote this, there should be a free and frequent
communication of secrets, a giving and taking of loving warnings, (yea Parents
in some circumstances should be willing to hearken to the submissive, and
prudent good advice of their children 1 Samuel 19, 6. Gen 11.31. with -- 12.1.
Jos. 24.2.
, and in a daily address to the Throne of grace, a mutual pleading in faith the
Covenant and Promises, for each others interests 2 Chronicles. 1.9, 10, 11, Psalm.
86.16. Romans 9.3. -- 10.1.
. Thus more generally.

2. More Particularly, some things may be said to the management of these
duties according to Scripture, still following the method of my Text, severally
to Children; then to Parents.

Children, such Directions as these following may be profitable for the well-
management of their duties: viz. (1.) Be thoroughly sensible of the mischief of
disobedience, and the benefit of obedience; and therefore really believe the
severe punishment of the former, and the gracious rewards of the latter. Be
sure, so much as there is of disobedience, so much is wanting in some kind of
natural affection, and that usually has monstrous attendants, which direful
judgments follow Romans 2.28, etc. 2 Timothy 3.2. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Lev 20.9. Exodus
21.17. Deuteronomy. 27.16, etc.
. On the other side, obedience qualifies for the best society, and entitles to
the promises: here is the special promise of life annexed Ephesians. 6.2.
, (as was hinted above) which must needs contain some peculiar benefit, which
God does graciously confer, to show what an estimate he has of childrens
obedience: that the use of a comfortable life should be lengthened out to them,
who according to godliness, give due honor to them, who are under him the
authors of their lives. So for the most part; and when it is otherwise that good
children do early depart hence, being sooner ripe, they do enter into a better
life. Besides we are not to take our measures of a long life in this state Bod.
in Ephesians.
from the course of times or decrepit age, but partly from the manner of
living, and divine good things received in life, and partly from attaining the
end of it. As if one in three months pass over as much way, as another in three
years, and come to the same mark with him: length is to be reckoned from the
traveling, rather than the way; and he is long-lived, to whom God by revealing
his end has brought nigh to himself. As David at seventy was said to die in
good old age 1 Chronicles. 29.28. Psalm. 90.10.
, as well as Isaac, who had lived an hundred and eighty. There is as much
perfection in a little circle, as a larger, in David's seventy, as Lamech's
seven hundred seventy seven years Genesis 5.31.
. It Is not so much from the number of days, but the filling them up, that life
is to be reckoned long Job 5.26. Isa. 65.20. Luke 2.25, 30. Sat vixit diu, quem
nec pudet vixisse, nec piget mo i.
. Truly obedient children have this benefit of the promise, that (as they say
of Figs and Lemmons) they never die, before they are ripe for salvation. Whereas
the disobedient are in a sense dead; though they stay long here, they may be
reckoned short-lived, when they do not answer the end of living. If Christian
Children would but seriously contemplate these things, and allow God a reserve
by Prerogative-royal in the performance of temporal promises, and then
heedfully observe the different practices, and issues of other children in
divine and humane story: take often into consideration the instances of both
sorts, and mark the ends of each, as Shem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, yea
above all the blessed Jesus himself: and on the contrary of Cham, Absalom,
Adonijah, etc. they would find it a good means to perform their duties
acceptably, and as he said (...)
, live perfecting all offices. (2.) Remove all the tendencies to the dishonor
of Parents, and set a value upon their instructions. It Is good to be
circumspect, and banish those inordinate affections which alienate the heart
from duty, as self-conceitedness in Absalom, and the Prodigal, the one thought
he could sway the Scepter 2 Samuel 15.3, 7.
, and the other manage his Portion better than his Father Luke 15.12, 13.
: so likewise high thoughts of merit, which the Prodigals elder Brother had --
29, 30.
: also ambition, which did so swell Adonijah 1 Kings 1.5, 6.
: and curiosity, as in Solomon's young man, who followed the sight of his eyes
Eccles. 9.11.
. Hence Children should take heed of associating with misguiding and misleading
companions Prove. 19.27. -- 13.20.
, and be afraid of whisperers, who secretly suggest things which may tend to
make Parents cheap Genesis 9.23, 24.
. Shem and Japhet would not listen unto Cham's tale in their ears, nor see too
narrowly into their Father's failings, lest this should cause a dis-esteem.
Whereas Children should appretiate their Parents respects, be afraid of their
reproofs, and set an high rate upon their good advice Prove, 4.3, 4. Psalm. 37.30.
; when it is right, it is then to be valued, otherwise it should not be approved
-- 49.13. Jer. 7.18. Ezekiel. 18.14.
, no more than Terah's Idol-worship was by his Son Abraham when called Joh.
24.2.
. Certainly Ahaziah sinned greatly, and so did the Daughter of Herodias, in
following their Mother's counsel 2 Chronicles. 22.3. Mat. 14.8.
, for if it be evil, the circumstances may be such, that obedient children must
testify against it, as Asa and Levi did 1 Kings 15.13. Deuteronomy. 33.9.
, yea disclose the wickedness of it, as Jonathan and Michal commendably did 1 Samuel 20.3, 4. -- 19.11, 12.
: but yet in such a case it should (if possible) be with so much caution, as
may prove there is no sleighting of the Relation, but a desire to keep up the
honor of that, by an hearty sorrow for the failure. The Stoics used to say,
that a wise man would make it his business to perform all things rightly, even
to the putting forth of the finger (...). Stob. Ni tibi concessit ratio,
digitum exere, peccas. Pers. Sat. 5.
. Be sure Christians should be careful, that they do not so much as by an
unwarrantable motion of that disparage their Parents, or despise those chosen
by them to give instructions. (3.) Perform all with sincerity, and equality or
impartiality to both Parents. As the great requisite to the due management of
these duties, Solomon says Prove. 23.26.
, My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways. He would not
have him look asquint, or come with by ends in a feigned observance, as Absalom
2 Samuel 14.32. -- 15.7, 10.
; or not real, only verbal, like him in the Gospel, who pretended to go, and
went not Mat. 21.28, 30.
, his obedience ended in a complement, and no more. But if Servants are to do
their duties heartily in absence and presence, as unto the Lord, and not unto
men, in the Verse following my Text; then much more are Children, who likewise
are greatly concerned to behave themselves impartially with equal respects to
both Parents, (as well as cordially) Phil. 2.22.
. The Law mentions Father and Mother expressly, which might have been included
in one word Parent: and Jacob is commended upon record, for his obedience to
his Father and Mother Genesis 28.7.
: Solomon many times in the Proverbs calls for obedience to both. Whatever
inequality may be betwixt a man and his wife, (who is obliged to be subject to
her husband) yet in relation to their children, they are both as one, and
deserve equal honor: Indeed, if in a purely indifferent thing they differ in
their peremptory commands, which are contrary, then the Fathers is to have the
precedence; yet with a very great respect to the Mother, when in that instant
the child is necessitated to decline hers; though if the Father's command were
unlawful, and the Mother's lawful, then the Mother were to be obeyed Lev. 19.3.
: but with hearty sorrow the Father should require what God dis-allows, and he
for that reason does modestly refuse. And this sincere obedience is to be given
to both, whether rich or poor in the world, whether good and gentle, or froward
Luke 2.51. 1 Pet. 2 18.
, in all that is well-pleasing to God, whose honor is the end ingenuous
Children should aim at, by just and honest means, in the exercise of their
duties, keeping themselves from their iniquities 1 Timothy 5.22.
, i. e. those which their own turbulent passions are apt to hurry them into. If
we did more reverence our selves, we should carry better toward our
Superiors. Pythagoras his advice is very wholesome (...). Carmin.
, Let a man be the greatest shame to himself, keep his own heart in awe, by a
secret blush upon his own extravagancies in their first risings, and so he will
have his Keeper every where with him: then, as he says further, Let him follow
that which is just not only in words but in deeds. He that is duly affected
with shame of himself, will be careful to pay just respects in all due
circumstances unto those he is mostly obliged to honor. (4.) Set about all
your duties to your Parents willingly and readily, not with grudging or
disdain, but with an holy warmth of heart, lifting up your selves to, and
following hard after whatever God requires Judges 5.39.
, in all affectionate expressions of a free and cheerful spirit, since all is to
be in the Lord, who loves readiness 2 Cor. 9.7.
. This manner of performance will be the more easy, if Children timely learn
the great lesson of self-denial; and do really exercise that and love; they
will then without bogling, go through the most unpleasant, uneasy, and mean
employments they are called unto, and concerned to manage for their Parents; as
Jacob's Sons did for their Father, after as well as before their marriage Genesis
30.35. -- 37.13 14. -- 42.1, 2, 3. -- 43.15. -- 47.1, 2, 3.
; and in his straits Judah expressed great readiness to comfort his Father --
44.33, 34, with -- 30.
. Ruth, as was noted before, was very exemplary in this manner of obedience
Ruth 1.15, 16.
; but Isaac's readiness was the most singular Genesis 22.9, 10.
, till Christ himself (whom he typified) came; then says he to his Father
Psalm. 40.8. Ad semper velle, non ad semper agere.
, I delight to do thy will, O my God, thy Law is within my heart. Believe it,
Willingness puts a great acceptableness upon duties: Children are bound always
to will, though not always to act; they should readily embrace all
opportunities. It Is said, Amasiah the Son of Zichri willingly offered himself
unto the Lord 2 Chronicles. 17.16.
; and so should ingenuous Children be ever ready (as Paul was in Christ) Acts
21.13.
for their Parents service. Somewhat of this was hinted before; and I shall
only add what Hierocles says in this case (...), etc. in Pythag. Carm. p. 54
57, mihi.
: It is fit we should not withdraw our selves from performing with our own
hands what our Parents require, as occasion serves; but by how much the more
mean and servile the offices, by so much should Children think them the more
honest and laudable; and not to he avoided because expensive, but to be done
with a ready and cheerful mind for their use, and with joy we are put to those
pains and expenses for their sakes (5.) Persevere in all, and be constant with
diligence unto the end; whatever temptations you meet with. Let not the
instructions you have received according to godliness depart from your heart
all the days of your life Deuteronomy. 4.9.
. Be not fickle or inconstant; but hold out in all circumstances, though your
Parents be aged and decayed Prove. 23.22. Ru h 1.15, 16. -- 4.15.
, so long as they and you coexist in this world, and the Relation remains. Be
like constant Ruth and holy Joseph, when advanced; he continued his obedience
to the very last moment of his dear Father's life, and after Genesis 46.29. --
47.31. -- 48.12.
: a virtue wherein, it seems Samuel's sons were defective 1 Samuel 8.5.
, but Jonadab's were praiseworthy Jer. 35.56.
(as well as others after their Parents decease) when tempted to the contrary:
yea, though it was in a business unpleasing to flesh and blood. They did as
Physicians prescribe to their Patients, receive their Father's documents cum
debita custodia, so as not to indulge their appetites in that he forbad them,
but persevere in observing his injunction. This is praiseworthy. Nay, though
our Parents should not submit to the yoke of Christ, we should not withdraw our
neck from their yoke, nor desist from obedience to them, so far as it hinders
not our obedience to Christ; but should hold out, that none take our Crown. As
Antonius said (...). Lib. 8. Sect. 5.
, Remember well you ought to be a good man, and that which the nature of man
requires of you, this do constantly: So that which the Nature of your Relation
calls for, do it with all your might, and never suffer your self to be diverted
or recalled from it. Having found the true way of obedience, go on in it, and
be not turned back again, remembering what our blessed Lord and Master says,
He that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved Mat. 24 13.
. After these Particulars to Children, I must crave leave before I shut up

2. To say somewhat in particular unto Parents, to direct and help them 1. Be
sure that you your selves do keep up the life and power of godliness in your
own domestic practice, that hereby your children may be kept from corruption
in a bad air, and encouraged in an holy conversation. I have already hinted
something of this, concerning the exemplariness of Parents, and in the premised
general duty of their good behavior; and therefore shall not need to enlarge
much upon it here. Only suggest this, that you are to walk in your integrity,
as for your own, so for your posteritie's comfort, in the family exercise of
Religion, by behaving your self wisely in an upright way, and walking within
your house with an upright heart Psalm. 101 2. -- 112.2. Prove. 20.7.
: showing your selves in all things patterns of good works Tit. 2.7.
: And putting persons and things into their proper places, to prevent
confusion, which else will arise, and much obstruct you in your most important
offices. This will gain a reputation to your Government, and facilitate the
management of particular duties. When your children see what a gloss you put
upon holiness by your sincere, cheerful, and grave Christian deportment; they
begin to discern the pleasantness of the ways of wisdom, the excellency of the
life of faith, and the odiousness of flesh-pleasing courses; and so come to
esteem your instructions, which are very legible and easy to be understood by
such a practical commentary. The holy life of John the Baptist had some
influence upon Herod's affections for a time Mark 6.20.
, to gain honor and respect from him. And Solomon says, A gracious woman
retains honor Prove. 11.16.
; and a gracious man too: both of them in the Relation of Parents; where
debauchery, though never so secret, and blanched with subtilty (but discerned
by nearest Relations) proves as poison to the souls of their children; teaching
them only with a fair outside, to imitate a politic Religion, which has no
spirit in it, but is flat and insipid, such as God will not relish: Whereas
real and internal godliness, truly exercised by Parents, does greatly quicken
their children, and powerfully help both Parents and Children in all relative
duties, which by their means will not be grievous, but delightful. But if
Parents be insincere, and have not their hearts right with God, and carry not
themselves blamelesly, having blots in their own conversation, they will find
the duties I have been speaking of to be very difficult and insuccessful: as we
may learn from the Apologue of the Mother Crab Cum dixisset Matter indecens esse
non recta via incedere, sed obliquos intorquere gressus: faciam (inquit ille)
mea Matter, si te idem f^cientem prius videro.
, who had her Son go straight forward, since it was indecent to crawl sideling,
awry, and backwards: who answered, I will do it Mother, if I shall first see
you your self doing so before me. Unholy Parents do indeed by their unholiness
contradict that hearty reverence they require from their Children, and render
the means of their education unprofitable. Those Parents, who would prosper in
their conduct, should, like that worthy Bishop of Antioch Theod. III. 6.
, by a good conversation commend their instructions, (...), teaching with
words, and confirming the words with an holy life. They themselves should, as
the Elders said to Boaz Ruth 4.11.
, do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem: put iniquity far from
their hands, and let it not dwell in their tabernacle Job. 11.14.
; lest, notwithstanding they otherwise be at pains for the education and
maintenance of their Children, the Lord shall have no joy in them Isa 9.13, 17.
, and never suffer them to be removed -- 14.20.
. And as you are to put away all iniquity; so particularly that of flattery to
friends, lest the eyes of your Children should fail Job 17.5. Vbi, ubi fueri,
vive Deo, qui esi Dator vitae tuae; vive conscientiae, quae est vita vitae
tuae; vive famae, quae est vita post vitam tuam.
. Be persuaded then, Cristian Parents, to take his advice, who said, Where,
wheresoever thou shall be, live to God, who is the donor of thy life: Live to
thy Conscience, which is the life of thy life: Live to thy good Name, which is
a life after this life; and (then I may add) will flourish most in thy
Posterity. (2.) Maintain your parental authority, and assert the dignity of
your Relation; yet not with lordly rigor, but still with love and mildness.
It Is good not to lose the power God has given you in superiority over your
Children, through any neglect of using it, or by making your self cheap in any
unbecoming familiarity: but then take care that you exercise it in equity, with
all gentleness and gravity: Let none despise you Tit. 2.15.
. Thus Abraham being in God's stead, he would command for God, and he is
commended for it Genesis 18.19. with 14.23, 24.
(as we have heard). If a Father's honor belong to you, you should not suffer
it to be trampled upon, or lightly esteemed Deuteronomy. 32.46. 1 Samuel 2.30.
. If you let go the reins of your Government, you cannot rule well; when the
Master of the Ship lets go the helm, his Vessel is driven before the wind and
tide. Those Parents who live according to the former direction, will be the
better able to observe this: For justice and holiness are venerable both in man
and woman, as was noted there Mark 6 20. Prove. 11.16.
. These will gain respects to persons in a Family, though they have not
authority, to restrain others from evil, keep them in a kind of awe, and gain
at least a formal approbation of virtuous actions; much more when they are
eminent in those vested with Authority, as Parents are, who (as an holy man Mr.
Baxter in his Cases, l. 543.
lately directed) should take care their Children be neither too bold with
them, nor yet too strange or fearful. They are not to be treated as servants,
but as the fruits of your own bodies. Too much familiarity will over-embolden
them, and too little countenance will discourage them. Endeavor to attain the
good skill of upholding, and using well, the pre-eminence of your station and
relation. Some Parents do not only abuse their authority in putting their
Children upon things unlawful, as Laban Genesis 29.23.
, Saul 1 Samuel 25.44.
, Herodias Mat. 14 8.
; but also by their own disobedience to God, and their sinful indulgence 2 Samuel
12.9. -- 13.19. Sam. 29 30.
. David himself it seems under a temptation did disparage himself, and lessen
his own authority, which gave occasion to his son Absolom's rebellion against
him. A virtuous management of power, with an unaffected amiable gravity, is
necessary to keep a Superior from being slighted. In commanding of virtue,
and restraining of vice in your Children, you are concerned to see your
pleasure be executed; but then your injunctions must be founded in love, and
designed for good: Hence you are obliged, as Salvian Regimen esse non potest,
nisi fuerit jugiter in Rectore judicium. De Gubern. Dei, l. 1.
has determined, to see, that what you resolve upon, be with judgment, and
good discretion, as you expect good success. When your orders are thus
circumstantiated, you will do well to see them performed, and not to connive at
your Childrens disobedience, nor to please their peccant humor, lest (says
Euripides (...).
) you afterward weep, when it is too late. (3.) Sweeten all with pathetick
expressions of endearing kindness, to insinuate the more into their affections;
but still with Christian prudence: this will make your government much more
easy and acceptable. Solomon gives us an account of the affectionateness of
his Father, and the tenderness of his Mother to him, when engaging him to duty
Prove. 4.3, 4. -- 31.1, 2, 3.
. Bathsheba uses an abrupt kind of speech, which imports abundance of
affection: What my son? and what the son of my womb? and what the son of my
vows? implying more of kindness than she was able to express, to stir him up,
as one whom his Mother comfort Isaiah 66.13.
. Nothing does more cheer up and is more sweet and pleasing to Children, than
the due commendation of the Parent (...). Eurip.
. So in our History of Martyrs, William Hunter's Mother cheared up her son in
that great duty of bearing testimony to Jesus Christ; saying, William, I think
thee as well bestowed, as ever any child that I bare in my womb. Thus Jacob did
in an holy wile get as it were into Joseph's heart, by insinuating the special
kindness he had for his dear Rachel, Joseph's Mother Gen 48.7.
. If you gain your Childrens hearts, then they will give ear to you, so as to
observe what you would have done Prove. 23.26.
. Hence it is that our Heavenly Father in Scripture is so abundant in
satisfying us of his love -- 3.12. Deuteronomy. 8.3, 4, 5.
, that he may gain our hearts and affections: Your converse then with your
children in all parental offices, should in all decent manner be still
expressive of love; thus much is peculiarly implied in my Text, which inhibits
discouragement. From love and tender bowels Phil. 1.8.
, if tears or compassionate expressions be mingled with instructions, this will
help much to win and commend Children unto goodness. Suitable gifts and rewards
prudently and seasonably bestowed will allure them: Upon which account it is
that Tertullian Gratius est nomen pietatis quam potestatis: etiam familiae
magis Patres quam Domini vocantur Apol. c. 34.
says, The name of Piety is more grateful than that of power, yea, they are
called Fathers, rather then Lords of the Family. Hence also Pliny l. 5. epist.
19.
was taken with a similitude of Homers (...).
, which he uses once and again, to show that a Prince should be moderate in
his Government; even as a Father is gentle in ruling of his Children. So the
People esteemed Joseph under Pharaoh, when he had power in Egypt, when he
procured such hearty obeisance Genesis 41.43. (...)
, that some render that word tender Father (as in the Margent) which in our
Translation is, bow the knee. Certainly the great friendship betwixt Parents
and Children requires all expressions of endearments; as in the tongue of the
prudent woman there should ever be the law of kindness Prove. 31.26.
. For as Maximus Tyrius (...), etc. Dissert. 36.
observes in another case, so here: If once the power of friendship be
enervated, there is nothing but it may easily move Relatives to anger, and
disturb them: even as by taking the rudder from a Ship, it is very soon tossed
any way. And here I think it very advisable, that Parents who have their
infirmities, should encourage their honest Children, by giving a favorable ear
unto their humble and discreet monitions and good advice for their honor and
spiritual welfare: even as Saul did, being convicted with reason, hearken unto
the voice of Jonathan his son 1 Samuel 19.6.
: And as Terah, upon the discovery which his son Abraham did from the Lord make
to him, complied with his advice for the removing of himself and family Genesis
11.31. with -- 12.1.
. (4.) Labor to carry it with all eavenness and impartiality to every child,
according to a rational proportion, so that it may be evident, you account all
that descend from you dear or beloved Children, as God himself does his Ephesians.
5.1. 1 Pet. 1.3. Jam. 1.18.
; for you are really concerned in all. It Is true, you should very distinctly
observe the different carriages of your Children toward God, your self, and
others; to approve virtue, and disapprove vice: but yet you are to cherish, as
near as may be, an equal desire of doing them all good alike: not hugging one,
and hunching another out of some partial respect, or distorted apprehension. A
good Parent, as one Mr. Fuller.
ingeniously notes, should observe a species of Gavelkind in dividing his
affections to his children, to prevent envying amongst them: and if the
expression thereof be different, it should be with equity and discretion, that
they in their own consciences may plainly read the reasons of it. Though there
is no necessity to make an equal distribution of Estate, wherein the right of
Primogeniture may seem from Scripture Genesis 37.4. -- 49 3. Exodus 13 2. Deuteronomy.
21.15, 16. 1 Chronicles. 5.2.
(as abovesaid) to claim a greater proportion; unless some kind of rebellion
put in a demurrer. For however a prudent Parent should, like a well-drawn
Picture, cast an eye equally upon all his Children, in point of affection: yet,
when he makes a distribution of his Estate in point of justice, it can be no
disparagement to him, to encourage the obedient with a reward; when by an
equitable abatement he may suffer the disobedient justly to feel the smart of
his misbehaviour: But yet he is concerned to be indifferent and impartial, the
same to every child in the same circumstances. It is, I confess, rare to find a
Parent indeed of this excellent temper amongst the sons of men: but a truly
Christian Parent should strive to resemble God in it; since as every child came
from his own substance, so he is to give an equal account to God of all; and
therefore should labor to overcome sense with reason, and in very deed exhibit
himself upon a due expense of circumstances one and the same to all. So that
they, who upon by and undue respects do prefer one child to another, whiles led
by a partial affection, cannot manage parental duties in a manner well-pleasing
to God. It Is said Scipio Africanus Dignus commiseratione magis est, cui natura
faves minus.
was so afraid of being unkind to his child (as too many are) for a natural
defect, that he rather showed most affection to his Son that was a fool,
saying, He was most worthy of commiseration, whom nature did favor least. (5.)
And last of all, Advise with your faithful Pastors and spiritual Guides,
especially in more intricate circumstances; yea, and study well your office.
Which that you may perform acceptably, it is good also to get what assistance
you can from others, to help you in the management thereof. As Manoah did not
only seek the Lord, but consulted the Angel concerning his Son Sampson, how
they should order him, and how they should do unto him Judges 13.8, 12.
: so should Parents endeavor to inform themselves, and get the best counsel
they can from those God has set over them in the ministration of ordinances
Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
, since now under the Gospel they are as spiritual Fathers appointed for the
feeding of Christ's sheep and his lambs Jo. 21.15.16, 17.
, which are directed to find pasture by the shepherds tents Cant. 1.7, 8. Ezekiel.
47.8, 9, 10. Jer. 8.22.
, and there get waters and balm for healing. Monica, Augustin's Mother August.
Conf.
, repaired to them for aid to reduce her Son: and indeed theirs is, as John
Baptist's Ministry was, to bring all to rights betwixt Parents and Children,
according to the Prophet's prediction Mal. 4 6. Mat. 17.12
, He shall turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the hearts of
the Children to their Fathers, lest I come and strike the earth with a curse.
Of so great advantage is the right and hearty discharge of these relative
duties, I have been treating on, for the saving of Nations, and particular
Churches from ruin and desolation: Yea, and so greatly instrumental are the
Ministers of Christ, for helping them in their duties, that it concerns honest
Parents, as to consult those who are holy, and able in the Ministry, for their
Childrens good: so to commend such faithful Ministers to them, as are worthy of
their respect; and to warn their Children to avoid such persons, as are likely
to draw them off from goodness: yea, and particularly in disposing of their
Children, especially into a Calling of public consequence, 'twill be very
requisite to consult those who are most able to judge in their own profession;
as in Divinity, Physic, or Law, that they may be tried by the faithful and
skilful of that profession, whether qualified for that they are designed; lest
you attempt that which cannot be effected (as Quintilian Ne tents quod effici
non potest; n^c ab eo quod quis e^time facit, in aliud cui nimis est idoneus
cum transferas.
observes) by putting them upon what they are unapt for; or hinder them from
that they have a genius to, and wherein they would be most serviceable. And it
will be good to take advice in choosing sit Educators and Tutors, according to
your abilities. David had such learned ones as Tutors with his Sons, 1 Chronicles.
27.32.
to see them instructed, as became the Princes of Israel (a). But here Parents
should be very careful unto whose conduct they commit their Children, or whom
they take in to assist them, that they be religious, orthodox, discreet,
humble, courteous, skilful, and not covetous, nor careless, but diligent. 'Twas
the great concern of reverend Claviger, to have those that feared God about
him, to do what he could his Wife and Children might be such, and then he
thought them well provided for. Luther kept one within his house to teach his
Children, that he might see them well-principled and ordered, as well as
learned. And the abovenamed Quintilian Si quis in eligendo filii praeceptore
manifesta flagitia non vitet: jam hinc sciat caetera quoque, quae ad utilitatem
juventutis componere conamur, esse sibi, hac part omissa, supervacua. l. 2.
Inst. c. 2.
from Nature's light could say, If any one in choosing a Tutor for his Son did
not shun manifest wickedness; hence let him know that other things also, which
we endeavor to compose for the profit of youth, prove useless and ineffectual,
this being neglected. This Constantius Socrat. III. 1. Sozom. II. 2.
was well aware of, when he was solicitous his Cousin Julian should not have or
hear Ethnic Tutors, lest considering his temper, he should decline to the
abomination of Gentilism: But notwithstanding his care, Julian privately got
the writings of Libanius an Heathen Philosopher; and after that of Maximus, who
underhand labored to pervert him, in hopes he would come to the Empire: and
to hide this instilled poison from Constantius, Julian counterfeited for a time
a monastic life; then openly in pretense read the Bible, but secretly studied
in earnest the Ethnic Doctrines, which made him a most bitter enemy to the
Christians, when advanced to the Empire, as the ancient Church experienced.
It Is dangerous to commit a Lamb to to the conduct of a Wolf. On the other hand,
Theodosius junior Soz. l. IX. 1.
was from his Cradle by his dying Father entrusted with his excellent and pious
Sister Pulcheria (then but 15 years old, and having two younger Sisters,
Arcadia and Marina) who got him instructed by such Tutors, especially in the
true Religion, accustoming him to prayer, and diligently to frequent the
Assemblies, that he had in great esteem the faithful Ministers, and other Godly
men, who were lovers of Religion, and so proved very instrumental for the
Orthodox Faith, and the advancement of Piety. In our own Land, and nearer our
times, we have a notable instance of Sir John Cheek, who being Tutor to King
Edward the Sixth, Dr. L. in Sir John Cheek 's Life.
was a special instrument of raising up and promoting the Reformed Religion
amongst us: for he was not only instrumental to sow the seeds of that Doctrine
in the Prince's heart, which afterward grew up to a general Reformation, when
he came to be King, but by his means the same saving truth was gently instilled
into the Lady Elizabeth by those, who by his procurement were admitted to be
the Guides of her younger studies. It is of great concern therefore to get good
advice and assistance in the education of Children, and for their encouragement
to reward those well, who are profitably employed in this work, according to
the Parents abilities, and their deserts; and for my own part, I should account
it better to spare in other matters, than in this for good assistance to train
up Children. Thus I have, as I could in my circumstances, dispatched what I
proposed: and now I dare upon the whole matter affirm,, That I have laid down
nothing in all this discourse, but what I hope is (at least for the main)
agreeable to the mind of God; and what by his assistance, I my self should
desire, and really endeavor to practice, either in the relation of Parent or
Child, which is all the Apology I shall make for my plain dealing: But shall
conclude with those precatory expressions in the Psalms, a very little varied
with respect to those Parents who heartily embrace the word of exhortation.
Psalm. 90.16, 17.
Let thy work (O Lord) appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children. And the beauty of the Lord our God be upon them: -- 144.2.
that their sons may be as plants grown up in their youth: that their daughters
may be as corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace. Considering
what the Lord has promised for the encouragement of his faithful servants --
102.28.
, viz. Their children shall continue, and their seed shall be established
before him.

Duties of Masters and Servants Sermon. XVIII.
Ephesians. VI. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart,
as unto Christ:

Not with eye-service, as men pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart.

With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men.

Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

And ye Masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing
that your Master also is in heaven neither is there respect of persons with him.


THE Question proposed to me to answer at this time is this:

What are the Duties of Masters and Servants, and how both must eye their
Master which is in heaven?

Before I come to the direct answer to this Question, I shall make way to it by
laying down a preliminary consideration or two.

First, That God did in infinite wisdom make all things, though of a far
different nature. Some beings he made more excellent, and endowed them with
noble faculties, fitted for communion with himself: and some of these he has
placed in a higher and some in a lower orb; and yet all making the glory of
infinite wisdom shine more clearly. He sets one creature higher, and another
lower: one to rule, and the other to be ruled. And of the same kind he
advances one above another, and yet with no injustice or wrong to any, but for
the mutual help one of another, the beauty and harmony of the whole Universe,
and the more visible displaying of his own unsearchable wisdom. Psalm. 104.24.
Genesis 1.31.
If all the Stars were Suns, how intolerable would their heat and light be? if
the whole body were eyes, how much of its use and excellency would it lose?
What a Chaos and heap of confusion would the Woald be without government? and
how can government be without superiority and inferiority? It was not without
good reason that the Philosopher said, Hierocles in Py. Car.
That there was a method of perfect wisdom in the making of all things; and it
was not by chance that they are what they are, but the contrivance of the most
excellent counsel. Who could have mended what God has made? What could be
better ordered, than what infinite Goodness has done? Ar. Epist. l. 2 c. 7.
Anton. ex Palate. l. 7. Ec. 3.11.
and who but a fool would desire that things should be otherwise than Wisdom it
self has determined? Oh! what cause has every one to adore God in every
thing, who has made every thing beautiful in its place and season? What cause
have all to sit down content and thankful in that place where God has fixed
them? how unreasonable and blasphemous are the repinings of some, that are
ready to quarrel with their Maker, and to impeach him, as guilty of partiality,
cruelty, and injustice, that has not advanced them to a higher, richer, and
more honorable condition then they are in. Shall the thing formed say unto him
that formed it, why have thou made me thus? What diabolical pride and arrogance
is this for the Creature to accuse and condemn his Creator? Shall folly it self
indict wisdom? must God come to his Creatures Bar? must he give thee an
account of his actings? art thou able to bear his pleadings? and can thou
without sinking into nothing stand before his glory? what obligation did thou
lay upon God to bring thee out of nothing into something? did he stand in any
need of thy being? what was there in thee that should commend thee to God, to
advance thee above a toad or a dog? I could here expatiate, were it not a
little besides my design: To conclude, I think it would be far better for us
all, to learn of that excellent Moralist, who said, Epictetus.
That though he was lame, and almost blind, and none of the richest; yet
because he was partaker of Reason, he had cause to magnify the distinguishing
goodness of his Maker, and could wish that all men would more adore and admire
God; and as for his part, it should be his work while he had a being, (...).
Ar. Epist. l. 1. c. 16.
and he did call all to join in consort to his praise, who has made all things
in so excellent an order and harmony. Did we all consider what God is, and what
we are, methinks it should effectually silence discontent, and leave no room
for any thing but love, praise, and gratitude. O! would to God there were a
little of that order, harmony, and wisdom in our actions, that is in God's: and
that we could act like them that study to imitate their Maker; O! that with
Paul we could learn still to be content in whatsoever condition we are in;
(...). id. l. 2. c. 14.
and if we have spoken or thought any thing derogatory to the infinite Wisdom,
to repent and abhor our selves in dust and ashes, and turn our murmurings
against God, that it is no better with us, into admiration that we are not
worse: every state on this side eternal misery is advancement above what we
deserve, and a mercy we can never be thankful enough for.

Secondly, As God did in infinite wisdom make every thing, and placed every and
be regular in his motion. I mean, It is every one's duty and excellency to fill
up that place and relation, that God has set him in, with duty. The whole
World is a great Army, and God is the General of this Army, and he appoints
every one their station and rank, and in keeping of it exactly is security,
honor and reward. God makes one a King, another a Subject; one a Master,
another a Servant; one rich, another poor; and he is really most excellent,
that is so in the faithful discharge of the state and relation he is in. A good
Servant is far better than a bad Master; a good Subject than a wicked Prince;
he that is not relatively good is not really good. He that breaks his rank to
get a higher and safe place, may be likelier to meet with destruction than
promotion. Adam's loss of Paradise, and the Angel's loss of Heaven, are
sufficient demonstrations of this truth. The World is a Stage, says the
Stoic, and in it every one has his part to act, and it is our commendation and
wisdom to act our part well, whether it be a Prince or a Beggar, a Father or a
Child, a Master or a Servant. Psalm. 101.2.
This was holy David's care and resolution; He would behave himself wisely in a
perfect way; and how shall that be done better than by walking before God in
his house with a perfect heart? What was Abraham commended for more than his
faithfulness? and was this the least act of his faithfulness to instruct bis
Family, and teach them the fear of God? Joshua was a man of great gallantry and
resolution, but I am ready to think he never acted both more bravely, Josh
24.15. (...); Epict.
than when he said, As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. Socrates
laughed at them for fools, that endeavored to persuade him to leave
instructing the youth; God (says he) has set me in this station, and how can
I leave it? O how few Christians exceed this Heathen? nay who almost comes near
him, if he lived as well as he spoke? It Is too true a proof, that there is but
little wisdom and Religion worth calling so in the world, in that so few
(blessed be God some there are) are good in their Relations. Where are
Magistrates to be found that are God's Vicegerents in their places? Where are
the Masters that command and direct in wisdom, so as their service is rather a
privilege than a toil, a pleasure than a vassalage? Where are the Servants that
obey in singleness of heart as unto Christ? Isa. 3.5.
What a strange disorder and confusion is there in the world, in Kingdoms,
Corporations, Jam. 4.1.
and Families? and who may be thanked for it but men's lusts, and their not
faithfully filling up that Relation God has set them in? Most are governed by
the Law of corrupt nature and hell; but few, too few have that respect to the
Law of God which should be. Ar. Epict. 1.13.
How excellently does that Imperial Philosopher declaim against those that are
unfaithful in their places, and do not willingly submit to, and order their
lives according to the direction of the most good, wise, and just Lawgiver of
the world? Hear his words: Antoninus ^, 4. n. 24. and l. ^. n. 38.
He is an Aposteme of the world, who being unfaithful in his place, does as it
were apostatize and separate himself from God's rational administration. O that
men were wise and understood their true interest, and were faithful to it. O
that every one would labor to rectify that ataxy and disorder that is in
himself, and then in his Family. Then, O then how happy would our Kingdom,
Cities, Families be? It was no small commendation of the Grecian Commander,
Plutarch in vita Them.
that he reckoned it none of the best qualifications of a man to be able to
play well upon a Harp, but to be able to govern himself and others well: and if
a City were put into his hands poor, dis-mantled, un-disciplined, to be able
quickly to make it rich, strong, orderly. To fill up our Relations with
Religion is the divine precept, our true wisdom, our peace, profit; it is
honest: I had almost said, it is one of the fairest fruits of real Christianity.
Would we could all as one man engage to do our best for the putting this in
execution, and then holiness to the Lord might quickly be written upon our
Door, our City might be called Jehovah Shammah, the Lord dwells there, and our
Land Hephsibah and Beulah. For this let every honest soul pray; for this let
Ministers preach: And in the prosecution of this design I shall in my poor way
give you advice by resolving of this Question, which I have made way to by this
Preface.

What are the Duties of Masters and Servants, and how must both eye their great
Master in Heaven?

In the answering of this Question the more fully, I shall do these things:

First, Show you what is meant by Master and Servant.

Secondly, Show you how both are to eye their great Master in Heaven.

Thirdly, I shall show you what is the Master's duty, exhort him to it, and
give

Fourthly, I shall show what is the duty of Servants, press them to it, and
give

First, I shall show what is meant by Master and Servant.

By Master here is meant either Master or Mistress, such a one as has the
power of himself, and upon whose government and command another depends.

Now in an absolute and most proper sense there is none may be called Master
but God; he only has an absolute, independent, unlimited power of himself, and
has all others at his command and direction, and he alone is fit for this
despotick Monarchy, being infinite in wisdom, goodness and justice. And this
clears the meaning of those words of our Savior, Call no man Father, Master,
Mat. 23.8.
but God, that is, look upon none as absolute, infallible Lords of the
Conscience, but him.

But in a more limited sense there are Masters, to which respect and honor
must be paid by their Servants, and that with all readiness and cheerfulness,
so far as they command nothing that is contrary to God's command.

By Servant, I mean one that is not at his own disposal, but at the command of
another, so far as his commands thwart not the commands of God.

Remember whatever is spoken of Servants, is spoken to Maidservants as well as
Menservants,

Now this Relation seems in a word to rise from Nature, Law, or Contract. From
Nature, in that some are of a more strong body, and weaker understanding;
others of weaker bodies, but of more judgment and experience; and so one is by
nature fit to rule, and the other to be ruled.

That Relation that rises from Law, is when any one by some flagitious act
has justly forfeited his liberty, and is condemned to servility either for a
time, or during his life.

The last and usual foundation of this Relation is by Contract, and that is,
where one that is by nature free, subjects himself to another's command for a
certain time, upon such and such just considerations.

Now this is that Relation that I am principally concerned to show you the
Duties of.

how both Master and Servants are to eye their great Master in Heaven.

have an eye to the presence of their great Master which is in Heaven. God in
his Nature is a Spirit, that is infinitely immense, filling Heaven and Earth,
and yet not included in either. If man did indeed lie under the lively
impressions of God's omnisciency and omnipresence, what an awe would it put
upon their spirits? how honest would it make them in the dark? This, this would
make the Master reasonable, just and merciful; this would make the Servant
faithful, diligent and constant in his obedience to his Master. What makes men
to act like Devils, but this, a hope that God does not see? Gen 17.1. Psalm.
16.8.
What made Abraham so upright, but his walking before God? What kept David so
unmoved, but his setting the Lord always before his eyes? I am persuaded, the
greatest failures in either Master or Servant have their spring here, a secret
root of atheism, and disbelief of God's eye and observation. What truth in all
the Bible more clear than this, and yet what almost less believed? O what do
men make of God? How do they rob him of his glory, and themselves of the truest
motives of fidelity, activity and cheerfulness? Sirs, Is the hundred thirty
ninth Psalm canonical Scripture or no? Can any hide any thing from God's eye?
Jer. 23.24. Prove. 15.3. Prove. 5.21. Psalm. 94.7, 9. Ar. Epict. 2. c. 8. (...)
Ar. Ep. l. 1. c. 14. 1 Cor. 10.31. Romans 6.16.
Do not his eyes behold the good and evil? Does not he ponder the ways of men?
Do you indeed believe this? What then is the meaning of falseness on all hands?
It was no unjust complaint of the Moralist, when he said, that many dare not do
that, the image of God being present, which they will do, God himself being
present, hearing, seeing, and observing exactly all that they do. The all
seeing eye of God is a good Motto; I would this were written upon our Doors,
Counters, Counting Houses, Studies, over our Tables: I shall conclude this with
an excellent one of Epictetus his sayings; When you are at home and have shut
the doors, and are in the dark, remember you never say you are alone, but God
is within, and he needs no Candle to see what you are doing.

Secondly, both Masters and Servants must have an eye to the glory of their
great Master in Heaven. There is not an action in our whole lives, but we
should either habitually or actually respect God's glory in it; and it is but
reasonable, that he of whom all things are, and by whom all things are
preserved, and from whom are all our hopes of good here and hereafter, should
have all Glory for ever and ever.

Actions loose their excellency when they have not a right end: and to make any
thing our end below God, Hierocles.
is little less than idolatry. It was excellent advice given, more then once,
by that brave Moralist, Refer all things to God, make him your center, your
end. I shall conclude with another of that noble Emperor Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus sayings; Remember always in all things thy Relation to God, for
without respect to him thou will never perform any action aright while thou
live.

Thirdly, both Masters and Servants must have an eye to the command of Psalm.
119.6.
Ask David how you shall escape a state and act of shame, and he will tell you,
by having respect unto all God's commands.

If men would never command any thing but what they have warrant for from the
Word of God, commands would then be just, and obedience easy: then the poor
Servant would never be put upon that sad Dilemma, whether he should obey his
earthly or heavenly Master. Acts 5.29.
The Pythagoreans were not at all out in that Doctrine of theirs; That man is
under an Oath of Allegiance to God, to be obedient to his Laws, and never
willingly to transgress them. If the Master consult God's commands, then he
will forbear threatening, and not make his Servants to serve with rigor, and be
faithful, meek, putting on bowels and pity, warning, instucting and correcting,
like a Christian, in love to them, and obedience to God. If the Servant had
still an eye to their great Master's commands, how singly, uprightly,
diligently and cheerfully would they obey? To the Law, to the testimony; and
peace will be to them that walk according to this Rule, and the whole Israel of
God. Both Masters and Servants, Enchiridion.
yea all men in all things should still be of Epictetus his mind, and still use
his Petition; Lead me O God whither thou please, I will follow thee
cheerfully, and if I be something unwilling, yet notwithstanding I am resolved
to look to thy command, and obey it. Let God's Word be our Counselor, and we
cannot do an unjust and imprudent act.

Fourthly, Both Masters and Servants must have an eye to the assistance of Our
heavenly Master is so humble and kind, that he never bids any Servant do any
work, but he is willing to put his own hand to it; and to say the truth of it,
the best Servant of all is so weak and foolish, that he is not able to manage
the least piece of work his Master sets him about, except himself be at one end
of it, and do the most of it, nay I had almost said, do all of it himself. And
if God stand by, direct and assist, how wisely, John 15.4.
gently and piously will Masters do their part? and how patiently, diligently
and readily will Servants do theirs? then the Masters will not threaten, nor
the Servants groan or complain. But I may have occasion to speak something of
this nature elsewhere.

Fifthly, Both Masters and Servants must have an eye to the sovereignty, He is
higher than the highest; he has us in his hand, as the Clay is in the hand of
the Potter, and none of his ways are unequal; he will do righteously, when men
do not; and the day is coming, when Masters and Servants, King and Subjects,
must stand upon even ground before him, and he will do unto every one according
to their works. O that Masters would remember that God is infinitely more above
them, than they are above the poorest Servant: Were this well weighed, how soon
would the heat of some Masters be cooled, their storms be calmed, and their
fury turned into meekness? Remember man, God can easily, without doing any
injury at all, make thee and thy Servant change places. O that Servants could
still remember that they have a greater and a better Master that must be
pleased, whosoever is displeased: the deep sense of God's sovereignty would
quickly make the proudest heart stoop: this, this would pull down the stout,
insolent, rebellious spirit of a wicked Servant, and make him judge obedience
far more tolerable then flames; and if any thing of injury be done him by his
Master, the thoughts of God's justice and righting will quiet his mind.

What is the Master's duty, and to exhort him to it. And this I shall do by
giving him

1. Some cautionary Directions.

2. Positive Directions.

First, I shall give you some cautionary Directions.

Masters take heed of being servants to sin and Satan, and rebels to God. A bad
man is not like to be a good Master. With what face can any man expect others
should obey him (whose commands are usually unreasonable) whilst he disobeyeth
God, whose commands are always good and equal? How can a drunken, prayerless,
swearing wretch, look for better service than he gives to his Master?

By sin man at first forfeited that Sovereignty that he had over the creatures;
and by a constant habit of sin, especially gross sins, which the light of
Nature does condemn, a man prostitutes his reason, debaseth his authority, and
loses that majesty which else he is invested with. How can a drunken Master
rebuke or punish his servant for tippling? Is an intemperate Sensualist a fit
person to censure gluttony? Can an unclean person condemn wantonness? Is it
likely that the Servant should be faithful, who sees his Master cheat and lie
every day? If the Master be a profuse Gamester, and given to his pleasure, is
it like that his Servant should be frugal and diligent? Are not lying, and
swearing, and cursing, and wickedness as soon learned of a Master, as a Trade?
And is it worth the while for a man to give twenty, forty, a hundred pound to
teach his child to serve the Devil, and a short cut to hell, and a sure way to
ruin and misery of body and soul? Is that man fit to govern another that cannot
rule himself? Is he that has drowned his reason capable of instructing one,
that which requires some wisdom to understand, and learn, and more to teach?
Are not Sots, that cannot speak sense, in a sweet frame to speak to God in
Prayer, or to read a Chapter? What have such to do to take God's name into
their mouths, which hate to be reformed? O that wicked Masters would consider
that their wickedness does not only hazard the damnation of a single soul, but
even of all that are under their charge. Is it not enough to have your own sins
to be laid to your charge? are all your oaths and lies and wickedness too
little to sink you, but you must make your Servants sins yours? Is one
damnation too little, but you must seek to double it? Are those flames so cool
and tolerable that you are busy in adding fuel to that terrible fire to make
it burn seven times hotter? What a hell must such a man's house be, in which the
Name of God is scarce heard, except it be in an oath or a curse? Is there a
blessing like to be in the house on which God's curse rests? Friends, I believe
you would be loath your children should have Cham's curse, and be servants to a
Tyrant and a Slave; Prove. 3.33. Pythagoras.
a wicked man is both. Masters, if you would have your servants obey your
commands, you must not break God's. If you would have them sober, you must not
be drunk; if you would have them chaste, you must not be filthy; if you would
have them true, you must not be false; if you would have them good, you must
not be bad your selves. Your example signifies more to them than your precept:
do not undo that by your actions and life, which you would build up by your
words. O! little do wicked Masters think what a plague they are to a City, what
a curse to a Family, and what inevitable ruin they expose their own and other
souls, bodies and estates to, except infinite power and mercy step in quickly
to prevent it.

Secondly, Take heed of idleness, carelessness, and trusting your Servants too
A master's negligence tempts the Servant to unfaithfulness. When Masters are
idle abroad, usually the Servants are so at home. It cannot well be expected,
that when the Master is spending his time foolishly and unaccountably in the
Coffee-houses, Alehouses, or Taverns, the Servant should spend his wisely in
the Shop; especially where he observes that the Master never minds which end
goes foremost, never examines his Books, nor calls him to any account. O this
sin of idleness, that Sodomitical, soul-debasing, body-weakning, Ez. 16.49.
estate-wasting sin! Have we a mind to try whether God will rain such another
storm of brimstone upon us, as once he did upon them? Seneca.
O how many persons are very prodigal of that commodity which will shortly be
very precious?

Sirs, do you never take a Bible in your hands? do you never read how much God
is displeased with sloth, how often he forbids it? Romans 12.11. Prove. 18.19.
Can you call your spending three or four hours together in an idle house in
insignificant chat, redeeming the time? Is neglecting your Servants the way to
make them faithful? O think of these things before it is too late. I know men
have their excuses, and can easily evade what I say. But believe it, it is one
thing to deal with a poor Minister, and another thing to deal with God: and a
thousand of your pleas, when they are cast into his balance at the Day of
Judgment, will be found light. If men must be judged for idle words, I believe
they will scarce be acquitted for idle actions. I wish we that are Masters
could often speak to our selves in that brave Emperor's language, Antoninus. l.
5. n. 1.
In the morning when thou find thy self unwilling to rise, consider with thy
self presently, it is to go about a man's work, that I am stirred up: am I
unwilling to do that for which I was born, and brought into this world? was I
made for this, to lay me down, and make much of my self in a warm bed? O but
this is pleasing. And was it for this that thou were born, that thou might
take thy pleasure? Was it not in truth that thou should always be busy and
in action? See thou not, how every thing is busy in its kind to perform what
belongs to it in its place? etc. and you use to say, If you keep the shop, the
shop will keep you. If you keep not your eye upon your servant, when you hope
to find an honest man, you may meet a thief.

who you admit into your Family. One that is born of wicked debauched Parents,
and has had nothing but bad examples, and seldom good precepts; that has been
accustomed to lying and baseness from the Cradle, that has not been taught to
read, and knows neither his duty to God nor man, that is ignorant of God,
Christ, Soul, Heaven, Hell, and consequently is not capable of lying under the
force of the most powerful motives to faithfulness. Psalm. 101 3.
David was huge cautious in this point; a liar should not dwell in his house.
As good servants bring a blessing along with them into the Families where they
come; Genesis 39 5.
so sometimes wicked servants bring a curse with them into the house where they
come. Little do Masters think how much damage a neglect in this may bring upon
them, their estate may insensibly be wasted, their other Servants infected,
their Children be corrupted, and provisions laid in to feed their sorrows all
their days. Never talk of what thou shall have with them; how responsable their
Parents be: will this balance the hazard of your Childrens Souls? Sooner take
a toad into your bosom, then a wicked servant into your Family.

putting your Servants upon too much work. It Is the way to alienate their
affections, to make them almost incapable of doing their duty as they should to
God, it puts them upon cries and groans to him, Exodus 2.24:
that has ever an ear open to the complaints of the oppessed: by this you make
them more blockish, and less ingenuous, and consequently not so fit to carry on
your business so much for your interest, as else they might do: remember how
contrary this is to humanity. How would you like this in others? Were the
Egyptians to be justified for their great burdens wherewith they loaded the
Israelites, and the Turks to be commended for the hard vassalage they put poor
Christians to? I know you readily censure both these, and how can you condemn
either, when you imitate both? Is your sin less because against greater light?
except you desire the curse of God and man too, take heed of this sin. You may
learn more mercy from an Heathen than you ever practiced: For he tells you,
Seneca de Clementia.
That your servants are the inferior, and poor friends, and are to be accounted
next to children, and came not into the house for servitude and vassalage, but
patronage.

letting them have too littie employment: It Is of dangerous consequence to get
a habit of idleness. It was none of the least commendations of that worthy
woman, Prove. 31.27.
that she would suffer none in her house to eat the bread of idleness. As you
must give an account of your own time; so must you also of your servants too,
how it is spent. When your Servants are idle, the Devil is at work. If you have
nothing for them to do, remember God has something. Set them to reading the
Word, praying, and put them upon using all diligence in making their calling
and election sure. It is far better to have no Servant, than to keep one to do
nothing but look about him. This, this has laid the foundation of some young
men's ruin this is unfaithfulness to God and man, by this you wrong body and
soul.

Sixthly, Take heed of bitterness and threatening, of cruelty and injustice,
Take heed of calling them names, and cursing them, and of correcting them with
unreasonable weapons, for slight or no faults; and using them worse than a
merciful man would do his beast. Are not your Servants of the same metal with
your selves? they have sense and feeling as well as you; their flesh is not
iron, nor their bones brass; Would you have God give you such mercy as you give
your Servants? If he should mark what you do amiss, what would soon become of
you? Did you never read the woes that God denounces against oppressors? and do
you think God threatens in jest? cannot he easily give life and execution to his
woes? and where are you then man? What if God should curse when you curse? what
if he should strike as well as you? are you able to bear the strokes that his
hand can lay on? can thy heart endure, or thy back bear what he can inflict?
when you are just lifting up your hand, consider a little the nature of the
fault, and do as thou would have God do by thee, and then be outrageous and
cruel if you can. Remember your Servants are God's Servants, and you must not
rule them with rigor: Lev. 25.42, 43 Deuteronomy. 24.14. Jam. 5.4.
read those Scriptures which you find quoted in the Margent. Some may wonder
that I insist upon this caution so long; but I wish the empty bellies, the thin
checks, the black and blew skins of many poor Servants did not give me too good
reason for what I say. Anton. l. 5. (...). and l. 6. n. 21.
I shall desire such Masters to ask themselves sometimes, Whose Soul do I now
properly possess, a Tyrant's, a Mad-man's, or a Beast's? Suppose your Servant
is not so wise, strong, and active as you would have him, it may be for this,
he more needs pity than blows or curses. But if he be really faulty, were you
never so too? and when punishment is due, remember that Religion, Reason, and
Humanity must always measure punishment. Think not they are in your power, and
poor, and friendless, and that they have none that can or will right them. If
this were a good warrant for oppressing another, how many are there who would
soon crush you to pieces?

Seventhly, Take heed of neglecting your Servants souls. Their souls as bodies
are your charge; and you must be accountable shortly for them. O! how few
consider seriously of this? Are not the souls of Servants slighted, as if they
were little better than the souls of Brutes? Sirs, is that which Christ thought
worth his blood, not worth your care? The neglect of most Masters in this thing
is horrible. How seldom do they speak a word of God to their Servants? how
great a rarity is it for them to pray with them, and read the Scriptures before
them, and to call upon them to mind what they read? who endeavors to convince
their Servants of the corruption of their nature, and that they are born slaves
of Sin and Satan? who commends Christ as the best Master, and commands his
Servants to obey him? where is the Master to be found that is frequently and
importunately endeavoring to convince all under his charge of the necessity of
faith in Christ, repentance, and a holy life? how little are Masters concerned
for God's honor and service? nay, are there not some that are so far from
minding the souls of their Servants, that if once they perceive a poor Servant
begins to set his face toward Heaven, how are they set against him? what
scoffs and jeers shall he then have, 2 Kings 21.11. Isa. 57.24.
and scarce live a quiet life after it? and there are others that put their
Servants upon sin, that keep them up to work so unreasonably late upon
Saturday-nights, that they lose half the Lord's Day with sleeping. How many that
put their Servants upon work, and serving of Goods upon the Lord's Day? How many
do we see keeping their Stalls open to sell Fruit? O where are our Nehemiah's?
-- who reproves his Servants for neglecting God's service, more than for
neglecting of his own? who observes what company they keep, how the Sabbath is
spent? who reproves them for lying and cheating for their profit? are there not
too many that put them upon telling lies to cover their own neglect? do such
Masters as these deserve the name of Christians? do they look like God's
Servants? whose fault is it that Moor-fields is so full of idle youths, and
that the Houses and Taverns are so frequented on the Lord's Day? who may we
thank for many of our disorders, judgments, and miseries, but careless Masters?
whence is it that so many vile women are maintained so high, that bastards are
so common, and that we hear so often of murdered Infants? how comes it to pass
that Prisons are so full, and Tyburn so fruitful? if the matter were well
canvased, we should find that Masters and Parents neglect of catechizing,
instructing, reproving, and correcting them under their charge, is not the
least cause of this and other evils. Sirs, can you prove the Bible to be a lie,
and souls and invisibles to be but fancies? O! what then do you mean by your
strange neglect of these affairs? Ezekiel. 3.18.
God has made you watchmen, and if you be asleep, or give not warning, at
whose hand do you think must the blood of the Souls in your Family be required?
The very Heathens have declaimed notably against this sin; Epictetus.
If, says one, a friend had but a dog under your care, you would not starve
him, but in some measure proportion your care of him to the love you bear to
your friend: and has not God put souls under your care, and are they to be
neglected? I have been the more large upon this Head, because this sin is so
common, and of such dismal consequence, and so little care is taken for the
redress of it.

I come now to lay down the positive duties of Masters, and that I shall do
with somewhat more brevity.

(...).
First, Let all Masters endeavor to be God's Servants: True Religion and divine
Principles in the heart will give a man the best measures of action: the grace
of God will teach him to deny his pride, passion, sensuality, and worldly
lusts, and to live holily, soberly, and righteously in this present world.
Religion in its power, O how lovely does it make a man? with what wisdom and
prudence does such an one act? with what sweetness, and love, and yet with what
majesty? What a brave Master was Abraham? and what made him so, but the fear of
God? Mat. 11, 28.
this, this will make a man merciful, patient, meek, heavenly minded, and yet
diligent in his place: this will make him exemplary, and as much as in him
lies, to act like God in his place. And what injury can such a person do? can
he be cruel that has such a Master as Christ? can he find in his heart to be
unmerciful, who has obtained mercy? if a man be very holy himself, his example
will have a drawing power in it to allure to that which is so good, and be a
constant check to that which is bad: Such a one is under the promise of God's
blessing, and he will teach him, and give him wisdom to discharge the duty of
his place: He is made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Epictetus.
Philem. 2^
and so enabled in some measure to act in a conformity to the Divine will. It
was no small commendation which Paul gave of Philemon, when he spoke of the
Church in his house.

When our first Parents were in their pure state, what homage did all the
creatures give them, as their visible Lord? and had not man by his fall
forfeited this prerogative, and by denying God's sovereignty lost their own,
they had no doubt still kept their dominion over the Creatures. And now the
more of holiness is in a man, and the more near God, and like him, the more
likely to get, and keep a majesty and dominion in his place. Pythagoras.
Surely great holiness commands respect and reverence: and rather choose to
have your inferiors reverence than fear you; for admiration and love accompany
reverence; but hatred, fear. O! what a noble thing were man, Hierocles.
if goodness and purity did always accompany superiority and government? these
are, and shall be honorable in spite of malice it self. A right worshipping of
God is the captain of all virtue, and when this Divine seed is cast into the
soul, Idem.
it lays the foundation of brave and true honor and respect; such a one he
offers himself a sacrifice to God, and makes a Temple for God in himself, and
then in his family, and such a Master, who would grudg to serve? How sweet must
obedience then be, when nothing is commanded but what God commands, and it is
interest and profit to obey? O Sirs! 1 Pet. 5 1.
little do you think how much power a meek, holy, grave conversation has: who
that has the least spark of ingenuity in him, will not be restrained, if not
conquered by it? O that Masters would but try this way: and if honoring God do
not more secure their honor, than severity, then let me be counted a deceiver:
this, this is the most effectual way to make Servants good, 1 Samuel 1.21.
to be good your selves; this will bring them to a true relish of Religion,
when it is pressed upon them by precept and example. I have known some Servants
that have blessed the day that ever they saw their Masters faces. O let your
excellency allure and draw those under you as the Sun does men's eyes, A^.
Epict. Anton. l. 6. n. 27.
or as meat and drink does the hungry.

Secondly, Endeavor the good of the souls of those under your charge with Romans
10.1.
Give them no rest till you have prevailed with them to be in good earnest for
heaven: allow them time for prayer, reading of the Word, hearing of good
Sermons, and for conversing with good Books: commend to them Baxter's Call to
the Unconverted, and Mr. Thomas Vincent's Explanation of the Assemblie's
Catechism, etc. and observe what company they keep, and if you know a holy
experi^nced Servant, commend their Society and example to them, keep ^ ^^stent
watch over your Servants: remember what temptations they are exposed to; know
how they spend their time; call them often to an account, and look well to your
Books, it will do them no hurt, and you much good: be often in meekness and pity,
treating with them about their everlasting concerns: and let your carriage
bring full evidence along with it of your dear love to their immortal souls.
Labor as well as you can to convince them of the corruption of their nature,
of the evil of sin, of their lost and undone state, of their impotency and
utter inability to save themselves, or to make the least satisfaction to Divine
justice, or to bear that punishment that is due unto them for every sin; show
them their absolute need of a Christ; and that without him there is no
salvation; make them to understand what the new birth is, what kind of change
it is, and how necessary; and warn them of the danger of miscarriage in
conversion, and of taking up with a half work, and resting in the outward part
of Religion, Mat. 5.20. Joh. 17.3. Prove. 3.17. Romans 12.1. Mat. 11.28. and 1 Timothy 4.8.
and their own righteousness: Put them upon laboring to know God in Christ;
this is life eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent. Do what you can possibly to convince their Judgments of the
reasonableness, profitableness, and sweetness of Religion, where it is in its
reality, vigor and constancy: take off the imputations and aspersions which
the unexperienced foolish Infidel would cast upon Christianity. Cant. 5.16.
Prove. 3.15.
Never think you can commend Christ too much to them. O! if you could allure
their souls, captivate their hearts, and make them in love with him who is
altogether lovely.

O! let them not alone till you see them deeply affected with these things;
expostulate the case with them frequently by themselves; ask them what they
think of the estate of their Souls, and leave not with their sullen silence:
ask them plainly, how they can eat, or drink, or sleep, without Christ and
pardon? and what they mean to be so unconcerned? Tell them that death may be
nearer them than they imagine; and that as death leaves them, judgment will
find them: Tell them that their stupidity is an effect of that deadness their
souls lie under; and that if they be not awakned quickly, they must be
unconceivably and eternally miserable: ask them what they have to say against
the ways of God, and what they have to plead for their neglecting their souls,
for Sin and for Satan: tell them these things are matters of such weight, that
they need not much time to determine what must be done: It Is a matter of such
vast importance, that it calls for the greatest speed, diligence, and care
imaginable, and that you cannot be satisfied till you see this work done:
catechize and instruct them constantly, at least once a week: Let the Word
sound daily in their ears, and pray twice a day with them; let some time be
allowed them for secret duties; and put them upon the performance of them
spiritually and constantly. Keep them not too long at work, or in the Shop, on
Saturday-night. The Jews had their preparation for the Sabbath; and the ancient
Christians did not fall short of them in their preparation for the Lord's Day.
Let the Sabbath be carefully spent in secret, family and public duties: and
for the better direction in your duties upon that day, I refer you to that
excellent piece, Mr. Wells his Practical Sabbatarian, a Book, it is pity any
great Family should want. Cause your Servants to bear you company to hear the
most powerful Preacher you can: require an account of what they hear, and let
the Sermons be repeated in your Family; and ask them what it was that did most
affect their hearts, and labor to press things home afresh upon their souls:
and if you perceive any good inclinations in them, encourage them greatly, and
improve them all you can: and if you do not see what you would presently, be
not quite discouraged, and cast them off as hopeless. Exhort them daily while
it is called to day; Heb. 3.13.
and if you see them still dull, hard-hearted, and under a spirit of slumber,
be yet the more earnest; who knows but a little more patience and compassion,
and zeal may prevail? But if after long using the forementioned means, you
find them still refractory, stubborn, and to slight your counsel, and run on in
sin, and to grow worse and worse, you must add sharp reproofs; and if they do
no good, Prove. 29.19.
but they make a mock at them, and endeavor to jeer their fellow servants out
of their duty too, then you must add blows to your words: Prove. 26.3.
Stripes are fit for the back of a fool; and if neither exhortations, reproofs,
nor corrections will prevail, but they continue still like sons of Belial,
rebellious to God and you; Psalm. 101.
then remember your duty is to ease your house of them: consider well what
danger there is of their infecting the rest of your Servants and Children;
consult your own peace, honor, and profit. Let not a liar, a company-keeper, 2
Cor. 6.14.
a vile person, dwell in your house, when you have used all possible means for
his reclaiming; what fellowship should light have with darkness? remember that
God has made you a Prophet, a Priest, and a King in your own Family.

Thirdly, Another duty of Masters is diligently and faithfully to instruct
their conceal nothing of the mystery of your Art from them (I mean of what is
lawful, for if you are skilled in the Art of cheating, you must unlearn that
your selves, and never teach them that which will hazard their ruin.) Some
Masters are ready to hide the most profitable and ingenious part of their trade
from their Servants. Remember, Sirs, that Law and Nature, Reason and Religion,
all command you to be faithful in this thing; their Parents or Friends put them
to you to teach them an honest Calling, and you promised you would do it, and
it is dishonesty in the highest degree to fail in this.

Fourthly, Be just, compassionate, and loving: be as ready to commend and
encourage them for doing their duty, as to reprove them for the neglect of it:
let them want nothing that is fitting for them in the place they are in: let
their food be wholesome, seasonable, and sufficient; Prove. 31.15.
let their clothing be warm, sweet, and decent; let their lodging be warm, and
sweet, and wholesome; not too far from your eye and ear: let them have rest
sufficient to recruit nature, and to fit them for God's Service and yours: And
in case of sickness, let them have such tendance, physic, and diet as they
need. You cannot imagine what obligations you may by this lay upon your Servants
to fidelity; how acceptable this is to God, and how much reputation it will get
you among men. See an excellent example in the Centurion. Mat. 8.5, 6. Col.
4.1. Job 31.13.
Give unto your Servants that which is just and equal. It was Job's
commendation, that he did not despise the cause of his handmaid. Use your
tongues to sweetness; a soft word sooner prevails than a hard blow or curse.

Be punctually faithful to your contract with them; pay them their wages to the
full; it is better to do more, than less than your bargain. In a word, As the
Elect of God put on bowels of pity, Col. 3.12. Jam. 1.20. Ephesians. 4.26,
and put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, cursing: remember the wrath of
man works not the righteousness of God. Be angry for nothing but sin. Remember
a Christ-like Gospel Spirit is a spirit of love, Gal. 5.22.
and peace, meekness, and faithfulness; with these things God and man are well
pleased.

Discharge your Servants with sweetness and love, and do not grudg that they
should have a livelihood as well as you. Send them out of your Family with the
counsel, the good will of a Father, and reckon, one that was a faithful Servant
to you seven years, deserves to be esteemed next a Child ever after. To this
end it would not be amiss, if you give him as good a report as he deserves, to
raise his reputation and credit; and if you help him as far as you are well
able in his setting up, you will not repent it upon a Deathbed, nor at the Day
of Judgment. In old time God did require, That when a Servant served six years,
Deuteronomy. 15 13, 14
he should not be sent away empty; but (says the Text) thou shall furnish him
liberally out of thy flock, out of thy floor, and out of thy wine press, and
that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed thee, thou shall give unto him.
And I know not why this may not be practiced still, where the Master is
wealthy, and able, and the Servant poor, and deserving: Col. 5:13. Romans 13.9,
10 1 These 4.9.
Neither do I know where the Gospel gives us a discharge from the works of
Charity and Mercy.

I come now to Exhort Masters to this work, to perform their Duty. And this I
shall press with a few Motives.

Consider what a Master God is to his Servants; he is most just and righteous
in all his dealings: Isa 45.21. Psalm. 92.15. Jam. 6.3. Psalm. 103.14. Mat. 3.17.
Mic. 7.18. Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 25.4. Job 36.22. Isa. 28.26. Romans 8.26. Psalm.
32.8. Isa. 43.2. Dan. 3.25. Psalm. 23.1. Psalm. 34.10. Psalm. 19.11. Psalm. 31.19,
20
who can accuse him of the least unrighteousness? who can say he has done him
wrong, and that be is a hard Master? Come, let any testify against God, and
make good their charge if they can. Is not he full of pity, and ready to
forgive? how ready to moderate his anger when he is highly provoked? It is not
without good reason that the Prophet says, Who is a God like unto our God? and
he is ready to teach his servants, and to help their infirmities; and if their
work be hard, he does bear the heavier part of it: He is ready to keep them
company, to succor and encourage, and comfort them; he provides all things
needful for them; he delights in the prosperity of his Servants, and loves to
see his Servants thrive; he gives them many a token of his love here: But, O
what great things has he laid up for them? eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive it. Their reward is
exceeding great, sure, and eternal. O what harm would it do you to be like God?
do not your Servants deserve more kindness from you, than you or any other does
from God?

Consider what need your Servants have of your utmost care in the
forementioned particulars: They are young, unexperienced, heady, nay,
naturally ignorant, proud, dead; Children of wrath, enemies to God; every
moment in danger of miscarrying: and at whose hand will their blood be
required, think you, if you do not your duty to warn, reprove, correct them?

Thirdly, Consider how much it will be for your honor: How high an esteem

Fourthly, Consider how pleasing and acceptable this is to God: Such the
Hierocles. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 1.3. Mat. 25.34.
but it is he that gives up his heart first to God, as a warm Sacrifice full of
love, and then his house unto the Lord; this, this is the man that God will
visit, comfort, bless; this is he that ere long shall hear his great Master's
commendation, and have a welcome to Glory.

Fifthly, Consider how much profit and pleasure you shall have here: by your
Prove. 28.20. Prove. 10.6.
your custom increase: And when the careless Master makes have to poverty; a
wise, diligent, and faithful, is in the most likely way to get, improve, and
keep an estate. I might say, what pleasure and comfort a man cannot but take in
his Family, when every one acts regularly in their place.

Sixthly, Consider how much good your faithfulness may do others. Your Servants
may, for ought that I know, call you their Spiritual Fathers, and bless God for
ever for your examples, exhortations, prayers; and your Servants may instruct
your Children, and be frequently instilling one good thing or other into them,
and influence them more than you are aware of. You are a mighty help to poor
Ministers, you help to plow up the ground, and make it fit for the Divine seed,
you pull out the stones, you weed up the roots of bitterness, or at least keep
them from thriving and growing up, you harrow in the good seed, you water it
with your tears, and God will make it fruitful; you pluck up the darnel and the
tares: Of all the persons living, we Ministers are most beholding to good
Masters and good Parents: we beseech you, if you have any love for us, or our
Master either, be faithful in this thing. Epict^tus.
O make us glad, when so many thousands are making us sad with their
wickedness. I might add, your Examples draw others, and make bad Citizens good.

Seventhly, Consider the danger of your neglect, if you be unfaithful: you
shame, and the curse of God for ever, you break the rules of equity and
humanity, you forfeit your reputation, you go the likeliest way to work to
bring upon you dismal calamities in your life, worse at death, and worst of all
after death. Mat. 25.26. Mat. 24.48, 49.50, 51.
O consider this you that forget God, and your duty; and read that Scripture
often you see quoted in the Margent.

I shall now crave leave to expostulate the case with Masters about their duty;
for I am loath to leave you, till I have prevailed with you to set to your work
like Christians. Sirs, you have heard your duty, and what have you to object
against it? can you prove that that which I have desired of you, is not
required by God himself? Have I not proved what I have said, by plain
Scriptures? and does not reason and humanity, as well as Christianity, oblige
you to the putting these duties in practice? have I not laid down many Motives
to press you to your duty? have I not told you what a Master God is to his
Servants? and put you upon being followers of him as dear children? Would it be
any disparagement to you to follow so perfect and unerring an example? Does not
he teach, direct, help, encourage and reward his Servants? Is not he faithful
to his promise, tender, pityful, and easy to be reconciled, and ready to
forgive? And are you not very well pleased with these properties in God? And if
this be amiable in God, why should it not be lovely in you? God humbles
himself to look upon what is done on earth, and is it below you to look upon
and take care of your Servants? What great difference is there, I pray, between
you and them? Are they not of the same mould? And shortly your bones and skuls
will not be distinguished. Why did you take them into your Family, if you
intended to take no more care of them than of a Dog? Was it not a piece of base
falsehood in you to promise and engage what you never intended to perform?
Methinks I have a mind to debate this matter fairly with you, so as to leave
you resolved for your duty, or without any reason or excuse for the neglect of
it. Sirs, Is there any thing of dishonesty in what I have been persuading you
to? Is it a dishonest thing to pray in your Families? to instruct them in the
things of God? to be holy, diligent and faithful? What harm is there in all
this? Would it do you or yours any injury? Would it hinder either your profit
or pleasure? Can godliness, which has the promise of this life, and that which
is to come, undo you? Should that which pleases God displease you? Is it an
unpleasant thing to see the beauty of holiness in your Family, and to have
yours serving God and you faithfully? Is it an unpleasant thing to have God's
commendation and peace? and to have good hopes that all yours are God's, and
shall be delivered from the wrath to come, and be heirs of a Crown of glory? If
you talk of pleasure, no pleasure like them that are in duty, and at the end of
duty. Well now, What have you to say against your duty? You cry pish, this is
the way to be a slave, a mope, a fool. Is it true indeed, that to be enlarged
for God in ones place is a slavery? how come such to be so full of peace and
joy? Is that the state of slaves? no body is about to debar you of moderate
liberty and recreation. But will you call nothing liberty and recreation, but
that which exposes you and yours to ruin? But if you take this course you
shall be poor; if you and your Servants may not lie, cheat, break Sabbaths, you
shall never be able to live. How then come so many honest men (that would not
do any of all these things for a world) to live so well? Were Abraham, Joshua,
David, Cornelius, all such poor men? If diligence, honesty, and holiness undo
men, what will make them? I hope you will not say that cursing, lying, fraud,
idleness, sensuality, and carelessness, are better ways of thriving. Well, once
more, what have you yet to say against what I have been persuading you to? Will
you now without delay bewail your former neglect? and in good earnest set to
your work, like a man, that in some measure knows the power of divine precepts,
the worth of souls, and the greatness of that charge that lies upon you? O
that there were in you such a heart: O that all Masters of Families were
resolved for that which humanity, reason, interest, reputation, and their
comfort call for; as well as the law of God and men oblige them to; What
blessed Families then should we have? What noble Corporations? what glorious
Cities? Might not Jehovah-Shammah be written then upon our Gates, and holiness
to the Lord upon every door? O when shall it once be?

Now in hopes that some honest hearts are affected with what has been spoken,
and are desirous to engage with all their might in their duties, I shall
briefly add a few Helps for the better performance of their duty.

First, Get a heart inflamed with love to God. This will make you much

Secondly, Get a deep sense of the worth of souls upon your spirits. Remember,

Thirdly, Beg of God a spirit of wisdom and government, that you may know 1
Kings 3.9. Jam. 1.17.
You know whence every good and perfect gift comes, and if any man lack wisdom,
they must ask of him that is ready to answer such requests, who will give
liberally, and not upbraid. Beg of God the gift and grace of prayer and
utterance; beg experience and knowledge, and use and improve fruitfully what
talent God has given you already. Hierocles.
A wise man instructed of God is a Priest of God, and the only man fit to do
his work.

Study the Scriptures much. Attend upon a conscientious, powerful Ministry, and
read some practical Books: there you will find the most excellent precepts;
there you will meet with the most commendable presidents; there you have the
most powerful motives to your duty, the most successful helps: In a word, there
you will meet with the assistance of God's Spirit; Psalm. 119.11.
by them you will be kept from any unrighteous thing.

Do as you would be done by; remember what measure you mete to another, Mat.
7.12.
shall be measured to you again. I believe David would scarce have been so
ready to pass such a sentence as he did, if he had well considered who was at
the bar; and it is likely a less punishment than burning might have been
pronounced against Tamar, if Judah had remembered who was the Father of her
Child.

Take heed of pride, selfishness and sensuality. These are the great
make-bates; these make the world so full of confusion and trouble; from hence
come war and fightings; Jam 4.1.
this brings such disorder, misery and sorrow unto Kingdoms, Cities, Houses: if
instead of these we had humility, publick-spiritedness, Prove. 3.10.
temperance, the world would be quickly well mended with us.

Think much upon your account, Death, Judgment, Heaven, Hell, and Eternity. I
had almost said, believe this truly, and think of it frequently, and be
unfaithful if you can. I am persuaded, that every wilful omission of a known
duty, and commission of known sin, has much of atheism and unbelief in it: it
is but yet a little while, and Master and Servant must be equal; death knows no
difference; the worms and rottenness will seize as soon on the one as the
other; and this might a little teach us humanity and moderation. Consider that
account that must be given of our opportunities of service, and every talent we
are entrusted with. Suppose God's Messenger were just ready to knock at your
door, and you were surely to appear before God before to morrow morning, what
meekness, diligence, faithfulness, would you then exercise? and how hardly
brought to do any thing to hazard God's displeasure? how full of good counsel
to every body? why, Luke 16.2. Heb. 9.27. Job 31.14.
how know thou, O man, but this hour may be thy last? This was that which
did not a little prevail with Job to do his duty, and not to despise the cause
of his handmaid: What then, said he, should I do, when God shall rise up? and
when he visits, what shall I answer him? Let death when he comes find you
doing the best work, Ar. Epict. l. 3. c. 15. Antoninus l. 2. n. 2.
and faithful in your place. I shall conclude this with the advice of that
gallant Emperor; Let it be thy earnest care constantly to perform every thing
thou art about with justice to every one, which you may well do, if you go
about every act as your last.

What is the Duty of Servants: and that I shall perform in the same method as I
did before,

1. By giving them some cautionary Directions.

2. Some positive Directions, and pressing these with some Motives, and give
them some Helps for the better performance of their Duty.

1. I shall give Servants some cautionary Directions.

First, Let Servants take heed of pride. This was the sin of the Angels, 1 Timothy
3.6.
this made them rebellious to God. A humble heart is ready for any work or
state that God in his providence calls him to; any thing but sin will down with
a humble man. Remember, pride unfits for the service of God and man, makes one
think himself fitter to command than to be commanded: that makes one go on
heavily with their work, impatient of reproof, ready to answer again, malepert,
saucy, ready to commit other sins to gratify their pride. A proud Servant will
scorn to be catechized, called to an account, or be kept under those bounds
that reason and Religion set. Humility does no body any harm, brings no
dishonor or inconveniency, but is as good a security to reputation, comfort
and profit, as any thing I know.

Secondly, Take heed of disobedience to the lawful commands of your Master.
Whosoever resists, shall receive to himself damnation. Rom 13.2.


Thirdly, Take heed of negligence, idleness, carelessness. By this you rob Mat.
5 26.
Remember what a sentence the wicked slothful Servant must shortly hear.

Fourthly, Take heed of mere eye-service. Is the eye of God nothing to Col.
3.12.
Does not he in plain words forbid this? O how many such Servants be there,
that when their Master is by, are very diligent, but when his back is turned,
then how lazy, how wanton, how careless! Would you be served thus your selves,
if you were Masters? Does God take no notice at all? and if he do, how do you
think he likes such doings? Is it a small matter to make light of his
presence? and if it be so, you shall shortly find to your cost, that his eye
was more than your Master's upon you; and if you will not believe his knowledge,
observation and eye, his hand shall shortly give you such a demonstration of
both, as you shall not be able to slight.

Take heed of Lying. By a lie you deny God's knowledge; you make one fault two;
you make your self an enemy to humane society: that is a sin which is hateful
to every honest man, and abominable to the Lord; the liar shall be shut out of
Heaven, Prove. 6.17. Rev. 21.8.
and have his portion in that Lake that burns for ever. I spare to speak how it
spoils a man's credit, and feeds jealousies in a Master, and makes him scarce
believe you when you speak truth. O! little do Servants think what folly they
are guilty of, by covering their faults with a lie: Little do they think how
dear that sin must cost them either here by deep repentance, or hereafter by
intolerable torments.

Take heed of purloining or imbezeling any part of your Master's goods for your
own use. Tit. 2.10. Luke 16.6.
Meddle with nothing but what is your own, and is allowed you; you would be
loath any one should call you a Thief. I pray then take care of that which will
make you deserve such a name: do not consent to any that are in the least
guilty in that kind; be not partners with a Thief, and make not your self an
accessory to another's wickedness by concealing any unfaithfulness of that
nature in your fellow servants, after you have roundly warned them your self;
eat not of the junkets that sensuality, wantonness and theft has provided. If
you would know what such doings tend to, in a word I may tell you, they pamper
lust many times, end in uncleanness, murder, a prison, a halter; and if that
were all, it were not so bad in comparison; by this you wrong God and man, fear
your conscience, and make way for a world of other sins, and bring speedy and
sure damnation, except a through repentance prevent it.

Take heed of bad companions, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. O how many hopeful youths are blasted by
wicked company? I am not ignorant of the high pretenses of love that such may
have, and what excuses they may palliate their wickedness with: but please
none, to displease God; never count him your friend, nor one that will do you a
kindness, that would lead you to sin, the devil, damnation.

Take heed of disclosing your Master's secrets: do not speak any thing that may
wound his reputation; make no mention of his faults without you are called to
it lawfully, and then not without deep regret and trouble, upon the account of
God's honor and his soul. Some Servants make nothing of prating against their
Masters and Mistresses behind their backs, little considering that this is a
sin that God will not overlook: is this ingenuous? Is this like to mend him,
and do him any good? Can you design God's glory by it? How do you think your
Master will like it, if it should come to his ears? This is neither pleasing to
God nor man.

Ninthly, Take heed of murmuring, discontent, and repining: Some Servants
remember that patience, nay, thankfulness, Matthew. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21.
would much better become you than murmuring; for if when you do well, and
suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God: for even
hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps.

Lastly, Take heed of sinning to please your Master: If a Master command Master
or Mistress should be so wicked as to put you upon sinning, let Joseph's answer
be yours, How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? If your
Master put you upon telling of lies, cheating, using of false weights or
measures, breaking the Sabbath, or any thing that is clearly against God's
honor, and your souls, you must first with all the humility and meekness you
can for your soul, plead with him, urge the commands of God, the fear that you
are in of displeasing of him, and wounding your own conscience; and if you
cannot by such means pacify him, tell him meekly of his danger in putting you
upon sin, and that, Dan 3.18.
come on it what will, you neither can nor will obey him.

I come now to lay down Servants duty positively.

First, Honor your Masters; Labor to get and keep a true valuation of observe
what is excellent in them, remember your relation to them, their care over you;
let this put you upon praying for them, and being affectionately concerned for
them: let your words be always humble, meek, and obliging; 1 Timothy 6.1. 1 Pet.
2.18.
let your behavior be with all the respect and sweetness you can. Remember
what counsel the Apostle gives you in this thing, Let as many servants as are
under the yoke count their own Masters worthy of all honor; be very loath to
displease them; fear to offend, lest in so doing you either offend God your
self, or cause them to do it. I have sometimes thought that carriage of
Naaman's Servants toward their peevish and unreasonable Master very well worth
others imitation: 2 Kings 5.13.
The Text says, His Servants came near, and spoke unto him, and said, my
father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have
done it? how much rather then when he says, wash and be clean? Love, fear, and
honor your Master; in so doing you please God and them too.

Obey your Masters sincerely, cheerfully, universally, and constantly, as long
as you stand in that relation to them: you must do what you do for your
Masters, as you would do it for your self; your Master's concerns must be
looked upon as your own. Col. 3 22.
Yea, whatsoever you do, you must do it heartily, as to the Lord; out of
Conscience and respect to God's command and honor: a flattering outside
service without the heart, love, and good will, is neither acceptable to God,
or man. Let your obedience also be cheerful; go not about your work with an ill
Will. Cheerfulness would not be a little helpful to your self; your work and
time would then seem nothing in comparison; Ephesians. 6.7.
God loves a cheerful giver, a cheerful worker, a cheerful Sufferer: and I
believe no Master but reckons himself better served by him that goes cheerfully
and nimbly about his business, than one that does obey but with a sour
discontented look, and a heavy countenance.

By this you cannot but win upon your Masters, and even compel them to love you,
speak well of you, and do well by you. Let your obedience also be universal,
that is, in all things that God gives you leave. It is not for you to pick and
choose, nor dispute and grumble. Some Servants are for easy, Col. 3.22.
pleasant, and more honorable works, and here they may be commanded; but if
they be at any time set about what likes not their proud, lazy, ungodly
humor, they are ready to put it off upon another; it may be to excuse it with
a Lie; perhaps, like rebels, flatly to deny obedience. If a Master put him upon
strict Observation of the Lord's day, upon learning his Catechism, and minding
his soul, then his base heart begins to rise, as if his Master did
undervalue him, when he put him upon the service of God; as if he judged it a
liberty and privilege to serve the Devil; and as if it were an unsufferable
injury to be commanded to escape the wrath to come, and a drudgery to be called
upon to look diligently after the securing of holiness and happiness: Such as
these look as if they were ripe for Hell, and would not be long before they
would come thither: O that none of you that hear and read these lines may be
found in this number: think nothing below you but sin: your disobedience cannot
be without sin, if your Master command not a sin. Lastly, let your obedience be
constant, it must begin and end with your relation to your Master.

Servant toward his Master is faithfulness. Ingenuity calls for it: Tit. 2.10.
he is unworthy of trust that does not answer it. The Master reposeth much
confidence in his Servant, and that should oblige him to the greatest fidelity.
You must be faithful in word and deed. Speak well of your Master behind his
back, and keep up his reputation and credit; and if you cannot do that without
falsness to God, if you can say no good by him, say no harm, except lawfully
called to it; and if you do perceive your Master's carelessness and wickedness
makes him go down the wind, and neglect his duty, it may be faithfulness in you
humbly to advise him in some such language as this: Sir, I entreat you give me
leave in a few words to express my true affection, respect, and faithfulness to
you, and for God's sake take it not unkindly at the hands of your poor Servant,
if I acquaint you with that which I have with regret of heart observed too long
in you; many a good Customer we lose for want of your presence in the Shop,
your frequent absence makes us have little to do, your credit (to my sorrow God
knows I speak it) begins to grow much lower than it was wont to be, my Mistress
takes on heavily, we have but few choice wares, and no cash, and little credit
to fetch more, and we cannot hold long at this rate; I beseech you Sir leave off
your company-keeping, and look into your Books, and consider how things be: O
how loath am I to see you or yours do otherwise than well! Sir, I beseech you be
not angry. I come not to teach you, but to entreat you, and humbly to desire
your serious consideration of what I shall further crave leave to speak; Sir, I
beseech you forget not us your poor Servants; we want your help in your Family,
your instructions, your prayers, your holy examples would be no small comfort
to us: In thus doing I am persuaded God would bless you, your trade and credit
might soon be recovered, we should serve you with joy, and bless God for you,
and you and yours fare the better for ever. Now who but a mad man, or incarnate
Devil, could choose but relish such sweet counsel as this, though from a
Servant. Then you must be faithful in your deeds: give nothing away without
your Master's leave; if you will be giving, give what is your own, give where
and when God commands you, and spare not: labor to preserve and increase your
Master's estate all you can by good and lawful means: For this is that which is
commanded by Christ in the Parable, has his gracious approbation and plentiful
reward, Well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a
little, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Your faithfulness must be further expressed by endeavoring all you can, the
good of your Master's children: labor to instill into them good principles,
encourage them in the learning their Books and Catechism, and obedience to
their Parents, do what you can to prejudice them against sin, and by your sweet
examples to be in love with God and godliness betimes. I might add also, Zech.
5.2, 3. Tit. 2.10.
it is no small expression of faithfulness to do all the good you can for your
Fellow Servants; give them good counsel, pray for them, help them all you may,
and carry it so before them, that they may easily discern an excellency in you,
and that you have a loving design upon them, and mean no more harm by all you
speak or do, but God's glory, your Master's profit, and comfort, and their
souls salvation.

Fourthly, Be very diligent in your Master's business; dispatch what he sets
slothful Servant is a wicked Servant: by idleness and carelessness you may do
your Master more wrong in a day, than you may make up in a twelve-moneth.
Besides, you must remember your strength and time is your Master's, and all of
it must be improved for him, except so much as God calls for, or your Master
gives you.

I come now to exhort Servants to the performance of these duties, and that I
may, if possible, prevail, I shall lay before them a few Motives to enforce
this duty.

do conscientiously perform the forementioned duties, you will bring no little
honor to your great Master which is in heaven; you will show the power of his
precepts, the beauty and excellency of his laws, and make Religion to be
thought well of: by this you will leave a strange conviction of the worth of
Grace upon the conscience of your Master. Whereas if you should be faulty in
any of the forementioned particulars, if you make any kind of profession, it
is ten to one, if God and Religion do not presently suffer for your fault, Is
this your Saintship? and it may be all the people of God may be railed at and
wounded for your sake: for God's sake be faithful in the performance of your
duty, and in so doing you will put to silence those that may condemn you, and
cause them to glorify your Father which is in heaven.

Consult your own interest here, it will be more in your way, than you (it may
be) at first imagine. I might tell you what respect and love it must needs
beget in the heart of your Master, and when he has opportunity, he cannot but
speak well of you: it will bring you in a more considerable revenue of peace
and content; by this you discharge your duty, and your conscience may have
peace in it; you draw others eyes and love, and make you a lasting interest,
which in time may signify more than at present you are aware of.

your time is but short. Suppose you suffer a little hardship, Seven years will
not last always: yet a little while, and you must have your liberty, and then
you and your Master may be Companions. Methinks the thoughts of your time being
out should make you the more patient and faithful; remember that the longest
time is but short, and ere long it must be furled together, and then it will be
nothing, who is Master, and who is Servant, but who is faithful.

reason, honesty, and ingenuity, do all call upon you to be faithful, and
perform your duty. Why should your Master give you meat, drink, clothing,
wages, or a calling for nothing? does not honesty and common justice require
that there should be some proportion between what he gives you, and you him?
did you not promise and engage to be a faithful Servant? do not your Indentures
bind you to it? does not ingenuity oblige you to be faithful to him, who has
been ready to take care of you in sickness and in health, and to tender you
next a child? I might add, the command of God requires it; but because I hinted
that in the beginning, I shall not here repeat it.

how great a reward you shall have in the other world; your labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord; there shall be a sure reward to the righteous. Suppose
your Master give you not that encouragement that your fidelity does deserve;
yet be not disheartened, you have a Master who is more ready to take notice of a
little good in you, than a great deal of bad, I mean the great God. Therefore
be of good cheer, Col. 3.24.
knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for
ye serve the Lord Christ. Yet a little while, and he will right the wronged,
recompense the diligent, reward the faithful. You shall ere long know you
served a Master that was most kind, generous, and noble. Shortly you shall not
be called Servants, but Friends; not Friends only, but children; not children
only, but heirs, joint-heirs with the Lord Jesus: eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what wages
our great Master will give to all that make it their business to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward man, and that do faithfully
fill up their relation to their earthly and heavenly Master with duty.

Consider the danger of not performing of your duty as a Servant; by this
relatively good, is not really good; a bad Servant is never a good Christian:
by this you give us just reason to fear that you are Servants of the Devil. I
spare to speak of your reputation, for I am ready to think, that if all other
arguments and motives have lost their cogency, that cannot have much power: know
this, if you be not faithful to your Master, God will judge you as unfaithful to
himself, and woe be to that Servant whom God himself shall call wicked and
slothful, what follows, but take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
outer darkness, there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth?

And now Sirs, What will you do? Are you resolved for your duty or no? Have I
been all this while beating the air? Have I not showed you what the Lord your
God requires of you? Have I desired any thing of you but what I have given you
Scripture-warrant for? and is Scripture nothing with you? Can you prove that I
am mistaken, and lay heavier burdens than God lays upon you? why then be at the
trouble to turn to the Scriptures you see quoted in the Margent. I dare not
charge any thing upon you but what I have received of the Lord, and are you
angry with God's commands? Dare you impeach your Maker of unjustice? What harm
is there in any thing that he enjoins you? Could you mend his Laws, and make
them better? Which of his prohibitions can you find fault with? Are you
displeased that God forbids pride and arrogance? Would you indeed have leave to
be like the Devil? Do you desire liberty to damn your self, and bring confusion
into the house where you dwell? What a sweet world should we have, if every
proud fool might have his will? What should Masters do with Servants, if their
commands should have no power upon them? Who but a mad man will judge idleness,
carelessness and prodigality, commendable qualities in a Servant? Is it so
unreasonable a thing for a Master to expect something to be done when his back
is turned, as well as when he is present? What commerce could be carried on
between man and man without truth? Are you desirous that God should give you
leave to lie, and are you willing to have it known that you are of this mind?
Is it a slavery to have your hands tied from picking and stealing? Would you
have a license to steal, and a badg of your privilege that every one might
read? Are wicked profligate wretches the best companions? Can you desire their
company in the other world? Is backbiting threatened by God in his Word, and
shall it be excused in you? How would you like one that were always grumbling,
and never content nor pleased? Is this temper hateful in another, and lovely in
you? Is there any wrong done you, when God bids you have a care of hazarding
your soul to get your Master a groat? Which of all the Cautions that I have
given you, are really prejudicial to your true credit, pleasure, or profit?
Well, Epictetus.
I perceive you have nothing, nay I am sure you can have nothing justly to
object against them; And dare you now venture still to be proud, disobedient,
idle? Do Sinners venture on still, in spite of Master, Minister, and the divine
prohibitions; but be it upon thy peril, for as sure as God lives he will call
you to judgment. Will half an hours junketting make amends for the loss of a
soul for ever? What is there in all the duties that are commanded that you have
any thing to object against? Are you troubled that your Master must be
honored? Should we not have sweet doings if Masters and Servants were fellows?
If you your self should ever live to be a Master, tell me plainly, how would
you like it to be slighted by your Servant? Is Obedience a word you mislike?
What is a Servant good for without obedience? What is he but a burden to the
earth, worse than the dung it self? Are faithfulness and diligence displeasing
to you? And I pray, who is pleased with unfaithfulness and idleness, but wicked
ones, fools, and the Devil? And are such as these to be pleased rather than
God, Parents, Masters? Well once more, What have you to say against your duty,
why it may not be practiced speedily? Have you weightier Arguments against it,
than I have for it? Come, produce your strong reason, and show your self a man.
Are the precepts of the mighty God nothing? Are his injunctions of no validity
at all? Are you not at all concerned for his honor? Is the gratifying a cursed
lust a matter of greater importance and necessity than God's glory? So little
he will take care of himself, and raise him honor out of your shame and ruin,
if you regard not God. Have you no respect to your self? Will your peace,
reputation and profit, prevail nothing with you? Is the quiet of the Family,
the glory of a City, the prosperity and safety of a Kingdom, a small matter
with you? Why all this seems in some measure wrapped up in Servants fidelity.
Have the promises and rewards of the great Master little efficacy? Is Heaven,
glory and eternal happiness, worth nothing? The truth of it is, if all this be
nothing, I know not what is something. But what do you think of judgment,
wrath, and Hell? If the former Motives signify little, does this so too? Then
I must conf^ss I know not what to add more; but you must take your course, and
take what follows: but know this, that you were warned, and counseled, and
pleaded with, till you had nothing to say, or if you had, I am sure nothing to
purpose, and that shortly you will be silenced. But God forbid that all
Servants should be of this mind, some, yea many, I hope better of, though I
thus speak; but the general complaint that sounds in our ears, makes us judge
such reasonings as these not altogether needless. And now for the sakes of some
that I hope resolve for duty, I shall add a Help or two for the performance of
their duty, and so I shall conclude.

good Servants, labor to be Christ's Freemen. Cast off the service of Satan,
1 Cor. 7.22. Romans 6.18.
and be no longer commanded by him: remember how cruel, how false, how
unreasonable a Master he is; consider what can he pay his Servants in at last;
and know it is impossible to serve two contrary Masters at once. Be not servants
to your lusts; cast them off as things that will not profit, and instead
thereof yield your selves to the Lord, and serve him with all your might; and
so be holy as he is holy, in all manner of conversation, and the grace of God
will teach you to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live holily,
righteously and soberly in this present world; that will teach you to
reverence, obey, to be faithful and diligent to your earthly Master, as knowing
your labors shall not be in vain in the Lord. If the fear of God be but in
your hearts, it will teach you wisdom, make you hate every evil way, and to do
that which is honest and just to your Master. A good Christian cannot be a bad
Servant.

Secondly, Be not a stranger to the Bible. When others are foolishly squandring
Epictetuc.
I remember it was the advice of an excellent Moralist, that we should often in
our actions think what Socrates, Zeno, Plato, or some wise Philosopher, would
do in such a case. I had rather you would think often, what would such a one as
Eliezer the Servant of Abraham do in such a case; read how he carried himself,
how naturally he was concerned for his Masters interest, how diligently,
faithfully and prudently he goes to work, how importunately he addresses
himself to God, and how heartily he prays for prosperity and success in his
Masters business, how much he advances his Masters credit, and how naturally
concerned for his Masters Son, and with what integrity and expedition he
dispatcheth his business; go you and do likewise. The example of Joseph and
Obadiah, who were good in bad houses, are well worth your consideration: Mat.
8.9
I might add the example of the Centurions Servant, whom his Master gives this
character of, That he was as ready to obey as he was to command. I shall add an
example or two more, though you find them not in the Scripture, yet they are
according to the Scripture; one of them I knew well: A certain Servant, that
it is probable was converted by the Father, was so faithful, diligent, lively,
full of spiritual discourse and importunate prayers for the children and
family, that it proved a means of the conversion of some of them; here is a
Servant worth gold! Another Servant I knew good for Earth and Heaven too, that
after other endeavors upon a Fellow Servants, spent some time at midnight to
pray for him, and being very importunate, the voice was heard into the next
Chamber, where he lay, at which, out of curiosity he rose in his shirt to
listen, and heard one pray for him, by which prayer he was converted. Study
therefore the Scriptures, and present the examples you find there to your
imitation.

Thirdly, Get a strong love to your Master. Love will put you upon any work;

Fourthly, Be humble, meek and patient. The humble man thinks nothing him which
is his duty; and if to do his duty be to be vile, Mat. 18.4. 1 Pet. 1.19.
he will yet be vilerstill. The humble God will guide, exalt and save. Humility
displeases none but the Devil.

Fifthly, Be much in good company, and hearken to their advice. Be constant in
prayer, and beg of God to make you faithful, and be conscientious in your
attendance upon a powerful faithful Ministry. In a word, live much in the
thought of your great account, and in thus doing, I question not but you will
find grace to be faithful to God and man, and be accepted of your Master here,
and rewarded by God hereafter.

Thus I have according to my poor ability set the duty of Masters and Servants
before them. O that there were a general resolution in both to put these duties
into practice! O then what a blessed reformation should we soon have? How soon
would our great troubles cease? How soon would our complaints be silenced, and
our sorrows be turned into joy? O that all sorts and degrees of men would but
reform one, and fill up their particular places and relations with duty! Then O
what happy times, what happy days should we yet enjoy? Christians, let us join
in our prayers and utmost endeavors for the promoting this glorious work, and
then our God would bless us, and we should bless him for ever.

The Sinfulness and Cure of Thoughts. Sermon. XIX.
Genesis 6.5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.


I Know not a more lively description in the whole Book of God of the Natural
corruption derived from our first Parents, than these words; Wherein you have
the Ground of that grief, which lay so close to God's heart, v. 6. and the
Resolve thereupon to destroy man, and whatsoever was serviceable to that
ungrateful creature. That must be highly offensive, which moved God to repent
of a fabric so pleasing to him at the creation: every stone in the building
being at the first laying pronounced good by Him, and upon a review at the
finishing the whole, He left it the same character with an Emphasis; Genesis 1.31.
very good. There was not a pin in the whole frame, but was Eccles. 3.11.
very beautiful, and being wrought by infinite Psalm. 104.24. (...). Eusebius.
Praeparo. Evang.
wisdom, it was a very comely piece of Art. What then should provoke him to
repent of so excellent a work? The wickedness of man, which was great in the
earth. How came it to pass that man's wickedness should swell so high? Whence
did it spring? Fom the imagination. Though these might be sinful imaginations,
might not the superior faculty preserve it self untainted? Alas! That was
defiled; The imagination of the thoughts was evil. But though running thoughts
might wheel about in his mind, yet they might leave no stamp or impression upon
the will and affections. Yes, they did, The imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was evil. Surely all could not be under such a blemish: Were there not
now and then some pure slashes of the mind? No not one; Every imagination. But
granting that they were evil, might there not be some fleeting good mixed with
them: as a poisonous toad has something useful? No, Only evil. Well, but there
might be some intervals of thinking, and though there was no good thought, yet
evil ones were not always rouling there. Yes, they were Continually; not a
moment of time that man was free from them. One would scarce imagine such an
inward nest of wickedness, but God has affirmed it; and if any man should deny
it, his own heart would give him the lie.

Let us now consider the words by themselves.

(...) Imagination, properly signifies figmentum, of (...) to afflict, press or
form a thing by way of compression. And thus it is a metaphor taken from a
potters framing a vessel, and extends to whatsoever is framed inwardly in the
heart, or outwardly in the work. It Is usually taken by the Jews for that
fountain of sin within us: Alii rect^us dicunt non esse (...) n^si in malum.
Merc. in loc.
Mercer tells us it is always used in an evil sense: But there are two places
(if no more) wherein it is taken in a good sense, Isa. 26.3. (...)
Whose mind is stayed; and 1 Chronicles. 29.18. where David prays, that a
disposition to offer willingly to the Lord might be preserved in the
Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of the people. Indeed for the most
part it is taken for the evil imaginations of the heart, as Deuteronomy. 31.21. Psalm.
103.14. etc. (...) Maimon. More Nevoch. Par. 3. c. 22. Amam. Censur. in locum.
The Jews make a double figment, a good and bad; and fancy two Angels assigned
to man, one bad, another good: which Maimonides interprets to be nothing else
but natural corruption, and reason. This word imagination being joined with
thoughts, implies not only the complete thoughts, but the first motion or
formation of them, to be evil.

The word Heart is taken variously in Scripture. It signifies properly that
inward member, which is the seat of the vital spirits: But sometimes it
signifies, 1. The understanding and mind, Psalm. 12.2. With a double heart do
they speak: i. e. with a double mind, Prove. 8.5. 2. For the Will, 2 Kings
10.30. All that is in my heart; i. e. in my Will and purpose. 3. For the
affections; as, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart: i. e. with
all thy affections. 4. For conscience, 2 Samuel 24.5. David's heart smote him: i.
e. his Conscience checked him. But Heart here is used for the whole soul,
because (according to Pareus his note) the soul is chiefly seated in the heart,
especially the Will, and the affections her attendants; because when any
affection stirs, the chief motion of it is felt in the heart. So that by the
imaginations of the thoughts of the heart are here meant all the inward
operations of the soul, which play their part principally in the heart: whether
they be the acts of the understanding, the resolutions of the Will, or the
blustrings of the affections.

Only evil] The Vulgar mentions not the exclusive particle (...), and so
enervates the sense of the place. But our Neighbor Translations either express
it as we do, Only; or to that sense, that they were Certainly, or no other than
evil.

(...)
Continually] The Hebrew, All the day, or every day. Some Translations express
it verbatim as the Hebrew. Not a moment of a man's life, wherein our hereditary
corruption does not belch out its froth, even from his youth, as God expounds
it, Genesis 8.21. to the end of his life.

Whether we shall refer the general wickedness of the heart in the Text to that
age, as some of the Jesuits do; because after the Deluge God does not seem so
severely to censure it: Or rather take the exposition the learned Rivet gives
of it, referring the first part of the Verse [and God saw that the wickedness
of man was great in the earth] to those times: Genesis 8.21. Rivet. in Genesis
exercit. 51.
and the second part to the universal corruption of man's nature, and the root
of all sin in the world. The Jesuits argument will not be very valid, for the
extenuation of original corruption, from Genesis 8.21. For if man's imaginations
be evil from his youth, what is it but in another phrase to say they were so
continually? But suppose it be understood of the iniquity of that age, may it
not be applied to all ages of the world? David complains of the wickedness of
his own time, Psalm. 14.3. Psalm. 5.9. Yet St. Paul applies it to all mankind,
Romans 3.12. Indeed it seems to be a description of man's natural pravity, by
God's words after the deluge, Genesis 8.21. which are the same in sense, to show
that man's nature after that destroying judgment, was no better than before.
Every word is emphatical, exaggerating man's defilement; Wherein consider the
Universality 1. Of the subject, Every man. 2. Of the act, Every thought. 3. Of
the qualification of the act, Only evil. 4. Of the time, Continually.


The words thus opened afford us this Proposition:

That the thoughts, and inward operations of the souls of men, are naturally
universally evil, and highly provoking.

Some by cogitation mean not only the acts of the understanding, but those of
the will, yea and the sense too. But indeed that which we call cogitation, or
thought, is the work of the mind; imagination, of the fancy. Carts. Princip.
Philos. Part. 1. Sect. 9.
It Is not properly thought, till it be wrought by the understanding; because
the fancy was not a power designed for thinking, but only to receive the images
impressed upon the sense, and concoct them, that they might be fit matter for
thoughts; and so it is the Exchequer, wherein all the acquisitions of sense are
deposited, and from thence received by the intellective faculty. So that
thoughts are inchoative in the fancy, consummative in the understanding,
terminative in all the other faculties. Thought first engenders opinion in the
mind; thought spurs the will to consent or dissent; it is thought also which
Spirits the affections.

I will not spend time to acquaint you with the methods of their generation.
Every man knows he has a thinking faculty, and some inward conceptions, which
he calls thoughts, he knows that he thinks, and what he thinks; though he be
not able to describe the manner of their formation in the womb, or remember it
any more than the species of his own face in a glass.

In this discourse let us first see what kind of thoughts are sins.

1. Negatively. A simple apprehension of sin is not sinful. Thoughts receive
not a sinfulness barely from the object: That may be unlawful to be acted,
which is not unlawful to be thought of. Though the will cannot will sin without
guilt, yet the understanding may apprehend sin without guilt; for that does no
more contract a pollution by the bare apprehension, than the eye does by the
reception of the species of a loathsome object. Thoughts are morally evil, when
they have a bad principle, want a due end, and converse with the object in a
wrong manner. Angels cannot but understand the offense which displaced the
Apostate Stars from heaven; but they know not sin cognitione practica:
Glorified Saints may consider their former sins, to enhance their admirations
of pardoning mercy. Christ himself must needs understand the matter of the
Devils temptation; yet Satan's suggestions to his thoughts were as the vapors
of a jakes mixed with the Sunbeams, without a defilement of them. Yea God
himself, who is infinite purity, knows the Object of his own acts, which are
conversant about sin; as his holiness in forbidding it, wisdom in permitting,
mercy in pardoning, and justice in punishing. But thoughts of sin in Christ,
Angels, and glorified Saints, are accompanied with an abhorrency of it, without
any combustible matter in them to be kindled by it. As our thoughts of a divine
object are not gracious, unless we love and delight in it; so a bare
apprehension of sin is not positively criminal, unless we delight in the object
apprehended. As a sinful Object does not render our thoughts evil, so a divine
object does not render them good; because we may think of it with undue
circumstances, as unseasonably, coldly, etc. And thus there is an imperfection
in the best thought a regenerate man has; for though I will suppose he may
have a sudden ejaculation without the mixture of any positive impurity, and a
simple apprehension of sin with a detestation of it, yet there is a defect in
each of them; because it is not with that raised affection to God, or intense
abhorrency of sin, as is due from us to such objects, and whereof we were
capable in our primitive state.



First motions; Those unfleched thoughts, and single threads, before a
multitude of them come to be twisted and woven into a discourse: such as skip
up from our natural corruption, and sink down again as fish in a river. These
are sins though we consent not to them; because, though they are without our
will, they are not against our nature; but spring from an inordinate frame, of
a different hue from what God implanted in us. How can the first sprouts be
good, if the root be evil? Not only the thought formed, but the very formation,
or first imagination is evil. Voluntariness is not necessary to the essence of
a sin, though it be to the aggravation of it. It Is not my Will or Knowledge,
Genesis 19.33, 35
which does make an act sinful, but God's prohibition. Lot's incest was not
ushered by any deliberate consent of his Will; yet who will deny it to be a
sin, since he should have exercised a severer command over himself, than to be
overtaken with drunkenness, which was the occasion of it? Original sin is not
effective voluntary in infants; because no act of the will is exerted in an
infant about it: Yet it is voluntary subjective; because it does inhaerere
voluntati. These motions may be said to be voluntary negatively, because the
Will does not set bounds to them, and exercise that sovereign dominion over the
operations of the soul, which it ought to do, and wherewith it was at it is
first creation invested. Besides though the Will does not immediately consent
to them, yet it consents to the occasions, which administer such motions; and
therefore, according to the rule, that causa causae est causa causati, may be
justly charged upon our score.

2. Voluntary thoughts, which are the blossoms of these motions. Such that have
no lawful object, no right end, not governed by reason, eccentrick, disorderly
in their motions, and like the jarring strings of an untuned Instrument. The
meanest of these floating phancies are sins; because we act not in the
production of them, as rational creatures: and what we do without reason, we do
against the law of our creation, which appointed reason for our guide, and the
understanding to be (...), the governing power in our souls.

These may be reduced to three heads,

1. In regard of God. 2. Of our selves. 3. Of others.

I. In regard of God.

1. Cold thoughts of God; When no affection is raised in us by them. When act
or manner of thinking, not in the object thought of; And thus these thoughts
have a folly and vanity in them. They are also sinful in a regenerate man, in
respect of the faintness of the understanding, not acting with that vigor, and
spriteliness, nor with those raised and spiritual affections, which the worth
of such an object does require.

2. Debasing Conceptions, unworthy of God. Such are called in the Heathen Vain
Imaginations Romans 1.21: (...) their reasonings about God.
; who as they glorified not God as God, so they did not think of God as God,
according to the dignity of a Deity. Such a mental Idolatry may be found in us,
when we dress up a God according to our own humors, humanize Him, and ascribe
to Him what is grateful to us, though never so base Psalm. 50.21. Thou
thoughtest that I was altogether sach an one as thy sel^. Exodus 15.11. Isai.
6.3. Psalm. 89.35.
. Which is a grosser degrading of the Deity, than any representation of him by
material Images: because it is directly against his Holiness, which is His
glory, applauded chiefly by the Angels; and an attribute, which He swears by,
as having the greatest regard to the honor of it. Such an imagination Adam
seemed to have, conceiting God to be so mean a being that he, a creature not of
a days standing, could mount to an equality of knowledge with Him.

3. Accusing thoughts of God: Either of his mercy, as in despair; or of his
Cain Genesis 4 13.
. Of His providence: Adam conceited, yea and charged God's providence to be an
occasion of his crime Genesis 3 12. The woman whom thou gave to be with me.
: His posterity are no juster to God, when they accuse Him as a negligent
Governor of the world, Psalm. 94.11. The Lord knows the thoughts of man that
they are vanity. What thoughts? Injurious thoughts of His providence, v. 7. as
though God were ignorant of men's actions: or, at best, but an idle Spectator
of all the unrighteousness done in the world, not to regard it though He did
see it. And they in the Prophet were of the same stamp, That said in their
hearts, the Lord will not do good, neither will He do evil. From such kind of
thoughts most of the Injuries from oppressors, and murmurings in the oppressed,
do arise.

4. Curious thoughts about things too high for us. It Is the frequent business
Genesis 3.5. God knows that your eyes shall be opened.
in the same manner as the Serpent did to our first parents, of envying us an
intellectual happiness. Yet how do all Adam's posterity long after this
forbidden fruit!

In regard of our selves; Our thoughts are proud, self-confident,
self-applauding, foolish, covetous, anxious, unclean; And what not?

Ambitious: The aspiring thought of the first man runs in the veins of his
posterity. God took notice of such Strains in the King of Babylon, when he said
in his heart, I will exalt my throne above the Stars of God: I will ascend
above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most High Isa. 14.13, 14.
. No less a charge will they stand under, that settle themselves upon their own
bottom, establish their own righteousness, and will not submit to the
righteousness of God's appointment Romans 10.3.
The most forlorn beggar has sometimes thoughts vast enough to grasp an Empire.

Self-confident: Edom's thoughts swelled him into a vain confidence of a
perpetual prosperity. Obad. 3. That says in his heart, who shall bring me down
to the ground.
And David sometimes said in the like state, that he should never be moved.

3. Self-applauding, Either in the vain remembrances of our former prosperity,
or ascribing our present happiness to the dexterity of our own wit. Such
flaunting thoughts had Nebuchadnezzar at the consideration of his settling
Babylon the head, and Metropolis of so great an Empire. Nothing more ordinary
among men, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the
house of the Kingdom, etc.
than overweening reflections upon their own parts, and Romans 12.3.
thinking of themselves above what they ought to think.

4. Ungrounded Imaginations of the events of things, either present, or future:
Such wild conceits, like Meteors bred of a few vapors, do often frisk in our
minds. 1. Of things present: It Is likely Eve foolishly imagined she had brought
forth the Messiah, when she brought forth a murderer, Genesis 4.1. I have (as in
the Hebrew) believing (as some interpret) that she had brought forth the
promised seed. (...)
And such a brisk conceit Lamech seems to have had of Noah Genesis 5.29.
. 2. Of things to come, either in bespeaking false hopes, or antedating
improbable griefs. Such are the jolly thoughts we have of a happy Estate in
reversion, which yet we may fall short of. Haman's heart leaped at the King's
question, Est. 6.6.
(What shall be done to the man whom the King delights to honor?) phancying
himself the mark of his Princes favor, without thinking that a halter should
soon choke his ambition. Or perplexing thoughts at the fear of some trouble,
which is not yet fallen upon us, and perhaps never may. How did David torture
his Soul by his unbelieving fears, 1 Samuel 27.1. And David said in his heart,
etc.
that he should one day perish by the hand of Saul? These forestalling thoughts
do really affect us: we often feel caprings in our Spirits upon imaginary
hopes, and shiverings, upon conceited fears. These pleasing impostures, and
self-afflicting suppositions are signs either of an idle, or indigent mind,
that has no will to work, or only rotten materials to work upon.

Immoderate thoughts about lawful things: When we exercise our minds too thick,
and with a fierceness of affection above their merit: not in subserviency to
God, or mixing our cares with dependencies on Him. Worldly concerns may quarter
in our thoughts; but they must not possess all the room, and thrust Christ into
a manger: Neither must they be of that value with us, as the law was with
David, sweeter than the honey or the honey comb.

III. In regard of others; All thoughts of our neighbor against the rule Such
that imagine evil in their hearts, God hates Zach. 8.17
. These principally are 1. Envious, when we torment our selves with others
fortunes. Such a thought in Cain, upon God's acceptance of his brother's
sacrifice, Genesis 4.5. 1 Timothy 6.4. 2 Cor. 13.5.
was the Prologue to, and foundation of, that cursed murder. 2. Censorious,
stigmatizing every freckle in our brother's conversation. 3. Jealous, and evil
surmises contrary to charity, which thinks no evil. 4. Revengeful, Est. 5.13.
Such made Haman take little content in his preferments, as long as Mordecai
refused to court him. And Esau thought of the days of mourning for his father,
Genesis 27 41. Esau said in his heart, etc.
that he might be revenged for his brother's deceits.

There is no sin committed in the world, but is hatched in one or other of
these thoughts. But beside these, there are a multitude of other volatile
conceits, like swarms of gnats buzzing about us, and preying upon us, and as
frequent in their successions, as the curlings of the water upon a small breath
of wind, one following another close at the heels. The mind is no more
satisfied with thoughts, than the first matter is with forms; continually
shifting one for another, and many times the nobler for the baser: as when upon
the putrefaction of a human body part of the Matter is endued with the form of
Vermin. Such changeable things are our minds, in leaving that which is good for
that which is worse, when they are enveigled by an active fancy, and Bedlam
affections. This madness is in the hearts of men while they live, Eccles 9.3.
and starts a thousand frenzies in a day. At the best our fancy is like a
Carrier's bag, stuffed with a world of Letters, having no dependence upon one
another; some containing business, and others nothing but froth.

In all these thoughts there is a further guilt in three respects, viz. 1.
Delight, 2. Contrivance, 3. Reacting.

1. Delight in them. The very tickling of our fancy by a sinful motion, though
without a formal consent, is a sin; because it is a degree of complacency in an
unlawful object. When the mind is pleased with the subject of the thought, as
it has a tendency to some sensual pleasure, and not simply in the thought it
self, as it may enrich the understanding with some degree of knowledge. The
thought indeed of an evil thing may be without any delight in the evil of it;
as Philosophers delight in making experiments of poisonous Creatures, without
delighting in the poison, as it is a noxious quality. We may delightfully think
of sin without guilt, not delighting in it as sin, but as God by his wise
providential ordering extracts Glory to himself, and good to his Creature. In
this case, though a sinful act be the material object of this pleasure, yet
it is not the formal object: because the delight is not terminated in the sin,
but in God's ordering the event of it to his own glory. But an Inclination to a
sinful motion, as it gratifies a corrupt affection, is sin: because every
inclination is a malignant tincture upon the affections, including in its own
nature an aversion from God, and testifying sin to be an agreeable object. And
without question, there can be no inclination to any thing, without some degree
of pleasure in it: because it is impossible we can incline to that, which we
have a perfect abhorrency of. Hence it follows, that every inclination to a
sinful motion is Consensus inchoatus, or a Consent in Embryo: though the act
may prove abortive. If we think of any unlawful thing with pleasure, and
imagine it either in fieri, or facto esse, it brings a guilt upon us, as if it
were really acted. As when upon the consideration of such a man's being my
enemy, I fancy robbers rifling his goods, and cutting his throat, and rejoice
in this revengeful thought, as if it were really done, it is a great sin:
because it testifies an approbation of such a butchery, if any man had will and
opportunity to commit it. And though it be a supposition, yet the act of the
mind is really the same it would be, if the sinful act I think of were
performed. Or when a man conditionally thinks with himself, I would steal such
a man's goods, or kill such a person, if I could escape escape the punishment
attending it, it is as if he did rob and murder him: because there is no
impediment in his will to the commission of it, but only in the outward
circumstances. Nay though it be a mere Ens intentionale, or rationis, which is
the object of the thought: yet the act of the mind is real, and as significant
of the inclination of the Soul, as if the object were real too: As if a man
has an unclean motion at the sight of a picture, which is only a composition
of well mixed and well ordered colors: or at the appearance of the Idea of a
beauty framed in his own fancy: it is as much uncleanness as if it were
terminated in some suitable object: the hinderance being not in the will, but
in the insufficiency of the object to concur in such an act. Now as the more
delight there is in any holy service, the more precious it is in it self, and
more grateful to God: so the more pleasure there is in any sinful motion, the
more malignity there is in it.

Contrivance. When the delight in the thought grows up to the contrivance of
the act, (which is still the work of the thinking faculty:) When the mind does
brood upon a sinful motion, to hatch it up, and invents methods for
performance: which the wise man calls artificial Inventions. So a learned man
interprets (...), Mat. 15.19. Eccles. 7.29. (...) Dr. Hammond on Mat. 15.9.
of contrivances of murder, adultery, etc. And the word signifies properly
reasonings. When men's wits play the Devils in their souls, in inventing
sophistical reasons for the commission and justification of their crimes, with
a mighty jollity at their own craft. Such plots are the trade of a wicked man's
heart. A covetous man will be working in his inward shop from morning till
night to study new methods for gain 2 Pet. 2.14. (...), a heart exercised in
covetous practices.
: and voluptuous, and ambitious persons, will draw schemes and models in their
fancy, of what they would outwardly accomplish: They conceive mischief, and
bring forth vanity, and their belly prepares deceit, Job. 15.35. Hence the
thoughts are called the counsels 1 Cor. 4.5.
and devices Isa. 32.7, 8.
of the heart: when the heart summons the head, and all the thoughts of it, to
sit in debate, as a private Junto, about a sinful motion.

Re-acting sin after it is outwardly committed. Though the individual action be
transient, and cannot be committed again: yet the Idea and Image of it
remaining in the memory, may by the help of an apish fancy be repeated a
thousand times over with a rarefied pleasure. As both the features of our
friends, and the agreeable Conversations we have had with them, may with a
fresh relish be represented in our fancies, though the persons were rotten many
years ago.

Having thus declared the nature of our thoughts, and the degrees of their
guilt: the next thing is to prove that they are sins.

The Jews did not acknowledge them to be sins, Kimchi in 66 Psalm. as quoted by
Grotius in Mat 5.20. Vt jam servaris been corpus; adultera men's est: Nec
custodiri, ni velit, illa p test. Nec mentem servare potes, licet omnia
claudas: Omnibus occlusis intus adulter erit. Ovid. Anor. l. 3. Eleg. 3. v. 5.
etc.
unless they were blasphemous, and immediately against God himself. Some
Heathens were more Orthodox, and among the rest Ovid, whose amorous pleasures
one would think should have smothered such sentiments in him. They Lord (whose
knowledge is infallible) knows the thoughts of men that they are vanity, Psalm.
94.11. yea, and of the wisest men too, according to the Apostle's
Interpretation, 1 Cor. 3.20. And who were they that became vain in their
Imaginations, but the wisest men the carnal world yielded? The Graecians the
greatest Philosophers, the Egyptians their Tutors, and the Romans their Apes.
The elaborate operations of an unregenerate mind are fleshly. Romans 8.5, 7. If
the whole web be so, needs must every thread. The thought of foolishness is sin
Prove. 24.9.
, ( i. e. a foolish thought; not objectively a thought of folly, but one
formally so) yea, an abomination to God Prove. 15.26.
. As good thoughts and purposes are acts in God's account, so are bad ones.
Abraham's intention to offer Isaac is accounted as an actual Sacrifice Heb.
11.17. Jam. 2.21.
: that the stroke was not given, was not from any reluctance of Abraham's will,
but the gracious indulgence of God. Sarab had a deriding thought, and God
charge it as if it were an outward laughter, and a scornful word Genesis 18.12,
15. Therefore Sarah laughed within h r self, saying (...) in visceribus suis,
Targum. Rom 7.7. I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not
covet,
. Thoughts are the words of the mind, and as real in God's account, as if they
were expressed with the Tongue.

There are three Reasons for the proof of this, that they are Sins.

1. They are contrary to the Law, which does forbid the first foamings and
belchings of the heart; because they arise from an habitual corruption, and
testify a defect of something, which the Law requires to be in us, to correct
the excursions of our minds. Does not the Law oblige man as a rational
creature? Shall it then leave that part, which does constitute him rational, to
sleeting and giddy fancies? No, it binds the soul as the principal agent, the
body only as the instrument. For if it were given only for the sensitive part,
without any respect to the rational, it would concern brutes as well as men,
which are as capable of a rational command, and a voluntary obedience, as man
without the conduct of a rational soul. It exacts a conformity of the whole man
to God, and prohibits a difformity; and therefore engages chiefly the inward
part, which is most the man. It must then extend to all the acts of the man,
consequently to his thoughts; they being more the acts of the man than the
motions of the body. Holiness is the prime excellency of the Law; a title
ascribed to it twice in one Verse, Romans 7.12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and
the Commandment holy, just and good. Could it be holy, if it indulged looseness
in the more noble part of the creature? Could it be just, if it favored inward
unrighteousness? Could it be good, and useful to man, which did not enjoin a
suitable conformity to God, wherein the creatures excellency lies? Can that
deserve the title of a spiritual Law, that should only regulate the brutish
part, and leave the spiritual to an unbounded licentiousness? Can perfection be
ascribed to that Law, which does countenance the unsavory breathings of the
Spirit, and lay no stricter an obligation upon us than the Laws of men? Mat. 5
28.
Must not God's Laws be as suitable to his sovereignty, as men's Laws are to
theirs? Must they not then be as extensive as God's Dominion, and reach even to
the privatest closets of the heart? It Is not for the honor of God's holiness,
righteousness, goodness, to let the Spirit, which bears more flourishing
characters of his Image than the body, range wildly about without a legal curb.

They are contrary to the order of nature, and the design of our Creation.
Whatsoever is a swerving from our primitive nature is sin, or at least a
consequent of it. Eccles. 7.29. God made man perfect; but they have s^ught out
many inventions.
But all inclinations to sin are contrary to that righteousness, wherewith man
was first endued. Man was created both with a disposition, and ability for holy
contemplations of God; the first glances of his soul were pure; he came every
way complete out of the mint of his infinitely wise and good Creator; and when
God pronounced all his Creatures good, he pronounced man very good amongst the
rest. But man is not now as God created him, he is off from his end, his
understanding is filled with lightness and vanity. This disorder never
proceeded from the God of order; infinite goodnes^ could never produce such an
evil frame; none of these loose inventions were of God's planting, but of man's
seeking. No, God never created the intellective, no, nor the sensitive part, to
play Domitian's game, and sport it self in the catching of Flies. Psalm. 49.20.
Man that is in honor, and understands not that which he ought to understand,
and thinks not that which he ought to think, is like the Beasts that perish:
Genesis 3.6.
he plays the beast, because he acts contrary to the nature of a rational and
immortal soul. And such brutes we all naturally are, since the first woman
believed her sense, her fancy, her affection, in their directions for the
attainment of wisdom, without consulting God's Law, or her own reason. The
fancy was bound by the right of nature to serve the understanding: It Is then a
slighting God's wisdom to invert this order, in making that our Governor,
which he made our Subject. It Is injustice to the dignity of our own souls, to
degrade the nobler part to a sordid slavery; in making the brute have dominion
over the man; as if the Horse were fittest to govern the Rider. It Is a
falseness to God, and a breach of trust, to let our minds be imposed upon by
our fancy; in giving it only feathers to dandle, and chaff to feed on, instead
of those braver objects it was made to converse withal.

We are accountable to God, and punishable for thoughts. Nothing is the
meritorious cause of God's wrath but sin. The Text tells us, that they were
once the keys, which opened the floud-gates of divine vengeance, and broached
both the upper and nether Cisterns Acts 8.22. If perhaps the thought of thy
heart may be forgiven thee. Prove. 12.2. (...) A man of thoughts i. e. evil
thoughts: the word being usually taken in an ill sense
, to overflow the world. If they need a pardon, (as certainly they do) then, if
mercy does not pardon them, justice will condemn them. And it is absolutely
said, that a man of wicked devices [or thoughts] God will condemn. It Is God's
prerogative, often mentioned in Scripture, to search the heart. To what
purpose, if the acts of it did not fall under His censure, as well as His
cognizance? He weighs the Spirits, Prove. 16.2. in the balance of His
Sanctuary, and by the weights of His Law, to sentence them, if they be found
too light. The word does discover, and judge them Heb. 4.12, 13.
; It divides asunder the soul and spirit, the sensitive part the affections,
and the rational the understanding and will; both which it does dissect, and
open, and judge the acts of them, even the thoughts and intents, (...),
whatsoever is within the (...), and whatsoever is within the (...), the one
referring to the Soul, the other to the Spirit: These it passes a Judgment
upon; as a Critic censures the Errata's, even to syllables, (...).
and Letters, in an old Manuscript. These we are to render an account of, (as
the Syriack renders those words v. 13. with whom we have to do.) Of what? Of
the first bubblings of the heart, the notions, and intents of it. The least
Speck and Atome of dust in every chink of this little world is known and
censured by God. If our thoughts be not judged, God would not be a righteous
judge. He would not judge according to the merit of the cause, if outward
actions were only scanned, without regarding the intents, wherein the principle
and end of every action lies, which either swell or diminish the malignity of
it. Actions in kind the same, may have different circumstances in the thoughts
to heighten the one above the other; and if they were only judged, the most
painted hypocrite might commence a blessed spirit at last, as well as the
exactest Saint. 1 Cor. 4, 5.
It Is necessary also for the Glory of God's omniscience. It Is hereby chiefly
that the extensiveness of God's knowledge is discovered, and that in order to
the praise, or dispraise of men, viz. To their Justification or condemnation.
Those very thoughts will accuse thee before God's Tribunal, which accuse thee
here before conscience, His Deputy, Romans 2.15, 16. Their thoughts the mean
while (i. e. in this life, while conscience bears witness) accusing, or
excusing one another; in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, i. e.
and also at the day of judgment, when conscience shall give in it is final
Testimony, upon God's examination of the secret counsels. This place is
properly meant of those reasonings concerning good and evil in men's
Consciences, agreeable to the Law of nature imprinted on them, which shall
excuse them, if they practice accordingly, or accuse them, if they behave
themselves contrary thereunto. But it will hold in this Case; for if those
inward approbations of the the notions of good and evil will accuse us for our
contrary practices, they will also accuse us for our contrary thoughts. Non
solum opus, sed mali operis cogitatio paenas luet. Hieron. in 1 Hos. 7. Acts
8.22.
Our good thoughts will be our accusers for not observing them, and our bad
thoughts will be indictments against us for complying with them. It Is probable
the Soul may be bound over to answer chiefly for these at the last day; for the
Apostle charge Simon's guilt upon his thought, not his word, and tells him,
pardon must be principally granted for that. The tongue was only an Instrument
to express what his heart did think, and would have been wholly innocent, had
not his thoughts been first criminal. What therefore is the principal subject
of pardon would be so of punishment: as the first incendiaries in a rebellion
are most severely dealt with. And if (as some think) the fallen Angels were
stripped of their primitive Glory, only for a conceived thought, how heinous must
that be, which has enrolled them in a remediless misery?

Having proved that there is a sinfulness in our thoughts, let us now see what
provocation there is in them: Which in some respects is greater than that of
our actions. But we must take actions here in sensu diviso, as distinguished
from the inward preparations to them. In the one there is more of scandal: in
the other more of odiousness to God. God indeed does not punish thoughts so
visibly, because, as He is Governor of the world, His Judgments are shot
against those sins that disturb humane society: but He has secret and
spiritual Judgments for these, suitable to the nature of the sins.

Now thoughts are greater in respect,

fruitfulness. The wickedness that God saw great in the earth was the fruit of
imaginations. They are the immediate causes of all sin. No Cockatrice but was
first an egg. It was a thought to be as God Genesis 3.5. 2 Cor. 11.3.
, that was the first breeder of all that sin, under which the world groans at
this day; For Eve's mind was first beguiled in the alteration of her thought.
Since that the lake of inward malignity acts all it is evil by these smoking
steams. Evil thoughts lead the van in our Savior's Catalogue, Matthew. 15.19.
as that which spirits all the black regiment which march behind. As good
motions cherished will spring up in good actions, so loose thoughts favored
will break out in visible plague-sores, and put fire unto all that wickedness
which lies habitually in the heart: 2 Timothy 2.16.
as a spark may to a whole stock of Gunpowder. The vain babblings of the soul,
as well as those of the Tongue, will increase to more ungodliness. Being thus
the cause, they include virtually in them all that is in the effect; as a seed
contains in its little body the leaves, fruit, color, scent, which afterward
appear in the plant. The seed includes all, but the color does not virtually
include the scent, or the scent the color, or the leaves the fruit: So it is
here, One act does not include the formal obliquity of another: but the thought
which caused it does seminally include both the formal and final obliquity of
every action; both that which is in the nature of it, and in the end to which
it tends. As when a Tradesman cherishes immoderate thoughts of gain, and in
the attaining it runs into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, 1 Timothy 6 9.
there is cheating, lying, swearing, to put off the commodity: all these
several acts have a particular sinfulness in the nature of the acts themselves,
besides the tendency they have to the satisfying an inordinate affection; all
which are the spawn of those first immoderate thoughts stirring up greedy
desires.

Quantity. Imaginations are said to be continually evil. There is an infinite
variety of conceptions, as the Psalmist speaks of the Sea, wherein are all
things creeping innumerable, both small and great, and a constant generation of
whole shoals of them; that you may as well number the Fish in the Sea, or the
Atoms in the Sunbeams, as recount them.

There is a greater number in regard of the acts, and in regard of the objects.

1. In regard of the acts of the mind:

1. Antecedent acts. How many preparatory motions of the mind are there (...),
etc. Plutarch. Moral. p. (mihi) 500.
how many sinful thoughts are twisted together to produce one deliberate sinful
word? All which have a distinct guilt, and, if weighed together, would outweigh
the guilt of the action abstractedly considered. How many repeated
complacencies in the first motion, degrees of consent, resolved broodings,
secret plottings, proposals of various methods, smothering contrary checks,
vehement longings, delightful hopes, and forestalled pleasures in the design?
All which are but thoughts assenting, or dissenting in order to the act
intended. Upon a dissection of all these secret motions by the critical power
of the word, we should find a more monstrous guilt, than would be apparent in
the single action, for whose sake all these spirits were raised. There may be
no sin in a material act, considered in it self, when there is a provoking
guilt in the mental motion. A hypocrite's religious services are materially
good, but poisoned by the Imagination skulking in the heart, that gave birth
unto them. Prove. 21.27. (...) with a wicked thought. Ezekiel. 23.3.19. Yet she
multiplied he^ whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the days of her youth etc.
v. 21. the lewdness of her youth.
It Is the wicked mind or thought makes the sacrifice (a commanded duty) much
more an abomination to the Lord.

2. Consequent acts; When a man's fancy is pregnant with the delightful
remembrance of the sin that is past, he draws down a fresh guilt upon himself:
as they did in the Prophet, in reviving the concurrence of the will to the act
committed, making the sensual pleasure to commence spiritual, and (if ever
there were an aching heart for it) revoking his former grief by a renewed
approbation of his darling lust. Thus the sin of thoughts is greater in regard
of duration. A man has neither strength nor opportunity always to act, but he
may always think; and imagination can supply the place of action. Or if the
mind be tired with sucking one object, it can with the be presently fasten
upon another. Senses are weary, till they have a new recruit of spirits: as the
poor horse may sink under his burden, when the rider is as violent as ever.
Thus old men may change their outward profaneness into mental wickedness; and
as the Psalmist remembered his old songs Psalm. 77.5, 6.
, so they their calcined sins in the night, with an equal pleasure. So that you
see there may be a thousand thoughts as ushers and lacqueys to one act, as
numerous as the sparks of a new lighted fire.

2. In regard of the Objects the mind is conversant about. Such thoughts there
are, and attended with a heavy guilt, which cannot probably, no nor possibly
descend into outward acts. A man may in a complacent thought commit fornication
with a woman in Spain, in a covetous thought rob another in the Indies, and in
a revengeful thought stab a third in America; and that while he is in this
Congregation. An unclean person may commit a mental folly with every beauty he
meets. A covetous man cannot plunder a whole Kingdom; but in one twinkling of a
thought he may wish himself the possessor of all the estates in it. A Timon, a
(...) cannot cut the throats of all the world; but like Nero, with one glance
of his heart he may chop off the heads of all mankind at a blow. Ambitious
men's practices are confined to a small spot of land, but with a cast of his
mind he may grasp an Empire as large as the four Monarchies. A beggar cannot
ascend a throne; but in his thoughts he may pass the Guards, murder his Prince
and usurp the Government. Nay further, an Atheist may think there is no God,
Psalm. 14.1. i. e. (as some interpret it) wish there were no God, and thus in
thought undeifie God himself; though he may sooner dash heaven and earth in
pieces, than accomplish it. The body is confined to one object, and that narrow
and proportionable to its nature: but the mind can wing it self to various
objects in all parts of the earth. Where it finds none, it can make one; for
fancy can compact several objects together, coin an image, color a picture,
and commit folly with it, when it has done; It can nestle it self in cobwebs
spun out of its own bowels.

Strength. Imaginations of the heart are only, i. e. purely evil. The nearer
any thing is in union with the root, the more radical strength it has. The
first ebullitions of light and heat from the Sun are more vigorous, than the
remoter beams: and the steams of a dunghill more noysom next that putrified
body, than when they are dilated in the air. Grace is stronger in the
heart-operations, than in the outward streams: and sin more soul in the
imagination of the thoughts of the heart, than in the act. In the Text the
outward wickedness of the world is passed over with a short expression; but the
Holy Ghost dwells upon the description of the wicked imagination, because there
lay the mass. Man's Psalm. 5 9. (...)
inward part is very wickednesses, a whole nest of vipers. Thoughts are the
immediate spawn of the original corruption, and therefote partake more of the
strength and nature of it. Acts are more distant, being the children of our
thoughts, but the Grandchildren of our natural pravity. Besides, they lie
nearest to that wickedness in the inward part, sucking the breast of that
poisonous dam that bred them. The strength of our thoughts is also reinforced
by being kept in, for want of opportunity to act them: as liquors in close
glasses ferment and increase their spriteliness. Musing, either carnal or
spiritual, makes the Psalm. 39.3.
fire burn the hotter: as the fury of fire is doubled by being pent in a
furnace. Outward acts are but the sprouts; the sap and juice lies in the wicked
imagination or contrivance, which has a strength in it to produce a thousand
fruits as poisonous as the former. The members are the instruments, or Romans
6.13. (...)
weapons, of unrighteousness; now the whole strength which does manage the
weapon lies in the arm that wields it, the weapon of it self could do no hurt
without a force impressed. Let me add this too, that sin in thoughts is more
simply sin. In acts there may be some occasional good to others, for a good man
will make use of the sight of sin committed by others to increase his hatred of
it: but in our sinful thoughts there it no occasion of good to others; they
lying locked up from the view of man.

Alliance. In these we have the nearest communion with the Devil. The
understanding of man is so tainted, that his Jam. 3.15.
wisdom, the chiefest flower in it, is not only earthly and sensual (it were
well if it were no worse) but devilish too. If the flower be so rank, what are
the weeds? 1 Cor. 2.11. 2 Cor. 10.5.
Satan's devices and our thoughts are of the same nature, and sometimes in
Scripture expressed by the same word, (...). As he has his devices, so have we
against the authority of God's law the power of the Gospel, and the Kingdom of
Christ. The Devils are called spiritual wickednesses because they are not
capable of carnal sins. Ephesians. 6.12.
Profaneness is an Uniformity with the world, and intellectual sins are an
Uniformity with the God of it, 1 Ephesians. 2.2.3. v. 3. There is a double walking,
answerable to a double pattern in v. 2. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh is
a walking according to the course of this world, or making the world our copy:
and fulfilling the desires of the mind is a walking according to the Prince of
the power of the air, or a making the Devil our pattern. In carnal sins Satan
is a tempter, in mental an actor. Therefore in the one we are conformed to his
will; in the other we are transformed into his likeness. In outward we evidence
more of obedience to his laws; in inward more of affection to his person, as
all imitations of others are. Therefore there is more of enmity to God, because
more of similitude and love to the Devil; a nearer approach to the Diabolical
nature implying a greater distance from the Divine. Christ never gave so black
a character; as that of the Devil's children, to the profane world, but to the
Pharisees, who had left the sins of men to take up those of Devils, and were
most guilty of those high imaginations which ought to be brought into captivity
to the obedience of Christ.

5. In respect of contrariety and odiousness to God. Imaginations were only and
so most directly contrary to God, who is only good. Romans 8.7.
Our natural enmity against God is seated in the mind. The sensitive part aims
at its own gratification, and in men's serving their lusts they serve their
pleasures; Tit. 3.3. serving diverse lusts and pleasures.
but the (...), the Prince in man, is possessed with principles of a more direct
contrariety; whence it must follow, that all the thoughts and counsels of it
are tinctured with this hatred. They are indeed a defilement of the higher part
of the soul, and that which belongs more peculiarly to God. And the nearer any
part does approach to God, the more abominable is a spot upon it; as to cast
dirt upon a Prince's house is not so heinous as to deface his image. The
understanding, the seat of thoughts, is more excellent than the will; both
because we know and judge before we will, or ought to will only so much, as the
understanding thinks fit to be willed; and because God has bestowed the
highest gifts upon it, adorning it with more lively lineaments of his own
image. Colos. 3.10. Renewed in knowledge after the image of Him that created
him; implying that there was more of the image of God at the first creation
bestowed upon the understanding, the seat of knowledge, than on any other part;
yea than on all the bodies of men distilled together. Heb 12.9.
Father of Spirits is one of God's titles: To bespatter His children, then so
near a relation, the jewel that he is choice of, must needs be more heinous. He
being the Father of Spirits, this spiritual wickedness of nourishing evil
thoughts is a cashiering all child-like likeness to him. The traitorous acts of
the mind are most offensive to God: as it is a greater despite for a son, to
whom the father has given the greater portion, to shut him out of his house,
only to revel in it with a company of Roisters and Strumpets, than in a child,
who never was so much the subject of his father's favor. And it is more heinous
and odious, if these thoughts, which possess our souls, be at any time
conversant about some Idea of our own framing. It were not altogether so bad,
if we loved something of God's creating, which had a physical goodness, and a
real usefulness in it to allure us: but to run wildly to embrace an Ens
rationis, to prefer a thing of no existence, but what is colored by our own
imagination, of no virtue, no usefulness, a thing that God never created, nor
pronounced good, is a greater enmity, and a higher slight of God.

Connaturalness and voluntariness. They are the imaginations of the thoughts of
the heart, (...); Plutarch. Moral. (...) T^ales. Diog. Lacrt.
and they are continually evil. They are as natural as the aestuations of the
Sea, the bubblings of a fountain, or the twinklings of the stars. The more
natural any motion is ordinarily the quicker it is. Time is requisite to
action, but thoughts have an instantaneous motion. The body is a heavy piece of
clay, but the mind can start out on every occasion. Actions have their stated
times and places; but these solicit us, and are entertained by us at all
seasons. Neither day nor night, street nor closet, exchange nor temple, can
privilege us from them; We meet them at every turn, and they strike upon our
souls as often as light upon our eyes. There is no restraint for them, The Laws
of men, the constitution of the body, the interest of profit or credit, are
mighty bars in the way of outward profaneness: but nothing lays the reins upon
thoughts but the Law of God; and this man is not subject to, neither can be.
Romans 8.7.
Besides, the natural Atheism in man is a special friend and nurse of these;
few firmly believing either the omniscience of God, or his government of the
world; which the Scripture speaks of frequently, as the cause of most sins
among the sons of men Isai. 29.15. Ezekiel. 9.9. Job 22.13, 14.
. Actions are done with some reluctance, and nips of natural conscience.
Conscience will start at a gross temptation, but it is not frighted at
thoughts. Men may commit speculative folly, and their conscience look on,
without so much as a nod against it: Men may tear out their neighbors bowels
in secret wishes, and their conscience never interpose to part the fray.
Conscience indeed cannot take notice of all of them; they are too subtle in
their nature, and too quick for the observation of a finite principle. They are
many, Prove. 19.21. There are many devices in a man's heart. Florus l. 2. c. 3.
M^jor aliquanto^abor erat invenire, quam vincere,
and they are nimble too: like the bubblings of a boiling pot, or the rising of
a wave, that presently slides into its level; and as Florus says of the
Ligurians, the difficulty is more to find, than conquer them. They are secret
sins, and are no more discerned than motes in the air, without a spiritual
sunbeam; whence David cries out, Psalm. 19.12. Cleanse me from secret sins:
which some explain of sins of thoughts that were like sudden and frequent
flashes of lightning, too quick for his notice, and unknown to himself, There
is also more delight in them. There is less of temptation in them, and so more
of election; and consequently more of the heart and pleasure in them, when they
lodge with us. Acts of sin are troublesome, there is danger as well as pleasure
in many of them: but there is no outward danger in thoughts; therefore the
complacency is more compact, and free from distraction. The delight is more
unmixed too; as intellectual pleasures are more refined than sensual. All these
considerations will enhance the guilt of these inward operations.

The Uses shall be two, though many Inferences might be drawn from the point,

1. Reproof. What a mass of vanity should we find in our minds, if we could
bring our thoughts in the space of one day, yea but one hour, to an account?
How many foolish thoughts with our wisdom, ignorant with our knowledge, worldly
with our heavenliness, hypocritical with our religion, and proud with our
humiliations? Our hearts would be like a Grott, furnished with monstrous and
ridiculous pictures: Ezekiel 8.5.10.
or as the wall in Ezekiel's vision pourtrayed with every form of creeping
things, and abominable beasts; a greater abomination than the Image of
jealousy at the outward gate of the Altar. Were our inwards opened, how should
we stand gazing both with scorn and wonder at our being such a pack of fools?
Well may we cry out with Agur, Prove. 30.2.
We have not the understandings of men: we make not the use of them, as is
requisite for rational creatures: because we degrade them to attendances on a
brutish fancy. I make no question, but were we able to know the phancies of
some irrational creatures, we should find them more noble, heroic and generous
in suo genere, than the thoughts of most men; more agreeable to their natures,
and suited to the law of their creation Psalm. 10 4. God is not in all his
^houghts.
. How little is God in any of our thoughts, according to His excellency? No,
our shops, our rents, our backs, and bellies usurp God's room. If any thoughts
of God do start up in us, how many covetous, ambitious, wanton, revengeful
thoughts are jumbled together with them? Is it not a monstrous absurdity to
place our friend with a crew of vipers, to lodge a King in a sty, and entertain
him with the fumes of a jakes and dunghill? A wicked man's heart is little
worth, Prove. 10.20. The tongue of the just is as choice silver, etc. Apud nos
and cogitare peccare est. Minucius Foelix.
all the pedling wares and works in his inward shop are not valuable with one
silver drop from a gracious man's lips. It was an invincible argument of the
primitive Christians for the purity of the Christian Religion above all others
in the world, that it did prohibit evil thoughts: And is it not as unanswerable
an argument that we are no Christians, if we give liberty to them? What is our
moral conversation outwardly, but only a bare abstinence from sin; not a
disaffection? Were we really and altogether Christians, would not that which is
the chiefest purity of Christianity, be our pleasure? And would we any more
wrong God in our secret hearts, than in the open streets? Is not thought a beam
of the mind, and shall it be enamored only on a dunghill? Is not the
understanding the eye of the soul, and shall it behold only gilded nothings?
It Is the flower of the spirit: (...) Plat.
Shall we let every Caterpillar suck it? It Is the Queen in us: Shall every
ruffian deflore it? It Is as the Sun in our heaven: and shall we besmear it with
misty phancies? It was created surely for better purposes, Lampridius.
than to catch a thousand weight of spiders (as Heliogabalus employed his
Servants.) It was not intended to be made the common fewer of filthiness, or
ranked among those (...), Arist. Histor. animal. lib. 8.
which eat not only fruit, and flesh, but flies, worms, dung, and all sorts of
loathsome materials. Let not therefore our minds wallow in a sink of
fantastical follies; whereby to rob God of his due, and our souls of their
happiness.

2. Exhortation. We must take care for the suppression of them. All vice does
arise Mirandul. de Imaginat. c 7. Isay 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, etc.
but upon a false conceit of the nature of honor? What engenders covetousness,
but a mistaken fancy of the excellency of wealth? Thoughts must be forsaken as
well as our way; we cannot else have an evidence of a true conversion: and if
we do not discard them, we are not like to have an abundant pardon; and what
will the issue of that be, but an abundant punishment? Mortification must
extend to these: Affections must be crucified, Gal. 5.24.
and all the little brats of thoughts, which beget them, or are begotten by
them. Shall we nourish that, which brought down the wrath of God upon the old
world; as though there had not been already sufficient experiments of the
mischief they have done? Is it not our highest excellency to be conformed to
God in holiness, in as full a measure as our finite natures are capable? And is
not God holy in his counsels and inward operations, as well as in his works?
Has God any thoughts but what are righteous and just? Therefore the more
foolish and vain our imaginations are, Ephesians. 4 17, 18.
the more are we alienated from the life of God. The Gentiles were so, because
they walked in the vanity of their mind; and we shall be so if vanity walk and
dwell in ours. As the tenth Commandment forbids all unlawful thoughts and
desires: so it obliges us to all thoughts and desires, that may make us
agreeable to the divine Will, and like to God himself. We shall find great
advantage by suppressing them: We can more easily resist temptations without,
if we conquer motions within. Thoughts are the mutineers in the soul, which set
open the gates for Satan: He has held a secret intelligence with them (so far
as he knows them) ever since the fall: and they are his spies to assist him in
the execution of his devices. They prepare the tinder and the next fiery dart
sets all on a flame. Can we cherish these, if we consider that Christ dyed for
them? He shed his blood for that which put the world out of order; which was
accomplished by the sinful imagination of the first man, and continued by those
imaginations mentioned in the Text. He dyed to restore God to his right, and
man to his happiness: neither of which can be perfectly attained, till those be
thrown out of the possession of the heart.

That we may do this, Let us consider these following directions, which may be
branched into these heads: 1. For the raising good thoughts. 2. Preventing bad.
3. Ordering bad when they do intrude. 4. Ordering good when they appear in us.



Get renewed hearts. The fountain must be cleansed which breeds the vermin. 2
Cor. 5, 17. Jer. 4.14. Wash thy heart from wickedness, etc. How long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge within thee?
Pure vapors can never ascend from a filthy quagmire. What issue can there be
of a vain heart, but vain imaginations? Thoughts will not become new, till a
man is in Christ. We must be holy, before we can think holily. Sanctification
is necessary for the dislodging of vain thoughts, and the introducing of good.
A sanctified reason would both discover, and shame our natural follies. As all
animal operations, so all the spiritual motions of our heads, depend upon the
life of our hearts Prove. 4.23.
, as the principium originis. As there is a law in our members to bring us into
Captivity to the law of sin, Romans 7.23. so there must be a law in our minds to
bring our thoughts to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. We must be renewed
in the spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4.23. in our reasonings and thoughts, which
are the spirits whereby the understanding acts; as the animal spirits are the
instruments of corporeal motion. Till the understanding be born of the spirit
John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of
the spirit, is spirit.
, it will delight in, and think of, nothing but things suitable to its fleshly
original: but when it is spiritual, it receives new impressions, new reasonings
and motions, suitable to the Holy Ghost, of whom it is born. A stone, if thrown
upwards a thousand times, will fall backward; because it is a forced motion: but
if the nature of this stone were changed into that of fire, it would mount as
naturally upward, as before it sunk downward. You may force some thoughts
toward heaven sometimes, but they will not be natural, till nature be changed.
Grace only gives stability, Heb. 13.9. It is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace.
and prevents fluctuation, by fixing the soul upon God as its chief end: and
what is our end will not only be first in our intentions, but most frequent in
our considerations. Hence a sanctified heart is called in Scripture a steadfast
heart There must be an enmity against Satan put into our hearts, according to
the first promise, before we can have an enmity against his imps, or any thing
that is like him.

2. Study Scripture. Original corruption stuffs us with bad thoughts, and Phil.
1.9, 1^.
Judicious knowledge would make us approve things that are excellent: and where
such things are approved, toys cannot be welcome. Fullness is the cause of
stedfastness. The cause of an intent and piercing eye is the multitude of
animal spirits. Without this skill in the word we shall have as foolish
conceits of divine things, as ignorant men without the rules of art have of the
Sun and Stars, or things in other countries which they never saw. The word is
called a lamp to our feet, i. e. the affections: a light to our eyes, Psalm.
119.105. Psalm. 19.8. enlightens the eyes.
i. e, the understanding. It will direct the glances of our minds, and the
motions of our affections. It enlightens the eyes, and makes us have a new
prospect of things: as a Scholar newly entered into Logic, and studied the
predicaments, etc. looks upon every thing with a new eye, and more rational
thoughts, and is mightily delighted with every thing he sees; because he eyes
them as clothed with those notions he has newly studied. The Devil had not his
engines so ready to assault Christ, as Christ from his knowledge had
Scripture-precepts to oppose him. As our Saviourby this means stifled thoughts
offered, so by the same we may be able to smother thoughts arising in us.
Lecti^ne assidua and meditatione diuturna pectus suum bibliothecam Christi
fecerat. Hierom. Ep 3.
Converse therefore often with the Scripture, transcribe it in your heart, and
turn it in succum and sanguinem; whereby a vigor will be derived into every
part of your soul, as there is by what you eat to every member of your body.
Thus you will make your mind Christ's library, as Hierom speaks of Nepotianus.

3. Reflect often upon the frame of your mind at your first conversion. None
notable chearings from God; and consider what matter it was which carried your
heart upward, what employment you were engaged in, when good thoughts did fill
your soul, and try the same experiment again. Asaph would oppose God's ancient
works to his murmuring thoughts: he would remember his song in the night, i. e.
the matter of his song, and read over the records of God's kindness. Psalm 77.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
David too would never forget, i. e. frequently renew, the remembrance of those
precepts, whereby God had particularly quickened him Psalm. 119.93.
. Yea, he would reflect upon the places too, where he had formerly conversed
with God, to rescue himself from dejecting thoughts; therefore will I remember
thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Missar Psalm.
42.6.
Some elevations surely David had felt in those places, the remembrance whereof
would sweeten the sharpness of his present grief. When our former sins visit
our minds, pleading to be speculatively reacted, let us remember the holy
dispositions we had in our repentance for them, and the thankful frames, Luke
24.32. Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures?
when God pardoned them. The Disciples at Christ's second appearance reflected
upon their own warm temper at his first discourse with them in a disguise, to
confirm their faith, and expel their unbelieving conceits, Strive to recollect
truths, precepts, promises, with the same affection which possessed your Souls,
when they first appeared in their glory and sweetness to you.

4. Ballast your heart with a Love to God. David thought all the day of God's
Law, as other men do of their lusts, because he unexpressibly loved it Psalm.
119.97, 113. Oh how I love thy Law! It is my meditation all the day, v. 113. I
hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love.

Aeneas oculis semper vigilantis inhaeret:

Aeneam animo noxque diesque refert. Ovid. Ep. 7. (...). Lucian Dialog. (...).
Chrysostom.


. This was the succesful means he used to stifle vain thoughts, and excite his
hatred of them. It Is the property of love to think no evil, 2 Cor. 13.5. It
thinks good and delightful thoughts of God; friendly and useful thoughts of
others. It fixes the Image of our beloved object in our minds, that it is not
in the power of other phancies to displace it. The beauty of an object will
fasten a rolling eye. It Is difficult to divorce our hearts and thoughts from
that which appears lovely and glorious in our minds, whether it be God or the
world. Love will by a pleasing violence bind down our thoughts, and hunt away
other affections; If it does not establish our minds, they will be like a Cork,
which with a light breath, and a short curl of water, shall be tossed up and
down from its station. Scholars that love learning will be continually
hammering upon some notion or other, which may further their progress, and as
greedily clasp it, as the Iron will its beloved Loadstone. He that is winged
with a divine love to Christ, will have frequent glances and flights toward
him, and will start out from his worldly business, several times in a day, to
give him a visit. Love in the very working is a settling grace; it increases
our delight in God, partly by the sight of his amiableness, which is cleared to
us in the very act of loving, and partly by the recompenses he gives to the
affectionate carriage of his creature; both which will stake down the heart
from vagaries, or giving entertainment to such loose companions, as evil
thoughts are. Well then, if we had this heavenly affection strong in us, it
would not suffer unwholesom weeds to grow up so near it; either our Love would
consume those weeds, or those weeds will choke our Love.

5. Exercise faith. As the habit of faith is attended with habitual
sanctification, Mirand. de Imaginat. cap. 11, 12.
man being the highest of imaginative beings, and the lowest of intelligent;
fancy is in its exaltation more than in creatures beneath him, and reason in
its detriment more than in creatures above him; and therefore the imagination
needs a more skilful guide than reason. Fancy is like fire, a good Servant but
a bad Master; if it march under the conduct of faith it may be highly
serviceable, and by putting lively colors upon divine truth may steal away our
affections to it. Faith is the evidence of things not seen, viz. not by a
corporeal, but intellectual eye; and so it will supply the office of sense:
It Is the substance of things hoped for; and if hope be an attendant on faith,
Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down, Oh my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in God.
our thoughts will surely follow our expectations. The remedy David used, when
he was almost stifled with disquieting thoughts, was to excite his soul to a
hope and confidence in God, Psalm. 42.5. and when they returned upon him, he
uses the same diversion, v. 11. The peace of God, i. e. the reconciliation
made by a Mediator between God and us believingly apprehended, will keep [or
garrison] our hearts and minds [or thoughts] against all anxious assaults both
from within and without Phil 4.6, 7. (...).
. When any vain conceit creeps up in you, act faith on the intercession of
Christ; and consider, Is Christ thinking of me now in Heaven, and pleading for
me, and shall I squander away my thoughts on trifles, which will cost me both
tears and blushes? Believingly meditate on the promises; they are a means to
cleanse us from the filthiness of the spirit, as well as that of the flesh 2
Cor 7.1. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves, etc.
If the having them be a motive, the using them will be a means to attain this
end. Looking at the things that are not seen, preserves us from fainting, and
renews the inward man day by day 2 Cor. 4.16, 18.
. These invisible things could not well keep our hearts from fainting, if faith
did not first keep the thoughts from wandering from them.

6. Accustom your self to a serious meditation every morning. Fresh airing our
souls in Heaven will engender in us purer spirits, and nobler thoughts. Intus
existens prohibet alienum.
Though other necessary thoughts about our callings will, and must come in, yet
when we have dispatched them, let us attend our morning Theme as our chief
companion. As a man that is going with another about some considerable
business, suppose to Westminster, though he meets with several friends in the
way, and salutes some, and others with whom he has some affairs he spends a
little time, yet he quickly returns to his companion, and both together go
their intended stage. Do thus in the present case. Our minds are active, and
will be doing something though to little purpose, and if they be not fixed upon
some noble object, they will like mad men and fools be mightily pleased in
playing with straws. The thoughts of God were the first Visiters David had in
the morning; Psalm. 139 17, 18
God and his heart met together as soon as he was awake, and kept company all
the day after. In this meditation look both to the matter and manner.

Look to the matter of your meditation. Let it be some truth, which will assist
you in reviving some languishing grace, or fortify you against some triumphing
corruption; for it is our darling sin which does most envenom our thoughts Prove.
23.7. As a man thinks in his heart, so is he.
. As if you have a thirst for honor, let your fancy represent the honor of
being a child of God and heir of Heaven. If you are inclined to covetousness,
think of the riches stored up in a Savior, and dispensed by him. If to
voluptuousness, fancy the pleasures in the ways of wisdom here, and at God's
right hand hereafter. This is to deal with our hearts as Paul with his hearers,
to catch them with guile. Stake your soul down to some serious and profitable
mystery of Religion; as the Majesty of God, some particular Attribute, The
heads of the Catechism might be taken in order, which would both increase and
actuate our knowledge. Psalm. 40.5.
his condescension in Christ, the love of our Redeemer, the value of his
sufferings, the virtue of his blood, the end of his ascension, the work of the
Spirit, the excellency of the soul, beauty of holiness, certainty of death,
terror of judgment, torments of Hell, and joys of Heaven. Why may not that
which was the subject of God's innumerable thoughts, be the subject of ours?
God's thoughts and counsels were concerning Christ, the end of his coming, his
death, his precepts of holiness, and promises of life; and that not only
speculatively, but with an infinite pleasure in his own glory, and the
creatures good to be accomplished by him. Would it not be work enough for our
thoughts all the day to travel over the length, breadth, height, and depth of
the love of Christ? Would the greatness of the journey give us leisure to make
any starts out of the way? Having settled the Theme for all the day, we shall
find occasional assistances, even from worldly businesses; as Scholars, who
have some Exercise to make, find helps in their own course of reading, though
the Book has no designed respect to their proper Theme. Thus by employing our
minds about one thing chiefly, we shall not only hinder them from vain
excursions, but make even common objects to be oil to our good thoughts, which
otherwise would have been fuel for our bad. Such generous liquor would scent
our minds and conversations all the day; that whatsoever motion came into our
hearts, would be tinctured with this spirit, and savor of our morning
thoughts: as vessels having been filled with a rich wine, communicate a relish
of it to the liquors afterward put into them. We might also more steadily go
about our worldly business, if we carry God in our minds; as one foot of the
Compass will more regularly move about the Circumference, when the other
remains firm in the Center.

Look to the manner of it.

intent. Transitory thoughts are like the glances of the eye, soon on, and soon
off; they make no clear discovery, and consequently raise no spritely
affections. Let it be one principal subject, and without flitting from it; for
if our thoughts be unsteady, we shall find but little warmth: a burning glass
often shifted fires nothing. We must look at the things that are not seen, as
wistly as men do at a mark they shoot at. 2 Cor. 4.18. (...). 2 Cor. 3.18.
Such an intent meditation would change us into the image, and cast us into the
mould of those truths we think of; it would make our minds more busy about
them all the day: as a glaring upon the Sun fills our eyes for some time after
with the image of it. To this purpose look upon your selves as deeply concerned
in the things you think of. Our minds dwell upon that whereof we apprehend an
absolute necessity. A condemned person would scarce think of any thing but
procuring a reprieve, and his earnestness for this would bar the door against
other intruders.

2. Let it be affectionate and practical. Meditation should excite a spiritual
Psalmist Psalm. 104.34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in
the Lord.
; and a divine delight would keep up good thoughts, and keep out
impertinencies. A bare speculation will tire the soul, and without application,
and pressing upon the will and affections, will rather chill, than warm
devotion. It Is only by this means, that we shall have the efficacy of truth in
our wills, and the sweetness in our affections, as well as the notion of it in
our understandings. The more operative any truth is in this manner upon us, the
less power will other thoughts have to interrupt, and the more disdainfully
will the heart look upon them, if they dare be impudent. Never therefore leave
thinking of a spiritual subject, till your heart be affected with it. If you
think of the evil of sin, leave not till your heart loath it; if of God, cease
not till it mount up in admirations of him. If you think of his mercy, melt for
abusing it; if of his sovereignty, awe your heart into obedient resolutions; if
of his presence, double your watch over your self. If you meditate on Christ,
make no end till your hearts love him; if of his death, plead the value of it
for the justification of your persons, and apply the virtue of it for the
sanctification of your natures. Without this practical stamp upon our
affections, we shall have light spirits, while we have opportunity to converse
with the most serious objects. We often hear foolish thoughts breathing out
themselves in a house of mourning, in the midst of Coffins, and trophies of
death, as if men were confident they should never die; whereas none are so
ridiculous as to assert they shall live for ever. By this instance in a truth
so certainly assented to, we may judge of the necessity of this direction in
truths more doubtfully believed.

7. Draw spiritual Inferences from occasional objects. David did but wistly
Psalm. 8.3, 4.
and humble admirations of God. Glean matter of instruction to your selves, and
praise to your Maker, from every thing you see: It will be a degree of
restoration to a state of innocence, since this was Adam's task in Paradise.
Dwell not upon any created object only as a Virtuoso, to gratify your rational
curiosity; but as a Christian call Religion to the feast, and make a spiritual
improvement. No creature can meet our eyes, but affords us lessons worthy our
thoughts; besides the general notices of the power and wisdom of the Creator.
Thus may the Sheep read us a Lecture of patience, the Dove of innocence, the
Ant and Be raise blushes in us for our sluggishness, and the stupid Ox and
dull Ass correct and shame our ungrateful ignorance. Isa. 1.3.
And since our Savior did set forth his own excellency in a sensible dress,
the consideration of those Metaphors by an acute fancy would garnish out divine
truths more deliciously, and conduct us into a more inward knowledge of the
mysteries of the Gospel. He whose eyes are open, cannot want an instructor,
unless he wants a heart. Thus may a Tradesman spiritualize the matter he works
upon, and make his commodities serve in wholesome meditations to his mind, and
at once enrich both his soul and his coffers; yea, and in part restore the
creatures to the happiness of answering a great end of their Creation, which
man deprived them of when he subjected them to vanity. Such a view of spiritual
truths in sensible pictures would clear our knowledge, purify our fancies,
animate our affections, encourage our graces, disgrace our vices, and both
argue and shame us into duty; and thus take away all the causes of our wild
wandering thoughts at once. And a frequent exercise of this method would beget
and support a habit of thinking well, and weaken, if not expel, a habit of
thinking ill.



Exercise frequent humiliations. Pride exposes us to impatient and disquieting
thoughts: whereas humility clears up a calm and serenity in the soul. Prove.
30.32.
It Is Agur's advice to be humbled particularly for evil thoughts. Frequent
humiliations will dead the fire within, and make the sparks the fewer. The
deeper the plough sinks the more the weeds are killed, and the ground fitted
for good grain. Men do not easily fall into those sins, for which they have
been deeply humbled. Vain conceits love to reside most in jolly hearts: but by
the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. Eccles. 7.3, 4.
There is more of wisdom, or wise consideration in a composed and graciously
mournful spirit, whereas carnal mirth and sports cause the heart to evaporate
into lightness and folly. The more we are humbled for them, the more our hatred
of them will be fomented: and consequently, the more prepared shall we be to
give them a repulse upon any bold intrusion.

Avoid entangling your selves with the world. This clay will clog our minds,
Lutea faelicitas. Aug. de Civ Dei. l. 10.
and a dirty happiness will engender but dirty thoughts. Who were so foolish to
have inward thoughts, that their houses should continue for ever, but those
that trusted in their riches Psalm. 49 6, 11.
? If the world possess our souls, it will breed carking thoughts: much business
meets with crosses, and then it breeds murmuring thoughts; and sometimes it is
crowned with success, and then it starts proud and self-applauding thoughts. 1 Timothy 6.9
Those that will be rich fall into many foolish and hurtful lusts: Such lusts
that make men fools; and one part of folly is to have wild and senseless
fancies. Mists and fogs are in the lower region near the earth; but reach not
that next the Heavens. Were we free from earthly affections, these gross
vapors could not so easily disturb our minds; but if the World once settle in
our hearts, we shall never want the sumes of it to fill our heads. And as
covetous desires will stuff us with foolish imaginations, so they will smother
any good thought cast into us; as the thorns of worldly cares choked the good
seed, and made it unfruitful, Mat. 13.22. As we are to rejoice in the world, as
though we rejoiced not: so, by the same reason, we should think of the world as
though we thought not. A conformity with the world in affection is inconsistent
with a change of the frame of the mind. Romans 12.2.


3. Avoid idleness. Serious callings do naturally compose men's spirits: but
Mat. 25.26. Thou wicked and slothful servant. Mat. 13 25.
that it will be wicked, if once it degenerates into slothfulness in its proper
charge. As empty minds are the fittest subjects for extravagant fooleries, so
vacant times are the fittest seasons. While we sleep the importunate enemy
within, as well as the envious adversary without us, will have a successful
opportunity to sow the tares: Whereas a constant employment frustrates the
attempt, and discourageth the Devil, because he sees we are not at leisure.
Therefore when any sinful motion steps in, double thy vigor about thy present
business, and the foolish impertinent will sneak out of thy heart at this
discountenance. So true is that in this case, which Pharaoh falsely imagined in
another, that the more we labor, the less we shall regard vain words Exodus 5.9.
. As Satan is prevented by diligence in our callings, so sometimes the Spirit
visits us, and fills us with holy affections at such seasons; as Christ
appeared to Peter and other Disciples, when they were a fishing Joh. 21.3, 4.
; and usually manifested his grace to men, when they were engaged in their
useful businesses, or religious services. But these motions (as we may observe
by the way) which come from the Spirit, are not to put us out of our way, but
to assist us in our walking in it, and further us both in our attendance on,
and success in our duties. To this end look upon the work of your callings as
the work of God, which ought to be done in obedience to Him; as He has set you
to be useful in the community. Thus a holy exercise of our callings would
sanctify our minds, and by prepossessing them with solid business we should
leave little room for any spider to weave its Cobwebs.

4. Awe your hearts with the thoughts of God's omniscience, especially the
discovery We are very much Atheists in the concern of this Attribute: for
though it be notionally believed, yet for the most part it is practically
denied. God understands all our thoughts afar off Psalm. 139.2.
: as He knew every creature, which lay hid in the Chaos, and undigested lump of
matter. God is in us all Ephesians. 4.6,
; as much in us all, as He is above us all; yea in every creek, and chink, and
point of our hearts. Not an Atome in the spirits of all men in the world, but
is obvious to that all-seeing eye, which knows every one of those things that
come into our minds Ezekiel. 11, 5.
. God knows both the order and confusion of them, and can better tell their
natures one by one than Adam named the creatures. Fancy then, that you hear the
sound of the last Trumpet, that you see God's tribunal set, and His omniscience
calling out singly all the secrets of your heart. Would not the consideration
of this allay the heat of all other imaginations? If a foolish thought break
in, consider, What if God, who knows this, should presently call me to judgment
for this sinful glance? psalm. 44 21.
Say with the Church, Shall not God search this out? Is it fit either for God's
glory, or our interest, that when He comes to make inquisition in us, He should
find such a nasty dunghill, and swarms of Egyptian lice and frogs creeping up
and down our chambers? Were our heads and hearts possessed by this substantial
truth, we should be ashamed to think, what we shall be ashamed to own at the
last day.

Keep a constant watch over your hearts. David desires God to set a watch
before the door of his lips; Psalm. 141.3.
much more should we desire, that God would keep the door of our hearts. We
should have grace stand sentinel there especially; for words have an outward
bridle, they may disgrace a man, and impair his interest and credit: but
thoughts are unknown, if undiscovered by words. If a man knew what time the
thief would come to rob him, he would watch. We know we have thieves within us
to steal away our hearts; therefore when they are so near us, we should watch
against a surprise; and the more carefully, because they are so extraordinary
sudden in their rise, and quick in their motion. Our minds are like idle
Schoolboys, that will be frisking from one place to another, if the Master's
back be turned, and playing instead of learning. Let a strict hand be kept over
our affections, those wild beasts within us; (...). Plato.
because they many times force the understanding to pass a judgment according
to their pleasure, not its own sentiment. Young men should be most intent upon
their guard; because their fancies gather vigor from their youthful heat, which
fires a world of squibs in a day; (which madmen, and those which have hot
diseases are subject to, because of the excessive inflammation of their
brains): and partly because they are not sprung up to a maturity of knowledge,
which would breed and foster better thoughts, and discover the plausible
pretenses of vain affections. There are particular seasons wherein we must
double our guard; as when incentives are present, that may set some inward
corruption on a flame. 1 Timothy 5.2. (...).
Timothy's office was to exhort younger, as well as elder women: and the
Apostle wishes him to do it with all purity or chastity, that a temptation,
lying in ambush for him, might not take his thoughts and affections unguarded.
Engage thy diligence more at solitary times, and in the night; wherein freedom
from business gives an opportunity to an unsanctified imagination, to conjure
up a thousand evil spirits: whence perhaps it is that the Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 17.3. Gen 19.30. Cellulam mearum cogitationum pertimescebam. Hieron.
God had tried him in the night, and found him holy. The solitary Cave tainted
Lot with incest, who had preserved himself fresh in the midst of the salt lusts
of Sodom. In ill company, wherein we may be occasionally cast, there is need of
an exacter observation of our hearts: lest corrupt steams, which rise from
them, as vapors from lakes and minerals, being breathed in by us, may tincture
our spirits; or as those (...), which (as Physicians tell us) exhaling from
consumptive persons, do by inspiration steal into our blood, and convey a
contagion to us. And though above all keepings and watchings we are to keep and
watch our hearts, Prove. 4.23.
because out of them are the issues of life: yet we must walk the rounds about
our senses, and members of the body, as the wise man there advises, v. 24. the
mouth which utters wickedness; the eyes, v. 25. which are brokers to make
bargains for the heart; and v. 26. the feet which are agents to run on the
errands of sin. And the rather must we watch over our senses, because we are
naturally more ready to follow the motions of them, as having had a longer
acquaintance and familiarity with them before we grew up to the use of reason.
Besides, Plotinus describes thought thus, (...). Ennead. 1. lib. Cor and oculi
sunt proxenctae peccati.
most of our thoughts creep in first at the windows of sense: The eye and the
ear robbed Eve of original righteousness: and the eye rifled David both of his
justice and chastity. If the eyes behold strange women, the heart will utter
perverse things, Prove. 23.33. Perverse thoughts will sparkle from a rolling
eye. Revel-rout is usual where there is a negligent government. He that has no
rule over his own spirit, is like a city that is broken down, and without walls
Prove. 25.28
; where any thieves may go in and out at pleasure.

3. The third sort of directions are for the ordering of evil thoughts, when
they do intrude, and,

1. Examine them. Look often into your heart to see what it is doing: and what
thoughts you find dabling in it, call to an account: enquire what David asked
his soul the reason of its troubled thoughts; Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou
disquieted O my soul?
so ask thy heart the reason why it entertains such ill company, and by what
authority they come there, and leave not chiding, till thou have put it to the
blush. Bring every thought to the test of the Word. Asaph had envious thoughts
at the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.2, 3. which had almost tript him up,
and laid him on his back. And these had blown up Atheistical thoughts, that God
did not much regard, whether his commands were kept or no; as though God had
untied the link between duty and reward, and the breach of his laws were the
readiest means to a favorable recompense; v. 13. I have cleansed my hands in
vain. But when he weighed things in the balance of the sanctuary, by the holy
rules of God's patience and justice, v. 17. He sees the brutishness of his
former conceits; v. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before
thee; and v. 25. he makes an improvement of them to excite his desire for God,
and delight in Him. Let us compare our thoughts with Scripture-rules. Comparing
spiritual things with spiritual, is the way to understand them; comparing
spiritual sins with spiritual commands, is the way to know them; and comparing
spiritual vices with spiritual graces, is the way to loath them. Take not then
any thing upon trust from a crazy fancy: nor, without a scrutiny; believe that
faculty, whereby dogs dream, and animals perform their natural exploits.

2. Check them at the first appearance. If they bear upon them a palpable
Vzziah out of the Temple: or as David answered his wicked sollicitors, Psalm.
119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers: for I will keep the commandments of my
God. Though we cannot hinder them from haunting us, yet we may from lodging in
us. The very sparkling of an abominable motion in our hearts is as little to be
looked upon; as the color of wine in a glass by a man inclined to drunkenness.
Quench them instantly, as you would do a spark of fire in a heap of straw: We
must not treat with them: Paul's resolve is a good pattern not to confer with
flesh and blood Gal. 1.16.
. Hic Annibal virtute non mora frangitur.
. We do not debate whether we should shake a viper off our hands. If it be
plainly a sinful motion, a treaty with it is a degree of disobedience; for a
putting it to the question whether we should suckle it, is to question whether
God should be obeyed or no. If it savor not of the things of God, hear not its
reasons, and complement it with no less indignation than our Savior did his
officious Disciple upon his carnal advice; Get thee behind me Satan, Mat.
16.22, 23. Excuse it not, because it is little: Small vapors may compact
themselves into great clouds, and obstruct our sight of heaven: a little poison
may spread its venom through a great quantity of meat. Ex hinc nota est
infirmitas mea: quia multo facilius irruunt abominandae phantasiae quam
discedunt. Kemp. de Imit. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 20.
We know not how big a small motion, like a Crocodile's egg, may grow, and how
ravenous the breed may prove: it may, if entertained, force our Judgment, drag
our Will, and make all our affections Bedlams. Besides, since the Fancy is that
power in us upon which the Devil can immediately imprint his suggestions, and
that we know not what army he has to back any sinful motion, if once the gate
be set open; let us crush the brat betimes, and fling the head over the wall to
discourage the party. Well then, let us be ashamed to cherish that in our
thoughts, which we should be ashamed should break out in our words or actions:
therefore as soon as you perceive it base, spit it out with detestation: as you
do a thing you unexpectedly find ungrateful to your palate.

Improve them. Poisons may be made medicinable. Let the thoughts of old sins
stir up a commotion of anger and hatred. We feel shiverings in our spirits, and
a motion in our blood at the very thought of a bitter Potion we have formerly
taken: why may we not do that spiritually, which the very frame and
constitution of our bodies does naturally, upon the calling a lothsom thing to
mind? The Romans sins were transient, but the shame was renewed every time they
reflected on them Romans 6.21. Whereof you are now ashamed.
: they reacted a detestation instead of the pleasure: so should the revivings
of old sins in our memories be entertained with our sighs, rather than our joy.
We should also manage the opportunity so as to promote some further degrees of
our conversion Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways: and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies.
. There is not the most hellish motion, but we may strike some sparks from it,
to kindle our love to God, renew our repentance, raise our thankfulness, or
quicken our obedience. Is it a blasphemous motion against God? It gives you a
just occasion thence to awe your heart into a deeper reverence of His Majesty.
Is it a lustful thought? Open the floud-gates of your godly sorrow, and groan
for your original sin. Is it a remembrance of your former sin? Let it wind up
your heart in the praises of him, who delivered you from it. Is it to tempt you
from duty? Endeavor to be more zealous in the performance of it. Is it to set
you at a distance from God? Resolve to be a light shining the clearer in that
darkness, and let it excite you to a closer adherence to him. Are they envious
thoughts which steal upon you? Let thankfulness be the product, that you enjoy
so much as you do, and more than you deserve. Let Satan's fiery darts inflame
your love rather than your Lust, and like a skilful Pilot, make use of the
violence of the winds, and raging of the Sea to further you in your spiritual
voyage. This is to beat the Devil and our own hearts with their own weapons;
who will have little stomach to fight with those arms wherewith they see
themselves wounded. There is not a remembrance of the worst objects but may be
improved to humility and thankfulness; as St. Paul never thought of his old
persecuting, but he sank down in humiliation, and mounted up in admirations of
the riches of grace.

4. Continue your resistance, if they still importune thee, and lay not down
Eccl. 10.13.
but our more acrial phancies, The beginning of them is foolishness, but if
suffered to gather strength they may end in mischievous madness; therefore if
they do continue, or reassume their arms, we must continue and reassume our
shield Ephesians 6.16. Above all taking the shield of faith; (...), taking up again.
. Resistance makes the Devil and his imps fly: but forbearance makes them
impudent. In a battle when one party faints and retreats, it adds new spirits
to the enemy that was almost broken before: so will these motions be the more
vigorous, if they perceive we begin to flag. That encouraging command, Resist
the Devil, and he will fly from you Jam 4.7.
, implies not only the beginning a fight, but continuance in it, till he does
fly. We must not leave the field, till they cease their importunity; nor
increase their courage by our own cowardice.

5. Join Supplication with your opposition. Watch and pray are sometimes Mat.
26 41.
. The diligence and multitude of our enemies should urge us to watch that we be
not surpised; and our own weakness and proneness to presumption should make us
pray, that we may be powerfully assisted. Be as frequent in soliciting God, as
they are in soliciting you: as they knock at your heart for entrance, so do
you knock at heaven for assistance. And take this for your comfort, As the
Devil takes their parts, so Christ will take yours at his Father's Throne; he
that prayed that the Devil might not winnow Peter's faith, will intercede that
your own heart may not winnow yours. If the waves come upon you, and you are
ready to sink, cry out with Peter. Master I perish; and you shall feel his hand
raising you, and the winds and waves rebuked into obedience by him. The very
motion of your hearts heavenward at such a time is a refusal of the thought
that presses upon you, and will be so put upon your account. When any of these
buzzing flies discompose you, or more violent hurricanes shake your minds, cry
out with David, Psalm 86.11, 12.
Unite my heart to fear thy Name; and a powerful word will soon silence these
disturbing enemies, and settle your souls in a calm, and a praising posture.

4. A fourth sort of directions is concerning good motions; whether they

1. Welcome and entertain them. As it is our happiness, as well as our duty, to
stifle evil motions: so it is our misery, as well as our sin, to extinguish
heavenly. Strange fire should be presently quenched, but that which descends
from heaven upon the Altar of a holy soul, (...). Polycarp. Epist. ad Phil.
terms holy persons.
must be kept alive by quickening meditation. When a holy thought lights
suddenly upon you, which has no connection with any antecedent business in your
mind (provided it be not unseasonable, nor hinder you from any absolutely
necessary duty either of religion, or your calling) receive it as a messenger
from heaven: and the rather because it is a stranger. You know not but you may
entertain an Angel, yea, something greater than an Angel, even the Holy Ghost.
Open all the powers of your souls, like so many Organ-pipes, to receive the
breath of this Spirit when he blows upon you. It Is a sign of an agreeableness
between the heart and heaven, when we close with, and preserve spiritual
motions. We need not stand long to examine them: they are evident by their
holiness, sweetness, and spirituality. We may as easily discern them, as we can
exotic plants from those that grow naturally in our own soil: or as a palate
at the first taste can distinguish between a rich and generous wine, and a
rough water. The thoughts instilled by the Spirit of adoption are not violent,
tumultuous, full of perturbation: but, like himself, gentle and dove-like
solicitings, Gal 5 22.
warm and holy impulses, and (when cherished) leave the soul in a more humble,
heavenly, pure, and believing temper than they found it. It Is a high
aggravation of sin to resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. Yet we may quench his
motions by neglect, as well as by opposition, and by that means lose both the
profit and pleasure, which would have attended the entertainment. Salvation
came both to Zacheus his house and heart, upon embracing the first motion our
Savior was pleased to make him; Had he slighted that, it is uncertain whether
another should have been bestowed upon him. The more such sprouts are planted
and nourished in us, the less room will stinking weeds have to root themselves,
and disperse their influence. And for thy own good thoughts, feed them, and
keep them alive, that they may not be like a blaze of straw which takes birth,
and expires the same minute. Brood upon them, and kill them not; as some birds
do their young ones, Psalm. 139.23. Try me, and know my thoughts.
by too often flying from their nests. David kept up a staple of sound and good
thoughts: he would scarce else have desired God to try, and know them, had they
been only some few weak flashes at uncertain times.

Improve them for those ends, to which they naturally tend. It Is not enough to
give them a bare reception, and forbear the smothering of them; but we must
consider what affections are proper to be raised by them, either in the search
of some truth, or performance of some duty. Those gleams, which shoot into us
on the sudden, have some lesson sealed up in them, to be opened, and learned by
us. When Peter upon the crowing of the cock called to mind his Master's
admonition, he thought thereon and wept: Mark 14 72.
he did not only receive the spark, but kindled a suitable affection. A choice
graff, though kept very carefully by us, yet if not presently set, will wither,
and disappoint our expectation of the desired fruit. No man is without some
secret whispers to dissuade him from some alluring and busy sin; Job 33.14,
17. God speaks once, yea twice, that he may withdraw man from his purpose.
as Cain had by an audible voice, Genesis 4.7. which had he observed to the
damping the revengeful motion against his brother, he had prevented his
brother's death, his own despair, and eternal ruin. Have you any motion to seek
God's face, as David had? Let your hearts reply, Thy face, Lord, will I seek.
Psalm. 27.8.
The address will be most acceptable at such a time, when your heart is tuned
by One, that searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10.
and knows his mind, and what airs are most delightful to Him. Let our motion
be quick in any duty which the Spirit does suggest; and while he heaves our
hearts, and oils our wheels, we shall do more in any religious service, and
that more pleasantly and successfully, than at another time with all our own
art and industry; for his injections are like water poured into a pump to raise
up more; and as Satan's motions are not without a main body to second them, so
neither do the Spirit's go unattended, without a sufficient strength to assist
the entertainers of them. Well then, lie not at anchor, when a fresh gale would
fill thy sails, but lay hold of the present opportunity. These seasons are
often like those influences from certain conjunctions of the Planets, which if
not (according to the Astrologer's opinion) presently applied, pass away, and
return not again in many ages: So the Spirit's breathings are often determined,
that if they be not entertained with suitable affections, the time will be
unregainable, and the same gracious opportunities of a sweet intercourse may be
for ever losts; for God will not have his holy Spirit dishonored in always
striving with wilful man. Genesis 6.3.
When Judas neglected our Savior's advertisement, John 13.21. the Devil
quickly enters, and hurries him to the execution of his traitorous project, v.
27. and he never meets with any motion afterward, but from his new Master, and
that eternally fatal both to his body and soul.

3. Refer them, if possible, to assist your Morning meditation; that like
little Thesis, follow it, and let your thoughts run whither it will lead you: a
Theme of the Spirit's setting is better than one of our own choosing.

4. Record the choicer of them. We may have occasion to look back upon them
Mary kept and pondered the short sayings of our Savior in her heart, Luke
2.17, 51. (...). Hesych.
committing and fitting them as it were in her commonplace book; why should
not we also preserve the whispers of that Spirit, who receives from the same
mouth and hand, what he both speaks and shows to us? It is pity the dust and
filings of choicer metals, which may one time be melted down into a mass,
should be lost in a heap of drossy thoughts. If we do not remember them, but
like children are taken with their novelty, more than their substance, and like
John Baptist's hearers, rejoice in their light only for a season, Joh. 5.35.
it will discourage the Spirit from sending any more; and then our hearts will
be empty, and we know who stands ready to clap in his hellish swarms and
legions. But howsoever we do, God will record our good thoughts as our
excusers, if we improve them: as our accusers, if we reject them; and as He
took notice how often He had appeared to Solomon, 1 Kings 11.9.
so He will take notice how often His Spirit has appeared to us, and write
down every motion, whereby we have been solicited, that they may be witnesses
of his endeavors for our good, and our own wilfulness.

Back them with ejaculations. Let our hearts be ready to attend every injection
from heaven with a motion to it: since it is ingratitude to receive a present,
without returning an acknowledgment to the Benefactor. As God turns His
thoughts of us into promises, so let us turn our thoughts of Him into prayers;
and since his regards of us are darted in beams upon us, let them be reflected
back upon Him in thankfulness for the gift, and earnestness both for the
continuance and increase of such impressions; as David prayed that God would
not take his holy Spirit from him, Psalm. 51.11.
which had inspired him with his penitential resolutions. To what purpose does
the Holy Ghost descend upon us, but to declare to us the things which are
freely given us of God? 1 Cor. 2.12.
And is it fit for us to hear such a declaration, without a quick suitable
reflection? Since the Comforter is to b ^ng to our remembrance Jo^. 14.26
what Christ both spoke and did; it must be for the same end, for which they
were both spoken and acted by him, which was to bring us to a near converse
with God. Therefore when the Spirit renews in our mind, a Gospel Truth, let us
turn it into a present plea, and be God's remembrancers of His own promises, as
the Spirit is our remembrancer of divine truths. We need not doubt some rich
fruit of the application at such a season: since without question the
impressions the Spirit stamps upon us, are as much according to God's will,
Romans 8.27.
as the intercessions he makes for us. Therefore when any holy thought does
advance it self in our souls, the most grateful reception we can bestow upon
it, will be to suffer our hearts to be immediately fired by it, and imitate
with a glowing devotion the Royal Prophet, in that form he has drawn up to our
hands; O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our fathers, keep this for
ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy servant, and
prepare my heart unto thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
This will be an encouragement to God to send more such guests into our hearts.
And by an affectionate entertainment of them, we shall gain both a habit of
thinking well, and a stock too.

How must we govern our Tongues? Sermon. XX.
Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace to the Hearers.


IN these words is a prohibition, and admonition; every corrupt word is
restrained, savoury and useful Discourse is enjoined.

For exposition enquire

1. What is this corrupt speech that is forbid?

Some restrain it to filthy unclean speech, others extend it to all wicked
speech; I conceive it reaches also unto idle, empty, unprofitable Discourse,
and to this apprehension I am led by the import of the Original word ((...))
which signifies rotten; and am further confirmed by the Antithesis in the
latter clause of the Verse (But that which is good to the use of Edifying)
where he seems to intimate, that the design of Discourse being the Edification
of one another; as rotten unsound Wood, that will bear no stress, is not put
into Building, so neither should sapless words, that have no heart in them, be
used in our Conversing. Downright evil words may be here condemned eminently,
unclean filthy words especially, but idle empty words I apprehend also
included, as in Ephesians. 5.4. they are particularly expressed (neither filthiness
nor foolish talking.)

2. What is understood by its goodness to the use of edifying?

In the Original it sounds pretty harsh (to the edifying of use) which I take
to be an Hebraism, and aequivalent to useful Edification. Some way or other
profitable our Discourse should be, to the imbettering and not worsting of our
selves, or Companions; and the goodness here spoken of, is its aptness to this
end. Though our Discourse has a higher or lower degree of goodness in it, as
it promotes and refers to a greater or lesser good; That which refers to the
imbettering of our Souls, is eminently good Discourse; and that which vulgarly
carries the name of it: But we are not confined to this; if the Body, the
Estate, the name of our Brother be industriously promoted, yea, if his mind be
innocently cheared, the Discourse by this Rule seems allowed and approved.

3. What is that Grace that should be still ministered by it?

Some understand it of Grace in the most noble sense, the begetting and
strengthening which, by our converse we should still be endeavoring; but I
cannot apprehend this singly meant, nor do I think the Apostle here speaks, of
the adaequate scope of our Discourse, for that he seems more generally to have
laid down in the words last explained; But I conceive he points at a by end,
that will result upon our eying the forementioned grand end, intimating that
if our words are so useful, they are likely to be grateful to the hearers, and
deservedly procure us grace and favor with them; Or else he here directs us,
so to season our speech that it may be savoury, and have a good relish with all
men; a relish of our wisdom, of our Charity, or some such like gift or Grace,
that God has bestowed upon us; And this way the Apostle seems to expound
himself, Col. 4.6. (Let your speech be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt)
the one is exegetical of the other if I mistake not: we should not speak as we
spit, what comes next, but have that respect to matter and manner, as no man
shall reasonably be disgusted at what we say, whereby he hopes we may be able
to answer every one, attaining by this practice the tongue of the Learned; The
Salt there advised is to prevent the putrefaction before cautioned. This grace
of speech Christ was eminent in, whereon it is said of him, (...).
Psalm. 45.2. Grace is poured into thy Lips. And by this as well as other
Excellencies, he grew in favor with God and Man, Luke 2.52.

From the various expressions in this latter clause I gather 1. That the design
of our speech should be always to some good use. 2. That ordinarily we should
aim at the promoting one another in grace. 3. That accordingly we should study
that there be an aptness and Idoneity in our speech to these purposes. Prove.
15.2. The Tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of Fools
pours, or belcheth out foolishness.


But to wave particulars, I shall only pursue this general Observation.

Obs.
That our very Lips are under God's Laws.

If we would approve our selves universally Christians, we must look to our
words, as well as hearts, and deeds. James 1.26. If any man among you seem to
be Religious and bridle not his Tongue, this man's Religion is vain. The Case
then I would speak to in answer to a query I may well expect from you, is,



In handling which I would proceed by these gradations, showing,

1. That there is a great difficulty in governing the Tongue; it is noted as a
very unruly Member, beyond other Members, yea, beyond every thing else, he
speaks even despairingly of our mastering it, James 3.7, 8. Every kind of
Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea is tamed, and has
been tamed of mankind; but the Tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil. We
find this by too sad Experience, persons that in their Actions are blameless,
are frequently in their words very faulty, and scarce reckon themselves guilty.
The double Guard that Nature has set over it, of lips to secure and Imprison
it, of Teeth as it were to punish it, suffices not to restrain it. It breaks
through all the bounds of God and Nature, and hardly acknowledges any Master.

Now the Tongue is so ungovernable,

1. In that it is a proud Member, being with its endowments of rational
Discourse peculiar to man, whereas our other Members are generally common to
Beasts; hereon we pride our selves hugely in it, David calls it his Glory,
Psalm. 57.8.
and it is certainly an Organ of great Excellency and Use, without which we
were incapable of Communion and Commerce, the chief advantages of humane life;
all of us have on this Account a great Opinion of it, are much pleased to hear
our selves talk, promise our selves great matters from our Tongue, that shall
get us favor, that shall get us honor, when we despair in every thing, we
have hope in that; That can make evil good by its pleadings, and that can make
good evil by its reproaches, that shall revenge us on our Enemy that is
otherwise too hard for us, and defend us at the Bar when ought is objected
against us, you cannot imagine what confidence men have in their Tongues, and
therefore no wonder they stand up so for the Liberty of them. Psalm. 12.4. With
our Tongues will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Herein
lies the impotent man's great power, and hereby he thinks to be even with every
one, the hands many times are bound and can do nothing, it is a relief and
pleasure that we can say what we list, if not before the face, yet behind the
back, truly or falsely. The Tongue's power lies in its Liberty, which makes us
so loath to have it abridged. When no way else Jeremiah's Enemies could hurt
him, by this Dart they thought to wound him, Jer. 20.10. They therefore that
are seeblest, and most destitute of other weapons, are lothest we should blunt
or any way restrain them in the use of this.

2. In that the Tongue is an Active Member, much beyond any others; opportunity
must be waited for their Actings, weariness is contracted by their Actings, but
the Tongue is always ready, and never weary, that it must be continually
watched.

Active this Member is in it self; compared therefore to a fire, James 3.6. The
Tongue is a fire, its volatility and Activity, as also its impartiality in
respect of Friend or Foe, is hereby noted.

Actuated also it is by many strong Springs within, that it is hard stopping
its motion, or finding out sometimes whence it has its Impression. Pride,
Anger, Envy, Malice, Hatred, all the wickedness of the Heart seeks its vent by
the Tongue, and falls in upon it like streams on a Mill-wheel, that of it self
is disposed to perpetual motion; how can it but move, and how can it regularly
move, that is impelled by such various and vicious principles? The Tongue, says
he, James 3.8. is full of deadly poison; all the ill humors are gathered to
it, hence it is a great difficulty to cure or check the malignity of it.

And yet moreover it is acted and vehemently incited from without; the Devil is
still provoking of it without occasion, and by presenting occasions to show its
tricks, so that there is little hope of its lying still, or acting according to
God's will. What can be expected from a Member that for its own Activity is a
fire, that is fed with such fuel, that is enflamed by such an Incendiary? For
so the Apostle tells us, that it is set on fire of Hell, James 3.6.

3. In that it is not aware of its iniquity, what mischief it does, how guilty
it is; whereon it is very hard either to prevent it or repent of it. What words
did they drop, and yet how do they stand up in the defense of them, as if
nothing had been said amiss? Mal. 3.13, 14, 15. Your words have been stout
against me, says the Lord, yet ye say, what have we spoken so much against
thee? The Tongue is never in fault, if we might be Judge, and that its own
Advocate; even they that are severest in censuring others words, have always
something to say for their own. And the insensibleness of Tongue-sins may arise,

1. In regard of its slight and nimbleness in its actings, especially when it
Acts in an accustomed way, it vastly out-runs our Observation, as in your
ordinary Cursers and Swearers you may see. Not one in ten of their horrible
Execrations is so much as noted by them, they patter them over, as a Parrot
does his lesson, without any present sense or after-reflection, and are ready
if hastily charged, to swear they did not swear, and curse themselves if they
cursed.

2. In regard of the imperceptible wound it makes, it draws no blood, it does
not immediately invade its Neighbor's Goods, and it cannot see what hurt it
does, any wound it makes, it thinks it can lick it well again straight; but
therein is a great deceit, it may lick its own lips and think so, and that
ordinarily suffices: Alas! can they not bear one of its lashes? We did but
talk, as we heard, as we thought, and that is nothing till it comes to be our
own case.

3. In regard of the pleasure it takes in all it does, that drowns all sense of
evil in it, it cannot be sin that tastes so sweet. Whereas many other sins are
not Acted without great pains, men draw at them like Horses, they proceed out
of us, as the Devils out of the poor men, tormenting and tearing of us, that we
are sensible of the evil of them: These sins of the Tongue are vented with
ease, we are not wasted, nor any way wearied by them; yea, they ease us in
their venting, we were big to be delivered of them, that some pleasure comes
that way to us; and several things in us are mainly tickled by them; now Pride
on a conceit of wit, then profaneness, in our very boldness. Again, Malice and
Revenge; that it has wreak't it self with such easiness: one Devil or other is
still set on laughing in us, and thus these sins go down merrily with us, and
are little suspected or censured by us, they look too pleasantly to mean any
harm to us. Thus you find some tickled by those speeches, through which others
were damned. 2 Pet. 2.13. Spots they are and blemishes ((...)) sporting
themselves with their own deceivings.

4. In regard of the applause it ordinarily has.

Whisperers and Tale-bearers how welcome are they to a great many for their
story's sake? They procure oftentimes favor to themselves, while they are
breaking the most entire Friendship. The profanest Scoffers, even at Religion
it self, for some spark of wit in that their greatest folly are entertained
commonly by laughter: one corruption or other in hearers cries up every thing
that is ill said, and many things purely for being ill said; and these prating
Fools are hardened in their sin, in that these laughing Fools make a mock of it,
Prove. 14.9. Upon these Accounts then it appears no small difficulty to govern
the Tongue; the more pains is to be took with it, the severer watch is to be
set over it.

2. Secondly, The Tongue is a very mischievous Outlaw, no Member like it, if
it get loose: what expressions has the Apostle of it? Jam. 3.6.
a world of iniquity he calls it, knowing by nothing greater to set it out, and
intimating all sin to be gathered together in it, Uncleanness, Injustice,
Heresy, Hard-heartedness, and what not? And yet as if he had not said enough,
he adds, that it defiles the whole Body: It begins its mischief at home, like a
recoyling Gun that lays its shooter in a shattered condition on his back, while
it wounds his Brother at the heart; one cannot bespatter his Neighbor but he
dirties, and daubs himself; the sin is his, and the shame shall be his, who
ever may at present suffer by him. Can he charge any further mischief on the
Tongue? (it sets on fire the course of Nature) all the turbulent motions of
these lower Spheres, are from the petulancy and inordinacy of this little
Member, that lashes every thing out of its genuine pace; it sows Jealousies, it
stirs up heats and Animosities, it foments enmities, provokes to Injuries, it
sets all the World together by the ears, that we had better been without
Tongues, than that they should be without government. Yet more particularly.

1. It lets fly at every one, no body is secure from it; Majesty and Innocence,
that are Fences against most evils, set none beyond the reach of the Tongue.
The God of Heaven, and the greatest and Holiest men on Earth, do often suffer
by it. We are told of some that should curse their King and their God. Isa.
8.21. 2 Pet. 2.10.
And are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities. It is a meddlesome Member, that
will let no body alone; a very Wasp that is buzzing about in every corner, if
its wings be not clipped; another Ishmael, its hands are against every one;
very extensive it is then in its Offense.

2. It lets fly every way; in a way of detracting, reviling, slattering, lying,
etc. No Member has so many and such contrary ways of offending, that it never
lacks opportunity of doing mischief, be it in good humor or in bad: either by
its glozing it deceives us, or by its roving it tires us, or by its levity it
deadens us, or by its Ribaldry it daubs us, or by its Insolency it affronts us.

3. No such Wounds as those that are made by it; it hits us e'ne where it
lists, in our Estates, in our Lives, in our Names, by false witness or privy
slander, it may undo us in all that is dear to us at once, especially in a
credulous uncharitable day (as this is): hence you may observe that he which
bore all the evils of the World without any flinching, Psalm. 69 19, 20
is something moved by what he suffered from the Tongue, that commonly touches
where we be most tender, its Darts sink deepest, and its wounds heal slowest of
any other; And in this respect the Tongue may be expressed not only by a Rod,
Psalm. 140.3. Psalm. 42.10. Prove. 14 3.
by a Scourge, by a Sword, but by the sting and poison of a Serpent, to note
the anguish of its biting, and the difficulty of its Curing.

Can we infer nothing from all this? Sure we may conclude,

1. That in all Reason and Righteousness such a Member should be strictly kept
in, even as an Ox that is wont to goring; Or,

2. That if we keep it not in, God will cut it out; his Righteousness requires
one, if our Righteousness fail of the other. If our Tongue must take its
course, and go uncontrolled, it shall not go unpunished; the first signal
Judgments in the Primitive times were for the sins of the Tongue. Ananias and
Saphira for their lie are struck dead, Acts 5.3. And Herod for his vanity and
vainglory in his speech is eaten up with Worms, while alive, Acts 12.23. And
does not the scorched Tongue of the Rich man in Hell tell us, Luke 16.24.
that Tongue-sins shall be severely required of us?

3. That the Tongue when reduced into Order is an Excellent Subject: no Member
so able, so Active as that; it is the same for good, as it was for evil; when
rightly set, none is more useful or Ornamental to Religion than that. You hear
what a value God sets upon it, the very hearts of others are not to be compared
to it. Prove. 10.20. The Tongue of the Just is as choice silver: the Heart of
the Wicked is little worth.

To show particularly what a good Subject it is, such as none like it, Note,

1. That it is a faithful Intelligencer to God, and to that purpose holds a
continual correspondence with him, betraying its bosom Friends that it finds
Enemies to him, and discovering all plots that are against him; not a sin shall
stir in our own hearts, but God shall hear of it, that he may timely suppress
it; not a sinner shall tumultuate in the World, but it shall notice him thereof
with a sharp Zeal for his Honor and Interest. Psalm. 119.126. It is time for
thee, Lord, to work, for they have made void thy Law. Psalm. 74, 22, 23. Arise,
O Lord, plead thine own Cause: remember how the Foolish man reproacheth thee
daily: forget not the voice of thine Enemies; the tumult of those that rise up
against thee increases continually. This Office advances the Tongue unto no
small capacity in the Kingdom of God; not that God needs it, but he likes and
requires it, and with a communication of like Secrets that concern us he
ordinarily requites it.

2. It pays a continual and considerable Tribute to him of Praise and
Thanksgiving; yea, it does not only pay its own share, but would willingly
Collect it of others for its great and greatly beloved Prince. Psalm. 145.21. My
mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his holy Name
for ever and ever. Its only grudging is, that it has so scanty an Offering,
that it can speak no louder, and sing no sweeter, when it has such a Subject
as God's praises: whence is that, Psalm. 51.15. O Lord open thou my Lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise.

3. It busies it self in bringing in, and reconciling Rebels to him, seeks
every way the enlargement of his Kingdom by making advantageous reports of him,
as in the 5. Cant. 10. by beseeching Persons to lay aside their enmity to him,
2 Cor. 5.20. David promises this Service to God with some hopes of success,
Psalm. 51.13. I will teach Transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
Converted to thee. It is needless to tell you how Serviceable the Tongues of
good men have been, and yet are, to this purpose: which work, as it is the
glory of God, so of all works is the joy of Angels, Luke 15.10.

4. It is also a useful Fellow-Subject; it has to give, and is ready to give,
good advice and counsel to others, by which it is hugely helpful to them. The
Tongue's Charity and Liberality is Famous; and, believe it, when it is become a
good Tongue, it is, as before noted, a silver Tongue, and its gifts are beyond
those of Silver and Gold. Two expressions note to this effect, Prove. 10.21. The
Lips of the Righteous feed many. Their words are others Bread, and the best
Bread they can get. But are they Drink too? See the 10. Prove. 11. The mouth of
a Righteous man is a Well of Life; a Well for plenty, for purity; and a Well
whose Waters have a singular Encomium, they are Waters of Life: to this let me
further add what you find, Prove. 12.18. The Tongue of the wise is health;
whence it may be called, the wholesome Tongue, Prove. 15.4.

Two Inferences I would hence make.

1. That it is worth our while, to use our utmost diligence to bring our
Tongues into Order, since they are such excellent Organs of God's Honor, and
so eminently serviceable unto our Brethren upon their Regulation.

2. That it must needs be God's great delight to see them in Order, and observe
them Acting in this their glory; now he loves to hear us speak, accordingly he
provokes us to it, as if it yielded sweet Melody to him. Cant. 2.14. O my Dove,
let me hear thy Voice, for thy Voice is sweet. Elsewhere what a high
commendation does he give of it? Cant. 4.11. Thy Lips, O my spouse, drop as the
Honeycomb, Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue. But above all we may see this
in that 3. of Mal. 16, 17. where they are represented talking, God harkening,
writing and resolving what he will do for them, and expressing what account he
made of them; their words seemed to hang as Jewels in his Ears, and their
Persons he will lay as Jewels in his Royal Closet, They shall be mine in the
day that I make up my Jewels.

4. That it is the great Glory of a man to have a good government over his
Tongue: the bare holding of it in makes a Fool seem wise, Prove. 17.28. Even a
Fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and he that shuts his Lips
is, esteemed a man of understanding. And the lolling out of the Tongue both
Naturally and Morally is reputed a great indication of Folly, Prove. 10.18. He
that utters a slander is a Fool. For what can he propose to himself in it to
compensate for what he ventures by it? his Brother's Credit is wasted; but his
own Conscience it may be wounded, as having transgressed both Charity and
Equity: and two to one, if in the like or a worse kind he be not requited, and
go unpitied: Yea, should all others spare him, he is even with himself; for
whatever he has said of his Neighbor, he has scarce given him a worse Name,
than he has took to himself of a slanderer.

But the right ordering of our Tongue, as to what is let out, and what is kept
in, does not only speak a good man, but makes him glorious and eminent among
other good men. Jam. 3.2. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect
man, and able to bridle the whole Body; he must have a measure of his own
parts, a command of his passions, and in-sight into Seasons and Occasions. It
is a modest expression, that he which can do this is able to command himself:
indeed if we could find the man he is fit to govern the World.

Whereas on the other hand he is fit for nothing that has a loose and
licentious Tongue; and it is generally a token of an impotent man. Try what you
can make of him, an ill Neighbor I will warrant you he will prove; he must be
prattling of every thing, and every one; every thing he sees, every thing he
hears, he turns into a story: one would not he should look over ones Wall, come
into ones House, talk with ones Children or Servants; he is either fishing out
of them, or dropping into them what is not convenient. His Eye, his Ear are
still progging for fuel to that fire his Tongue is enflamed with. His humor
is set out, Psalm. 41.6. If he come to see me he speaks Vanity, h^s heart
gathers Iniquity to it self, when he goes abroad he tells it. As bad a
Neighbor as he is, he is yet a worse Friend; he trifles away our time, he
tires our patience, he betrays our trusts; there can be no confidence in him,
we must still be upon the Watch, one may as well make a whole Town our Friend
as such a one. But yet too a much worse Relation he makes, it is next dwelling
in a Mill, to dwell with him; his clack is always going, only not in so good
tune and order as that we allude to; the wise man could not think of a
Condition so intolerable, as the being yoked with such a Relation. Prove. 25.24.
It is better to dwell in the Corner of an Housetop, than with a brawling Woman
and in a wide House. And a brawling man is as very a trouble-house, and in some
sense more intolerable, as more praeter-natural. In sum, a well governed Tongue
is not more our glory, than an unruly one is our shame; that we are pricked on
both sides by Honor and dishonor, to endeavor as much as may be the
regulation of this Member, as we consult the Credit of our whole man. These
things that we in general have promised may be improved as motives, and moral
helps for the government of the Tongue. But more particularly, in order to its
right management we must consider, 1. Its just measure. 2. Its due matter. 3.
Its proper scope.


1. As to the measure; and here we must note the extremes that are to be
avoided, and the mean that is to be observed.

1. The first extreme is over-silence; a rare fault, but a fault against the
very intent of the Tongue, and is a burying of that Talent; it is justly
chargeable with a great deal of evil, and suspicious of much more. And this in
some is natural from frigidity, and excessive melancholy; they are the easiest
pardoned, though not altogether excused, when otherwise duly qualified and
called, Exodus 4.10, 11, 12.

In some this is contracted by others iniquity: these are most to be pityed,
the violent suffocation of their thoughts is not without great vexation of
their hearts: as Lot might be an instance, 2 Pet. 2.2, 8. And David, Psalm.
39.23. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow
was stirred, my heart was but within me, while I mused the fire burnt.

In others this is affected out of Moroseness, doggedness, or design, in these
the offense is most aggravated, the silence is most sinful: but more
particularly.

When are we guilty of overmuch silence?

1. When Justice is obstructed by it: my Neighbor has suffered wrong, I know
it, without my testimony he cannot have right, I conceal it, my secrecy
involves me in the iniquity, Lev. 5.1. A pretense of peaceableness and good
Neighborhood stops the mouths of several in this case; but peace of
Conscience, and the cause of Righteousness, should be preferred before all
peace, and above every other consideration take place, if the matter especially
be momentous.

2. When Charity is omitted, and is not like from other hands to be at least so
seasonably, and advantagiously administered, there is oft-times great Charity in
a word, and it is the greatest cruelty imaginable to spare that word, and it is
often further heightened from the parties to which it is grudged. For instance,
if we are made privy to any thing, the discovery of which is for great public
good, and conceal it for private advantage, beyond what is fitting for our
private capacity, and a just reward for our ingenuity; we highly transgress
against public Charity, and are unworthy of the benefits of Society: this we
learn from the Lepers case, themselves being Judges, 2 Kings 7.8, 9. Again, if
we alone are privy to a Brother or Friend's fault, wherein he goes on, and is
not like of himself to come off, bolstering himself up in the opinion of its
secrecy, a word of reproof from thee might save him, and thou art the greatest
Enemy he has, if thou with-holdest it from him, Lev. 19.17.

Further, thy own Soul is in a dark and dismal state, thy Neighbor or Friend
is full of light, by one question thou might do much to thy own
illumination, and yet thou pinest away and perishest for lack of knowledge,
where is thy love to thy self in the mean time? Tongue-Charity is the cheapest
of all Charity, and yet many, certainly not without great guilt, let their
Countries, Friends, and own Souls starve for lack of it.

3. If our own Spirits be soured by it, words kept in are many times like
humors struck in, go to the heart and offend the vital parts. Maliciousness,
censoriousness, are often so fed; vent might give relief in this case, and be
the only means for our Cure, if moderately and discreetly given. Many can write
their probatum est to this.

4. If our Company, whom we may and ought to please so far as we can, be
grieved or offended at it. Silence, where we may be free, and have wont to be
free, and it is justly expected we should be free, as among Friends, Relations,
etc. Speaks very cuttingly, and should not causlesly be long kept, lest it be
ill interpreted; it intimates anger at them, or contempt of them, it renders
you wholly insignificant to them, you had as good send your Horse among them,
if you will not converse like a man with them.

5. If our Calling and Commission from God be to speak, we may not be silent,
as to any one thing committed to us to speak, in this case. You know who said,
Acts 4.20:
We cannot but speak, woe is us if we do not; Paul no other way could clear
himself of their blood, than by protesting that he had not shunned to declare
unto them the whole counsel of God, Acts 20.27. And our Savior does mainly
comfort himself, as having hid or kept back nothing given in charge to him,
Psalm. 40.9, 10, 11. Lo, I have not refrained my Lips, O Lord, thou know. I
have not hid thy Righteousness within my heart, I have not concealed thy loving
kindness, and thy truth; withold not thou thy tender mercies from me.

6. If the Cause and Honor of God call for a public testimony, no one in his
way may innocently withold it, however mean be his capacity; Children
therefore in Christ's day were called forth to it, and justified in it, Mat.
21.15, 16. And when offense was took on a like occasion, he tells them, that if
those should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

Eccl. 3.7.
You see then that there is a time to speak as well as keep silence: happy he
that hits his time, and he that heeds it will hardly miss it, or if he does,
shall the more easily be excused it. We commonly say that little said is soon
amended: true, but yet for not speaking as well as not doing in some cases we
may be condemned. It is therefore our duty to rouse our Tongue when it is
sluggish, as well as hold it in where it is lavish, calling upon it as he,
Psalm. 57.8. Awake up my Glory; or as you have another instance, Judges 5.12.
Awake, Awake, Deborah, Awake, Awake, utter a Song.

2. The second extreme to be avoided is Loquacity, or overmuch speaking, a
fault many are incident to, through the levity of their temper, and looseness
of their Tongues, and it is a very hard task for them to talk much and talk
well. He is peremptory, Prove. 10.19. that in the multitude of words there wants
not sin. And I suppose he speaks modestly, and that he means, that there is a
great deal of sin.

But let our Query be



Some few of many instances take as follows.

1. When talking excludes thinking, the Tongue out-runs the wit: a little of
this talk is too much, as being to no purpose but to betray our folly, abuse
our Brother's patience, and waste precious time. One may talk to Children at
this rate to save a needless expense of sense, where there is but little; but
it is an intolerable presumption upon men, to entertain them with words
morecrude than our belches, that we fetch not so low as our breath, and that
little differ from an Asse's braying.

2. When it will not give way to hearing, especially when wiser and better men
be present. If they were inferior and weaker, it were meet they should be
allowed their turns; every one may be supposed to have brought something
wherewith the whole might be edified: in engrossing all the talk to thy self,
thou art chargeable with unseemly vaunting, thou art in the ready way to
emptying, there is no hope of thy replenishing; go hoop and hallow in the
Woods, if thou will be answered only by thy own Echo. Proud men and passionate
men are apt so to offend, they have no ears, and so are unlike to edify, and
for any thing they are like to get, had as good keep out of Company. Mark
advice of one that understood the government of the Tongue as well as any
other, James 1.19. Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath. The last direction is to make good the former.

3. When talking shuts out working either in our common or Christian Calling.
Some men have got such a vein of talking, that it is their great business, and
for which they neglect all business, so many hours in a day they snatch from
all occasions on purpose to chat, this is more than can be justified; the
Apostle blames it in the Women of his day, 1 Timothy 5.13. They learn to be idle,
wandering about from House to House, and not only idle, but tattlers also, and
busybodies, speaking things they ought not. And sure it is more to be
reproved; in men, that should be more stayed, and might be much better
employed; but the Tongue is not only wont to take the hands off of business,
but to take upon it the business of the hands, as in the great duty of
distributing to the poor, that will serve them with good words, when the hands
should be ministering good things, the vanity of which he upbraids, Jam. 2.15,
16. And so it is apt to run all Religious Offices into mere talk, which is like
grain that has only a stalk.

4. When the whole man is turned into Tongue, that sure is a talkative man. And
such there be a great many, that cannot utter half their mind the Natural way,
whether it be from the fullness of filthiness of the matter they are stuffed
with you may guess; I am apt to think that they are full of filthy matter, that
the Tongue is e'ne ashamed to utter; or else straightened to vent fast enough, and
therefore hands, and feet and eyes, must speak too for greater riddance; they
talk in Characters for have, sometimes you have signs for words, at other times
words for Sentences, you must guess their meaning: for instance, He is -- I Will
say no more -- that is their way to brand a man, leaving you to think the worst
you can, and at leisure to put it in, reserving hereby a Liberty for themselves
to creep out if called in Question. This is the greatest talker I know, he
speaks when he says nothing, and says most when he utters: least Hunc tu Roman
caveto, look to this man, I durst almost warrant him a filthy beast, or crafty
knave, though it may be he only counterfeits one -- the wise man does so
represent him, Prove. 6.12, 13, 14. He walks with his mouth, and talks with
his Feet; what a Monster is this Man?

3. The mean that lies between these two extremes is, neither to wrap this
Talent up in a Napkin, nor yet lavish it away; but prudently to use it as we
see opportunity to improve it, that in the latter day we may give an Account of
it.

Rules.
In order to the observance of which mean I would give the following Directions.

1. Rest not in Ignorance; that will seal up thy mouth in silence if thou be
sensible of it, or let loose thy Tongue with impudence if thou over-lookest it.
Open thy Eyes, open thy Ears, open thy Heart to receive instruction, that thou
may be fit for pertinent communication; lay in before thou layest out; and
particularly know thy self, know whereof thou art about to speak, to whom thou
do speak, and thou shall not be to seek how to speak, whether any thing or
nothing, whether much or little, whether interrogatively or dogmatically; the
knowledge of thy own measure will be a great help to keep the right measure in
this whole matter.

2. Give not way to idleness: employ thy heart, employ thy hands, charge every
part with something, and then this busy Member may submit to its share, and go
to its burden; but if the whole man be dis-engaged, and unimployed, all the
vigor of the man does ordinarily run to his Tongue, he must be doing something
though next to nothing, and falls commonly into a humor of excessive talking,
as you may observe in Children that are not come to work, and old people that
are past it, unless Grace or gravity of manners check it. The Athenians were
this way tainted, that nothing but News would be disgested, and in gathering
and spreading that, they were perpetually Exercised, Acts 17.21. But business
diverts and spends the humor, and something tames and moderates this as well
as other Members.

3. Avoid Drunkenness; that loosens the Reins of the whole man, and especially
prevents the Government of the Tongue, and sets it on running and rambling
without fear or wit. It makes men spew that were wont only to spit, it brings
up all that is in our minds as well as stomachs: In vino veritas, all will out
when the Wine is in, Prove. 23.13. Persons of an airy light temper may find this
inconvenience forthwith, upon a sip or two of Wine or strong Drink, and for
every glass of Liquor abate an Ounce of wit; they should be more cautious than
other men. Wine is indeed proper for them of a sorrowful heart, to raise their
dejected Spirits to a due temper; but one that for ordinary is rather touched
with too much levity, is quickly overborn with it, and his Tongue soon trips,
however firm his Feet may stand.

4. Watch against all passionateness; that is a degree of madness, and
precipitates wise men into great Extravagancies of Speech; many can scarce hold
their hands, but fewer can hold their Tongues under the transport of it. If
ever the teeth are useful to bite in the Tongue, it is when it is enflamed by
Passion, and has broke in heat from the Government of Reason; either refrain
Anger, or refrain speech altogether when angry, as you would not proclaim your
own Folly.

5. Keep under Pride, that never keeps a decorum, but puts you forward beyond
what becomes you, in contempt of others that are not Inferiors to you; whereas
Humility will represent them at least even with you, that you would be awed
into a graceful modesty. If we think we have all the wit, we shall next
arrogate to our selves all the talk, and by thinking our selves wise make our
selves Fools.

6. Keep up Charity, which will secure from the transports of ill will and Envy.

2. The matter of our Discourse is to be regulated: and here occurs a twofold
consideration of it.

1. Something it is our sin to make matter of our Discourse. 2. Other things it
is our Duty.
1. As to sinful matter, we must wholly restrain our Tongues; Let no corrupt
Communication proceed out of your mouths: and again, Psalm. 34.13. Keep thy
Tongue from evil.

The particular evils of the Tongue are not to be reckoned up in a single
Sermon.

Some general Rules I will therefore lay down, whereto the most considerable
may be reduced.

1. Those things are evil, and not to be uttered, whereby God immediately is
dishonored: And by this we are admonished to take heed of venting Heresies,
uttering Blasphemies, all rash Swearing, forswearing, and taking God's Name in
vain; Sins all of an high Nature, and committed generally in height of Spirit,
and look as like presumptuous sins, for which God has appointed no Sacrifice,
as most we can reckon up, in regard of the small temptation to them, Numb.
15.30, 31.
and the impudence that is common in them.

2. Those things also our Tongue is to be restrained from, whereby our Brother
is wronged as to his outward man, whether as to Life, Estate, or Name:
unrighteousness is the evil of such Speeches, a manifest evil, and is
aggravated from the degree wherein he suffers, and from the directness of our
intention in bringing it upon him; though whether directly, or indirectly, of
malice and set purpose, or out of pure weakness, our Brother suffers and we
sin, that we were no more tender of him in concerns that are so dear to our
selves, and about which we have been so specially cautioned of God: and of this
Nature eminently are slander and false Testimony.

3. Those things must more especially be forborne, whereby our Brother's Soul is
like to be defiled, and his manners corrupted, in that the greatest Charity is
here transgressed. As for instance, all unclean Speeches, by which Lust may be
drawn forth; provoking Speeches, whereby passion may be stirred up; all
enticements to evil, and encouragements in evil; any thing whereby our
Brother's spirit may be lightened, or his heart hardened.

4. Such things whereby the fundamental Laws of Society are violated, and all
confidence in one another destroyed; I will instance particularly in three.

1. Lying, that makes words signify just nothing, and cuts off all communion
between one another Souls, that we can never know each others minds: we are
hereby at a far greater loss than if we could not speak at all. How detestable
this sin is you may learn by what you read, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15.

2. Tale-bearing, that is a Trade set up directly against all Friendship, and
the great bane of Love in the World; which yet has too much countenance from
the generality of the World: but God that is always more than our selves
solicitous for our good, has especially cautioned against it, Lev. 19.16. and
warned us of the evil effects of it, Prove. 18.8.

3. Revealing of Secrets, which destroys all confidence, and breaks the most
sacred Bonds of Friendship. And as to these we may be doubly faulty.

1. In reference to such Secrets as are committed to us sub sigillo: these
every one is convinced he ought to keep so for his truths sake, and to answer
the confidence that was put in him; though many are never quiet till they have
broke this Bond, but are rather irritated by their being bound. Prove. 11.13. A
Talebearer reveals Secrets. Especially,

2. In reference to such as come to us without such a formal Bond, out of
weakness or good nature; if there may be wrong to the party confiding in us by
divulging what he has so committed to us, the very matter of the case obliges
us, in justice, though not in faithfulness, we are bound to be his Secretaries,
if a far greater good may not come by the discovery. And let me here give a
special caution in a case wherein you may be liable to Temptation.

Take heed what you do tell to a Friend, lest he should after prove an Enemy;
this is prudence. Take heed you discover not, when an Enemy, what was told you
as a Friend; that is Piety.

5. The matter of the Discourse is faulty, when the very ends of it are
overlooked, and you fruitlesly and foolishly squander away both time and
Talents, not considering that idle words are also evil words, and to be
reckoned for another day, Mat. 12, 36, 37.



1. By purging the Seeds of it out of our hearts. Our Savior looked upon it as
an unnatural thing, and not to be expected, that they that are evil should
speak good things, in as much as out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, Mat. 12.34. That therefore must be first cleansed, that the mouth may
be kept clean; while there are filthy thoughts, malicious purposes, impetuous
passions, and idle imaginations allowed there, by the Tongue as well as other
ways they will have their vent: by every Member the heart will be discharging
it self of it is abundance; whence again he observes, that out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies,
Mat. 15.19. Mind therefore how you are still directed to lay the Ax unto the
Root, and crucify the evil affections of the heart, that you may prevent the
Extravagancies of the Tongue, Ephesians. 4.31. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and
Anger, and Clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all malice; he
despaired Clamor and evil speaking should be restrained, except Wrath and
Malice were extirpated. And to the same purpose Col. 3.8 9. Put off Anger,
Wrath, Malice, and then he has some hopes, they might also forbear Blasphemy,
filthy Communication, Lying. Let your first care then be of the Heart, and it is
first Motions, for every Member thence has it is impressions and all pretense
of care without a regard to this Will be but a palliation, and we may expect a
more violent Eruption.

2. By stopping our Ears, and shutting our Eyes against every thing that may
feed the forementioned evil humors; if they be fermented afresh, they will
flow anew, and be aware of remainders of them in the best of you: If we would
effectually keep a fire from smoking, we must keep it from burning; and to
secure it from burning, keep it from blowing and fresh supplies of fuel. We
can easily apply this, no refining of the Tongue without purging of the Heart,
no keeping that pure, if any thing that defiles is suffered to enter there, the
ordinary passages into which are by the Eye and Ear; avoid therefore in
prosecution of this Direction, all vain, idle, angry, envious, malicious
Companions, lest they be infusing into thee their Venom. Bid adieu to all
Profane Ranters and Ribalds, to all Tale-bearers and Whisperers; they will
kindle the fire of Lust or Anger, if there be a spark in thee. And next to
them, avoid all Books that are stuffed with profane Jests, or that gender to
excessive heats; these assault us like formed Armies, when occasional words are
like slight Sallies of a small party. And lastly, beware of vain and filthy
sights, and the more artificial, the more dangerous^, as more affecting the
fancy, sinking deeper into the memory, and pressing more importunately into the
mouth, they tickle us into the talk of them.

3. By laying the Laws against all idle and evil speaking before our eyes, in
their reasonableness and rigor: their reasonableness will appear, if we
consider them as for us; would we any body should abuse us with lies? or load
us with reproaches? no; why then it is well God has provided by his Law that
they shall not; and is it not alike equal, thou should not deal by another,
as thou would not be dealt by thy self? The Law then is good, and the
punishment is as great. Thy Soul may go for an ill word: consider of it, has an
evil word sufficient pleasure to compensate for eternal pain? Sure it is wisdom
to forbear such words, if we may pay so dear for them.

4. By considering the odiousness of it in others, and in them we may see it in
its true colors; things are too near us to be aright discerned by us, when
they are observed in our selves. A Liar, a False-witness, a Back-bit^^r, a
Talebearer, how do you like such men? Would you have your Child trained up in
such things? Why then will you allow them in your selves? How came they to be
more tolerable in you than other men? Is it that it is no matter what becomes
of you? How comes it that you have cast off all care of and love to self, that
you would have every body better than your self?

5. By reflecting upon the reproaches we have had from our own hearts for it,
and the inconveniences we have suffered, and the damages others have reaped
by it, beyond our possible reparation; is it not time then to take up?

6. By remembering that God observes it, and will Judge thee for it. A Reverend
man would awe thee, if there was danger, especially of the Pillory; and how
can thou cast off the fear of God, to talk before him so loosely? How will thou like to have all thy vain and vile words read and aggravated at the last
day? It will be one part of that days work, Jude 15, 16.

2. There is matter that it is our Duty to Discourse of, the general Nature of
which I shall lay before you; as,

1. Such, as though of a common and inferior Nature, as referring to things of
this Life; yet is of consequence to our selves or Neighbors to be debated, for
the right understanding or better managing of our joint, or several concerns:
this as tending to Justice, Charity, Peace, or the like, by the good use it may
be of, is Sanctified and becomes our duty, and we may not without sin decline
it, when duly provoked to it; for, as mean as these matters seem, God has
concerned himself to make severe Laws, that we worst not one another in them,
by which we are obliged to improve, and imbetter each other as we can, and
surely most of all when by a word it may be done. How does Job's Conscience
approve him in his having been a faithful Counselor? Job 19.15. I was eyes to
the Blind. And what a Character does Christ give to the Peacemakers? Mat. 5.9.
They shall be called the Children of God. And yet further, the command to
Worldly business six days in seven does more than allow Worldly Discourse,
especially when it has a moral use. So that as it is a vain Superstition of
some not to touch these things, so is it of others to decline necessary
profitable talk of them, as if it were a piece of Service to God to be useless
unto men, while by his providence we are among them. Know then, where by
weakness your Brother needs advice, and by a greater stock of wisdom you are
able to give it, it is his duty in order to the prudent management even of his
Worldly affairs to ask it, and yours as freely to give it for you therefore;
have it, and cannot otherwise give a good account of it.

Caution.
Let me only caution, that on this pretense you Lanch not out into Discourse of
this Nature

Unseasonably, as on the Lord's Day; unnecessarily for mere talk's sake;
immoderately, to the burying of all other Discourse, or hindering more
important business of your own or Brother's: it would also be carefully avoided
that we intrude not our selves as busybodies into the Discourse of others
matters, while we are unconcerned, and to Persons unconcerned, for which we are
like to go unthanked, whereby our Brother may be wronged, and no body is
edified.

2. It may be our duty to Discourse of what is done in the World, wherein God's
Justice, Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness or Goodness is advanced; One design of
God's mavelous working is to furnish us with fit matter for talking. His
Signs in Egypt are particularly noted to have had this reference, That they
might tell in the Ears of their Sons, and Sons Sons, what things he had wrought
in Egypt, that they might know that he was the Lord, Exodus 10.2. God's works
are one of his Books, that we should much confer about. David pleases himself
to see the whole World as set about a round Table, conferring their Notes of
what they had seen and observed of God in his works from Generation to
Generation. Psalm. 145.5, 6. I will speak of the glorious Honor of thy Majesty,
and of thy wondrous works, and men shall speak of the might of thy terrible
Acts, and I will declare thy greatness, they shall abundantly utter the memory
of thy great goodness.

This seems to be talk for the Generality of men, there is something in it
peculiarly pleasing to all palats, and an Example often affects, when a Precept
would be over-looked; and I am confident, if we could prudently Discourse of
the works of God, we might more advantage the profaner sort of men, than by
talking to them out of the Word; for they are prejudiced against that, and shut
upon it straight, as perceiving whereto that would, but they are pleased with
story, and lie more open to it, that there is greater hope e're they be aware
of their being caught with it, Psalm. 107.42. That this Discourse may be
profitable, take the following advice.

1. Make wise Observation, look with both Eyes on what happens, look into it,
look after God in it, and spy what Attribute is eminently glorified by it.
Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

2. Make faithful representations, lie not for God. The Romish Legends by their
multitude of Fables have greatly minished the veneration of all Miracles. One
fly spoils a whole pot of Ointment: the same does one lie in a most useful
History.

3. Make Charitable Interpretations, as to persons or parties, be not too
severe in censuring them that God makes Examples. It was the fault and folly of
the Jews. Christ tells us, they were out: and we as well as they may be out;
let us be warned by them, Luke 13.1, 2, 3.

4. And make pious applications, and still put in your self as concerned where
you note any thing to be learned, 1 Cor. 10.5, 11. Psalm. 90.11, 12. Many
profane the Providence of God by their slight Discourses of them, without
regard to God or his Glory in them; but you on the other hand by observing
Rules, may hallow his Name and spread his fame.

3. It is yet more especially our duty to be Discoursing to one another of what
God has said to the World for our mutual Direction, Caution, and Consolation;
this is to be our familiar and frequent Discourse, wherein we should be most
delighted, and whereby we may be most edified. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words, which
I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
House, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. Col. 3.16. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another.

What will we advise in Order to the more easy and profitable management of
this Duty?

1. Furnish your selves with all variety of pious matter, that you may have a
word to adapt every occasion, and bring out of your Treasure new or old
according to the Season; hence you will have a presentness of mind to the work,
and there will be a peculiar gratefulness in your words, as savouring neither
of force or affect^tion: in this sense Christ had the Tongue of the Learned,
Mat. 13.52.
and thus he would have every Scribe instructed: this would make our Discourse
still pertinent, that it could not well be rejected, Prove. 25.11. a word upon
the wheels he calls it, Isa. 50.40.
in respect of readiness and regularity.

2. Affect your heart with what you are about to speak. David waited till his
heart was hot, and the fire burned, and then he spoke, Psalm. 39.3. And then it
is that your words will slow from your mouths, and glow upon your Companions
hearts, you seem in carnest, and they know not how to take it in j^st.

3. Fortify your selves for such Discourse, reckoning you may meet with
discouragements; but put on the brow of brass, be not dismayed nor ashamed: let
iniquity be ashamed and stop its mouth; but while vanity and all manner of
Ribaldry passes current in every Company, let not good Discourse creep into a
corner, as if it alone were guilty. Say as Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, and resolve to walk and talk according to it, say the World what
they will of thee for it.

4. Watch occasions to fall most handsomely upon it; not as putting by Discourse
of a lower allay, but as improving it, ingraffing your good Fruit on their
Crab-stock, as Christ has given you frequent Examples; and assure your selves
the more Natural and insensible your transition is, the easier and better will
the Discourse be entertained, in as much as the Company is less affronted, than
if their Discourse was directly put by, and yours preferred.

5. Labor to make your good Discourse every way as grateful as it may, wisely
considering persons you are conversing with, what is to be said, and how every
thing may take best that you say: because the Preacher was wise he sought out
acceptable, Eccl. 2.10.
as well as profitable words; and no doubt acceptable, that they might be
profitable. Now there are several things give a grace, and are a great set off
to our words, some of which commend them to one, and some to others, and some
to all.

To begin with those that are more general and adorn all Discourse: such are
measure, season, suitableness, sweetness, foundness, etc. These must be still
regarded, or Company may justly be offended, as being some way abused, their
time seems not valued, their businesses regarded, their passions considered,
their Persons or parts duly reverenced, when their Ears are impertinently
entertained, or perpetually with the same things tired.

And then more particularly, modesty wins much on Superiors, familiarity on
Inferiors, a pleasant Lepor or Saltness upon Equals, freeness on Friends,
Courteousness on Strangers, meekness on Offenders, plainness on the Ignorant.
You need take least care to please the wise, for he heeds the matter, and can
make allowances for the manner of the Discourse.



The grounds of doubt are in that the Apostle seems to reckon it inconvenient
in any Discourse, Ephesians. 5.4. And it may look like a transgression of that
peculiar gravity that seems proper for our Religious Discourse.

First, Calvin says of it, that it is worthy of a Free and ingenious man.

2. It is as generally supposed, that this Lepor or Saltness of Speech was
ordinarily abused, and under pretense of wit most men played the Fools, venting
the froth instead of the Flower of their brains, which the Apostle is thought
to have respected in joining together jesting and foolish talking; And you know
that a Jester and a Fool are even Synonymous terms among us, none more idly
squandring away their wit, without respect to those chief ends, for which God
gave it, and they are obliged to use it, minding only the tickling of the
flesh, having no regard to the profiting of the Spirit. This abuse of wit, that
was even become general, I conceive the Apostle lets fly at, as also they
apprehended, that Translated the word by scurrility, into which this Lepor was
degenerated. Now our wit may be recko^ed to be abused,

1. When we are conceited of it, and use it purely in Ostentation of self, and
contempt of others; hereby we are injurious to our own Souls, nourishing Pride,
which it should be our great business to pluck down.

2. When we are immoderate in it, and either vainly or extravagantly lavish it.
Wit should be used like Salt, sparingly: a grain or two does well, a meal
surfeits. It speaks vanity in us, and nourishes overmuch levity in others, and
two to one we run dregs, if we know not when to have done, meddling with every
thing and every one.

3. When we are offensive by it, either to God's holy Ears by our Profaneness,
or to our Brother's by over-sharpness; and we should be especially tender,
where there is more than ordinary weakness, or plainness; and a greater Liberty
may be used in this latter kind, where there is great wickedness or
conceitedness.

4. When to any base ends we prostitute it: as first, to expose holy things or
Persons to the scorn of Fools, lessning their repute and reverence by our light
mentioning of them, or playing upon them, this is a degree of Blasphemy; or,
Secondly, when we design it only to make sport and raise Laughter, among those
especially which we should rather provoke to weeping. From all this it appears
that there needs great Caution in the use of this gift or faculty, But yet that
it may be both innocently, and advantagiously used, and Christian gravity
maintained, I shall briefly prove from Scripture Examples, even in most serious
and weighty matters. And I note eminently three occasions, where there may seem
needful some more than ordinary strain of Speech, or use of Salt in it.

1. If what we say be for Food or Physic to a Sick or weak stomacked Person,
that may otherwise nauseate it, this Salt may be useful to give it a relish,
and get it the easier down: for which purpose the plain way of speaking was
waved by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.1, etc. And again, by another Prophet, 1 Kings
20.38, etc. And almost generally by our Savior: without a Parable he scarce
spoke any thing; there was no coming upon those kind of Persons, without
circumventing of them. On the like necessity we should endeavor to show like
ingenuity, that we may catch Persons with guile, that will not otherwise come
to hand.

2. If our words be intended for Swords, this kind of Speech does set a
keenness upon them, for which purpose it is most frequently used in Scripture,
as you may see notable instances, 1 Kings 18.27. 2 Kings 17.32, 33. The proud
Fool will not be convinced often by plain Reason, that there is almost a
necessity of irrision; we must make him ridiculous that his Folly may be
conspicuous, when he is thoroughly exposed, he may chance be humbled. I take the
wise man, as directing us to this method with this sort of men, Prove. 26.5.
Answer a Fool according to his Folly, lest he be wise in his own Conceit;
according to his Folly, that is, according as his Folly does deserve, answer
him sharply, smartly, utterly silence him, that he may take care to speak wiser
another time, (repone illi verbera and virgam) as one says, answer him with
words as smart as Rods, the Fool's back requires them, Prove. 26.3.

3. Eccl. 12.11.
If as Nails we would drive our words (to which also they are compared) there
is a tendency in this pleasantness of Speech to fasten them, and fix them more
firmly in the memory; whence I conceive old dying Jacob gave his last Blessing
in such harmonious words, as some of them are bearing allusion to his Sons
names, such as Jehudah, Jodudah; Dan, Jadin; Gad, Gedud, etc. The Mothers
imposed their names for one Reason, but something in their future condition the
Father sees that agrees well enough to their names, whereon he chooses to read
their destinies as it were by them, for the more easy remembrance of them. I
would not these Examples should be abused, to prevent which let me only caution,

That we gravely, sparingly, and for like necessary ends, do imitate them; or
pretend no Patronage from them. To proceed.

6. Naturalize this Discourse if possible, and as far as possible to you; then,
and not till then you will speak with ease, and speak with a grace, and this
facility is chiefly got by frequency. We must in a manner confine our selves to
this dialect, that we may get this Excellency in it; for which purpose let your
converse be most with those that speak this Language, and converse with all
that are any way capable in this Language; provoke them to it, use them to it,
necessitate them to it, if they will converse with you, be as one that could
hardly speak any thing but it, from your youths accustom your selves to it, in
your Houses and among your familiars, initiate your selves herein, they will
bear with your stammerings, which you might be ashamed of before Strangers, and
having once got, take heed you do not forget the Language, but inure your
selves daily to it, you may travel through the World with it, it is one of the
Learned Languages, that all Scholars (...) have been bred in Christ's School
understand, you herein have con^^se with them; and it is no great matter if you
are a Barbarian to others, if it quits you of their Company it does you a
kindness, if this way you can be quit of vile and vain Companions, it is the
honourablest way you can be rid of them, and so far as separated from them, you
have Heaven's happiness on Earth; better a great deal they should be angered and
estranged from you upon the holiness of your Discourse, than you grieved or
defiled by the commonness or Profaneness of theirs. Though I must also tell
you, if once this Discourse was habitual to you, it might be better born in
you, and no body would expect other from you, but as they had occasions of
dealing with you, might probably be awed into a Conformity to you.

Further to engage you so far as may be in this holy strain of Speech, take
these Motives.

1. No Discourse is so proper for you as Christians, Motives.
it being the Language of the Country to which you do belong; further, your
concerns generally lie in the word, all that are worth speaking of, why should
you in a manner talk of any thing else? It is almost an impertinency for a
Christian to talk of this World, wherein he is a Stranger, and whereof he can
call little his own but a burying place. This was the utmost I find great
Abraham to have grasped after, or reckoned of in this World that he made sure
of, Genesis 23.4, 20. I am a Stranger and Sojourner with you, give me a possession
of a burying place. And the Field and the Cave was made sure to Abraham for a
Burial place. Truly this is all we are sure of here below, that if we talk of
any thing in this World, it is most proper to talk of our Graves, and our daily
readiness to drop into them: into which Discourse David Naturally fell when his
Company would not bear higher, Psalm. 39.4, etc. Lord make me to know my end,
and the measure of my days, what it is, that I may know how frail I am. But
turn him to the Word, he has something there; God, Christ, Men, Angels, Life,
Death, things present, things to come, all things are his. Confine then to your
own matters, especially since you have so large a Field. Every one talks of
their proper concerns: (Navita de ponto.) Have you nothing of your own to talk
of? or is it not to compare with what others so much please themselves to
prattle about? For shame Christians, that you alone should rove and ramble at
this rate; holy heavenly Discourse is that one would expect from you, and that
alone seems pertinent to you.

2. No Discourse is so profitable. One may hear a deal of other chat, and be
neither the better nor wiser, or at least we are instructed unto some little
mean designs; but when we talk out of the Word, we are in the way of Learning
or Teaching, what will be for our universal accomplishment: for as he says, 2 Timothy 3.16. The Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Yea, such Discourse does not
only fit us for the work of this World, the best, the noblest Achievements in
it; but it prepares us for, and in a sense enters us into the Work of the other
World, for that I conceive lies much in the holy use of the Tongue: we hear of
no other employment of the Saints in glory, but that they night and day are
praising God, he is always in their eyes, he is ever in their mouth. The work
of Heaven will not be uncouth to them, that have been much Exercised in holy
Heavenly Discourse on Earth; but for others, that can scarce frame their mouths
to a good word on Earth, for my part I know not what they will do in Heaven,
though I think there is no great danger of their coming thither.

3. No Discourse is so pleasant: next to the Songs of Angels, the pious
conference of holy men, is the sweetest melody our ears can be entertained
with; other things comparatively found harsh to the things of God, neither at
the instant affect the Ear with that pleasure, nor afterward leave it in that
composure. To reflect a little by way of comparison: And first let us listen a
little to what the World says; a buzze there is in both ears, but what do we
hear? Such a man has played the Knave, and such a man has played the Fool,
such a Family is at great Discord, or in great distress, such a Nation is
involved in War, or such a Person has shed the blood of War in Peace: for
ordinary we hear nothing but what it is a vexation to hear, nothing but what
may make our Ears to tingle; or if ought seems at present to tickle them, as
profane Jests and idle stories may for a while do, this tickling ends in
torment, the Ear is put out of Order, and the Heart as being defiled is not a
little discomposed. He could see so little pleasure in the Speeches, that he
abhorred the Songs of Sinners, as having no harmony in them, their Mirth was
rather his Sorrow, Eccl. 7.5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the Wise, than
for a man to hear the Song of Fools. But,

2. In listening to holy Discourse, we hear of the Love of God, the glory of
Heaven, the Graces that do shine in some, the Duties that are performed by
others, we hear of an end that shall be put to all earthly troubles, whereby
the sharpest sufferings are allayed, and by what we may hear further, death it
self comes to be despised. Are the stories we hear on one Ear and the other to
be compared? we may hearken long enough e're the Ear will be satisfied with
hearing, except we chance to hear something from Heaven; all the good News is
in the Word of God, and to be heard from good men that bring us stories
therefrom.

4. By neglecting holy Discourse you may lose opportunities of good both to
your selves and others, that you will wish you had taken.

1. It may be as to your selves you were in Company with Persons eminent for
grace and knowledge, here was an opportunity of doing your own Soul good, but by
the stream of your impertinent tattle, all savoury Discourse was diverted, that
Season was neglected, afterward you see your lack of knowledge, the Instrument
is removed, Ah Fools! do we not then cry out of our selves, the opportunity is
gone, and we are undone? How must it gall an awakned Jew to think what
Discourse he had with Jesus Christ? Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar?
Here is a Woman caught in Adultery. Why do not thy Disciples Fast? etc. Ah! had
I nothing else to enquire of my Savior? Would it not have been more pertinent
to have asked, what I shall do to be saved? But he is gone, and I must die in
my sins. How many Persons have we sent away, that have had a word of wisdom in
their hearts, having learnt only what a Clock it was, what weather, what News,
forgetting to ask our own hearts, what all this was to us, and enquire of them
things worthy of their wisdom and our learning? Secondly, as to others, you may
rue the opportunities you have lost; here lay a poor wretch with one foot in
Hell, would he not have started back, if he had had light to Discover his
Danger? Well, you are together, something you must say, the same breath would
serve for a compassionate admonition as a complacent impertinency, which will
redound to neither of your advantages; you part, the man dies in his sins, and
in the midst of Hell cries out against you, one word of yours might have saved
me, you had me, you might have told me of my danger, you forbore, I hardened,
the Lord reward your negligence. Oh give not poor Souls occasion to rail at you
in Hell for your sinful silence or impertinent converse with them here on Earth.

You will pretend (it may be) want of matter in excuse for your forbearing holy
Discourse.

No, Friend, it was want of mind, End; Eternity is not sufficient for it, but
thou art resolved also it shall have no beginning.

Well, you know your duty, and do as likes you.

3. In order to the right management of our Tongue, especial regard must be had
to its scope, what is aimed at in every motion of it, either immediately or
ultimately; for without some scope it is vain talk, and according to the
goodness or badness of our scope, it is ordinarily good or bad talk: I say
ordinarily, for some talk is so bad that it is scarce capable of a good scope,
much less of being made good by it, yet less evil it does become, to instance
in blasphemy and lying, great moral evils both in their own Nature, and no
design can destroy the Nature of them, in that the Word of God allows not, but
forbids the doing of evil that good may come of it, yet speeches materially so
have been passed over, the evil as of simplicity pardoned, and the good aimed
at in them as of sincerity rather rewarded. As Paul, Rahab, and the Egyptian
Midwives might be instances; but let us take heed of making them Examples. But
ordinarily, as I said before, the Scope does much unto the Specification of the
Speech, so much,

1. That fair Speeches become foul, if dirty designs be couched under them or
carried on by them; he cries out therefore for help against the Flatterer, as
if he was a Murderer, Psalm. 12.1, 2, 3. Help Lord for the faithful fail, they
speak vanity every one with his Neighbor with flattering lips, etc. the Lord
shall cut off all flattering lips. Psalm. 55.21. His words are softer than Oil,
yet are they drawn Swords. The like may be said of the fawning Woman, that
entices to vice, Prove. 5.3, 4. The Lips of a strange Woman drop as an
Honeycomb, but her end is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword.

2. Good Speeches become evil to the users of them, if evil be meant by them:
as if we couch under them to cover sinful purposes, or color sinful practices,
hereby they are profaned, and the holier they be, the wickeder; Woe to you, ye
devour Widow's Houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers.

3. Our most common Speeches, that might otherwise seem culpable, are not only
allowable, but commendable as they may be referred unto some good purpose. As
first for the remission of a mind over-bent and burdened with serious matter,
that one may return with more vigor to it. Secondly, For the prevention of
worse Discourse, where better will not be entertained. Thirdly, For insinuation
into bad men, that we may gain an opportunity of doing good upon them; and for
introduction into better Discourse; which abruptly cannot be brought in.

So much then depending upon the Scope of our Discourse, let me give two
Cautions hereon.

Caution.
First, That none Pride themselves in the material goodness of their Discourse;
if the design be bad, it is like a fair Apple rotten at the core.

2. That we judge none rashly for the seeming commonness of their Discourse, if
it be not their common dialect, and especially if they are among common
spirited People, there may be a pious guile in it, a reason for it, and it is
Charity to suppose it: but let every one judge himself, who only has a Capacity
to know himself, and let us all be cautious however, that we lay not a
stumbling block before a weak Brother.

How may Detraction be best prevented or Cured? Sermon. XXI.
Psalm. 15.3. He that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does evil to his
Neighbor, nor takes up a Reproach against his Neighbor.


AMong the many Sins for which God is contending with England, and especially
with the Professors of Religion in it, I doubt not but one, and that none of
the least is, the gross misgovernment of their Tongues. The abuses of the
Tongue are many, one whereof is the malignity of it. And whereas in David's
time a malignant and virulent Tongue was the badg and cognizance of an Atheist,
Psalm. 59.7. Behold, they belch out with their mouths, Swords are in their Lips,
for who (say they) does hear? Now alas! this Spot is become the Spot of God's
Children, and high professors of Religion. A man can scarce come into any
Company, but his Ears shall be filled with censures, detractions, reproaches,
Party against Party, Person against Person: Instead of that old Christian Love
and Charity, for which the Ancient Christians were noted and applauded even by
their Adversaries, ( Behold, said they, how the Christians love one another.)
Men's hearts are generally full of rancour, and their Tongues of sharp
reflections, contemptuous and reproachful expressions, censures and slanders,
against their absent, and oft-times innocent and more worthy Brethren. This is
the Disease which I would endeavor to administer some Physic to from these
words.

The Coherence is plain. David proposes a Question, verse 1. Lord, who shall
abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? By which you may
understand either Sion, where the Ark then was, or Moriah, where the Temple was
to be Built, and by either of them, the Church of God here, and especially the
Heavenly Temple hereafter.

So that it is as if David had said, and asked, what is the qualification of
the true Members of God's Church, of the Citizens of the New Jerusalem? By what
properties are they known and distinguished from other men? To this David does
not answer, that they are so differenced by their high Talks, by their crying
out upon the sins of other men, or the wickedness of the times, by their
frequent attendance at God's Tabernacle; but by the uprightness of their
Hearts, by the good Government of their Tongues, by the holiness of their
Lives. Verse 2. He that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and
speaks the Truth in his heart. And in this 3d. Verse that I have now read, He
that backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes
up a Reproach against his Neighbor. It is the last clause which I intend to
speak to, because it will comprehend the former. Nor takes up a Reproach
against his Neighbor. The words I shall explain in the handling of the
Doctrine, which is this,

It is the Duty, and must be the care of every true Christian, not to take up a
Reproach against his Neighbor.

I shall first explain the point, then prove it, and lastly, apply it.

For Explanation, three things are to be enquired into.

1. Who is my Neighbor? There are some men of Name in the world that will tell
you, that in the Language of the Old Testament, by Neighbor is to be
understood one of the same Country and Religion, Popularis Israelita, and it
is the peculiarity of the Gospel that every man is made my Neighbor. But if we
examine Scripture, we shall find this to be a gross mistake. I need not go
farther for the confutation of it, than to the Decalogue it self; Thou shall
not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor. I suppose it will seem a very
hard saying to affirm that it is Lawful to bear false Witness against a
Stranger. So when God commands, Thou shall not lie carnally with thy
Neighbor's Wife, Lev. 18.20. I presume these Gentlemen would not allow
themselves that Liberty with the Wife of a Stranger. If God may be his own
Interpreter, this Controversy will quickly be ended from Lev. 19. chapter where if
you compare two Verses, Verse 18. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
with Verse 34. But the Stranger that Dwells with you shall be unto you as one
born among you, and thou shall love him as thy self; you will not need the help
of an Artist to form this Conclusion, that the Stranger is in God's Account,
and ought to be in mine Account, my Neighbor. To the same purpose you may
please to compare two other places of Scripture together, Deuteronomy. 22.4. Thou
shall not see thy Brother's Ass nor his Ox fall down by the way, and hide thy
self from them: thou shall surely help him to lift them up again, with Exodus
23.4, 5. If thou meet thine Enemie's Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall
surely bring him back again. If thou see the Ass of him that hates thee
lying under his Burden thou shall help him up. He who is my Brother, which is
nearer than a Neighbor, in the one place, is mine Enemy, and he that hates me
in another place. And it is further observable to this end, that the Hebrew
word (...) and the Greek (...) a Neighbor is usually rendered in Scripture by
(...), another, as Romans 13.8.9. He that loves another has fulfilled the Law,
for the Law says thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Most true
therefore is that of St. Augustine, Proximus est omnis homo homini, every man
is a Neighbor to any other man. Nay, the more intelligent part of the Jews
were of this Opinion, and Kimchi upon these words says, He is called my
Neighbor with whom I have any business. And the Scribe, of whom we read, Luke
10. knowing the mistakes of many of his Brethren, asks our Savior this
Question, Verse 29. Who is my Neighbor? And our Savior gives him an Answer,
the sum whereof is this, that even the Samaritan was to be looked upon as his
Neighbor.

2. What is a Reproach?

I answer in general, it is nothing else but an evil Report, or an evil Speech,
unduly uttered concerning another.

Now a Report is evil two ways.

1. When it is evil in it self, a false Report: when a man belyes his
Neighbor, and bears false Witness against him, either in judicial proceedings,
or in common Conversation. These kind of evil Reports David was Exercised with,
Psalm. 35.11. False witness did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I
knew not.

2. When it is evil to a man's Neighbor, when your Speech tends to your
Neighbor's disparagement and defamation. And here I must inform you that a man
may be guilty of Reproaching men by Commendations, as David speaks of his
Enemy, Psalm. 55.21. His words were smoother than Oil, yet were they drawn
Swords. It is the usual Practice of some men to smooth the way to a reproach by
a Commendation, and to raise a man's reputation, that he may tumble it down
with more advantage.

2. When a man publishes a Neighbor's secret Infirmities or sins. This all
casuists allow to be a kind of Detraction: and good Reason; for though the
matter may be true and good; yet the principle from whence this proceeds is
evil. It proceeds from want of Love to my Neighbor, and of the just care that
I ought to have of his Credit: And the Ends either of Speaker, or of the Speech
in its own Nature, or of both, are evil, even to bring his Neighbor into
contempt or disgrace.

3. When a man aggravates the real or supposed faults of his Neighbor either
in Opinion or in practice. Certainly the Professors of this Age, and this City,
are deeply guilty in both these respects.

1. In aggravating other men's real or supposed Errors and mistakes,
Oftentimes men call that an Error through their own Ignorance or prejudicate
Opinion, which in the judgment of far wiser and better men than themselves, and
in reality, is a precious Truth of God: And the pardonable mistakes of their
Neighbor they decry as fundamental and damnable Errors, or at least as
Errors dangerous to Salvation. I am far from pleading for Errors that are
really damnable, or highly dangerous, such as those of the Papists, Socinians,
Quakers, and the like: But there are other and lesser differences among,
Protestants, who holding the Head as the Apostle speaks, differ in Doctrines of
less moment, or in the methods and modes of Worship, in Rites and Ceremonies,
which possibly one man thinks to be necessary, another to be Lawful and
indifferent, another sinful; and by these differing Opinions it is lamentable
to consider, and, I confess, I cannot think of it without horror and loathing,
how Protestants traduce and defame one another. The one is Superstitious,
Idolatrous, a Formalist, a Profane Person, and one that has no sense of
Religion. The other is an Heretic, a Schismatic, a Fanatic, a licentious
lawless Person, that follows his own sensuality, and has not the fear of God
before his Eyes. Thus they mutually rail at one another, as if they had neither
sense nor Conscience. Nay, the Disease is grown to that height, that not
content to censure men's Opinions, they will also judge of their Consciences,
and secret intentions, as if they maintained such Doctrines against the light
of their own Consciences. A Censure which proceeds from deep Ignorance of the
merits of the Cause. It were, I confess, a very desirable thing that all men
were of one mind, and Christians indeed are to labor for it, and to pray for
it, 1 Cor. 1.10. I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that you all speak the same things, that there be no Divisions among you, but
that you be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
judgment. But if a man consider the great weakness of most men's
understandings, the Infinite variety of their parts and apprehensions,
Educations, Inclinations, Interests, or what the Scripture has foretold,
There must be Heresies, that they that are approved may be made manifest, I
think he will conclude, that he who shall expect this absolute harmony and
uniformity in this World must either dream or dote. And therefore the Holy
Ghost has directed us what to do in case of such differences of judgment, to
wit, to talk charitably toward those that differ from us: Romans 14.15. If thy
Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not charitably: And to agree
with others as far as we can, Phil. 3.15, 16. Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus, indeed and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you. Notwithstanding whereto you have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same things. But for those mutual
reproaches and censures one against another, I must take the boldness to charge
you all, as you tender your Salvation, to have a care of them: for though these
points wherein you differ be disputable, yet this is out of all dispute, that
you ought to love your Neighbor as your self, and that you ought not to take
up a Reproach against your Neighbor. And therefore take heed, lest while you
condemn another man for disputable and lesser Errors, you do not run into an
indisputable Crime and fundamental Miscarriage.

2. Men are guilty of reproaching their Neighbors by aggravating their Errors
in practice and conversation: When men censure and reproach others for things
indifferent and of small moment. As for Example; In their Habits and Garbs. I
am not Ignorant that there are great miscarriages in men's Habits, and that the
Bush that hangs at the door does frequently discover what is within, and tell
the pride of men's hearts, and there are certain bounds and limits to be
observed, that men's Habits be agreeable to their Quality, Estate, Calling, and
Condition in the World: but yet there is a just Latitude in these things, the
Lawfulness of them does not consist in a Mathematical point, these are to be
regulated by the Customs of times and places: Now if a man see another that
does a little vary from his fancy or practice, whose Garb is a little more
Ornamental than his, though not much extravagant, if now he judges the state
of this man, and concludes him to be a profane or carnal Person, this is a
Reproach. So again, when a man commits some miscarriage toward his Neighbor
through carelessness, or forgetfulness, or mistake, it is a common thing for
men to charge it as a malicious design intended for their hurt; this is a
Reproach. And you may easily multiply Instances in your own thoughts.

3. Question, What is it to take up a Reproach against a man's Neighbor?

I answer: It is a defective manner of expression: and therefore is diversely
supplied; but especially and most reasonably two ways, and accordingly a man
may be guilty of taking up a reproach against his Neighbor two ways.

1. When he takes it up into his mouth. The Hebrew word is often so used: As
Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. Not take
it, that is, not lift it up upon thy Tongue, or not take it into thy Mouth. So
Isa. 14.4. Thou shall take up this Proverb against the King of Babylon; that
is, thou shall take it up into thy lips, thou shall utter and publish it. Thus
Ezekiel. 26.17. They shall take up a lamentation for thee: which is explained in
the following words, and say to thee, how art thou destroyed? And therefore
elsewhere the word, Lips or mouth, is added: as Psalm. 16.4. Their
drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my
lips. Psalm. 50.16. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant into thy mouth? And this phrase of taking up, may
possibly respect the situation of the Mouth above the Heart; which, according
to the Opinion of the Hebrews, is the seat of the Understanding: As if he had
said; If there should rise in thy heart any evil thought or device against thy
Brother, let it die there, let it never come up into thy mouth. Now in this
respect a man may be guilty of this sin of taking up a reproach against his
Neighbor two ways.

1. When he is the Author and first raiser of a reproach: Such as Sanballat
was, Neh. 6.8. There are no such things as thou say, but thou feignest them
of thy own heart.

2. When a man is the Spreader or Promoter of it. Suppose it comes from another
Fountain, if thou art the Conduit-pipe by whom it is conveyed to others, thou
art guilty of it. Lev. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer
among thy people.

2. When a man takes it into his Ear: So some expound these words, thou shall
not receive, not admit, not endure a reproach against thy Neighbor. You know
the Receiver of stolen goods is as obnoxious to the Law, as he that takes them
away: So then a man may be guilty of this sin, not only by speaking, but also
by the hearing of a reproach against his Neighbor; and so he may be three ways.

1. When a man quietly permits it, and gives no check to it. This is certain,
the great Law of Charity commands me not only to do no hurt to my Neighbor,
but also to suffer no hurt to be done to him, which it lies in my power to
prevent or remove. If another set his house on fire, I must lend my help to
quench it; I must pull my Neighbor's Ox out of the Pit, though another man
has cast him in; and consequently, when the good name of my Neighbor is
invaded by another, if I patiently bear the reproach, I make my self guilty.

2. When a man hears a reproach against his Neighbor greedily, and with
delight. It is a sin, and that of no small size, for a man to take pleasure in
the sins of others; and therefore the Apostle makes it an aggravation of sin,
Romans 1.32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things
are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also have pleasure in them that
do them: 1 Cor. 13.6. Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth. Consider, I beseech you, the commonness of this sin; if a reproach be
fastened upon one who is a man's Enemy, or of another Party, men commonly hear
such reproaches with delight, not considering that this is not only a blemish
to his own Party, but also a blot to Christianity, a reproach to the Protestant
Religion, a sin against God, and against the Gospel, a scandal to men; and
these things should rather call for tears, than laughter, and approbation. And
therefore when a man seems to approve another man's reproach, and encourage the
reproacher, he involves himself in the guilt of it. It is the saying of a very
Learned Man upon the Proverbs, That it is not easy to know whether is a
greater sinner, or whether is the greater plague to a Commonwealth, he that
spreads a reproach, or he that willingly receives it.

3. When a man easily believes a reproach. It is said indeed, 1 Cor. 13.7.
Charity believes all things; but the object of this belief is the good of my
Neighbor, and not his evil. Charity readily believes well concerning its
Neighbor, where there is the least color or foundation for it; but it is slow
to believe evil concerning him: and when a man is prone to believe evil
concerning another man, it is a great sign of an uncharitable disposition; the
reason is, because men do most readily believe those things which comply with
their own desires and inclinations; as in Wars and differing Factions, every
man is apt to believe good tidings concerning his own Party. Good men are the
least suspicious, and slowest to believe evil of others: of which you have a
remarkable instance in Gedaliah; when Johanan told him of Ismael's design to
murder him, it is said, he believed him not, Jer. 40.14. And when it was
pressed upon him a second time, and Johanan offered to punish the Conspirator,
and to prevent the Execution of the Treason, he said, Thou shall not do this
thing, for thou speak falsely concerning Ismael, verse 16.

You may observe how backward fond Parents are to believe any ill report
concerning their Children; and whence does this proceed? even from an
inordinate love and kindness to them: and therefore on the contrary, men's
credulity unto evil reports concerning their Neighbors does proceed from want
of love and affection to them. So much for the Explication.

2. The Proof of the Doctrine shall consist in the representation of the
sinfulness and injury of this practice of censuring, backbiting, and
reproaching of others. And that I may more effectually dissuade and affright my
self and you from it, I shall discover to you how pregnant a sin this is: There
is a complication of injuries in it. It is injurious; First, to God; Secondly,
to your selves; Thirdly, to the Party censured or reproached; Fourthly, to
other men.

1. To God and Christ in diverse particulars.

1. It is an invasion of God's Prerogative. You know how dangerous a Crime this
is, when it is committed against an Earthly Prince: nor can you in reason think
it less criminal and hazardous, when it is committed against him who accepts
not the persons of Princes, and who is greater than the Kings of the Earth. And
therefore observe how severely God rebukes this sin in the Epistle to the
Romans, Chap. 14. when men did censure and Reproach one another, either for the
Observation of days and meats, as guilty of Superstition, or for the neglect
of them, as proceeding from licentiousness, what says the Apostle? Who art
thou that judge another man's Servant? verse 4. And, But why do thou judge
or set at naught thy Brother? For we must all stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, verse 10. As if he had said, thou do set thy self in the Throne of
God, and thou do take God's work out of his hands.

2. This is a manifest breach of the Laws of God and of Christ. The things, as
I said before, which thou do censure and reproach another for, are
oftentimes doubtful and liable to dispute, but the Command of God against this
sinful practice, is evident, and without controversy. He, whom thou censurest,
possibly may sin, but thou that do reproach him, certainly do sin, and that
against clear Light, and so thou do put thy self into the Number of those
that rebel against the Light, which is mentioned as a great aggravation of sin,
Job 24.13. The Law of God has so evidently forbidden this sin, that if thy
Conscience does not smite thee for it, if thou can go on quietly in this sin,
it is a sign thou art in a deep sleep, if not dead in Trespasses and sins. That
this practice is so great a breach of the Laws of God, and of Christ, will
appear by these particulars.

1. It is against particular and express Scriptures, forbidding this practice.
The Text is evident, it is not like some places of Scripture, which are hard to
be understood, and soon wrested, but it is so plain, that he that runs may read
it, none shall dwell in God's holy Hill that allow themselves in this practice.
Again, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false Report against thy Brother. A
false Report, either that which thou know to be false, then thou art guilty
of Forgery: or that which in the Issue shall be found to be false, in which
case thou art guilty of rashness and uncharitableness. In the Hebrew it is a
vain Report, a report that wants the solidity of a through information, and of
real use to thy Neighbor, Jam. 4.11. Speak not evil of another, for he that
speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother, speaks evil of the
Law, and judges the Law, and so, in the grossest sense, is an Antinomian, Tit.
3.2. Ministers must put people in mind to speak evil of no man.

2. This is against the fundamental Law of Love and Charity, which is the chief
of the Laws of God, so great a Law that the rest of the Laws of God must give
place to it; Sacrifice, Sabbaths, The Worship and Service of God must
frequently give place unto this duty of Mercy and Charity to men; by which you
may see, as how great a duty this is, so how great a sin the violation of this
command is. God accepts no man's person, he regards no Service, where this is
wanting. Though men pretend, or express never so much love to God, though they
do or suffer never so much for him, yet if they have not Charity, it prositeth
nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. and 1 John 3.10. In this the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother, 1 John 4.20. If a man say I
love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: for he that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

But possibly some may ask, who then is my Brother, to the love of whom I am
thus obliged? Possibly he is one of my own party and Religion, and such I do
love. No, every man is thy Brother in this sense and the object of thy Love.
It Is true, good men are the principal objects of thy Love: but not the only
objects of it, the commands of the Gospel in this matter are general, 1 Pet.
2.17. Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, that is, Love them in a more
eminent degree, Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity let us do good to all men,
especially to the Household of Faith. But now, all Persons, yea, even those that
censure and reproach others, will pretend they love them: but be not deceived,
if thou do sincerely love thy Neighbor, thou will be ready to do all good
Offices for him, to seek his Good, to maintain his Credit, to Interpret all
things in the best sense, to cover his failings, 1 Pet. 4.8. Charity will cover
a multitude of sins. Did thou love thy Neighbor, thou would not be so apt
to censure him, so greedy to hear, nor so ready to believe, evil reports
concerning him. When God shall come at the last day to try men's Love to their
Brethren by the Rules and Characters of it, which he did prescribe in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, 13th. Chapter, I doubt multitudes of Persons will
be found deeply guilty, that thought themselves in a manner wholly Innocent.
You should do well to study that Chapter, and to labor thoroughly to understand
it, and that I commend to you as an excellent Antidote against this wicked
practice.

2. This is a sin against that great and Royal Law of Christ, which even the
Heathens have admired, and the Emperor Severus did so highly applaud, Mat.
7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets. Now let your own Consciences answer the
Question, would you be thus dealt with by others? Would you have all your
Infirmities sharply censured? Your secret miscarriages published to the World?
The whole course of your Lives ripped up, and all your actions severely examined?
No, no, they that are so forward to censure the real or supposed miscarriages
of others, would have their own more tenderly dealt with: And generally those
that are most severe Judges of others are most partial to themselves: they that
will most freely defame other men will not endure to be reproved and admonished
themselves. They that will turn the edge of the Sword to others, would have the
back only turned to themselves.

3. It is sin against the great Law of maintaining Peace amongst men. This is
prescribed as a remedy against this very sin, Romans 14.9. Let us therefore
follow after the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith we may Edify
one another. Heb. 12.4. Follow Peace with all men. Romans 12.18. If it be
possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. He says
indeed, if it be possible, because in some cases it is impossible to have peace
with wicked men without the neglect of our Duty, and without the loss of Truth
and Holiness, but as far as it is possible, we are obliged to promote it. But
what Peace can there be in the midst of Censures and Reproaches? The Natural
Offspring of such Parents are Contentions, Divisions, Animosities; while Peace
lies bleeding and languishing.

4. It is against that great Command laid upon all Christians, of excelling
other men. Christ requires more from Christians than he does from other men,
Mat. 5.47. What do ye more than others? Christians must be free from the Vices
of other men, Ephesians. 4.17 This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye
walk not as other Gentiles walk. So Luke 22.25, 26. The Kings of the Gentiles
Exercise Lordship, they are Proud, Ambitious, Imperious. But it shall not be so
among you. Christians must be in the World like Lights shining in a dark place.
They must have all the Virtues that others have, and they must be clean from
all the Vices and Lusts in which others Live. Now the very Heathens have
condemned this Practice of Reproaching and traducing others: Detractors were
infamous amongst them, and therefore it is a shame this should be practiced by
Christians.

3. This is a sin against the whole design and scope of the Scriptures. These
are, as I may say, the two Poles, upon which the Heavenly Globe of the
Scripture turns; the Love of God, and the Love of our Neighbor. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self, Mat. 22.37, etc. Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and
the Law is enforced by Christ, Joh. 13.34. A new Commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another. So then, all the Scripture has but one Neck, and
this the Detractor cuts off, and so makes himself the greatest Anti-Scripturist
in the World.

3. This is a great injury to God, because it is a Confederacy with God's
greatest Enemy, the Devil. God judges of men's Relations by their Works, and
not by their talks, John 8.39. If ye were Abraham 's Children, you would do the
Works of Abraham. And verse 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts
of your Father ye will do. Now this among others is the Devil's great Work and
Office, who is hence called the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. And from
whence he has his Name Diabolus, which is a Calumniator, a Slanderer, a
Reproacher. And these Men as they do the Devil's Work, so they are called by
the Devil's name, 1 Timothy 3.12. Not Slanderers, in the Greek, not Devils: And as
they do the Devil's Work, so they serve the Devil's great Design. God is Love,
and therefore his design is to promote Love in the World. The Devil is a
malignant and hateful Spirit, and his work is to promote hatred, contention,
and strife among men: And that is effectually done by this way.

2. This is an injury to thy self in these particulars.

1. Hereby thou do contract guilt, the worst of all evils. A man's sin may
injure another Man; but the greatest and the worst part of it falls upon his
own head. Wickedness, says Seneca, drinks up the greatest part of it is own
poison, Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me wrongeth his own Soul. Thou
woundest another Man's Fame, but thou woundest thy own Conscience; which of
these is the worst? He whom thou reproachest gets a blot before men; and thou
do procure to thy self a blot before God. Thou accusest him before other Men,
and thy Conscience will accuse thee for it before God.

2. Hereby thou do expel or weaken that excellent Grace of Love, that
necessary and fundamental Grace, that sweet and amiable Grace. As all Virtue is
a reward to it self, so is this in a more special manner. Infinite is the
pleasure of the Holy Soul in loving God, and loving all Men, and loving
Enemies. O this is a most delightful Work! And on the contrary, Hatred, and
Malice, and Envy, as they are most sinful, so are they very miserable works,
and a great Torment to him that has them; while the mind of a wicked malicious
man is like the raging Sea, continually casting up mire and dirt, and is its
own Tormentor. The mind of a good Man exercising it self in love is, as it
were, a Sea of Glass like unto Crystal, calm and serene, it enjoys God, and it
self, and other men, yea, even a man's Enemies: By this Holy Art a Man may get
comfort out of his Enemies whether they will or no.

3. Hereby thou do lay a Foundation for thy own Reproach, Mat. 7.1, 2. Judge
not, that ye be not judged, for with what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be
judged, and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
Methinks this Text should strike a terror into all Persons who are guilty of
this sin. The Law of Retaliation prescribed by God is frequently inflicted by
him also, James 2.13. He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no
mercy. So that thou do engage the great God against thee, to pour contempt
upon thy Name, and to make thee a Reproach in the World.

3. It is a great injury to the Person whom thou do censure and reproach, and
that in these particulars.

1. Thou do rob him of the best Treasure which he has in the World, Prove.
22.1. A good Name is rather to be chosen than Riches, and consequently thou art
more Criminal than he that dies by the hands of Justice for taking away
another Man's Goods: Thou robbest him of that which thou art not able to give
him, thou robbest him of the most lasting good which he has, and that which
alone will abide after Death. So that thy cruelty extends beyond the Grave, and
tends to this to make his Name rot above ground, while his Body rots in it: And
this injury is the greater, because it cannot be prevented; there is no Fence
against this Vice, it is the Arrow that flies by Night, which no man can either
observe or avoid, and it is an Injury which can hardly be repaired. Breaches in
men's Estates may be made up, Liberty lost may be recovered, a Conscience
wounded may be healed: but a Reputation can hardly ever be restored. Calumnia
re fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit, Slander a man resolutely, and something to be
sure will stick.

2. Hereby thou do disenable him from getting good both as to his outward,
and as to his inward man.

As to his outward Man.

Who knows not the necessity of a good fame for the successful management of a
man's Worldly concernments? By one Act of this sin thou may possibly undo a
man and all his Family.

It hinders him also from receiving inward good as to the state of his Soul: At
least he is not likely to get any good from thee. Whereas it is thy duty to
rebuke thy Neighbor, and not to suffer sin to rest upon him, Levit. 19.17.
This is the way to make that work altogether unsuccessful; it stops his Ear
against thy Counsels, it hardens his heart against thy admonitions, and many
times such Reproaches make men careless, and by degrees impudent; and when once
they have lost their Reputation by thy Calumnies, they are not careful to
regain it, and it may be judge it impossible.

3. Hereby thou do hinder him from doing of good in the World. It is certain
a good Name is of absolute necessity to make a man considerably serviceable in
the World; when a Man has once lost this, the very good which he does is
despised and dis-regarded. And this reason especially concerns you in the
reproaching of three sorts of Persons, which I do therefore in a special manner
caution you against.

1. In reproaching of Magistrates, of Kings, and Persons in Authority.
Magistrates, though bad in themselves, yet are to be looked upon as great
blessings. And if we had the Persian Experiment of absolute Anarchy but for a
few days, that every man might do that which seemed right in his own eyes, we
should all be sensible of this Truth. Now, the Magistrate's Reputation is the
great Supporter of that Majesty and Authority, which he bears, and the
Magistrates Authority is the Peoples benefit. And therefore all Persons should
be tender in this particular, they should not expose Kings and Magistrates to
contempt and scorn, nor beget irreverence in People toward them. And therefore
they ought to take heed not only of divulging false reports concerning them,
but even such as possibly may be true, they must take heed of publishing the
secret miscarriages of Princes, for this, as I told you, is a sin against any
Man; but much more against Persons in Authority.

2. Against Ministers. Their Fame is most necessary for their usefulness in the
Word. And therefore when a Man defames a Minister, besides that Injury which is
common to other men, he does this peculiar mischief, he endeavors to rob the
World of all the good which such a Person may do in it. I cannot but take this
occasion to vent my great grief, and the scandal I justly take at those
Ministers and Christians, who, if a Man differ from them in some Doctrines or
Rites of less moment, (though otherwise never so eminent,) make it their
business to disparage and bespatter him, and think they do God good Service in
blasting his Reputation, representing him as a Papist, Socinian, Time-server,
etc. In the fear of God, consider the sinfulness of this practice. Whatsoever
good such a Person might do in convincing, converting, and building up of
Souls, so far as this is hindered by thy means, the Blood of such Souls will
fall upon thy head: Nay, which is more, although good should not be hindered by
it, yet thou shall answer for all that might have been hindered by it. And for
this reason Constantine the Great did profess, that if he should know any
secret miscarriage of a Minister, he would cover it with a Mantle.

3. Against good men, or eminent Professors of Religion: who, I confess, when
they are bad, are the vilest of Men, and when their sins are known and
public, they ought to be used with most severity, and such shall have the
hottest place in Hell who use Religion as a Cloak for their Villainies: yet when
the sins of such Persons are secret and scarce known, we should take heed of
spreading of them. Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon, not for their sakes, but for the sake of Religion, which infinitely
suffers by their misdemeanors, and the Reproaches which arise from them.

4. This is a great Injury to other men, in these particulars.

1. Thou corruptest others by thy Example. Especially Ministers and eminent
Professors of Religion they should above all others avoid this sin, because
their Actions are presidential: They that will not follow your counsel, will
imitate your Example: and though our Savior has cautioned us concerning the
Pharisees, Mat. 23.3. What they bid or teach you, observe and do, but do not
after their Works: yet in spite of all that Christ has said, Men will take a
contrary course, they will not hear your Sermons, but will diligently attend to
your conversations. O consider this, every time another hears thee censuring
and reproaching thy Neighbor, thou do in effect Preach and persuade him to
this Practice; Thou set a Copy which other men may write after when thou
art gone into another World, and no man knows how far the contagion of such an
evil Example may spread, nor how great a fire a little spark may kindle.

2. Thou art a disturber of Humane Society, an Incendiary in the place where
thou dwell. The Peace and tranquillity of Cities and Kingdoms is often
disturbed by this means. Whence come Wars and Fightings among you? Come they
not hence, even from your Lusts that War in your Members? They do not come from
Men's Lusts as they remain in their own hearts, for so they are secret and
unknown to the World, but as they break out, first, in their Lips, and then in
their hands.

3. Thou art a great Enemy to the Church of God, however thou may seem to thy
self, or others, a zealous Friend of it. It is not easy for any man to
conceive the great mischief which these Censures and Reproaches produce in the
Church; they break the peace of it, and fill it with sharp contentions and
Divisions: Yea, they strike at the being of it. You know a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand: they do their part to pull down the glorious
Building of the Church, so as one stone should not be left upon another. They
Eclipse the glory of the Church, which does not consist in external splendor,
in Riches and Ornaments; but in Love, Peace, and Unity among themselves. This
was Jerusalem's Beauty, that it was Built as a City that is Compact together,
Psalm. 122.3. This hinders the growth and Progress of the Church, and of
Religion. When Persons professing Religion allow themselves in such sins which
are not only offensive to God, but also odious in the World, it fills the minds
of men with powerful and invincible prejudices against Religious men, and
against Religion it self for their sakes. I must tell you, if the Professors of
Religion would learn the Government of their Tongues, and the right ordering of
their Conversations, it would be the likeliest means to propagate Religion in
the World. And, Christians, if ever you would do this, do it now: never was it
more necessary or seasonable to wipe off those stains and blemishes which at
this day lie upon Religion for the neglect of this Duty by the Professors of
it. And thrice blessed are all you that contribute to so glorious a work as the
Restoration of that Beauty and Glory, which Religion once had in some of our
Remembrance. But when the Tongues of Christians are Exercised in this sinful
practice, besides the particular injury to the Person Reproached, it hinders
the conversion and Salvation of others. Consider, I beseech you, a little the
greatness of this sin. You think it a great Crime, and so it was, in Elymas the
Sorcerer, who, when Sergius Paulus called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired
them to Preach to him the Word of God, withstood them, seeking to turn the
Deputy from the Faith, Acts 13.8. He did this by his words, and thou do it by
thy Actions. Thou do the Devil's work in stealing the Seed of the Word of God
out of Men's hearts, and making it unfruitful. These practices beget in men a
mean esteem and contempt of God's Word, when they see how little good it does
to others, and how little power it has with you that profess it.

Before I come to the Application, two Questions are to be Answered.

1. May I not speak evil of another Person when it is true? Quest. 1.


A Man may be faulty in so doing. The real secret faults of your Neighbor, as
I told you, you ought not unnecessarily to publish. And suppose there be no
untruth nor injustice in it, yet there is uncharitableness, and unkindness in
it, and that is a sin. Thou would not have all Truth said concerning thy
self, nor all thy real faults publicly traduced. Out of thy own mouth will God
Judge thee, O thou wicked Servant: Yea, thy own Tongue and Conscience shall
another day condemn thee.

2. You may speak evil of another Person, when necessity requires it. It may be
necessary sometimes for his good, and so you may speak evil of him unto those
that can help it: as a man may acquaint Parents with the miscarriages of their
Children, in order to their amendment. Thus, Genesis 27.2. Joseph brought to his
Father the evil Report of his Brethren. Sometimes this may be necessary for the
caution of others; as if I see a man ready to enter into intimate Friendship
and Acquaintance with a Person whom I know to be highly vicious and dangerous:
I may in such a case caution him against it; For certainly if Charity commands
me, when my Neighbor's Ox is ready to fall into a Pit, to do my endeavor to
prevent it; much more am I obliged to prevent the ruin of my Brother's Soul,
when I see him so near destruction. But for a man to do this unnecessarily, and
unprofitably, this is the sin I have been speaking of.

3. If you will speak evil of other Persons, do it in the right method. Christ
has given us an Excellent Rule, Mat. 18.15, 16. If thy Brother shall trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between him and thee alone: if he shall
hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother; But if he will not hear thee, take two
or three more, and if he will not hear them, tell it to the Church. But if Men
will be preposterous, and will not follow Christ's Order, but instead of
private admonishing, will publish men's faults to others, herein they make
themselves Transgressors.

4. In doubtful cases silence is the safest way. It is rarely men's duty to
speak evil of Men; and when it is not their duty to speak, it is not their sin
to be silent. It is seldom that any suffer by my silence, or concealment of his
fault; but great hazards are run, and many Persons commonly are made sufferers,
by my publication. Now, as Charity commands me to pass the most favorable
judgment, so Wisdom obliges me to choose the safest course.



For Answer to this, consider,

1. There is abundance of sinful Zeal in the World, and in the Church:
Therefore the Apostle gives us a Caution, Gal. 4.18. It is good to be zealously
affected in a good thing. Otherwise we know it was from Zeal that Paul
persecuted the Church, Phil. 3.6. Zeal indeed is an Excellent grace in it self,
but nothing more frequently both pretended where it is not, and where Envy,
Interest, or Malice, lie at the bottom; and abused where it is.

2. True Zeal has an equal respect to all God's commands, and especially to
those that are most plain and most considerable. It is at least doubtful,
whether the man thou traducest be an Enemy to God and his ways; sure I am it is
so with some Ministers and Christians that are highly censured and reproached
by those that differ from them, and it were great Impudence to deny it: But
this is a certain truth, and evident duty, Thou shall not take up an evil
reproach against thy Neighbor.

3. Consider how easy a mistake is in this case, and how dangerous.
Peradventure he whom thou call an Enemy to God, will upon enquiry be found a
Friend of God and his ways. But what do thou mean by the ways of God?
Possibly thy own ways or party that thou art engaged in, take heed of that. If
you would Judge aright, you must distinguish between the circumstantials, and
the essentials of the ways of God. Suppose a man be an Enemy to thy Party, and
thy way and manner of Religious Worship and Government; yea, let us suppose
that thine is indeed the way of God, wherein yet thou may be mistaken: if now
this man be an able and zealous Assertor of the substantial and fundamental
truths of God, and ways of Holiness, and this be attended with an Holy and
exemplary Life, who dare say that this man is an enemy to God and his ways? O
my Soul, come not into the secrets of such Persons.

4. You must not go out of God's way to meet with God's Enemies. If any man be
really an Enemy of God and of his Truths and ways, I do not persuade you to
comply with him, or by sinful silence to betray the cause of God: only let me
entreat you to do God's work in God's way; you may apply your selves to him,
and endeavor to convince him, you may speak or write against his Doctrine,
provided, you do it with modesty and moderation, and not with that virulence
and venom wherewith too many Books are now leavened. But for this way of
Detraction and Reproach, it is a dishonorable, and disingenuous way, it is a
sinful and disorderly way, it is an unprofitable and ineffectual way, and no
way suitable either to the Nature of God whom you serve, or to the Rule and
Example of our Blessed Savior, or to the great principle of Love and Charity,
or to that end which you are to aim at in all things, the honor of God, and
the good of other men.

Now I come to the Application.

Lamentation for the gross neglect of this Duty, or the frequent Commission
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked. When a man's heart is full of Hell, it
is not unreasonable to expect that his Tongue should be set on fire of Hell;
And it is no wonder to hear such Persons reproach good men, yea, even for their
goodness. But alas! the D^sease does not rest here, this Plague is not only
among the Egyptians, but Israelites too. It is very doleful to consider, how
Professors sharpen their Tongues like Swords against Professors; and one good
man censures and reproaches another, and one Minister traduceth another: and
who can say, I am clean from this sin? O that I could move your pity in this
case! For the Lord's sake pity your selves, and do not pollute and wound your
Consciences with this Crime: Pity your Brethren, let it suffice that godly
Ministers and Christians are loaded with reproaches by wicked men, there is no
need that you should combine with them in this Diabolical work: You should
support and strengthen their hands against the reproaches of the ungodly World,
and not add affliction to the afflicted. O pity the World, and pity the Church
which Christ has purchased with his own Blood, which methinks bespeaks you in
those words, Job 19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my Friends, for
the hand of the Lord has touched me: Pity the mad and miserable World, and
help it against this sin, stop the bloody Issue, restrain this wicked practice
amongst men as much as possibly you can, and lament it before God, and for what
you cannot do your selves, give God no rest until he shall please to work a
Cure.

Caution. Take heed you be not found guilty of this sin. Wherein any of us have
been guilty, let us be truly and thoroughly humbled for it, and for the future
let us make conscience of abstaining from it. I will suppose what I have said
may be sufficient for Arguments to convince, and for Motives to persuade you;
And therefore I shall only give you some Directions in order to the practice of
this Duty: And to assist you against this sin,



1. Take heed of uncharitableness in all its kinds and degrees, Malice, Envy,
Hatred; where these Diseases are in the Heart, they will break out at the Lips.
Out of the abundance of the Heart the mouth speaks.

2. Take heed of Loquacity and multitude of words. A Man need not seek far for
perpetual motion, he may find it in some Persons restless and incessant
Tongues. Now Persons of this temper will not want matter of Discourse; and
therefore pick up and spread abroad all sorts of censures and reproaches
against others, not so much out of Malice against them, as for their own
Diversion and ease, that their Tongues may not want Exercise. Take heed of
this, it is in it self a sin, an abuse of the Tongue, a wasting of time, a
reproach to thy self, it makes thee cheap and mean and contemptible in the eyes
of others, and especially of wise and good men, and it is also the cause of
many other sins.

3. Take heed of Pragmaticalness, which is, when Men are inquisitive and busy
about other men's matters. A sin often reproved in Scripture, 2 These. 3.11. For
we hear that there are some walking among you disorderly, working not at all. 1
Pet. 4.15. Let none of you suffer as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other
men's matters. You may observe how Christ reproves this in his own dear
Apostle, Joh. 21.21, 22. Peter seeing him says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall
this man do? Jesus says to him, if I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? follow thou me: As if he had said, mind you your own business, do
not busy your head about other men.

4. Take heed of man-pleasing. There are many whose great employment and
business it is to spread evil reports concerning others, who are therefore
called Tale-bearers; and this they do to please the humors of Persons with
whom they converse, unto whom they know such Discourse is most acceptable. And
thus many Persons make themselves guilty in hearing reproaches and not checking
them, because they will comply with the Company, they will not displease nor
offend their Friends. Take heed of this, and remember that severe Sentence of
the Apostle, Gal. 1.10. If I yet pleased men, I should not be the Servant of
Christ. He that pleases other men, so as to neglect any Duty, or to commit any
sin, whatsoever he pretends, he is not the Servant of Christ.

James lays the stress of all Religion upon it, Jam. 1.26. If any man among you
seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, this man's Religion is in
vain. And if this be true, I am sure there are many high Professors that must
be blotted out of the Saints Calendar. Consider also the easiness of this
government of the Tongue. Men have more command of their Tongues and of their
outward Members, than they have of their inward motions, concupiscences, and
passions: If Tongues be unruly, God and Nature has given you a bridle to
restrain them, the (...), the fence of the Teeth, as the Poet speaks.

Learn distrust of Reports; it is a good Rule (...), learn to disbelieve.

4. Reproach no man for that which you do not thoroughly understand. This, I am
sure, is highly reasonable, and he that does otherwise is altogether
inexcusable, because he runs an infinite hazard, lest while he opposes a man
he be found to fight against God. And truly if this Rule were practiced, some
kinds of reproaches would be rare in the World: for Persons of true and clear
understanding are not apt to reproach others for different Opinions in lesser
matters; they consider the weakness of humane Nature, and the necessity of
mutual forbearance. It is the weaker sort that are here, as in other things,
most querulous; and generally where there is least light there is most heat.
Those Persons by whose censures and reproaches the Church of God among us is
most miserably torn and wasted, are generally the more ignorant part of
Christians. How many are there that are full of rage one against another for
being either for a Form of Prayer or against it, either for the Ceremonies or
against them, that never searched into the state of the Controversy, and never
took pains to examine the Arguments on both sides, which in all reason they
ought to have done, or else at least to have restrained their Tongues from such
unreasonable and sinful censures and reproaches? These, I say, are the Persons
that are most guilty, nay, upon the matter, the only guilty Persons, except
such whom base Lust and Interest does corrupt and work to these animosities.

5. Converse much with your selves. It is want of business at home in men's own
hearts, that makes them ramble so much abroad, and rake into the Lives of
others. Study your selves more, and other men less. Did you search your own
hearts and lives, you would find so much cause of self-judging and
self-abhorring, that you would have little cause to despise others, and much
cause of compassion toward others.

6. Judge of others as you would do of your selves and your own Actions. It is
worth our consideration, what a great difference there is between the Judgment
men pass upon themselves, and other men. As for themselves, all their Errors
are but small mistakes, and all their sins against God, however attended with
ugly circumstances of light, of consent of the will, custom, and allowance, yet
they are but sins of Infirmity, if themselves may be Judges in their own Cause;
Their injuries to men are but small and trivial offenses; and they do indeed
expect both from God and Man a Pardon of course, which if they have not, they
judge God tobe harsh and severe, Men to be cruel and implacable: But when they
come to pass Judgment upon other Men, the Tables are turned, some mistakes are
damnable delusions, and all their sins against God, which they can observe, are
evidences of a naughty heart, and inconsistent with Grace, and the Offenses of
others against them are inexcusable and intolerable, great affronts and
Indignities: whereas on the contrary, thou should, as it was said of a great
Man, Be severe to thy self, and Candid to others: Because thou know more
wickedness by thy self, and more aggravation of thy own sins, than of all the
sins that are in the World. But at least all the reason and Justice in the
World requires this, that thou should weigh thy self and others in the same
Balance, that thou should try thy own and their Actions by the same
Touchstone; and more need not be done. Thou who art so prone to flatter thy
self, would certainly be more indulgent to other men, and pass a more
favorable construction upon their Actions.

What Light must shine in our Works. Sermon. XXII.
Matthew. 5.16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven.


THE Work designed for this time, is to resolve this practical Case, [What is
that Light which must shine before Men, in the Works of Christ's Disciples, for
the Glorifying of God?]

But the Explication of the Text is therein included.

The Son of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, who gives Light to every one that
comes into the World (or coming into the World, gives Light to all,) from his
fullness has bespangled the Inferior Heavens, his Church, with many fulgent
Stars, appointed freely to communicate the Heavenly light which they had freely
received. In his corporal presence he prepared them; and his Spirit having
moved on the darkened World, he unresistably said, at the descent of the Holy
Ghost, Let there be Light, and there was Light; beginning at Jerusalem, but not
fixed to any determinate place: But what he gave them, necessarily and
antecedently, they were to Exercise as Free Agents, by a command more
resistable; which here he gives them. Having told them their Office, and given
them their Names, v. 14. [Ye are the Lights of the World,] he next tells them
how they must be useful. They must be conspicuous, 1. Because the Church where
they are placed, is like a City on a Hill, which cannot be hid. 2. Because it is
the end of him that lights them and sets them up, not to put them under a
Bushel, but on a Candlestick, to give light to all his House. And therefore no
men's silencing or prohibitions, no difficulties or sufferings will excuse them
from their Duty, Lights they are, and Shine they must: But lest they should
think that it is Preaching only which he means, he here commanding them their
Duty, lets them know, that the splendor of Christianity is in Works as well as
Words: And thereby gives us cause to think, that it is all his Disciples or
Christians that he speaks to, though first, and eminently, to the Apostles
and Teachers of the World.

1. By [Light] he means both the Illuminating knowledge which must be uttered
by Words; and the Splendor or Glory of Holiness which must be refulgent in
their Lives.

2. He calls it [Your] Light, as being their own in his Graces, as the
Subjects, and their own in Exercise as the Actors; though both under him.

3. It must [Shine,] that is, Appear in its splendor, for the Illumination and
conviction of the World.

4. It must [So] shine, as is fittest to attain these ends: It is not every
twinkling that will answer their great obligations.

5. It must be [Before men;] that is, both those within, and especially those
without the Church, that are but Men.

6. It must be a Light shining in [Good Works,] and their [Own] Works: For that
is the grand difference between the Disciples of Christ and others; He teaches
them not only to know and talk well, but to Do well: And he makes men such as
he Teaches them to be: Non magna loquimur sed vivimus, said Tertullian.

7. [That Men may see] does signify both the necessary refulgent quality of
their Works, and also the end of God and them.

8. But it is not Hypocritical ostentation of what they are not; nor of what
they are and have, as for their own Glory, to be honored and praised of Men:
but for the Glorifying of God.

Who is called [their Father] to show their obligation to him, and to encourage
them by the honor and comfort of their Relation, and to show why their Works
will tend to the glorifying of God; even because they are so nearly related to
him.

And he is said to be [in Heaven,] because there he appears operatively in
his Glory to the beautifying of Holy Spirits: As the Soul is said to be in the
Head; and we look a man in the face when we talk to him, as if there
principally we saw the Man; because it is in the Head that it operateth by
Reason. So much of the meaning of the Words.

Many Doctrines the Text affords us: as, 1. Christ's Disciples are the Lights
of the World, both in the splendor of Wisdom and Holiness. 2. Their most
eminent and convincing splendor is in their good Works. 3. Their Light and
good works are their own, though by the grace of Christ: And it is no injury to
Christ, or his Righteousness, or Grace, to say, that they are their own. 4. The
splendor of Christians in their good Works must be such as may be seen of Men.
5. The Glorifying of God must be the end of our Good Works, and of their
appearance unto men. 6. As bad as corrupted Nature is there is yet something in
mankind which tends to the approving of the good works of Christians, and to
their glorifying God thereupon. 7. God is glorified even by common men, when
they approve of the Glory of Holiness in Believers: It is not only by Saints
that God is glorified. 8. As contrary as Holiness is to corrupted Nature, there
is such resplendent goodness in true Christians works, which common men may
glorify God for: And so somewhat in them, and in Christianity, which has such
agreeableness, as may tend to further good. 9. The Excellency and Splendor of
the good works of Christians, especially Teachers, is a grand means, ordained
by God himself for the Conviction of the World, and the glorifying of God.


But the resolving the Question, What the splendor of these works must be, is
my present undertaken task.

God is not glorified by our adding to him, but by our receiving from him; not
by our making him greater, or better, or happier than he is, but by owning him,
loving him, and declaring him as he is, that we and others may thereby be wise,
and good, and happy.

He is his own glory, and ours: And by his own light only we must know both
him, and all things. We are not called to bring our Candle to show the World
that there is a Sun, but to persuade them into its light, to open the Windows
and Curtains, to disperse the Clouds, and to open the eyes of blinded sinners.

I. The way of doing this, and glorifying God, is in the order following.

1. The first thing that our works must show is their own goodness: They can
never prove the Cause good, till it is clear, that they are good themselves:
Therefore doubtless Christ here intends, that we must abound, especially in
those good works which the world is capable of knowing to be good, and not only
in those which none but Christians themselves approve. If believers and
unbelievers agreed in no common principles, we were not capable of preaching to
unbelievers, nor convincing them, nor of conversing with them. There are many
excellent things which Nature does approve, and which both parties are agreed
to be good: By the advantage of these, as granted principles, we must convince
them of the conclusions, which they yet deny; and not, as the scandalous
Christian, so absurdly affect singularity, as to make light of all good which
is taken for good by unbelievers, and to seek for eminency in nothing, but what
the World thinks evil. There is a glory in some good works, which all do
honor, and which manifests it self.

2. And then the goodness of the work does manifest the goodness of the doer.
Every man's work is so far his own, that he is related to it, and by it, either
as laudable, or as culpable; as it is, Gal. 6.4, 5. Let every man prove his own
work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another;
for every man shall bear his own burden. God himself will judge men according
to their works; and so will men; and so must we (much) do by our selves; for it
is the rightest judging, which is likest God's.

This subordinate honor God grants to his servants: If their works were not an
honor to them, as the next Agents, they could be none to him in their
Morality, as man's acts; though they might, as acts in general, ordered to good
by his own goodness. If God's Natural Works of Creation (Sun, and Moon, and
Earth, etc.) were not praiseworthy in themselves, God would not be praised for
them, as their Maker. There are works that God is said to be dishonored by,
Romans 2.23, 24. And what are they, but such as are really bad, and a dishonor
to the Authors* It is so far from being true, that no praise, or honor, or
comfort from good works is to be given to man, that God himself is not like
else to be honored by them as moral good, if the Actors be not honored by
them: The World must first be convinced that Christians are far better than
other men, and the righteous more excellent than his Neighbor, before they
will glorify God as the Author of their goodness. In God's own Judgment [Well
done] is the first word, and [Good and Faithful Servant] is the second, and
[Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord] is the third.

Two sorts of Scandalous persons rob God of his honor in his Saints.

1. Those that professing Christianity, live wickedly, or at least no better
than other men; whose lives tell the World, that Christians are but such as
they.

2. Those that slander and belie true Believers, and would hide their goodness,
and make them odious to the World.

As for them that say only, that we have no righteousness in our selvet by
which we can be justified, I shall not differ with them, if they do but grant
that all shall be judged according to their works; and that he that is accused
as an Infidel, Impenitent, an Hypocrite, or an Unregenerate, Ungodly Person,
must against that accusation be justified by his own Faith, Repentance,
Sincerity, and Holiness, or be unjustified for ever.

3. The next thing to the Work and the Person that is hereby honored is the
Christian Religion it self, with the Spirit's operations on the Souls of
Christians: The outward Doctrine and Example Of Christ, who teaches his
Servants to be better than the World; and the inward Sanctification of the
Spirit which makes them better. The Air and Food are commended which make men
healthy, and the Medicines are praised which cure the disease: That is
accounted good, as a means and cause, which does good, and which makes men
good: If Christians were more commonly and notoriously much better than all
other men, the World would believe that the Gospel, and the Christian Religion,
were the best.

But when scandalous Christians appear as bad or worse than Infidels, the World
thinks that their Religion is as bad or worse than theirs.

4. The next ascent of Honor is to the Maker or Author of our Religion; the
World will see that he is good that makes so good a Law and Gospel, and that
makes all his true Disciples so much to excel all other men. And here the
first honor will be to the Holy Spirit, which renews Souls, and makes them
holy: And the next will be to the Son our Savior, who gives us both the Word
and Spirit: And the highest or ultimate Glory will be to God the Father, who
gives us both his Son, and his Spirit.

And thus Honor ascends to the Highest by these steps, and the World
begins at that which is nearest to them, and Reason will proceed by these
degrees: 1. The excellent holy lives of Christians are better than other men's:
2. Therefore Christians are better than other men: 3. Therefore their Religion
is the best, or the Word and Work which make them such: 4. Therefore the Spirit
is good which makes them good; the Savior is good who gives them that Word
and Spirit; and God the Fountain of all, even the Father of Mercies, Is the
Fountain of all good, and consequently the End of all. And thus God is known
and glorified by our works.

II. The works which thus glorify him, are first to be described in general,
and then enumerated in special.

I. In General, 1. They must be such as make, or show men to be in their places
like to God: They must be such as represent the particular Perfections of God,
which are called his Communicable Attributes; and such as declare his Relations
to us; and such as declare his Attributes, as so related, and his works.

A^ 1. We must so live, that men may see, that indeed we take not our selve to
be our own, but God to be our absolute Owner; and that it is not our selves,
but He that must of right dispose both of us and ours; and that we willingly
stand to his disposal, 1 Cor. 6.19. Ye are not your own.

2. We must so live, as may declare that we are not lawless, nor the mere
servants of men, but the resolved Subjects of God, the Sovereign King of all;
and that really we are ruled by his Laws and Will, and not by our own lusts or
wills, nor by the wills of any, but as under him; and that we fear not any hurt
to the flesh, or them that can but kill the body, in comparison of that one
Lawgiver and Judge, who is able to save, or to destroy for ever, Luke 12.4.
Jam. 4.12. 1 Cor. 7.23. and that we are moved more by his Promises, than by all
that mortal men can give us; and trust wholly to the Heavenly reward of glory,
and not to the transitory prosperity of this world, believing that God is True
and Just, and none of his Word shall ever fail. 1 Pet. 1.3. We are begotten
again unto a lively hope, through the Resurrection of Christ to an Inheritance
incorruptible, etc.

3. We must so live, as may declare that God is our Grand Benefactor, from whom
we have all the good that ever we received, and from whom we hope for all that
ever we shall possess; and that he is infinitely good, the Original and End of
all created good: We must live as those that believe that we are made for God,
even to glorify him, and please his blessed Will, not by making him beholden
to us, but by a willing receiving of his mercies, and a willing improvement of
them to our own felicity: And as those that believe, that his love is better
than life it self; and that to know him, and love him, and glorify him for
ever, is the ultimate End and Happiness of man, Psalm. 4.7, 8. and 63.3. and
73.25, 26, 28. Phil. 3.7, 8. Matthew. 6.33. 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 5.1.

2. And we must so live in relation to Christ, and to his Spirit, as may
declare to the world, that the mercy of the Father is conveyed to us by the
Son, and the Grace of the Father and Son, by the Spirit; and what wonders of
Wisdom, Goodness and Power, Truth and Justice, Holiness and Mercy, are
manifested in Christ, and his Mediation to Mankind, Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.16, 17.
Phil. 1.20, 21. Job. 17.10.

3. In sum, the works that glorify God must have these three parts of his
likeness upon them.

1. They must be works of Light, like the Light which from the Father of Lights
does illuminate us. Christians must be much wiser than the men of the world, in
holy, though not in worldly things, Col. 1.9, 28. and 3.16. Darkness is the
state of Satan's Kingdom, and ignorant Christians are scandalous, and a
dishonor to Christ; not those that are ignorant of unnecessary, unprofitable,
or unrevealed things, but those that are ignorant of revealed, necessary,
saving truths, 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.11, 12.

2. They must be works of Holy Love to God and Man, which show that God and
Goodness have our hearts, and that we would imitate God in doing good to all
according to our places and power, Gal. 6.10. Romans 13.10, 11, 12.

3. They must be works of Life and Power, where serious diligence expresses
zeal, and we set our selves no lower bounds, than with all our heart, and mind,
and might, 2 Timothy 1.7. Romans 12.11. Thus much for the general description of
them.

II. The description of a Christian, whose works glorify God, according to
Scripture and Experience may be given you in the following particulars.

I. He is one that places his saving Religion in the practical knowledge of
the only true God, and Jesus Christ the Savior, whom he has sent, Joh. 17.3.
He puts no limits to his endeavors after useful knowledge, but what God has
put by his Word or Providence: He would abound in holy wisdom, and thinks it
worth his greatest diligence, and is still upon the increasing hand: He has so
much knowledge of the lesser matters of Religion, as to keep him from
scandalous miscarriages about them: but it is the knowledge of God, and of a
crucified and glorified Christ, in which he takes wisdom to consist, Joh.
17.3. 1 Cor. 2.2. This is the Light in which he has his daily conversation;
the Light which governs his will and practice; which feeds his Meditations,
his prayers, and his discourse; which repelleth his temptations; which
maintains his hope; and is his daily work of Recreation, his Food, and Feast.

For Men will now perceive, 1. That his Religion is not a matter of names and
words, and trifling Controversies, but has the greatest and most excellent
Subject in the world: And as Nature teaches all to reverence God, so it will
tell them, that they must reverence that Religion, that Conversation, and that
Person, who is most Divine, and where the most of God appears.

2. And they will see that his Religion consists not in uncertainties, which
no man can be sure of, when he has done his best; but in things so sure as
none should doubt of: which will easily bring men over to consent, and shame or
silence Contradicters.

3. And then they will see that it is a Religion which all sober personr are
united in, and does not lose its Authority, or Reverence, by the divisions,
wranglings, and digladiations of Sects of different minds; for God is denied by
no sober man, nor the Essentials of Christianity by any true Christian.

4. And men will see that our Religion is no matter of Indifferency, which one
may do well enough without, but of absolute necessity to Salvation, and that
which man was made and redeemed for. And a Religion of the greatest Subject,
the greatest Certainty, the greatest Consent, and the greatest Necessity, will
honor it self, and its Author in the world, if it be rightly represented in
the Lives of them that do profess it.

But when men's over-doing shall pretend that all this is too little, and shall
seek to raise it, as to more perfection, by their own Inventions, or uncertain
Opinions in Doctrine, Worship, Church Discipline, or Practice, they presently
cast it as a Football before the Boys in the Streets, and make it a matter of
doubtful endless Disputations, of multiplied Sects, of pernicious Contentions,
and cruel Persecutions: And then the Reverence and Glory of it is gone; and
every Philosopher will vie with it in subtilty, and every Stranger will presume
to censure it, if not to blaspheme it, and deride it. And thus Over-doers are
the Scandals of the World.

II. The Christian that will glorify God, and his Profession, must be
conscionable in the smallest matters; but he must ever describe and open the
Nature of his Religion, as consisting in great and certain things, and not talk
too much of smaller matters, as if it were those that men were to be saved by.
Tell men of the necessity of believing, fearing, obeying, trusting, and loving
God, and of coming to him by Jesus Christ, the Great Mediator between God and
Man: Tell them of the intrinsic evil of sin, and of God's Justice, and of
Man's Corruption, and of the Nature and Excellency of Holiness, and of the
necessity of being Newborn of the Holy Spirit, and of mortifying the desires
and deeds of the Flesh; and tell them of Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, especially
the certainty and excellency of the everlasting promised Glory; persuade them
to believe all this, to think much of all this, and to be true to what they
know, and to make it the work of Life to be always prepared for Death. Let this
be your discourse with sinners, (as I told you in the first Character, it must
be your own Religion) and then men will perceive that Religion is a matter that
does indeed concern them, and that they are indeed great and necessary things,
in which you differ from ungodly men: But the Scandalous Christian talks most
of external Church-orders, and Forms, and Opinions, and Parties, and thereby
makes the ignorant believe, that the difference is but that one will sit, when
the other kneeleth; and one will pray by the Book, and the other without Book;
and one is for this Church Government, and another for that; and one for
praying in White, and the other in Black. And talking too much of such things
as these deceives the hearers: some it makes formal hypocrites, who take up
this for their Religion; and the rest it hardens, and makes them think, that
such people are only more humourous, and self-conceited, and giddy, and
factious than others, but no whit better.

III. The Genuine Christian has an humble and cautelous understanding;
sensible when he knows most, how little he knows, and how much he is still
unacquainted with, in the great mysterious matters of God. His Ignorance is his
daily grief and burden, and he is still longing and looking for some clearer
Light: Not a new word of Revelation from God; but a clearer understanding of
his Word. He knows how weak and slippery Man's understanding is, and he is
humbly conscious of the darkness of his own. Therefore he is not conceitedly
wise, nor a boaster of his knowledge; but says, as Paul, 1 Cor. 8.2. He that
thinks that he knows any thing, (that is, is proudly conceited of his own
knowledge,) knows nothing as he ought to know.

And hence it is that though he daily grow in the firmer apprehension of
necessary Truths; yet he is never confident and peremptory about uncertain
doubtful things: And therefore he is not apt to be Quarrelsome and contentious,
nor yet censorious against those that differ from him in matters of no greater
moment. And hence it is, that he runs not into Sects, nor burns with the
scaverish dividing Zeal, nor yet is scandalously mutable in his Opinions;
because, as one that is conscious of his Ignorance, he does not rashly receive
things which he understands not, but suspendeth his judgment, till Evidence
make him fit to Judge; and joyneth with neither of the contending Parties, till
he is sure or know indeed which of them is right. And thus he avoideth that
dishonouring of Religion, which the scandalous Christian is woefully guilty of;
who with an unhumbled understanding grows confident upon quick and
insufficient information, and Judges before he understands the case, and
before he has heard or read, and considered what on both sides may be said,
and what is necessary to a true understanding: And thus either by audacious
prating of what he never understood, or reviling and censuring Men wiser than
himself, or by making himself a Judge where he has need to be many years a
Learner, or making a Religion of his own mistakes, and setting up dividing
Sects to propagate them, or else by shameful mutability and unsettledness, he
becomes a scandal to harden unbelievers, and a Disease to the Church, and a
shame to his profession; Read James 3. Conceited Wisdom kindles a contentious
Zeal, and is not of God, but from beneath, v. 15.16, 17.

IV. The Christian who Glorifieth God by his Religion, is one that so Lives,
that men may perceive that his carnal Interest is not the End and Ruler of his
Life; but that God is his End, and to please him is his Work, and his Reward,
in which he is comforted, though the Flesh and World be never so much
displeased; And that the perfect Light and love of God in the unseen Glory of
another Life is the satisfying sum of all his hopes, for which all the World
must be forsaken. To talk much of Heaven, and to be as much and as eager for
the World as others, is the way by which the scandalous Hypocrite does bring
Religion into Contempt. It is no high, nor very honorable Work, to talk of the
vanity of the World, but to Live above it, and to be out of the power of it:
Nor is it any great matter to speak honorably of Heaven; but to Live as
believing-seekers of it, and as those that have there their Treasure and their
hearts, Mat. 6.20, 21. and are comforted more by the Hopes of the Life to come,
than by all their possessions or pleasures in the World. If we will glorify
God, our Lives must persuade Men, that he will certainly be our Everlasting
Portion, and the sure and plentiful Rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
Heb. 11.6. It is much of the use of a true Christian's Life to convince
Unbelievers that there is a Heaven for Saints; and the scandalous worldling
persuades them that there is none, Mat. 5.5, 11, 12. Phil. 3.26, 21. Col. 3.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.

V. Therefore it Glorifieth God and our Religion, when Christians Live in
greater Joy, or at least greater contentedness and Peace, than other Men: when
they can answer all the Crosses in the World sufficiently with this, that God
is their God, and his Love shall be their endless Joy, Psalm. 73.1. and 73.25,
26. And when they can Live by Faith, not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. and can rejoice
in hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.3, 5. and can comfort themselves and one
another with this, that they shall for ever be with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17, 18.
and can trust him to the Death, who has said, I will never fail thee, nor
forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. If you would have other Men honor your God and your
Religion, and desire to be such as you, you must really show them that you are
on safer grounds, and in a happier state than they: And that you will hardly
do, if you be not more comfortable than they, or at least settled in more Peace
and contentedness of mind, as those that have a certain Cure for the fears of
Death, and the danger that ungodly men are in, of the revenging Justice of the
final Judge.

I confess it is possible for trembling, troubled, and distressed Christians to
be saved: But O that they knew what a scandal they are to Unbelievers, and what
a dishonor to God whom their Lives should Glorify! What Man will fall in Love
with Terrors, and unquietness of mind? If you would Glorify God by your fears
and tears, they must be such as are accompanied with Faith and Hope; and you
must not only show men what would make you happy, if you could obtain it, but
also that it is attainable. Happiness is every Man's desire, and none will come
to Christ unless they believe that it tends to their Happiness: They take up
with the present pleasures of the Flesh, because they have no satisfying
apprehensions of any better. And if no Man show them the first fruits of any
better here, they will hardly believe that they may have better hereafter. It
is too hard a talk to put a poor Drunkard, Fornicator, or a proud and Covetous
Worldling on to believe that a poor, complaining, comfortless Christian is
happier than he, and that so sad and unquiet a Life must be preferred before
all his temporal contentments and delights. You must show him better, or the
signs and fruits of better, before he will part with what he has; You must
show him the bunch of Grapes, if you will have him go for the Land of Promise,
when he is told of Giants that must be overcome. And O what a blessing is
reserved for every Caleb and Joshua, that encourage Souls, and glorify the
Promise! And how much do dejected discouragers of sinners dishonor God and
displease him! I have known some ungodly Men, when they have seen believers
rejoicing in God, and triumphantly passing through sufferings in the joyful
hopes of Glory, to sigh and say, would I were such a one, or in his case: But I
have seldom heard any say so of a Person that is still sad, or crying, or
troubling themselves and others with their Scruples, Crosses, or Discontents;
unless it be in respect to their blameless Living, perhaps condoling them they
may say, Would I had no more sin to trouble me than you have. I confess that
some Excellent Christians do show no great mirth in the way of their
Conversation; either because they are of a grave and silent temper, or taken up
with severe Studies and Contemplations, or hindered by bodily pains or weakness:
But yet their grave and sober Comforts, their Peace of Conscience and settled
hopes, and trust in God, delivering them from the terrors of Death and Hell,
may convince an Unbeliever that this is a far better state than the mirth and
laughter of Fools in the House of Feasting, and in the vanities of a short
prosperity. The grave and solid Peace and Comfort of those that have made their
Calling and Election sure, is more convincing, than a lighter kind of mirth,
Joh. 16.22.

VI. The Dominion of Love in the hearts of Christians, appearing in all the
course of their Lives, does much Glorify God and their Religion: I mean a
common hearty Love to all men, and a special love to holy men, according to
their various degrees of loveliness. Love is a thing so agreeable to right
reason, and to sociable Nature, and to the common Interest of all Mankind, that
all Men commend it; and they that have it not for others, would have it from
others: Who is it that loves not to be loved? And who is it that loves not
the Man, that he is convinced loves him, better than him that hates him, or
regards him not? And do you think that the same course, which makes men hate
your selves, is like to make them love your Religion? Love is the powerful
Conqueror of the World: By it God conquereth the enmity of Man, and reconcileth
to himself even malignant sinners: And by it he has taught us to conquer all
the tribulations and persecutions, by which the world would separate us from
his Love: Yea, and to be more than Conquerers through him that loved us, and
thereby did kindle in us our reflecting love, Romans 8.34, 35, 36. And by it he
has instructed us to go on to Conquer both his Enemies and our own; yea, to
conquer the enmity rather than the Enemy, in imitation of himself, who saves
the sinner, and kills the sin: And this is the most noble kind of Victory.
Every Soldier can end a Fever or other Disease by cutting a man's throat, and
ending his Life: But it is the work of the Physician to kill the Disease, and
save the Man. The scandalous Pastor is for Curing Heresy in the Roman way, by
silencing sound Preachers, and tormenting and burning the supposed Heretics:
or at least to trust for the acceptance and success of his Labors to the
Sword: And if that which will restrain men from crossing the Pastor, would
restrain them from res^sting the Spirit of God, and constrain them to the love
of Holiness, it were well: Then the glory of conversion should be more ascribed
to the Magistrate and Soldier than to the Preacher. But the true Pastor is
Armed with a special measure of Life, Light, and Love, that he may be a meet
Instrument for the Regenerating of Souls, who by holy Life, and Light, and
Love, must be renewed to their Father's Image. Every thing Naturally generateth
its like, which has a generative power. And it is the Love of God which the
Preacher is to bring all men to, that must be saved: This is his Office; this
is his work, and this must be his study: He does little or nothing if he does
not this. Souls are not sanctified till they are wrought up to the Love of God
and Holiness. And therefore the Furniture and Arms which Christ has left us in
his Word, are all suited to this work of Love. We have the Love of God himself
to Preach to them; and the love of an humbled, dying, and Glorified Redeemer;
and all the amiable blessings of Heaven and Earth to open to them; and all the
loving promises and invitations of the Gospel: And must not our Hearts, our
Ministry, and our Lives be answerable to all this? Believe it, it must be a
Preacher, whose matter and manner of Preaching and Living does show forth a
hearty Love to God, and Love to Godliness, and Love to all his Peoples Souls,
that is the fit Instrument to glorify God by convincing and converting
sinners. God can work by what means he will; by a scandalous, domineering,
self-seeking Preacher, but it is not his ordinary way. Foxes and Wolves are not
Nature's Instruments to generate sheep. I never knew much good done to Souls by
any Pastors, but such as Preached and Lived in the Power of Love, working by
clear convincing Light, and both managed by a holy, lively seriousness. You
must bring fire, if you would kindle fire. Trust not here to the Cartesian
Philosophy, that mere motion will turn another Element into fire. Speak as loud
as you will, and make as great a stir as you will, it will be all in vain to
win men's Love to God and Goodness, till their hearts be touched with his Love
and Amiableness; which usually must be done by the Instrumentality of the
Preacher's Love. Let them hate me, so they do but fear me and obey me, is the
saying of such as set up for themselves, (and but foolishly for themselves,)
and like Satan would Rule Men to damnation. If Love be the sum and fulfilling
of the Law, Love must be the sum and fulfilling of our Ministry. But yet by
Love I mean not Flattery; Parents do love as necessarily as any, and yet must
Correct: And God himself can love and yet Correct: Yea, he chasteneth every Son
that he receives, Heb. 12.6, 7. And his Love consists with paternal justice,
and with hatred of sin, and plain and sharp reproof of sinners: And so must
ours; but all, as the various operations of Love, as the objects vary.

And what I say of Ministers, I say of every Christian in his place. Love is
the great and the new Commandment, (that is, the last which Christ would leave
at his departure to his Disciples.) O could we learn of the Lord of Love, and
Him, who calls himself LOVE it self, to love our Enemies, to bless them that
curse us, and to do good to the Evil, and pray for them that hurt and persecute
us, we should not only prove that we are genuine Christians, the Children of
our Heavenly Father, ( Mat. 5.44, 45.) but should heap coals of fire on our
Enemies heads, and melt them into Compassion and some remorse, if not into an
holy Love. I tell you, it is the Christian, who does truly love his Neighbor
as himself; who loves the Godly as his Coheirs of Heaven, and loves the
ungodly with a desire to make them truly Godly; who loves a Friend as a
Friend, and an Enemy as a Man that is capable of Holiness and Salvation. It is
he that Lives, walks, speaks, converseth, (yea, suffers, which is the
great difficulty) in love, and is as it were turned by the love of God shed
abroad upon his heart, into love it self; who does glorify God in the World,
and glorify his Religion, and really rebuke the Blasphemer, that derideth the
Spirit in Believers, as if it were but a Fanatic Dream.

And it is he that by tyranny, cruelty, contempt of others, and needless proud
singularities and separations, Magisterially condemning and vilifying all that
walk not in his fashion, and pray not in his fashion, and are not of his
opinion, where it is like enough he is himself mistaken, that is the Scandalous
Christian, who does as much against God; and Religion, and the Church, and men's
Souls, as he does against Love. And though it be Satan's way as an Angel of
Light, and his Ministers way as Ministers of Righteousness, to destroy Christ's
Interest by dividing it, and separate things which God will have conjoined, and
so to pretend the love of Truth, the love of Order, or the love of Godliness,
or Discipline against the love of Souls, and to use even the name of love it
self against love, to justify all their cruelties, or censures, and
alienations; yet God will keep up that Sacred Fire in the hearts of the sound
Christians which shall live and conquer these temptations, and they will
understand and regard the warning of the Holy Ghost, Romans 16.17. I beseech you
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which
you have learned, and avoid them, (in their sinful, dividing, offensive ways)
for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus, (though they may confidently
think they do) but their own bellies; (or carnal interests, though perhaps they
will not see it in themselves) and by good words, and fair (or flattering)
speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. The word is (...), hominum minime
malorum, no bad men, or harmless well meaning men; who in case it be not to
mortal Errors, perhaps may be in the main sincere, and may be saved when their
stubble is burnt: But whether sincere or not, they are Scandals in the World,
and great dishonourers of God, and serve Satan, when they little think so, in
all that they do contrary to that Universal Love by which God must be
glorified, and sinners overcome.

VII. A public mind that is set upon doing good, as the work of his life, and
that with sincere and evident self denial, does greatly glorify God in the
World. As God makes his Goodness known to us by doing good; so also must his
Children do. Nothing is more communicative than Goodness and Love; nothing will
more certainly make it self known, when ever there is opportunity. That a wordy
barren Love, which does not help, and succor, and do good, is no true
Christian Love, St. James has told us fully in his detection of a dead and
barren faith. No man in reason can expect that others should take him for a
Good man, for something that is known to no one but himself (save only that
public converse and communion must be kept up by the charitable belief of
Professions, till they are disproved.) The Tree is known by its Fruits, and the
Fruits best by the taste, though the sight may give some lower degree of
commendation. The Character of Christ's purified peculiar people is, that they
are zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. The Scandalous Christian may be zealous
against others, and zealous to hurt them, to persecute them, to censure them,
to disparage them, and to avoid them; but the Genuine Christian is zealous in
loving them, and doing them all the good he can. To do a little good upon the
by, and from a Full Table to send an Alms to Lazarus at the door; yea, to give
to the Needy as much as the Flesh can spare, without any suffering to it self,
or any abatement of its Grandeur, pomp, and pleasure in the world, will prove
you to be men, not utterly void of all compassion; but it will never prove you
to be Christians, nor better than Infidels and Heathens. Look not that men
should think you better than your fruits do manifest you to be; nor that they
take you to be good, for saying that you are good; nor judge you to excel
others, any further than your works are better than others: And marvel not if
the World ask, What do you more than others? when Christ himself does ask the
same, Matthew. 5.47. If ye salute your Brethren, and those of your own Opinion
and way, and if ye love them that love you, and say as ye say, do not even
Publicans and Infidels do the same? Matthew. 5.46. Marvel not if men judge you
according to your works, when God himself will do so, who knows the heart. He
that is all for himself, may love himself, and think well of himself, but must
not expect much love from others: Selfishness is the Boil or Imposthume of
Societies, where the Blood and Spirits have an inordinate Afflux, till their
corruption torment or gangrene the part. While men are all for themselves, and
would draw all to themselves, instead of loving their Neighbor as themselves,
and the Public Good above themselves, they do but hurt and destroy themselves;
for they forfeit their communion with the body, and deserve that none should
care for them, who care for none but themselves. To a Genuine Christian
another's good rejoices him as if it were his own; (and how much then has
such a one continually to feed his joy?) and he is careful to supply another's
wants, as if they were his own: But the scandalous selfish hypocrite does live
quietly, and sleep easily, if he be but well himself, (and it go well with his
Party) however it go with all his Neighbors, or with the Church, or with the
World. To himself he is fallen, to himself he lives, himself he loves,
himself he seeks; and himself, that is, his temporal prosperity, he will
advance and save, if he can, whatever his Religion be; and yet himself he
destroys, and will lose. It is not well considered in the World, how much of
sin consists in the narrow Contraction of men's love, and regard unto their
natural selves, and how much of goodness consists in a Community of love; and
what a glory it is to the Government and Laws of God, that he makes it so
noble and necessary a part of every man's duty to love all men, and to do good
to all, as he is able, though with a difference. God could do us all good
enough by Himself alone without one another: But what a mercy is it to the
World, that as many Persons as there are, so many there are obliged by God to
love their Neighbors as themselves, and to do good to all about them? And what
a mercy is it to the Actor, that God will thus make him the Instrument and
Messenger of his Beneficence?

Ministers, and Christians all, Would you be thought better than others? Are
you angry with men that think otherwise of you? What good do you more than
others in your places? What good do you that other men (...) see, and feel, and
taste, and judge of? Every man loves himself, and can feel what does him good
in natural things: And God that by giving you food, and other mercies to your
bodies, would have you therein taste his love to your Souls, would use you just
so for your Brethrens good. Do you give them good words and counsel? It is
well: But that is not it, that they can yet taste, and value: You must do that
sort of good for them which they can know, and relish; not that this will save
them, or is any great matter of it self, no more than God's common bodily
mercies to you; but this is the best way to get down better. And he that sees
his Brother have need, and shuts up the bowels of his compassion from him,
how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. Give to him that asks, and
from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away, Matthew. 5.42. That is,
let not want of Charity hinder thee at any time from giving, though want of
ability may hinder thee, and prudence may restrain thee, and must guide thee.
If you say, Alas, we have it not to give: I answer: 1. Do what you can. 2. Show
by your compassion, that you would if you could: Take care of your poor
Brethren. 3. Beg of others for them, and put on those that can, to do it.

Say not, These carnal people value nothing but carnal things, and cannot
perceive a man's love by spiritual benefits: For it is not Grace, but the means
and outside of things spiritual that you can give them, and for ought I see,
the most of us all do very hardly believe God's own love to us, if he deny us
bodily mercies. If you languish in poverty, crosses, and painful sickness any
thing long, your murmuring shows, that you do not sufficiently taste God's
goodness without the help of bodily sense: And can you expect that natural men
believe you to be good for your bare words, when you so hardly think well of
God himself, though he promise you Life Eternal, unless he also give you bodily
supplies?

VIII. He that will glorify his Religion, and God, before men, must be
strictly just in all his dealings, just in governing, just in trading and
bargaining; just to Superiors, and to Inferiors, to Friends, and to Enemies;
just in performing all his promises, and in giving every man his Right: He that
in love must part with his own Right for his Neighbor's greater good, must not
deprive another of his Right; for Charity includes Justice, as a lower Virtue
is included in a higher and more perfect: He must not be unjust for himself for
riches, or any worldly ends; he must not be unjust for Friends or Kindred; he
must not be drawn to it by fear or flattery; no price must hire him to do an
unrighteous deed: But above all, he must never be unjust as for Religion, as if
God either needed or countenanced a lie, or any iniquity. No men are more
scandalous dishonourers of Religion, and of God, than they that think it lawful
to deceive, or lie, or be perjured, or break Covenants, or be rebellious, or
use any sinful means to secure or promote Religion; as if God were not able to
accomplish his Ends by righteous means. This comes from Atheism and Unbeli^f,
when men think that God will lose his Cause, unless our wits and sinful shifts
preserve it, as if we, and not He, were the Rulers of the world. The
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. and seldom escape
the hatred or contempt of men.

IX. He that will glorify God, must know and observe the Order of Commands and
Duties, and that God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; and must prefer the
End before the Means as such. He must not pretend a lesser Duty against a
greater, nor take the lesser at that time for a Duty, but for a sin, when the
greater should take place. God has made his Laws, and our Duty, to be the
means of our own good. It is no profaneness, but duty, to omit that which else
would be a duty, when a greater is to be preferred: God calls it the Sacrifice
of a Fool, who knows not that he does evil under the name of duty, when
Sacrifice is preferred before an obedient hearing of Gods Commands, Eccl. 5.1,
2, 3. It was no want of holy zeal in Christ, which made him bid the
unreconciled, leave thy Gift at the Altar, and first go and be reconciled to
thy Brother, and then come and offer thy Gift, Matthew. 5.24. Some zealous
Persecutors, Censurers, and Dividers now, would think I spoke like an ungodly
person, if I should say to them, Let your Liturgy, and your Prayers, and your
Worship stay, till you have confessed and lamented your injuries to your
Brethren, and then come and offer your service to God, and lift up pure hands
to him, without wrath and doubting: yet is it no more than God often calls for
to the hypocritical Jews, Isa. 1.11, etc. To what purpose is the multitude of
your Sacrifices, when ye come and appear before me? Who has required this at
your hands, to tread in my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations; Incense is an
abomination to me -- When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes;
when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Wash
you, make you clean. -- Relieve the oppressed, Isa. 58.2.3, etc. They seek me
daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinances of their God; they ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice; they take delight in approaching to God: -- Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou see not? -- Have we afflicted our Soul, and thou take no
knowledge? -- Ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: Ye shall not fast as this day, to make your voice to be heard on
high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his
Soul? to bow down his head as a bull-rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is
not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, and to
let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house? When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thy own flesh? Then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning,
and thy health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go
before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward: Then shall thou call,
and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. --

It is a point that our Lord Jesus lays a great stress upon: He purposely
heals on the Sabbath day; and tells the censorious Pharisees, The Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; that is, the end, which is man's
good, is to be preferred before the means; nay, it is no means, and so no duty,
which is against it. He defends his Disciples for getting themselves food as
they passed in the Cornfieldsd; and he teaches them the lawfulness of the
Priest's labor on the Sabbath, and of David's eating of the Shewbread; and at
two several times does tell them, that God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice;
and bids them go learn what that means, Mat. 4.13. and Mat. 12.7.

And it is not only Pharisees, but many better men who have need to go learn
the meaning of that Sentence. The meaning i^ this, that caeteris paribus, the
great duties of the Law of Nature, are to take place before the positive
Institutions. God's Institutions are for man's good; whatever is a duty, is
also a means to the happiness of man, and pleasing of God, which is the end of
all: Love to God and (...) greater than all the instituted means of them, as
such; therefore (...) no duty which is no means, or is against the Instituter's
end. Preaching and Prayer must be omitted for some works of love and humane
good: Discipline is a duty, when it is a means to the end for which it is
ordained: But when it would hinder or destroy that end, (the reputation of
Religion, and the glory of God's Holiness, and the Church's good) it is no
duty, but a sin. To omit a Sacrament, to break the Rest of the Lord's day, to
forbear the Sacred Assemblies, may be a duty, when the good of men requires
them. Ordination is a duty, when it is a means to its proper end: But if it
were pleaded against those ends, and order set against the thing ordered, even
the work of the Ministry, the case would be altered.

When men mistake, and mis-time, and mis-place God's Institutions, to the
excluding of the great Moral duties which are their end, and persuade men to
that as a part of Religion, which would certainly do more hurt than good, they
scandalously drive men away from Religion. Thus imprudent scandalous Professors
can backbite and reproach others, and make them odious, and destroy Christian
Love, and Peace, and Concord, on pretense of Zeal for Order, Government,
Ceremonies, Forms, or for this or that Mode of Discipline or Worship; not
having learned what this means, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice, nor,
that Forms and External Institutions were made for man, and not man for them.
And yet I know, that this will not justify the Familist, or Hypocrite, who
thinks that he may do any thing to save his flesh.

Do you think it is not a scandal to Turks, or other Infidels, tempting them to
deride, or hate Christianity, to find the Papists placing their Merits in
hurtful Pilgrimages, which waste that time which should be spent, and in a
multitude of unprofitable Ceremonies, and in unwholesome food and injuries to
health, under the Names of Abstinence and Mortification? By this Rule they may
next persuade us, that it will please God, if men famish, or hang themselves;
and consequently, if they do so by others: For we must love our Neighbor but
as our selves. God himself has made all our Religion so suitable to our good,
that he expects not that we should take any thing for our duty, but what he
gives us Evidence in the thing, or security by his promise, shall be our gain.
He that works upon self-love, and wins man by a Savior, and a glorious
reward, and proves the goodness of all his Word and ways, as to our happiness,
has instituted none of his Ordinances to our hurt. The Apostles had their
power only to Edification, and not the Destruction, or hurt of Souls, 2 Cor.
10.8. and 13.10. Let all things be done to Edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26, is a word of
greater comprehension and use, than many do conceive: When it is against
Edification, it is not acceptable to God. One would think Christ had broken his
own Law of Discipline, when he did familiarly eat with Publicans and Sinners:
And yet that very Act of his, is one of those which he justifies by the
aforesaid Rule, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, Mat. 9.11, 12, 13. Learn
this Lesson of preferring Mercy before Sacrifice, if ever you will glorify God.

The right manner of Worshipping God is of great moment to the Honor of him
and of our Religion before the World: That we give no false descriptions of
God, or dishonorable attributes: That we teach no dishonorable Doctrine as
his; especially of his own Will and Counsels, and of his Government, Laws, and
Judgment: That we neither take down the Glory of the Gospel Mysteries by
reducing them to the rank of Common Providence, nor yet be deceived by Satan or
his Ministers, as the promoters of Light and Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.15. to
abuse and dishonor them by over-doing: That we seek not to glorify God by our
lies, or by our own mistaken Interpretations or inventions. God must be
Worshipped as a Spirit in Spirit and Truth, and not with Popish toys and
fopperies; which make others think, that our Religion is but like a Poppet-Play
and ludicrous device, to keep the People in Servitude to the Priests by a blind
Devotion: God must be Worshipped Rationally, and with all holy wisdom; and not
with Childish shadows and trifles, nor with slovenly and imprudent words, which
tend to breed in the hearers derision or contempt: Neither the cantings or
scenical Actions, or affected Repetitions of the Papists, nor the rude,
disorderly, incongruous Expressions of unskilful men, are fit to be offered to
the Glorious God: Prudence, and Holiness, and Seriousness, and Reverence must
appear in that Worship which must honor God. O with what Holiness should we
hear from, and speak to the Holy, Holy, Holy God, Who will be Sanctified in all
that draw near him, Lev. 10.3. and will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in Vain! They that will do it acceptably must serve him with Reverence and
godly fear, Heb. 12.28. as knowing that he is a consuming fire; and yet with
alacrity love and delight, as knowing that in his favor is Life, and that he
is the infinitely amiable Good, the hope and only Portion of Believers.

XI. The Humility, Meekness, and Patience of Christians, are greatly necessary
to their glorifying of God: I join all three together for brevity sake.

1. It is a thing very amiable in the eyes of all, when Men have not too high
thoughts of themselves, and seek not to be over-valued by others, either as
great, or wise, or good: when they seek not precedence, preferment or honor;
but take the lowest place, and envy not the precedence or honor of others; but
take another's honor as their own, and take another to be fitter (caeteris
paribus) for places of Power, Trust, or Eminency than themselves: when they do
(according to the measure of their worth) honor all men, 1 Pet. 2.17. And are
kindly affectioned one to another in Brotherly Love, in honor, preferring one
another, Romans 12.10. Not dissemblingly and Complementally, saying [Your
Servant, Sir,] while they would fain have others below them, and to be obedient
to their wills: But really to think meanly of their own worth and Wisdom, Romans
12.3. For I say, through the grace given to me, to every man that is among you,
not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think
soberly, as God has dealt to every Man the measure of Faith. Not thinking
himself something when he is nothing, Gal. 6.3. Nor to be more Learned, or
Wise, or Pious than he is. We must be indeed his Disciples, who humbled
himself, and made himself of no Reputation, Phil. 2.7, 8. and washed and wiped
the feet of his Disciples, to teach them what to be, and do to one another; who
has taught us the necessity of Cross-bearing, and self-denial, and to humble
our selves as little Children, if ever we will enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 16.24. and 18.3, 4. and has decreed and foretold us, that
whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted; and therefore the greatness which his Ministers must seek,
must be to be the Servants of the rest, Mat. 23.11, 12, 13. Honor shall uphold
the humble in spirit, Prove. 29.23. But a man's Pride shall bring him low.
Better is it to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the
spoils with the Proud, Prove. 16.10. He that will honor his Religion, must put
on as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind (not of
Tongue only) meekness, long-suffering forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any man have a Quarrel against any, Col. 3.12, 13. He must not set
out himself like the Richest, and desire to seem high or notable to others, nor
set up himself with his Superiors, nor swell or grudge if he be not regarded
or taken notice of; no, nor if he be reproved or dishonored: But must learn of
an humbled Christ to be meek and lowly, Mat. 11.29. and must not mind (or
desire) high things; but condescend to men of low estate, and not be wise in
his own conceit, Romans 12.16. I beseech you therefore, that you walk worthy the
vocation, wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in Love, Ephesians. 4.1, 2. Let nothing be
done through strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem
others better than themselves, Phil. 2.3. What man loves not such a Spirit and
Conversation? O that it were more common and eminent among us, and then we
should find that the dis-affection of the Ignorant, would be much abated, and
that, when a man's ways thus please God, his Enemies will be (the more) at
peace with him, Prove. 16.7. But when they are proud, and we are proud, and we
cannot yield nor bow, nor give place to the wrathful, but must justle and
contend with them for our place and honor, we lose our Christian honor by
seeking Carnal honor, and appear to be but like other men: And even the Proud
themselves will disdain the Proud.

2. And though we may be Angry and not sin, and must be plain and zealous
against sin and for God, though guilty galled sinners be displeased by it; yet
meekness must be our temperature: For a turbulent, rough, unquiet spirit, is
displeasing both to God and Man; such Persons have seldom peace with others or
themselves. A meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price, 1
Pet. 3.4. Blessed are the meek for they shall Inherit the Earth; they shall
speed better than others, even in this World, Mat. 5.5. The Wisdom from above
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits. Paul tells us what the good works are, which we must be always
ready to. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers; but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men, Tit. 3.1, 2. The Scripture speaks more of this than I have
leisure to recite: See Gal. 5.23. and 6.1. 1 Timothy 6.11. and 2 Timothy 2.25. 1 Pet.
3.15. Jam. 3.13. Zeph. 2.3. Isa. 29.19. Psalm. 141.4. and 76.9. and 147.6. and
37.11.

3. And Patience both toward God and Man is a necessary Companion of Humility
and Meekness. This greatly differs from Natural dullness, and an insensible
temperature. When a man's Soul is partly so much awed by God's Authority and
Presence; and partly so much taken up with the great matters of his Service;
and partly so much contented with his favor and grace and the hopes of glory,
as to make light of all the Interests of the Flesh as such, and therefore to
bear patiently such losses and crosses, and wants, and sufferings, as touch the
Flesh, as taking it for no great matter to lose all the World, if we save our
Souls; this is true Patience, by which God is glorified: For by this men will
see that Christians have indeed such great things in their hopes, as set them
quite above the transitory things of the Flesh and World. But when they are
much troubled at every Cross and Loss; and whine and complain as if they were
undone, if they live in Poverty or Reproach; and are at their wit's end in
every danger; and fret and storm at every ill word, or every one that wrongeth
them; they are the shame of their Profession, and scandals to the World. It is
not a sudden Anger which is the great sin of Impatience; but an impotent
disability to suffer in the Flesh, in Estate or Name, and a repining under
every want, which shows a Fleshly Worldly mind, and a want of true believing
the heavenly Felicity: Though I confess that Pity must make some Excuse for
many poor Women, whose Natural temper makes their Passions troubles and fears
invincible. He that said, In your Patience possess your souls, does intimate,
that we have lost our selves and the government, order, and Peace of our Souls,
when we have lost our Patience, Luke 21.19. See Eccl. 7.8. Jam. 5.7, 8. 1 Pet.
2.20. 1 These. 5.14. Be patient toward all men, 1 Timothy 6.11. Col. 1.11.
Whatever Zeal you seem to have in Prayer, in Preaching, and for purity of
Worship, if you can bear wants and sickness, and the loss of all the World no
better than others, you will appear no better in their Eyes; for if you faint
in the day of Adversity your strength is small, Prove. 20.10.

XII. And as a special fruit of Humility, An easy and thankful bearing of
Reproof, and readiness to confess a fault upon due conviction, is a necessary
duty to the Honoring of God. It will show men that you are Enemies to sin
indeed, and that you are not Hypocrites, who weed only their Neighbors Fields,
and see the Mote in another's Eye, and not the Beam which is in your own. If
the Righteous smite us by Reproofs, it must be taken as a kindness, and as a
precious Balsome which does not break our Head, but heal us, Psalm. 141.5. Not
that we are bound to belie our selves in compliance with every man's censorious
humor that will accuse us; but we must be readier to censure our selves than
others, and readier to confess a fault, than to expect a confession from others
whom we Reprove. Sincerity and serious Repentance will be honorable in that
Person, who is most careful to avoid sin, and most ready penitently to confess
it when he has been overcome, and truly thankful to those that call him to
Repentance; as being more desirous that God and his Laws and Religion have the
glory of their Holiness, than that he himself should have the undue glory of
Innocence, and escape the deserved shame of his sin.

It is one of the most dangerous Diseases of Professors and greatest scandals
of this Age, that Persons taken for eminently Religious are more impatient of
plain (though just) reproof, than many a Drunkard, Swearer, or Fornicator: And
when they have spent hours or days in the seeming earnest Confession of their
sin, and lament before God and Man, that they cannot do it with more grief, and
tears; yet they take it for a heinous injury in another, that will say half so
much against them, and take him for a malignant Enemy of the godly, who will
call them as they call themselves. They look that the chief business of a
Preacher should be to praise them, and set them above the rest, as the only
People of God; and they take him for an Enemy that will tell them the truth.
But the scandal is greatest in those Preachers themselves, who cannot endure to
hear that they are sinners: So tender and impatient of Reproof are some, yea,
some that for their Learning, and Preaching, and Piety, are ranked in the
highest form, or expect to be so, that almost nothing but flattery or praise
can please them; and they can hardly bear the gentlest Reproof, no, nor a
contradiction of any of their Opinions: But they seem to tell men that it is
their part and privilege to be the Reprovers of others, and to have no
Reprover; and to tell other men of sin, and be themselves accounted Innocent;
and to call other men to Repentance for Particular sins, while they themselves
must have no other Repentance, than in general to say that they a sinners; and
to proclaim to all that their Public Confessions are formalities, and that it
is a Christ to heal the Souls of others that they Preach, while they
acknowledge but little work for his remedies on themselves. But he that
refuses reproof does err, and he that hates it is brutish, how Learned, or
Reverend, or Pious soever he would be accounted, Prove. 11.17. and 12.1. He that
regards reproof is prudent, and he that hates it shall die, Prove. 15.5, 10.
As ready humble penitent confession of sin does tend to our Pardon from God; so
does it tend to our acceptance with Man: When God and Man will condemn the
Pharisee, that justifies himself till Confession be extorted from him.

XIII. It is another very Honorable fruit of Humility to have a learning
disposition, and not to be Magisterial; and to be swift to hear, and sl^w to
speak. All Christ's Disciples must be as little Children, Matthew. 18.3, 4.
especially in a learning, teachable disposition. A Child does not use to set
his wit against his Master's, or any other that will teach him, nor to rise up
against instruction, as a Disputer that must have the better, and be accounted
the wisest; but his daily business is submissively to learn. A Genuine
Christian is indeed communicative, and willing that others should partake with
him in the wisdom and happiness which God has revealed to him: But he is ready
first to learn himself, and knows that he must receive before he can
communicate: And there is none so far below him, but he is willing to hear and
learn of; but especially among his Equals he is readier to hear and learn, than
to teach, because he is still conscious of his ignorance, and honors the
gifts of God in others, which the proud despise, Jam. 3.1. and 1.19.

But the scandalous Christian is so wise in his own eyes, that he is ever of a
teaching humor, and those please him best that will sit and hear, and
reverence him as an Oracle, and magnify every word that drops from his lips:
He is so full of himself, that he has scarce the patience to observe well what
another speaks or writes; and so valueth his own Conceptions, that he thinks
they should be valued by the hearers: And so scandalous is the teaching humor
of some Learned men, that they have not the common good manners or civility to
suffer another to speak to the end, but they must needs interrupt him, that
they may speak, as being more worthy: They take other men's speeches to be so
tedious, that their patience cannot hold out the length of them: I mean not,
that a Wise man is bound to lose his time in hearing every self-conceited
person talk; but when men are engaged in Conference or Disputes, for a man to
have such list to speak, that he cannot stay till another (though long) come to
the end, it is scandalous incivility; yea, some can scarce stay till two or
three Sentences be uttered, but their haste must tell you, that they take
themselves to be much the Wiser, and to be fitter to teach, than to hear and
learn: And they are so over-loaden with their own conceited wisdom, that they
can carry it no longer without some vent; and so full of their own, that they
have no room to receive any more from others: And being all Masters, they
receive from God and Man the greater Condemnation, Jam. 3.1. Prove. 12.17. and
1.5. and 18.13.

XIV. The Genuine Christian hates backbiting, and disgraceful reports of
others, and yet can bear it from others to himself. He has learned to love
all, and to speak evil of no man, nor to receive or vend ill reports of others.
He knows that this is the work of the Devil, the mortal Enemy of Love. He
modestly rebukes the backbiting tongue, and with an angry countenance drives
it away, Psalm. 15.3. Tit. 3.2. Prove. 25.23. Backbiters tell us that they are
haters of men: And the Apostle joins them with haters of God, Romans 1.30.
Debates, backbitings, whisperings, envyings, are the scandalous Christian's
work, 2 Cor. 12.20. He that hears them, will either distaste them, or catch
the disease, and be as bad as they: And he that hears that he is calumniated
or reproached by them behind his back, is tempted to abhor both them and their
Profession. But to deal with men as faithful Friends, and in plainness (but
with prudence and love) to tell them secretly of their defects and faults, this
tends to good, and to reconcile the minds of men at last, and to the honor
of the Christian way, Matthew. 18.15, 16. Levit. 19.17. Prove. 9.8. and 24.25. and
27.5. Eccl. 7.5. Prove. 28.23.

But yet when we are belyed and reproached our selves, though by Christians, or
Teachers, or Superiors, it beseems us not to make too great a matter of it,
as being tender of our own Reputation; but only to be sorry for the slanderer's
or backbiter's sin and misery. For men's corruption will have vent; the angry,
and malicious, and envious, will speak from the abundance of their hearts; and
the guilty will be tender; and Children will cry and quarrel; and proud
Contenders will be impatient: And how small a matter is it, as to us, to be
Judged of Man, who must all be shortly Judged of the Lord?

XV. He is one that would keep open to the notice of all, the great difference
between the Godly, and the Wicked; and aspireth after the highest degrees of
Holiness, as knowing the corruptions and calamities of the weak, and how much
of Heaven is in Holiness it self; and yet he loves, honors, and cherishes
the least spark of Grace in the weakest Christian; and is none of them that
consoriously despise such, nor that tyrannically tread them down, or cast them
injuriously out of the Church.

1. To make men believe that there is little difference between the holy and
the profane, is to bring all Religion into contempt, and is a wickedness which
God's Laws throughout condemn, and his Judgment shall publicly confute, Matthew.
3.18. 2 These. 1.6. to 11. Jude 15. Matthew. 13.25. throughout.

2. To take up with a little goodness, which consists with scandalous
corruptions, is to be a scandal in the Church.

3. And yet to be supercilious, and to disdain the weak, or shut out any as
ungodly, whom Christ has not warranted us to shut out, and to make stricter
Rules of Trial and Church Communion than he has made, this is justly
displeasing both to God and Man: It tempts men to abhor that Religion, which
tends more to men's reproach than to their cure, and causes Professors to set
themselves higher above the weak, and at a greater distance from their
Neighbors, than God would have them. Christ is tender of little ones, and
would not have them scandalized: His own Apostles were very low in knowledge
all the time that he was with them on Earth. It is not mere want of words, that
will warrant us to take men for ungodly; even he that is weak in the Faith must
be received, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.15. To Cull out a few
that have learnt to speak better than the rest, and shut out, with the Dogs,
all the Infant-Christians who must be fed with Milk, because they want
expressions, is one of Satan's ways of over-doing, by which he would banish
Religion out of the World.

XVI. He that will glorify God by his good works, must be zealous and diligent
in them, and make them the serious business of his life: He must live so, that
men may see, that indeed he does believe, and hope for Heaven. That which a man
coldly speaks of, and coldly seeks, men will think he coldly desires; and
therefore that he does but doubtingly believe it. A cold slothful Christian
proclaims his unbelief to others, and so inviteth them to the like. When
Christians bestir themselves, as for their lives, and ply God's work with
greatest diligence, and redeem their lives, as knowing that all is short enough
to prepare for an endless life; this wakeneth others to life and
thoughtfulness, to enquire into the matter of our hopes.

XVII. He that will glorify God must be wise and watchful, to see and take the
opportunities of good before they are past by, and to avoid temptations to
error and iniquity, and especially Temerity in matters of great and publiek
consequence.

1. Good works have their season: You lose them, if you take them not in their
time; that may be done now, which, if you pass this time, you can never do.

2. Temptations also have their season, and must just then be resisted, lest
many a year repair not an hours loss. And they are very many: And
narrow-sighted careless persons, who avoid two, and fall into the third, or
avoid nineteen, and are conquered by the twentieth, are always scandalous.

3. And rash adventures on any Opinions or actions, but especially of public
consequence, are usually most scandalous and pernicious to the Church. As in
Military Affairs, and in Physic, ubi non licet bis errare, men's lives must pay
for our temerity and error, and all the World cannot remedy the effects of one
mistake: So in matters of Religion, if we mistake by our rash conceitedness,
and take not time for necessary trial, and proceed not as a man on the Ice, or
among Quicksands, with great care and deliberation; the shaking of Kingdoms,
the ruin of Churches, the silencing of Ministers, the corruption of Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, and the sin and damnation of many Souls, may be the
effect of our proud presumption and temerity: But the humble, self-suspecting
man, that suspendeth his judgment and practice, till he has thoroughly proved
all, does preserve the honor of Religion, and avoid such late and dear
repentance.

XVIII. The man whose works shall glorify God, must be devoted to the Unity
and Concord of Believers, and be greatly averse to dividing and love-killing
Opinions, words, and practices, and as much as in him lies, he must live
peaceably with all men, 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 14, 15, 16.
Romans 16.17. and 12.18. 1 These. 5.17. Joh. 17.24. When Paul says, that Dividers
serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, he intimates to us, that
though Truth and Purity be in their mouths, and really intended by them, as
they take it; yet there is usually a secret self-interest that is carried on,
that byasseth the judgment: And when he tells them, Act. 20.30. that of their
own selves should men arise, speaking perverse things, which they called (and
it is like believed to be) the Truth; yet self-interest lay at the bottom, to be
somebody in drawing Disciples after them: For it is so notorious a truth, that
Unity and Concord are indispensably necessary to the Church, as it is to our
Body, to Families, to Kingdoms; that men could not do so destructive a thing as
dividing is, if some sin had not first caused the error of their minds. It
greatly honors Christ and Religion in the world, when Believers live in love
and unity: And their discords and divisions have in all Ages been the scandal
of the World, and the great reproach and dishonor of the Church. When Christ's
Disciples are one in him, it is the way to the Infidel-world's Conversion, that
they may believe that the Father sent him, Joh. 17.24.

And here the Devil has two sorts of servants: 1. The true Schismatic or
Heretic, who fearlesly and blindly divides the Churches. 2. The over-doing
Papist, and Church-Tyrant, who will have a greater unity than Christ will here
give us, that so we may have none. And when Christ prays that we may be one in
him, the Pope says that we shall also be one in him, or we shall be accounted
Schismatics, and destroyed as such. And when the Ancient Church, according to
Christ's Institution, united all in the Baptismal Covenant, explained in the
Creed, and Paul numbreth the necessary terms of unity, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. 1. One
Body (or Church of Christ) into which we are baptized. 2. One Spirit of
Holiness in all. 3. One Hope of the Glorious Reward. 4. One Lord, by whom we do
attain it. 5. One Faith, even the Christian Verity. 6. One Baptism, or Covenant
of Christianity. 7. And One God, and Father of all; and in these God would have
all his Servants to be One: then come in these Over-doers, and they must have
us to be all One in all their Papal policy, and all the Decrees of their Popes
and Councels de Fide, and in their multitude of corruptions, and ceremonious
impositions; which is as much as to say, You shall have no Unity: For he that
says to all the City or Kingdom, You shall be destroyed for discord, or
reproached as dividers, if you are not all of one Complexion, or have not all
the same Appetite, Age, or Bodily Stature, does pronounce reproach or
destruction on them absolutely: So is it with all others that put their
self-devised terms on their Brethren as necessary to Unity and Peace, on how
pious or fair pretenses soever: Impossible conditions make the thing
impossible. These are the Church-tearing scandals. These are the snares by
which Satan has made the Church a scorn, and our Religion a Stumbling block to
Turks and Heathens: But had the Peacemakers been heard, who learned of the
Holy Ghost ( Act. 15.) to impose nothing on the Brethren but necessary things,
and who have labored to revive love, and shame emulations and divisions; God
had been more glorified by men, and the reproach of the Churches and solemn
Assemblies taken away. When all Sects and Parties have busled and raised a dust
in the World, to foul the Church, and blind each other; if ever the Church's
Glory be restored, and our shame taken away, it will be by men of Love and
Peace, by healing, uniting, reconciling principles and means.

XIX. He that will glorify God, must live in and to the Will of God, and seek
to reduce his own will wholly into God's, and to destroy in himself all will
that striveth against God's Will.

1. The disposing Will of God our Owner must be absolutely submitted to, and
the bounteous Will of God our Benefactor thankfully and joyfully acknowledged.

2. The ruling Will of God our Lawgiver must be with daily study and care
obeyed, and his punishing and rewarding Justice glorified.

3. The final felicitating Will and Love of God our ultimate end and object,
that we may please him, and be everlastingly pleased in him, love him, and be
loved by him, must be totally desired and sought, as the only and perfect Rest
of Souls.

O! that is the holy, the joyful, the honorable Christian, who daily labors
(and in some good measure does prevail) to have no Will but the Will of God,
and that which wholly is resolved into it; who looks no further to know what
he should do, but to know by his Word what is the Law, or Will of God: who
believes that all that God wills is good, and had rather have his life, and
health, and wealth, and friends, at God's will and disposal, than his own; who
knows that God's Will is love it self, and that to please him is the End of
all the World, and the only felicity of men and Angels; and rests wholly in
the pleasing of that will. What can be more wise and just, than to have the
same will (objectively) with him who is infinitely wise and just? What can be
more honorable, than to have the same Will as God himself, and (so far) as his
Children, to be like our Father? What can be more orderly and harmonious, than
for the will of the creature to move according to the Creator,s Will, and to be
duly subservient to it, and accurately compliant with it? What can be more
Holy, nay what else is Holiness, but a will and life devoted and conformed to
the Will of God? What can be more safe, or what else can be safe at all, but to
will the same things which the most perfect Wisdom does direct to, and infinite
love it self does choose? And what can be more easy and quieting to the Soul,
than to rest in that Will, which is always good, which never was misguided, and
never chose amiss, and never was frustrated, or mist of its decreed ends? If we
have no will, but what is (objectively) the same with God's, that is, if we
wholly comply with, and follow his will as our Guide, and rest in his will as
our ultimate end; our wills will never be disordered, sinful, misled, or
frustrate. God has all that he wills (absolutely,) and is never
disappointed: And so should we, if we could will nothing but what he wills.
And would you not take him unquestionably for a happy man, who has whatsoever
he would have? Yea, and would have nothing but what is more just and good?
There is no way to this Happiness, but making the Will of God our will. God
will not mutably change his Will to bring it to ours: Should Holiness it self
be conformed to sinners? and perfection to imperfection? But we must (by Grace)
bring over our wills to God's, and then they are in joint; and then only will
they find content and rest. O what would I beg more earnestly in the World,
than a will conformed wholly to God's Will, and cast into that Mould, and
desiring nothing but what God wills?

But contrarily, What can be more foolish, than for such Infants and ignorant
Souls as we, to will that which Infinite Wisdom is against? What more
dishonorable, than to be even at the very Heart so contrary, or unlike to God?
What can be more irregular and unjust, than for a created Worm to set his will
against his Maker's? What else is sin, but a will and life that is cross to the
regulating Will of God? What can be more perilous and pernicious, than to
forsake a perfect unerring Guide, and to follow such ignorant judgments as our
own, in matters of Eternal consequence? What can that Soul expect, but a
restless state in an uncomfortable Wilderness, yea perpetual self-vexation and
despair, who forsakes God's Will to follow his own, and has a will that does
go cross to God's? Poor self-tormenting sinners consider, that your own wills
are your Idols, which you set up against the Will of God; and your own wills
are the Tyrants to which you are in bondage; your own wills are your Prison,
and the Executioners that torment you with fear, and grief, and
disappointments. What is it that you are afraid of, but lest you miss of your
own wills? For sure you fear not, lest God's Will should be overcome and
frustrate. What are your cares about but this? What are your sighs, and groans,
and tears for? And what is it else that you complain of, but that your own
wills are not fulfilled? It is not that God has not his Will. What is it that
you are so impatient of, but the crossing of your own wills? This person
crosses them, and that accident crosses them, and God crosses them, and you
cross them your selves; and crossed they will be while they are cross to the Will
of God: For all this while, they are as a bone out of joint; there is no ease
till it be set right. In a word, a will that is contrary to God's Will, and
striveth and struggleth against it, is the Offspring of the Devil, the sum of
all sin, and a fore-taste of Hell, even a restless self-tormenter: And to will
nothing but what God wills, and to love his will, and study to please him,
and rest therein, is the rectitude and only Rest of Souls; and he that cannot
rest contentedly in the Will of God, must be for ever restless.

And when such a Holy will and contentment appears in you, mankind will
reverence it, and see that your Natures are Divine; and as they dare not
reproach the Will of God, so they will fear to speak evil of yours: When they
see that you choose but what God first chooses for you, and your wills do but
follow the Will of God, men will be afraid of provoking God against them as
blasphemers, if they should scorn, deride, or vilify you. And could we
convince all men that our course is but the same which God commands, it would
do much to stop their reproach and persecution: And if they see that we can
joyfully suffer reproach, or poverty, or pains, or death, and joyfully pass
away to God, when he shall call us, and live and die in a contented complacency
in the Will of God, they will see that you have a beginning of Heaven on Earth,
which no Tyrant, no loss, or cross, or suffering, can deprive you of, while you
can joyfully say, The Will of the Lord be done, Act. 21.14.

Object. But if it be God's Will for sin to punish me, or forsake me, should I
contentedly rest in that revenging Will?

Answ. 1. That sin of ours, which makes us incapable objects of the
complacential Will of God, is evil, and to be hated: But that Will of God,
which is terminated on such an object, according to the nature of it, by just
hatred, is good, and should be loved: And punishment is hurtful to us; but
God's Will and Justice is good and amiable. 2. If you will close with God's
Will, you need not fear his Will. If your will be unfeignedly to obey his
commanding Will, and to be and do what he would have you, his Will is not to
condemn or punish you: But if God's Will prescribe you a holy life, and your
will rebel, and be against it, no wonder if God's Will be to punish you, when
your wills would not be punished, Joh. 1.13. Heb. 10.10. Joh. 7.17. Luke 12.47.

XX. It glorifieth God and Religion in the World, when Christians are faithful
in all their Relations, and diligently endeavor the sanctifying and happiness
of all the Societies which they are members of.

I. Holy Families well ordered do much glorify God, and keep up Religion in
the World.

1. When Husbands live with their Wives in wisdom, holiness, and love; and
Wives are pious, obedient, meek, and peaceable, Ephesians. 5.22, 25. Col. 3.18, 19.
yea, unto such Husbands as obey not the Word, that without the Word they may be
won by the conversation of the Wives, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.

2. When Parents make it their great and constant care and labor, with all
holy skill, and love, and diligence, to educate their Children in the fear of
God, and the love of goodness, and the practice of a holy life; and to save
them from sin, and the temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil; and
have more tender care of their Souls than of their bodies, that so the Church
may have a succession of Saints: And when children love, honor, and obey their
Parents, and comfort them by their forwardness to all that is good, and their
avoiding the ways and company of the ungodly, Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20. Psalm. 1.1, 2.

3. When Masters rule their Servants as the Servants of God; and Servants
willingly obey their Masters, and serve them with cheerful diligence and trust,
and are as careful and faithful about all their goods and business, as if it
were their own, Ephesians. 6.5, 9. Col. 3.21. and 4.1. 1 Pet. 2.18.

When the Houses of Christians are Societies of Saints, and Churches of God,
and live in love and concord together, and all are laborious and faithful in
their Callings, abhorring idleness, gluttony, drunkenness, pride, contention,
and evil speaking, and dealing justly with all their Neighbors, and denying
their own right for love and peace; this is the way to glorify Religion in the
world.

II. Well ordered Churches are the second sort of Societies, which must
glorify God, and propagate Religion in the world.

1. When the Pastors are Learned in the holy Scriptures, and skilful in all
their sacred work, and far excel all the people in the Light of Faith and
knowledge, and in love to goodness, and to men's Souls, and in lively, zealous
diligence for God, and for men's Salvation, thinking no labor, cost, or
suffering, too dear a price for the peoples good; when no sufferings or
reproaches move them, nor account they their lives dear to them, that they may
but finish their course and Ministry with joy; when their public Preaching
has convincing light and clearness, and powerful affectionate application; and
their private oversight is performed with impartiality, humility, and
unwearied diligence, and they are able to resolve the peoples Cases of
Conscience solidly, and to exhort them earnestly, with powerful reason, and
melting love: This honors Religion, and wins Souls.

When they envy not one another, nor strive who shall be greatest, or
uppermost; but contrariwise, who shall be most serviceable to his Brethren, and
to the peoples Souls: When they over-see, and feed the Flock of God which is
among them, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being ensamples to
the Flock; and seeking not theirs, but them, are willing to spend, and be spent
for their sakes; yea, though the more they love them, the less they are
beloved; not minding high things, but condescending to men of low estate. This
is the way for Ministers to glorify God. 1* Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2.14,
15. 1 Timothy 4.10. Heb. 4.11, 13. Act. 20.24. 1 These. 2.8. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. Luke
22.24, 25, 26. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. Romans 12.16.

When Ministers are above all wordly interest, and so teach and live, that the
people may see that they seek not the honor which is of men, but only that
which is of God, and lay not up a treasure on Earth, but in Heaven, and trade
all for another world, and are further from pride, than the lowest of their
stock: when they have not only the clothing of sheep, but their harmless
profitable nature, and not the ravenousness or bloody jaws of destroying
Wolves: when they use not carnal weapons in their warfare, but by an eminency
of light, and love, and life, endeavor to work the same in others: when they
are of more public spirits than the people, and more self-denying, and above
all private interests, and envyings, and revenge, and are more patient in
suffering than the people, through the power of stronger Faith, and Hope, and
Love: when they are wholly addicted to holiness and peace, and are zealous for
the Love and Unity of Believers, and become all things to all men to win some;
in meekness instructing opposers, abhorring contention, doing nothing in strife
or vainglory, but preferring others before themselves; not preaching Christ in
pride or envy, nor seeking their own praise, but thirsting after men's
conversion, edification, and salvation. Thus must Christ be honored by his
Ministers in the world.

When they speak the same things, being of one mind and judgment, uniting in
the common Faith, and contending for that against Infidels and Heretics, and
so far as they have attained walk by the same rule, and mind the same things;
and where they are differently minded or opinioned, wait in meekness and love
till God reveal to them reconciling truth: when they study more to narrow
Controversies, than to widen them, and are skilful in detecting those ambiguous
words, and verbal and notional differences, which to the unskilful seem
material: when they are as Surgeons, and not as Soldiers, as skilful to heal
differences, as the proud and ignorant are ready to make them, and can plainly
show the dark Contenders, wherein they agree and do not know it: when they live
in that sweet and amicable concord, which may tell the world that they love one
another, and are of one Faith and Heart, being one in Christ. This is the way
for Ministers to glorify God in the world. And with thankfulness to God I
acknowledge, that such for many years I had my conversation with, of whom the
world that now despises them is not worthy. Phil. 2.21. Matthew. 6.19, 20, 21.
John 5.44. 2 Cor. 10.4. 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 22. and 10.33. Phil.
2.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.14, 24. Phil. 3. 15, 16,
17. John 17.24. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 1.10. James 3.17, 18.

And the maintaining of sound Doctrine, Spiritual, Reasonable, and Reverent
Worship, without ludicrous and unreverent trifling, or rudeness, or Ignorance,
or Superstition, or needless singularity, much honors God, (as is
aforesaid.) And so does the Exercise of Holy Discipline in the Churches: Such
Discipline whereby the precious may be separated from the vile, and the holy
from the profane, by Authority and Order, and not by popular usurpation,
disorder, or unjust presumptions: Where the cause is fairly tried and judged,
before men are cast out, or denied the privileges of the Church: Where Charity
appears in embracing the weakest, and turning away none that turn not away from
Christ, and condemning none without just proof: And justice and holiness
appears in purging out the dangerous leaven, and in trying and rejecting the
obstinately impenitent Heretic, and gross sinner after the first and second
admonition, and disowning them that will not hear the Church, Mat. 18.15, 16.
Tit. 3.10. 1 Cor. 5.11. When the neglect of Discipline does leave the Church as
polluted a Society as the Infidel World, and Christians that are owned in the
public Communion are as vicious, sensual and ungodly as Heathens and
Mahometans, it is one of the greatest injuries to Christ and our Religion in
the World: For it is by the purifying of a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, that Christ is known to be really the Savior of the World; and by
making his followers better than others, that he and his Doctrine and Religion
are known to be the best. Travelers tell me that nothing so much hinders the
conversion of the Mahometans, as their daily Experience that the Lives of the
Greek Christians, and others that Live among them, are too ordinarily worse
than theirs. More drunkenness, and more falsehood, lying, deceit, it is said, are
among those Christians than among the Turks. If that be true, those are no true
Christians; but woe be to them, by whom such offense comes. I have often heard
those Soldiers justly censured as profane, who turn Churches into Stables
(without great necessity:) But how much more hurtfully profane are they, who
for carnal ends confound the World and the Church; and keep the multitude of
the most sensual ungodly Persons in their Communion, without ever calling them
Personally to Repentance; and use the Church Keys but to revenge themselves on
those that differ from them in some Opinions, or that cross their Interest and
wills, or that seem too smart and zealous in the dislike of their Carnality,
Sloth, and Church-pollutions? When the Churches are as full of scandalous
sinners as the Assemblies of Infidels and Heathens, the World will hardly ever
believe that Infidelity and Heathenism is not as good as the Christian Faith.
It is more by Persons than by Precepts, that the World will judge of Christ and
Christianity. And what Men on Earth do more scandalize the World, more expose
Christianity to reproach, more harden Infidels, more injure Christ, and serve
the Devil, than they that fill the Church with impious Carnal Pastors (as in
the Church of Rome) and then with impious Carnal People, maintained constantly
in her Communion, without any open disowning by a distinguishing, reforming
Discipline? When such Pastors are no better than the soberer sort of Heathens,
save only in their Opinion and formal words, and when their ordinary
Communicants are no better, it is no thanks to them, if all turn not Infidels
that know them, and if Christianity be contemned and decay out of the World:
And it is long of such, that disorderly separations attempt that Discipline and
distinguishing of the godly and the notoriously wicked, which such ungodly
Pastors will not attempt: See Lev. 19.17. Mat. 18.15, 16. 1 Cor. 5. Tit. 3.10.
Jer. 15.19. Psalm. 15. 2 These. 3. Romans 16.17. 2 Timothy 3.4, 5.

III. But O how great an honor is it to God and to Religion, when Kings,
Princes, and States do zealously devote their Power to God, from whom they do
receive it, and labor to make their Kingdoms Holy! When Truth, Sobriety, and
Piety have the countenance of humane powers, and Rulers wholly set themselves
to further the faithful Preaching and practicing of the Holy Faith, and to
Unite and strengthen the Ministers and Churches, and to suppress Iniquity, and
be a terror to evil doers, it takes Satan's great advantage out of his hand,
and works on carnal Men by such means as they can feel and understand. Not
that God needs the help of Man, but that he has settled Officers and a Natural
Order, by which he usually works in the World. And as it cannot be expected
that an unholy Parent and Master should have a Holy Family, or an unholy Pastor
a Holy Church, unless by extraordinary Mercy; no more can we expect that
ungodly Magistrates should have a godly Kingdom or Commonwealth; of which the
Sacred History of the Jewish and Israelitish Kings does give you a full
confirmation: But this I must now say no more of. And thus I have told you in
Twenty particulars, what are those good Works in which the Light of Christians
must shine before Men to the Glorifying of God.

Does not Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Contradict all this? Blessed are ye when men
revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for
my sake.

Men. 2. Of Righteousness and Good Works.

I. The Men that we have to do with are, 1. Ordinary Natural Men, Corrupted by
Original sin; but yet not hardened to Serpentine Malignity, as some are: 2. Or
they are Men that by sinning against Nature and common Light are forsaken and
given up to malignant minds.

II. The Good Works, which Natural Light and humane Interest can discern and
commend, do differ from those which are merely Evangelical, of Supernatural
Revelation.

1. Malignant Persons hardened in Enmity will scorn and persecute Holiness it
self, and even that Good which Reason Justifies; and therefore are called
unreasonable wicked Men, 2 These. 3.2. Good works with these Men make us odious,
unless they are such as gratify their Lusts.

2. But there are Natural Men not yet so hardened and forsaken, who are usually
them that the Gospel does Convert: And these have not yet so blinded Nature,
nor lost all sense of good and evil, but that they honor him that does good in
all the Twenty particulars which I have named, and think ill of those that do
the contrary; though yet they relish not the Christian Righteousness, and
things of Supernatural Revelation for want of Faith.

Let us briefly now apply it.

This informs us what an honorable state Christianity and true Godliness
Holiness, as the Sun and Stars do to the Glory of his Power. No wonder if in
Glory we shall shine as Stars in the Firmament of our Father, if we do so here,
Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43. Phil. 2.15. This must not make us proud, but thankful;
for our Pride is our shame, and our Humility is our Glory.

And what wonder if all the Powers of darkness do bend their endeavors Prince
of darkness is the Enemy of the Father of Lights: And this is the great war
between Christ and Satan in the world, Christ is the Light of the World, and
sets up Ministerial Lights for the world, and for his House; his work is to
send them forth, to teach them, and defend them, and to send his Spirit to work
in and by them, to bring Men to the everlasting Light: And Satan's work is to
stir up all that he can against them, high and low, learned and unlearned, and
to put Christ's Lights (both Ministers and People) under a bushel, and to make
the world believe that they are their Enemies and come to hurt them, that they
may be hated as the Scorn and offscouring of the world, and to keep up
Ignorance in Ministers themselves, that the Churches Eyes being dark, the
darkness may be great.

But let us pray that God would forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and
Slanderers, and turn their hearts; and that he would open our Lips, that our
mouths may show forth his praise; and though his Ministers and People have
their faulty weaknesses, that he would be merciful to our Infirmities, and
grant that those things, which the craft and subtilty of the Devil, or Man
works against us, may be brought to naught, and by the providence of his
goodness may be dispersed; that we his Servants being hindered by no
persecution, may give thanks to him in his holy Church, and serve him in
holiness and pureness of life, to his Glory, through Jesus Christ.

You may see hence how much those men are mistaken, who talk of the Good Works
or Lives of Christians, as that which must have no honor, lest it dishonor
God: As if all the honor were taken from Christ, which is given to Good Works;
and the Patients health were the dishonor of the Physician: When we are
Redeemed and Purified to be zealous of good works, and created for them in
Christ Jesus, as Tit. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.10. Yea, and shall be judged according to
our Works.

This Informs you, that the Good Works or Lives of Christians is a Great
means ordained by Christ for the Convincing of Sinners, and the Glorifying of
God in the World. Preaching does much, but it is not appointed to do all. The
Lives of Preachers must also be a convincing Light: And all true Christians,
Men and Women, are called to Preach to the World, by their Good Works: And a
Holy, Righteous, and Sober Life, is the great Ordinance of God, appointed for
the saving of your selves and others. O that the Lord would bring this close to
all our hearts. Christians, if you abhor dumb Teachers, because they starve and
betray Souls, take heed lest you condemn your selves; you owe Men the
convincing helps of a holy, fruitful life, as well as the Preacher owes them
his Ministry. Preach by well-doing, shine out in good works; or else you are no
Lights of Christ, but betrayers of Men's souls; you rob all about you of a great
Ordinance of God, a great means appointed by him for men's Salvation. The world
will judge of the Scriptures by your Lives, and of Religion by your Lives, and
of Christ himself by your Lives. If your Lives are such as tend to persuade
men, that Christians are but like other Men, yea, that they are but
self-conceited Sinners, as Carnal, Sensual, Uncharitable, Proud, Self-seeking,
Worldly, Envious, as others, and so that Christianity is but such. This is a
horrid blaspheming of Christ, how highly soever your Tongues may speak of him,
and how low soever your Knees may bow to him. O that you knew how much of God's
great Work of Salvation in the world is to be done by Christians Lives. Your
Lives must teach men to believe that there is a Heaven to be won, and a Hell to
be escaped: Your Lives must help Men to believe that Christ and his Word are
true: Your Lives must tell Men what Holiness is, and convince them of the need
of Regeneration, and that the Spirit of Sanctification is no fancy, but the
witness of Jesus Christ in the world: Your Lives must tell Men by Repentance
and Obedience that sin is the greatest Evil; and must show them the difference
between the Righteous and the Wicked: Yea, the Holiness of God must be
Glorified by Your Lives. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Scripture, the
Church, and Heaven it self, must be known much by our Lives. And may not I say
then with the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of Persons then ought we to be
in all holy Conversation and Godliness, when the Grace of God, which brings
Salvation has appeared to all Men, teaching us to deny ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world? Tit.
2.11, 12.

our Humiliation and Lamentation on such a day as this? A flood of Tears is not
too much to lament the scandals of the Christian world. With what wounded
Hearts should we think of the State of the Churches in Armenia, Syria, Egypt,
Abassia, and all the oppressed Greeks, and all the poor deceived and oppressed
Papists, and all the ignorant Carnal Protestants? O how unlike are your Lives
to your Christian Faith, and to the Pattern left them by their Lord? Does a
worldly, proud, and fleshly and contentious Clergy Glorify God? Does an
ignorant Ministry Glorify him, who understand not the Message which they
should deliver? Will the world turn Christians by seeing Christians seek the
blood and ruin of each other? And hearing even Preachers Reproach each other?
Or seeing them silence, or persecute each other? Or by seeing the People run
into many Sects, and separate from one another, as unworthy of Christian
Communion? Will Proud, Ignorant, Censorious, Fleshly, Worldly Professors of
Religion, ever draw the World to love Religion? Or will peevish, self-willed,
impatient, discontented Souls, that are still wrangling, crying, and repining,
make men believe that their Religion rejoices, blesses and satisfies the
Soul, and makes men far happier than all others in the world? Alas! what
wonder that so small a part of the world are Christians, and so few converted
to the love of Holiness, when the Great Means is denied them by you, which God
has appointed for their Conversion, and the world has not one Helper for a
hundred or thousand that it should have? You cry out of those that put out the
Church-lights under pretense of snuffing them, while your selves are Darkness,
or as a stinking Snuff.

O Brethren, and Christians all, I beseech you let us now, and often, closely
ask our selves, What do we more than an Antonine, a Seneca, or a Cicero, or a
Socrates did, beyond opinions, words, and formalities? What do you which is
like to convert the world, to convince an Infidel, or glorify God? Nay, do not
some among us think that it is the height (or part) of their Religion, to live
so contrary to the world, as to be singular from others, even in lawful or
indifferent things, and to do little or nothing which the world thinks well of?
As if crossing and displeasing men needlessly were their winning conversation. O
when once we go as far beyond them in love, humility, meekness, patience,
fruitfulness, mortification, self-denial, and heavenliness, as we do in
opinions, profession, and self-esteem; then we shall win Souls, and glorify
God, and he will also glorify us.

And here we see the wonderful mercy of God to the World, who God's Will that
every Christian in the World should be as a Star, to shine to sinners in their
darkness; and O then how gloriously would the World be bespangled and
enlightened! If you say, Why then does not God make Christians better? That is a
question which cannot be well answered without a larger opening of the Methods
of Grace, than we can now have leisure for; and therefore must be done its
proper season.

Those that honor God he will honor; and therefore let us also give renewing
and sanctifying Souls, which none else in the World can do. These show the
World, that Faith, and Holiness, and Self-denial, and the hopes of Immortality,
are no deceits: These glorify God, and are the great Benefactors of the World.
I must solemnly profess, that did I not know such a people in the world, who
(notwithstanding their infirmities) do manifest a holy and heavenly disposition
in their lives, I should want my self so great a help to my Faith in Christ,
and the promise of Life Eternal, that, I fear, without it my Faith would fail.
And had I never known a holier Ministry and People than those that live but a
common life, and excel Heathens in nothing but their Belief or Opinions, and
Church orders and Formalities, I should find my Faith assaulted with so great
temptations, as, I doubt, I should not well withstand. No talk will persuade
men, that he is the best Physician that heals no more nor worse diseases than
others do: Nor would Christ be taken for the Savior of the World, if he did
not save men: And he saves them not, if he make them not holier and better
than other men.

O then how much do we owe to Christ for sending his Spirit into his Saints,
and for exemplifying his holy Word on holy Souls, and for giving us as many
visible proofs of his Holiness, Power, and Truth, as there are Holy Christians
in the world! we must not flatter them, nor excuse their faults, nor puff them
up: But because the Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, we must
accordingly love and honor them, and Christ in them: For Christ tells us,
that he is glorified in them here, Joh. 17.10. And that what is done to them,
his Brethren, even the least, is taken as done to him, Mat. 25. And he will be
glorified and admired in them, when he comes in his Glory at the last, 2 These.
1.8, 9, 10. And he will glorify their very works before all the world with a
Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

What is it to do all we do in the Name of Christ, and how may we do so? Sermon.
XXIII.
Colos. 3.17. And whatsoever ye do in word and deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him.


THERE have been, and still are, many great and famous Names in the World into
which men have been Baptized, according to which they have been called, and
also walked in the world. Rev. 11.13. (...). Men of great Name, or men of
Renown, Genesis 6.4. What a Renowned Name had the Beast in the Earth, Rev. 13.3,
4. that the world wondered after the Beast, and worshipped the Dragon that gave
power to the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like to the
Beast? Pharaoh was a great Name amongst the Kings of Egypt, which were so
called from their famous Predecessors: So the Kings of the Amalakites were
called Agag, and of Tire Hyram, and of Lycia Antiochus, of Pontus Mithridates,
of the Emperors of Rome Caesar's, and in the Church Professors have affected to
be called by the Name of some Eminent persons, 1 Cor. 3.4, 5. Some cried up
Paul, others Peter; and this was a growing evil in the Church, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13,
14. They ambitiously affected to be denominated from some Eminent Persons among
them: As the Lutherans, and Calvinists, and many others at this day, have been
called and denominated from some great persons that have been famous in their
Generation: But here is a Name in my Text is above all Names in Heaven and
Earth; and all Christians are called by this Name, and call on this Name, Jer.
14.9. Amos 9.12. This Name you must trust in, and boast in, beyond and above
all Names whatsoever, Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength; and in the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory. See what a Name is given to Christ. Isa. 6.7. And
bow to it; his Name shall be called Wonderful Counselor; and consider every
Letter of his Name, and adore it. The Apostle, according to his usual manner,
in this Epistle having spoken of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and how they
received it, and the influence it had on them, v. 12, 13. And concerning
Christ, in whom they had Redemption, v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And of the
Excellency of his Person, and of the riches of the glory of his Grace revealed
in it, v. 27. Then Chap. 2. he stirs them up to live such lives as becomes the
Gospel, and to beware of Seducers, v. 16. to the end. Then Chap. 3. he puts
them in mind of several duties throughout the Chap. He lays down some general
Exhortations, with reference to the Gospel, and their living suitably to it;
from v. 1. to 17. Then he proceeds to particular duties in our place and
Relations; and in this v. 17. having laid down something, he gathers up all
into one sum, how to carry themselves in the whole course of their lives in
their thoughts, words, and works.

We may observe from the general Scope: Doct. That the Doctrine of the Gospel
carries the highest and strictest obligations upon all such (to whom it
revealed) to duty and service in their places and relations to God and Man.

In the words we have 1. A Rule laid down. 2. The things that are under the
Rule, words, works, and thoughts, and secret motions of the heart; which works
also are well known to God, and so they come under Rule. 3. Here is the
Universality of the Rule in its extent and full compass; it fetches in all
words and works without exception, and all persons: for this You takes in all
persons, of what rank or degree soever. 4. Here is the manner how they must be
done, so as to answer the Mind of God in the Name of Christ. 5. Here is a
further Rule, or rather a part of the general Rule, that we should give thanks,
etc. 1. Here Is the duty it self, Thanksgiving. 2. The Object of it, God, etc.
3. How it must be managed, by Christ, or through Christ.

1. Obs. All our actions, thoughts, words, and works, must be done in the Name
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Obs. All Praises and Thanksgivings, as they are only due to God, so they
must be performed by us to him by Jesus Christ, that they may be accepted of
him.

All thanks are due to God the Father, who is the Father of Christ, and in him
our God and Father; and therefore this work is to be done only in, by, and
through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5.20. giving thanks always for all things unto
God, and the Father, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. All glory be given
by the Church to Christ, Heb. 10.12, 15. and Romans 16.27. How this great Duty is
to be performed to God through Christ Jesus. 3. Praises and Thanksgivings are
the great duty of our lives; for if we do all things in the Name of Jesus
Christ, then whatever we do in his Name is special matter of Thanksgiving. In
every thing give thanks: if we think a good thought, or do a good work, it is
of God; and therefore be thankful, and it is a Sacrifice to be tendered to God
every day, Heb. 13.15. As to the first Doctrine, consider 1. What it is to do
all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Why we must do all in that Name.
3. How shall we come to do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 4. Some
Uses.

1. What is it to do all in the Name of Christ? 1. It is to go to him as a
Mediator, or to go to God by him: For we must upon all occasions go to God in a
way of prayer by Christ, if we will be accepted, Psalm. 65.2. God's Spirit tells
us, that he is a God hearing prayer; therefore unto him shall all flesh come
and appear: Not come to God in prayer, but by Christ as Mediator. Beza sets it
out, Invocato Christi Nomine, we must go to God; quod autem addit (...)
diligenter notandum est, ut sciamus Deum frustra coli nisi Christus Mediator
interveniat. We must go to God (by him) we must take special notice of that
word, for we do in vain make our Addresses to God, but by the intercession of
our Mediator. All our Supplications are to be put in the Name of Christ, as he
bids us, John 15.3, 16. and John 16.23, 26. he tells them, whatsoever they
should ask the Father in his Name at that day ( i. e. after his Ascension, and
giving the Spirit) you shall ask in my Name; and I say not unto you, etc. He
speaks this by way of encouragement unto them, that they should go in his Name,
and then they should certainly speed: He gives as loving Friends sometimes do,
when they certainly intend to do some special good for a Friend; they say, I
will not tell you what I Will do for you, intimating thereby they will do what
they can for them.

2. It is to do all by his Authority, Power, and Command, Mat. 18.18, 19, 20.
Christ tells them, that whatever they did bind or loose on Earth in his Name,
(i. e. by his Authority and Command) should be bound in Heaven: For when two or
three are gathered together in his Name, (i. e. by virtue of his Command) he
would be in the midst of them. All Power and Authority is given of the Father
to Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. and therefore go in the Name of the Father, etc.
Laws and Proclamations, which go forth in the Name of the King, they go forth
in his Authority. All our actions come under his Command, he is our King and
our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. Though other Lords besides Christ have had Dominion
over us, but by him only will we make mention of his Name, Isa. 26.13. By
virtue of his Command and Authority we'll make mention of thy Name, we will
admire and praise thee. He is a Sovereign Lord who Commands, and does impose
Laws on the Consciences of men; his Laws reach the inward as well as the
outward man, else all that we do cannot be done in his Name, and by virtue of
some Authority from him, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16.
and the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.11.

3. It is to do all in his strength and power, this is to do all in his Name.
Thus Acts 4.6, 7. Annas and Caiaphas, etc. asked Peter and John, by what Power,
or by what Name they had done this, v. 10. Peter told them that in the Name of
Jesus Christ did that Man stand whole before them: thus did they come in the
Power of Christ. To go about a work in the Name of Christ is to go about it and
do it in his strength and Power, 1 Samuel 17.45. David went against Goliath in the
Name of the Lord of Hosts; so David said, Psalm. 108.10, 11. that in the Name of
the Lord he would destroy them, i. e. in the strength and Power of the Lord.
Paul can do all things through Christ who strengthens him, Phil. 4.13. His
Grace was sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12.9. No man in the strength of his own
parts or gifts can do any thing so as to be accepted, John 15.5. (without me ye
can do nothing) he does not say, that you may do something, or that you can do
but little, but you can do nothing without me. He works all our works for us,
Isa. 26.12. even the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. Paul labored more
abundantly than they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. but he presently corrected himself, Yet
not I, but the Grace of God which was with me.

4. For his Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. So that as he is the Author, so he is the end
of all we do, Romans 11.36. All people must honor the Son, as they honor the
Father, Joh. 5.23. Christ is the Alpha and Omega of all, Rev. 1.8. All Glory
and Honor is due to Christ, as is due to the Father, Rev. 4.9, 11. they give
glory to him that sits on the Throne, and Rev. 5.12, 13. there is all honor
given to him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb, they which do all for
the glory of God, do all their actions to the honor of God the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, so that when God does any thing for us, he does it for his
Name's sake; and therefore when David begged of God, that for his Name's sake
he would lead him, Psalm. 31.3. he means, for his Glory, we should have an eye
at the Glory of Christ.

5. To do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, is to live a life of Faith for a
supply of all things for Life and Godliness, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.2,
3. he tells us, we have all things, that is, we that have like precious Faith,
spoken of in v. 1. and that Live in the Exercise of it upon Christ, as Paul
did, Gal. 2.20. This Faith in Christ's Name being Exercised in a way of Prayer
is the way to obtain whatever we ask, Joh. 16.23. Every Believer does live a
life of Faith, Heb. 10.33. In all conditions, and at all times, in the whole
course of his Life: so that what Peter said of the healing of the Cripple, may
in a sort be said of a Believer in the course of his Life, by Faith in Christ's
Name he does all.

6. To do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, it is to walk in the Religion of
the Lord Jesus, according to his Rule, for Doctrine, Worship, and Practice of
Life, Micah 4.5. The People of God do say, we will walk in the Name of the Lord
our God. The Heathens did own and honor the Names of their gods, especially in
the Religion, Worship, and Institutions of their gods: and so the People of God
that walk in the Name of the Lord Jesus keep close to the Religion of Christ, 2 Timothy 2.19. He that names the Name of Christ must depart from Iniquity. It is
on this account that the Servants of Christ are hated and persecuted, Mat.
10.22. Luke 21.17. for his Religion which they Professed, so Rev. 2.3. they are
said for his Name's sake to have labored, etc. 13. to hold fast his Name, and
Rev. 3.8. not to deny his Name.

All People join in Communion with their God and one another that trust in the
Name of their God, Acts 2.42, 43. The Primitive Christians did walk and
continue in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and they about the Throne at
the Sea of Ordinances appointed by Christ, Rev. 15.2. worshipping of him in a
way of visible Communion with all such as are joined to the God of Abraham,
Psalm. 47.9. All that walk in the Name of Christ walk in all the ways and
Ordinances of Christ, Deuteronomy. 8.6. In all his ways, Deuteronomy. 11.22. and in no other,
Mat. 28.19, 20. observe all things which I command you.

7. It is to follow his Example. The Examples of Persons, who have had great
Names in the World, have prevailed much for doing and suffering. All such as
are professedly the Disciples of Christ, his Name is upon them in a special
manner, and therefore they should follow his Example, Mat. 16.24. And follow
me. We must walk as Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. We must follow his Example, for
his Life was Exemplary, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. He presses his own Example, Mat.
11.29. for meekness and lowliness, and Joh. 13.15. I have given you an Example,
that you should do as I have done to you. It was an Example of the greatest
condescension in the eleven Offices of Love, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands have Christ
propounded as an Example of Love to their Wives; Persons of Eminency and
Dignity have great Names, and carry many followers, and many walk according to
their Example, and upon that account are called by their Names: for Examples
prevail more than Precepts.

The second thing proposed, was the reasons why we must do all in the Name of
Christ. 1. Because all we have, are, or can do, is of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
All Grace and strength to us is from him, 1 Cor. 1.30. So that he is a
Believer's all and in all, Col. 3.11. All that God gives to us is through him,
and by him only, Ephesians. 1.3, etc. Adoption is by him, v. 5. the Seal of the
Spirit, and the earnest of our Inheritance is by him, v. 13, 14. We are created
to good works in him, Ephesians. 2.10. Reconciliation and Peace is by him, 2 Cor.
5.18. All our actual supplies are by him, Phil. 4.19. His Grace is exceeding
abundant in him, 1 Timothy 1.14, 15. For he is a Super-excellent Person, and has
the pre-eminence above all things, a Name above every Name; in him all things
subsist, in him all fullness dwells, as the Apostle shows, Col. 1.16, 17, 18, 19.
and therefore it pleases the Father that we should receive all Grace for Grace
through him.

2. Because the Father has exalted Christ, and given him a Name above every
Name, that he who was so much despised and rejected, and whose Name was a
Reproach and Scorn to all, Isa. 53.2, 3, etc. that Name so much abased, the
Father has appointed that it shall be exalted above every Name, Phil. 2.8, 9,
10. and all other names shall vanish, and be as nothing before this Name, Acts
4.12. there being no other Name in Heaven or in Earth by which we shall be
saved; therefore all must honor the Son as they honor the Father, Joh. 5.23.
Upon this account all People shall be beholding to him for all the good that
ever they do, or have, or are.

3. Because we cannot be accepted either as to our Persons or performances, but
by him, Ephesians. 1.6. accepted in the beloved, in him alone he is well pleased,
Mat. 3.17. so that all that goes to God from us is by his hand, it must be
presented by his hand, and perfumed with his Incense, Rev. 8.3, 4. Abel's
Sacrifice found acceptance by faith in the Messiah, when he presented it to
God, Heb. 11.4. We have our Lord Christ, Rev. 5.6. in the midst of the Throne,
to negotiate between him that sits upon the Throne, and the Saints that are
about the Throne; so that nothing comes from Heaven to us in a way of Blessing,
but what comes through his hand, and nothing goes from us to Heaven in a way of
Duty so as to be accepted, but only by his hand, Joh. 16.23. So that his Name
is the only prevailing Name with God, he having satisfied the Justice of God,
pacified the wrath of God, and removed the Curse of God from us; so that all
Sacrifices whatever, that find the way to Heaven and find acceptance there,
must of necessity be in his Name, Heb. 13.15. Heb. 5.1.

4. Because all that comes from God to us must be by his hand, he is the
Jacob's Ladder, spoken of, Genesis 28.12. God acts toward us as a God in a
Covenant of Grace and Peace with us only in Christ, Heb. 13.20, 21. 1 Pet.
5.10. and therefore the Apostolical Benedictions and Prayers for Grace, Mercy,
and Peace, are from God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.3,
4. 2 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.2, 3. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3. He calls them Elect, etc. by God the
Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and blood of Jesus, v. 3. We are
said to be blessed by the Father and begotten, etc. through Christ; and
therefore since God does act as a God of all Grace and Peace, we must do all in
his Name, by which the Father is propitiated toward us, he being made sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5.20. and a Curse, Gal. 3.13.

But here comes in a Quest. How they can be said to do any thing in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, that are not one with him, though yet they pretend to do
all in his Name, Mat. 7.22, 23. but are not owned by him.

I Answer, It is one thing to pretend to do a thing in the Name of Christ,
another thing to do it indeed; that is, by true Faith in his Name, by which
they are made one with him.

2. There was in that Age a Faith of Miracles, which though it were an
Extraordinary gift, and common both to Believers and Reprobates, they might be
said to do those great things in Christ's Name; that is, by a Power derived
from him, though they were not in Christ, neither did own him as their Savior,
nor were owned by him.

Ponum non nisi ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet d^f^ctu.
3. What is done properly in his Name in the sense of the Text must take into
its compass all the foregoing particulars mentioned, else it will not be
accepted, it must be done in the Name of Christ as Mediator: Many things may be
done in the Name of Christ, even Mountains may be removed, 1 Cor. 13.2. and yet
not be done by Faith in his Name, as has been said. The third thing propounded
was, how we may come to do all in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and this may be
instead of a Use of Direction to us.

1. We must be supposed to be in Christ before we can do any thing in Christ's
Name, according to that in John 15.4, 5. where he tells us, that except we
abide in him, (that supposes that they are in him first) we can do nothing, v.
5. for he compares our being in him to that of a Branch in the Vine, which
cannot bear Fruit of it self unless it abide in the Vine. Luther, enquiring
into the reason why so many ordinary things done by the Saints are set down in
Scripture with a mark of Honor upon them, and yet the moral virtues and famous
deeds of the great Philosophers and others are passed by, Answers, that the
reason is, because their Persons are not in Christ, and therefore their actions
are not accepted, and says, Si vel Cicero, vel Socrates sanguinem sudasset,
tamen propterea non placeret Deo, If Socrates or Cicero had sweat drops of
blood, their actions had not pleased God. Coment. in Genesis 29.

2. Supposing we are one with Christ, we must Exercise Faith upon him, and have
constant recourse to him in all that ever we do, for the supplies of his Grace
and Spirit, 1 Pet. 2.20. By Faith resigning all to him, casting all our burdens
and cares upon him, committing our selves and all our affairs to him, and
fetching in all our strength from him. Christ tells us, Whatever we ask the
Father in his Name shall be given to us, John 15.16. John 16.23, 26. For
whatever we ask in Prayer, believing, we shall receive, Mat. 21.22. Jam. 5.15.
So that if we would be enabled to do all in the Name of Christ, we must
Exercise Faith in his Name in Prayer to God for all things, for he is in Office
in Heaven for this purpose, Heb. 7.25. for he ever Lives to make Intercession
for us. The hand of Faith put forth in Prayer, though but in ejaculatory
Prayer, draws virtue from Heaven; as we read, when he was on Earth, those that
did but touch him drew virtue from him, Luke 6.19. Luke 8.46.

3. Living close and secret Communion with the Lord Jesus in the use of all his
Ordinances, by and through which he communicates himself in the fullness and
freeness of Life, Light, Love, and Grace to our Souls; for they be the Golden
Pipes spoken of, Zach. 4.12. by which the Golden Oil is conveyed to our Souls,
for his Name is an ointment poured forth in days of Holy Communion, Cant. 1.3.
By this means we come to have further acquaintance with him, and peace from
him; to see his Power and Glory, and our Souls to be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness, Psalm. 63.5. and to be changed into his Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. and to
be refreshed with fuller tastes of his love, which is better than Wine.

4. Exercise your thoughts much upon him, and be much taken up with him in the
course of your lives: but in a special manner, upon singular occasions. The
Psalmist Psalm. 73.23. says, I am continually with thee, that was, in his heart
and thoughts. Let your thoughts be taken up much in the consideration how to
manage your affairs, so as may be according to the mind of Christ by strength
derived from him, and for his honor, that we may be accepted in our works.
Perhaps you will object, that it is impossible we should in every business of
our lives have actual thoughts of Christ and his Glory, or go actually to him
for assistance and guidance in every particular business. I answer,

1. There may and must be an habitual, gracious, holy frame of heart in us
wrought by the Spirit, by which we may be strongly inclined to the Lord Christ,
and his Word as our Rule, and his Glory as our end; so that we do in the full
purpose of our hearts resolve to trust in him, and commit our selves to him,
and rest upon him for help, assistance, guidance, acceptance, and success in
all things. What David prayed for, for himself and people, when they were in a
good frame of heart, is the desire and endeavor of every believer, 1 Chronicles.
29.18. (viz.) that the Lord would keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of their hearts, and prepare their hearts unto him: This is the
habitual preparation of the heart for God; this frame of heart is the New
Creature in us.

2. When we have especial and particular work to do for Christ, then there
ought to be an actual preparation of our hearts for him, and stirring up the
grace that is in us, an actual making out after him, and laying hold on him for
strength and grace from him in time of need, Heb. 4. last. This is especially
to be done upon more solemn and momentous occasions, then we must in an
especial manner think upon that word that was spoken to Israel, Amos 4.11.
Prepare to meet thy God. We read, Exodus 40.30, 31. there was a Laver before the
Altar, in which they were to wash before they went into the Congregation for
service. We cannot sanctify God in an Ordinance, except we prepare for him,
which is all one with sanctifying of God, Levit. 10.3. 1 Samuel 16.5. Samuel,
when he came to sacrifice to the Lord, said to the Elders of Bethleem,
Sanctify your selves, and come with me to the Sacrifice.

3. The more frequent actual thoughts we have of Christ and his Word, and our
eye upon the Rule, and his Glory as our end, it is the better ever; therefore
we should often call upon our selves as Deborah did, Judges 5.12. Awake
Deborah, awake, etc. There must be an actual excitation of our selves, and
exercising of our Graces, when we have some special duty to perform. It is said
of Sampson, Judges 16.20. That he went out and shook himself, as at other
times. It seems to have been his manner, when he went about any great work. We
should stir up our hearts, and send up frequent Ejaculatory Prayers, though we
cannot engage in a solemn way of duty to God: and much work is done that way,
Exodus 14.15. Moses sent up an Ejaculation upon a great exigent, which reached
Heaven, yet there was not a word spoken by him; yet says God, Wherefore cryest
thou unto me? We should often cast the eye of Faith up toward God, Isa. 45.22.
as they looked up to the Brazen Serpent, and were healed. The people of God
looked to the Temple when they could not come near to it; and the Temple was a
Type of Christ, 1 Kings 8.29, 30, 35. Jonah 2.4. This which has been laid down
by way of Direction, I would press by way of Exhortation, in a word, to have
frequent recourse to the Lord Jesus Christ, since he does so frequently press
us to this very thing; the oftener we visit him, the more enlarged we are in our
desires toward him, the more we receive from him, and the better welcome we
are to him, and the Father for his sake. He bids us open our mouths wide, and
he will fill them, Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15, 16. and takes it very ill at our hands,
when we are straightened in our hearts toward him: We cannot go to God as a Father
in Christ, in Christ's Name, but we must needs speed, Heb. 4. last verse, and
we cannot speed but by him, and upon his account; for 1. We have admittance and
access to the Father only by Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. 2. We have assistance only
through him, Joh. 15.5. Phil. 4.13. 3. In regard of acceptance, which is only
in and through him, Ephesians. 1.3, 6. 4. In regard of recompense, Rev. 22.12. Our
reward is only by him, Mat. 5.11, 12. that is a great reward for Christ's sake,
eternal Life. The greatest reward is by Christ, Romans 6.23.

The Fourth thing propounded was some Uses, that since we must do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, hence may be inferred, First, That all our
Actions as they must be done in his strength, and for his Glory, 1 Cor. 10.31.
So by his Authority, and according to his Rule, and Word. It is not in our
Power, nor at our Liberty, to Act as we please according to our own Fancy, or
for our own ends, Romans 14.7, 8. none of us Lives to himself, as if he should
say, we are none of our own, therefore Living and dying we are the Lords, and
so in neither at our own disposing. He had spoken before of their eating or
forbearing to eat, how they ought to eat or not to eat according to the Will of
God, it must be to the Lord's Glory, especially considering that he who
requires we should do all in his strength and Name, and for his Glory, has
such a Title to us, to lay Laws upon us as none else has, 1 Cor. 6.20. So that
all our Actions must come under some Rules general, if not particular.

1. Of Piety to God. 2. Of Charity to Men. 3. Of Sobriety to our selves. And
all this the Gospel teaches us, Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God which has
appeared to all Men, teaches us, that denying all ungodliness, etc. we should
Live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World: There is the Rule
of the New Creature, Gal. 6.16. by which a Saint does walk in his general and
particular Calling in all holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11. They
are a proud Generation that say as they, Psalm. 12.4. Our Tongues are our own,
who is Lord over us? We will not be bounded by any Laws, nor walk by any Rule,
nor be controlled by any whatever; but we have not so learned Christ, we have
our bounds and limits set us not only in Sacred, but civil things. Therefore
Bishop Davenant, upon Col. 3.17. speaks fully to our purpose, Fallitur vulgus
cum judicat licere sibi uti victu, vestitu, sermon, aut quaecunque adiaphora
suo arbitrio: nam haec omnia ad Regulam adhibenda sunt, alioquin licet ipsa re
nullum sit vitium, erit tamen in utente, The vulgar sort are much mistaken, who
judge it Lawful for them to use their Liberty wholly in Eating, Drinking,
Clothing, Speaking, or any other indifferent things according to their own
wills and pleasure, for all these things are to be brought under Rule,
otherwise what is lawful in it self may be unlawful to him that uses it.

2. Inference, That they are very bold and saucy wretches, who presume to
entitle Christ to their impious and wicked courses; In nomine Domini incipit
omne malum. How many do justify themselves in their superstitious practices by
the Word of God? How many be like Satan, who, when he tempted Christ, produced
Scripture to enforce his temptations? Mat. 4.2, 3, 4, etc. So too many cite
Scripture for their False Worships, and for their False Doctrines, and wicked
Lives; but Wisdom is justified of her Children, Mat. 11.19. It was a
profanation of God's Name, when the Israelites proclaimed a Feast to the Lord,
which was to their Idols, Exodus 32.5. We find the false Apostles pretend as
much to the Name of Christ, as the Apostle Paul did, and to Preach in his Name,
though they Preached false Doctrine, 2 Cor. 11.13. And Antichrist himself
pretends to be like the Lamb, when he speaks like a Dragon, Rev. 13.11.

3. Infer. Hence we infer, That we cannot expect God's Blessing upon any thing
which is not done in the Name of Christ. What we undertake, and not in the fear
of the dreadful Name of the Lord Jehovah, not for his Honor, and according to
his Word, we cannot expect his Blessing: None can expect God's guidance,
assistance, or success in that which cannot be warranted by the Word of Christ,
all Blessings being wholly and only in his Name, Ephesians. 1.3. We have all things
in Christ in a way of Blessing, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Whilst we are with him, he
will be with us, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. While we are with him in a way of Duty, he will
be with us in a way of Blessing.

4. Infer. Hence it follows, That it is not in the power of any Person by
natural or acquired parts to do any thing according to the Rule of Christ, or
for his Glory, which is not done in his strength; and therefore Paul, who could
do all things through Christ which strengthened him, Phil. 4.13. could not so
much as think a good thought without him, 2 Cor. 3.5. And this our Lord Christ
puts out of Question, John 15.5. where he tells us, Without me ye can do
nothing. It is not in the name of the most ^^cellent parts, or gifts, or grace
whatever, that we can do any thing acceptable or well pleasing to God.

5. Infer. Whatever Excellency there is in any Action or worthy Achievement,
so as to commend it to God, it is from Christ through Faith in his Name. Though
the Action may be a common Action in it self, or perhaps, some base servile low
employment, yet being done in the Name of Christ, with Faith in him, with care
and conscience to please him, such an Action far surpasses the great and noble
exploit of Alexander the Great, of Pompey, or Caesar, or of any of the Renowned
Hero's in the World, who in the name of parts or gifts or any acquired
Excellencies have done great things in the World. There may be a great
difference betwixt Persons and their Employments, as betwixt a Prince and a
Peasant in their places, and yet a poor Peasant doing some common work in an
ordinary way, it may be a piece of drudgery, yet his work being done by Faith
in Christ's Name, it does as much surpass the Person and Actions of a Prince in
a worth and Excellency, which does not manage his Public and weighty affairs
of State in the Name of Christ, as the Prince does surpass him in place. They
have great advantage above all others, who go about their common Employments in
the Name of Christ, and for the honor of Christ, above all others who Act in
their own name; as it was with David and Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45. The lowest
Actions done by Faith have a very great honor put upon them by the Spirit of
God above all others, Heb. 11.31. The Harlot Rahab receiving the Spies by
Faith, is put among the worthies upon that account. Civil and natural Actions
done in the Name of Christ are raised to a very great height, to have the name
of Religious put upon them: Thus does Faith in Christ's Name turn Brass and
Copper into Gold. Luther says, that if he might have his Option, he would
rather choose the lowest and basest Employment of a poor Rustic, or
Maidservant, doing their work in Faith, before all the Victories and Triumphs
of Alexander the Great, or Julius Caesar. Why? Because hic est Deus, illic est
Diabolus; haec est differentia essentialis, hoc non omnes possunt cernere,
neque Erasmus quidem vidit; that is, because with a poor Saint God is, and the
Devil with them; and this is an essential difference betwixt them, every one
does not see it; Erasmus himself did not perceive it. By this Name the most
contemptible Persons in the World are come to be renowned in the Church, Heb.
11.2, 38, 39. Those that Live by Faith on that Name, had a great and good
Report in Heaven, and though they were despised by the World, yet the World was
not worthy of them. God never speaks such a word of all the men of great Name
in the World, as he does of the poorest Saint on Earth, that the World is not
worthy of them.

Sure I am that many of those great Men of the World were not worthy to Live in
the World: the World was weary of them, and the worse for them.

6. Infer. If all we do well in the World is to be done in Christ's Name, and
through his strength, it is very fit that we should give him the glory of all:
Since all we can do is of him, and from him, all must be to him, Romans 11.36. We
find in Rev. 5.8, 9, 10, etc. that the Saints and Angels fell down and gave
glory to God, and to the Lamb. The Lord is very jealous of his Honor, when Men
take the glory that is due to him to themselves, and Sacrifice to their own
Acts; and as God is jealous of his Honor, Isa. 42.8. and will endure to have
no Copartners with him: so the Servants of Christ are also jealous of
themselves, lest when they have done worthily, they should rob him of his
Honor; and therefore, 1 Cor. 15.10. the Apostle Paul, when he had said, I
labored more abundantly than they all, seems presently to correct himself, yet
not I, but the Grace of God in me.

7. Infer. Hence it will follow that whatever Service or Worship is done in any
Name to God, than that of Christ, it is rejected; or what is done in his Name,
but not according to his mind is abhorred of God, though he may do that which
is commanded by God, which for Substance may be the same that a Believer does,
yet being not done in the Name of Christ God abhors it, Isa. 66.3. Though they
did Sacrifice such things as God commanded, Isa 58.1, 2, 3, etc.
yet being not done in the Name of the Lord for his Glory, and according to his
Word, it is rejected of God, Isa. 1.10, 11, 12. Their Incense, which was
appointed for expiation, was an abomination to God: so that all the Worship of
the Jewish Synagogue was abhorred of God, because the Name of Christ is
abhorred by them; and all the Services of Papists, who are of the Synagogue of
Satan, which are tendered in the Name of Saints or Angels, or of their own
merit or Righteousness, are rejected with greatest detestation; all the Service
of the whole Nations of Turks, what are done in the Name of Mahomet and their
Alchoran, are an abomination to God.

8. Infer. Hence Learn, that there is no honoring of God, but in the Name of
his Son, John 5.23. There can be no true praise given to God in any work by any
Person, but in and through Christ, Ephesians. 2.10. We are Created in Christ Jesus to
good Works; so as they must be a new Created People through Christ, which are a
People to his Praise, Psalm. 102.8. The lowest, meanest work done by Faith in
Christ, as it brings great Honor to God, so it is greatly honored by God,
Mat. 10. A Cup of cold water given upon the account of Christ has a great
reward from him. Salvian speaks to this point very notably, non perdiderit
mercedem suam, Mat. 10.42. Etiam eam rem in futuro habituram praemium esse
dicit, quae in praesenti praetium non dabit; tantum honoris cultori suo
tribuit, ut aliquid esset per fidem, quod hic omnino nihil esset per
servilitatem, He shall not lose his reward (says he) in the World to come; he
shall have a great reward, which perhaps in the present Life he may miss of; so
great an honor is God pleased to put upon an Action done in Faith, however
mean and inconsiderable, and which by reason of its vileness in the eyes of men
is nothing. A visit of a poor Member of Christ, sick or in Prison, or an Alms
given to feed or cloth them, what an honor is put upon these at the last day?
Mat. 25.34, 35, 36. But what shall we think of Cyrus and Darius, and others,
who did so great things for the Church of God? Isa. 45.1, 2, 3, 4. And of the
King of Tyrus, who upon account of the Protection that the People of God had
from him, is called the Anointed Cherub that covers? Ezekiel. 28.14, 16. To this
I Answer, that as for Cyrus, though God made great use of him, yet the Lord
says expressly of him, that he know him not; and therefore as for all those
Actions they did for the Church of God, though God did gain Honor by them, yet
they did not honor God, nor were they accepted of him, because they were not
in Christ.

Use of Exhort. To study the Name of the Lord Jesus: for by how much the more
we know of his Name, by so much the more we shall trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. It
is the Name which is above every Name, Phil. 2.9. His Name is as sweet precious
Ointment poured forth, Cant. 1.3. The richest Treasuries of Grace are laid up
in that Name of Christ, John 1.16. Study it, that you may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the height and depth, etc. of it, that you may be
filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. There is a surpassing
Excellency as in that Name, so in the knowledge of it, Phil. 3.8. for by this
knowledge we come to the fairest and clearest discoveries of the Glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ; the Lord shines into the hearts of such Students,
and communicates a glorious Light unto them.

We come by this knowledge as to see into the Treasuries of Grace in him, so to
possess and enjoy them; and this knowledge carries Eternal Life with it, John
17.3.

The next Use is of Reproof; 1. Too many of great parts, Learning, and Worth,
yet have ambitiously affected a great name in the Church and in the World, to
gain followers and make a party, to be cried up as teaching Men, Mat. 23.8, 9,
10. This was it, which Christ saw was a very prevailing evil among the Scribes
and Pharisees, and utterly decried it, saying, be not called Rabbi, Rabbi, that
is, do not affect to be so called, or through Pride and Ambition delight in
these Titles. Augustine was a Person of great Piety and Parts, and he abhorred
this Spiritual preheminency, which he took notice of in many in his time, who
took up their Religion and Faith upon trust, and upon the Credit of some Men of
great name in the Church; non ad (...) nomen ambulo, (said he) Christi nomen
tenea; pert^em si essem de p^^te pauli ^^^omodo non per irem si essem ex part
Donat^? reced^^t (...) I walk not according to the names (...) Titles (...) of
Christ; I should perish if I took (...) more under the name of Donatus: away
(...) the same Augustine, in Soliloquio speaking of Christ, says, vocast^
(...) n^mine tuo, signasti me sanguine tuo, unxisti me oleo tuo, de quo a ictus
fuist, at a te Christo dicerer Christianus, Thou have signed me with thy Blood,
thou have called me by thy Name, I have been anointed by thee and from Christ I
am a Christian. And Luther, Tom. 2. Wittemb. says, primum oro, nomen meum
taceatur, and nemo Lutheranus, sed Christianus appelletur. Quid est Lutherus?
atqui Doctrina non est mea, nec pro quopiam sum Crucifixus. Vnde mihi putido
vermium Sacco hoc accideret, ut filii Christi a meo vilissimo nomine
denominentur? Absit, amici: deleamus Schismatica nomina, and denominemur a
Christo, cujus Doctrinam habemus. I desire first, that my name may be
concealed, and that none should be called a Lutheran, but a Christian. What is
Luther? my Doctrine is not mine, but Christ's; I was not crucified for any. How
comes it to pass that I who am but a filthy stinking bag of Worms, that any of
the Sons of Christ should be denominated from my Name? Away with these
Schismatical names, let us be denominated from Christ, from whom alone we have
our Doctrine.

This very thing of affectation of a Name and Fame in the Church has been very
pernicious: The greatest Heresies have been owned, propagated, and maintained
upon this account, as (...) L. 1. C. 20. tells us the Simonians from Simon
Magus; and Justin Martyr in his Dialogue says some have been called
Marcionites, others Valentinians, others Bazilidians, * (...) some by one name,
some by another, from their first Founders. But Lactantius tells us, l. 4. de
vera sapientia, when once men come under such denominations, Christiani esse
desierunt, qui, Christi nomine amisso, humana and externa vocabula induerunt,
they cease to be Christians, when they come under humane names and titles in
matters of Religion; and therefore Paul would have none follow him further,
than he followed Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. He rejects the honors which some would
have put upon him with an indignation: some affected to be called by his, and
other great names in the Church, 1 Cor. 1.12, 13. Some said they were of Paul,
etc. but when he comes to speak as to himself, he speaks with an abhorrence
that any should set up his name with Christ's. What was Paul crucified for you?
or were you baptized into the name of Paul? God forbid that any should be
guilty of so great a sin, as to come under that denomination.

2. Others are to be blamed, even the generality of Professors, that having
taken the Name of Christ upon them, and are called by his Name, are a reproach
to this high and holy Name, who are so far from doing all things in the Name of
Christ, as they do nothing in his Name, but do live against that Name, they do
not depart from iniquity, as every Christian upon that account ought to do, 2 Timothy 2.19. How many say they are Christians but are not? Rev. 3.9. He calls it
Blasphemy in them that said they were Jews, that is, Christians, but were not;
they pretended indeed to be true Christians, but held such Doctrines, and lived
in such lewd sinful practices, as were opposite to Christ. Such persons profane
the sacred Name of Christ, who live in such a way as cast a blot and imputation
upon him. Christians, as such, should be so far from the practice even of such
sins as many have very light thoughts of, that they must not so much as name
them, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Fornication, Uncleanness and Covetousness must not so much
as be named by them. The Lord Christ and his Gospel suffer more by Christians
that bear his Name, than by others that despise him; they open the mouths of
the enemy to blaspheme the holy Name of Christ, and the Religion of Christ,
Jam. 2.7. They blaspheme that worthy Name by which they are called. He had
spoken before of some Professors, who had the Faith of the Lord Jesus with
respect of persons, v. 1, 2, and 6. proud rich ones that did oppress others,
such men by their wicked practices did blaspheme the Name of Christ, by such
practices they did cast a blot and scandal upon the Religion which they did
profess, and by that means caused others to blaspheme the Name of Christ. To
the like purpose Paul speaks concerning the Jews, who were high pretenders to
the Law, yet lived in the continual breach of it, Romans 2.24. Through them the
Name of God was blasphemed among the Gentiles. So 2 Pet. 2.2. He had spoken of
some, who by their Doctrines denied the Lord Christ that bought them, by reason
of whom the way of truth was evil spoken of by the false Doctrines and
flagitious lives of Professors, the Name and Religion of Christ is rent and
torn in pieces, and brought into contempt among the worst of men. And therefore
we find, that when Professors are pressed to walk as becomes the Gospel, one
great Argument is taken from the great reproach that else will follow, 1 Timothy
6.1. he presses servants to account their Masters worthy of double honor,
that the Name of God, and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. The like Argument we
have upon Wives, that they be discreet, etc. obedient to their own Husbands,
Tit. 2.4. that the Word of God be not blasphemed, that the way of Religion, in
which they profess to serve God, be not made vile and contemptible in the eyes
of such as have little regard to any Religion at all. Averroes was most taken
with the Christians Sect, (as he called it) but when he saw the Christians do
what he thought was a great offense against the God whom they served or
worshipped, he said, Moriatur anima mea cum Philosophis, Let me die amongst the
Philosophers, and not among the Christians. It is reported of one Hathway an
Indian, as blind as he was, so possessed with prejudice against the Christian
Religion by the cruelty of the Spaniards, that he refused to be Baptized,
because of their vile carriage, and said he would not go to the same Heaven
with them.

Of all persons, Christians have cause to walk most wisely, and uprightly, in
reference to that honorable Name which they bear, lest otherwise they expose
it to contempt. Let us do as the Primitive Saints did, Acts 9.31. of whom it is
said they walked in the fear of the Lord, and the Churches had rest. They were
in the midst of persecuting bloody Enemies, who seeing them walk in the fear of
the Lord, and according to the Rules of the Christian Religion, which did
strike such an awe into them of the Majesty of their Religion, which did shine
forth in their holy, heavenly Conversation, as brought their Enemies under so
great Convictions, as they durst not at that present attempt them, or hinder
their peace. A Saint sanctifies the Name of the Lord in the course of his life,
while he walks in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 8.13.

This was a great Argument which prevailed with Nehemiah, and he propounded it
to the people, to walk in the fear of the Lord, because of the reproach of the
Enemy, Nehem. 8.9. It is not the Jew which denies the Name of Christ, or the
Turk which defieth it, or the Pagan Dragon, Rev. 12.2, 3. which persecuteth the
Name of Christ, that casts so soul a blot and reproach upon the Name of Christ,
as he which takes upon him the Name of Christ, and under a form of godliness
lives in the practice of those foul abominations spoken of, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 5.
from which turn away.

How we may steer an even Course between Presumption and Despair. Sermon. XXIV.
Luke 3.4, 5. As it is written in the Book of the words of Isaiah the Prophet,
saying, The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make his Paths straight.

Every Valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought
low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made
smooth.


THIS Chapter begins with the Ministry of John the Baptist, the Forerunner of
Christ: In which you have,

1. The Time of his Ministry, when it began, set down and ascertained by some
particular, and very memorable remarks upon it, from the names of those who
were then in Authority, chief Governors, and Rulers both in Church and State,
whose several Offices and Commands bore the same date with John's preaching,
ver. 1, 2. The reason of this, I shall not now trouble you with.

2. His Call unto this Office, ver. 2. The Word of God came unto John.

3. The Subject matter of his preaching, viz. The Baptism of Repentance for
remission of Sins, ver. 3.

4. The occasion, that prompted him to this subject, and made him fix his
thoughts upon it, which was an ancient prophecy out of Isaiah, chapter 40.3. The
Holy Ghost bringing this into his mind, telling him it was now to be fulfilled
by his preaching, and therefore no doubt directed him to pitch upon such a
subject, as might tend most to the accomplishment of that Prophecy.

The Prophecy or Promise (for it is both) you have in the words of my Text, and
in the last Clause of the succeeding Verse.

I shall not insist upon the several Metaphors in the Text, but in short give
you the general sense of the whole.

By mountains and valleys I understand all sorts of Men, high and low, rich and
poor; who considered in their natural condition, whether convinced or
unconvinced, do all stand in a direct opposition to Jesus Christ, are exceeding
averse from, and unprepared for the Doctrine of the Gospel, will not submit to
the Law of Faith, some upon one account, and some upon another, till God by a
further work of the Spirit does open their eyes and draw their hearts to Christ.

Now the words of the Text do contain this Preparatory Work of the Gospel upon
poor Sinners, in order to due reception of Christ, and, aright application of
him by Faith unto the Soul. It consists of two parts, 1. Pulling down
Mountains. 2. Filling up Valleys, both very difficult work. John had to do with
some, who were puffed up with a conceit of their own Righteousness and would be
their own Saviors, and not be beholding to Christ and free Grace for any
thing, thinking themselves to be something, when indeed they were nothing, Gal.
6.3. Revel. 3.16, 17. These were the proud Pharisees boasting of their own
Righteousness; and besides these there are also a company of Profane
Atheistical Sadducees, who gloried in their sins, and denying the Resurrection
of the Body, and the Immortality of the Soul, ran out into all licentiousness.

Others again were so convinced of Sin, and of the dangerous consequence of it,
that they were ready to sink into Despair, knew not what to do, fearing their
sins were greater than could be forgiven, these are the Mountains and Valleys
in the Text. Presumption on the one hand, and Despair on the other, that rises
too high, this sinks too low, that inclines too much one way, this too much the
other; and there is a crookedness and obliquity in both, which must be
rectified and straightened by the Preaching of Repentance in order to the
Remission of Sins: This John does, first urging the necessity of Repentance
upon the proud Pharisees, who thought they needed no Repentance, Luke 15.7.
Secondly urging the great Gospel Privilege that Christ has purchased for
Believers upon their repentance, viz. Remission of Sins, upon poor dejected
Sinners, that both the one and the other might see the right way of Salvation
by Jesus Christ: for though the Light of Nature, by which we are convinced of
the equity and righteousness of the Moral Law, do bind us to Repentance, when
we act against it, yet it cannot promise that we shall get any thing by our
Repentance, being altogether ignorant of the Mystery of the Gospel. Thus we see
the Mountains must be brought low, and the Valleys filled up, and both reduced
to such an exact level, evenness, and plainness, that Christ may sit close upon
the soul without the least interposition of any thing between him and us, or
the least remaining vacuity or emptiness in our selves, into which his Fullness
does not descend, making up whatsoever is wanting in us; and when it is so,
there is a through perfect closure with Christ in the greatest nearness, in the
strictest and most intimate union that can be.

But you will say, How shall we come to this? How shall we walk thus between
the Mountain and the Valley in a straight direct line of Faith and Hope to
Jesus Christ? which brings me to the Case or Question now to be spoken to from
the Text, which is this, viz. How may we steer an even course between
Presumption and Despair?

The true state of this Question depends upon a clear discovery of the real
difference that is between the Grace of Hope, and both these extremes,
Presumption and Despair; therefore

1. I shall distinguish between Presumption and Hope. The difference between
Hope and Despair is more apparent; but we are too too apt to confound
Presumption and Hope, there being a greater Affinity between these than the
other; as in Morality, some virtue? come nearer to one extreme, than to the
other: So here, there is something of the general nature of Hope in
Presumption. Presumptio non excludit spem sed rectitud^nem spei, Zanch.
Therefore we must be the more acurate, and strict in distinguishing between the
Grace of Hope, and the Sin of Presumprion, which fallente quadam Specie
(Aquinas) resembles the grace of Hope; and those who are guilty of this Sin, do
always put the specious name of Hope upon it; they are not sensible of any
Presumption as others are of Despair, and therefore their case is more
dangerous; Eo magis desperati quo minus desperantes, Ames. de Consc. And where
one despairs, thousands do presume.

Before I come to particulars I must distinguish of a double Presumption.

1. Of our Selves and our own merits. 2. Of God, and his mercy.
Both stand in a direct opposition to the true Grace of Hope, and I shall show
you where the difference lies. I begin with

1. The First sort of Presumption, which is of our selves. This is a proud
arrogant presumption, arising from a vain conceit of our own supposed worth,
and righteousness; we think to stand upon our own legs, insisting not upon what
Christ is to us, or has done for us, but upon what we are in and to our
selves, and have done for Christ. We have Prophesied in thy Name, etc. Mat.
7.22. We are not as this Publican, we have done thus and thus, and ought to be
considered for our good works; and we doubt not but we shall: it is not the
Promises of Free Grace, but the Law, and their strict observance of that, which
these men ground their hope upon. But the true Grace of Hope is always
grounded upon Faith in the Promises, and is all along fed, nourished,
maintained, and strengthened by those believing persuasions, that it has of
the truth of those Promises, which at first produced and begat this hope in the
Soul, and in the continual exercise of this Grace, in its daily actings, it
eyes the Promises, has daily recourse to them for its further confirmation,
it is bottomed upon them, takes its rise from thence, and bears up the Soul upon
the credit of them, Romans 15.4. Psalm. 119.74. this is the hope of the Gospel,
Col. 1.23. that carries us out of our selves. A Christian's Hope is hope in
another, and not in himself. The right notion of Hope, as it is an Evangelical
Grace, implies our sole dependence upon God, as the only Author and Fountain of
all that good which we desire and look for; which does sufficiently difference
it from that false hope, or self-presumption, that I have been speaking of, and
which was principally aimed at by John in the Text, being a Presumption more
peculiar to those times, and persons here spoken of, who lived under the Law,
and were much in doing, but understood not the End of their Moral or Ceremonial
Works, but trusted in them, and made Saviors of them; and at the first
entrance of the Gospel they opposed the Doctrine of Free Grace, would hear
neither John nor Christ himself, but rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves, Luke 7.30, 33, 34. See what a Character Paul gives of them, and of
all others throughout the world, who should entertain the least thought of
Salvation out of Christ, Romans 3.16, 17. Destruction and misery are in their
ways, and the way of peace have they not known. This one Scripture, if well
weighed, is enough to shake the confidence of the most Presumptuous
Self-justitiary that is, and to convince him, and all the world of their need
of Christ. In Psalm. 14. which Paul quotes in this Chapter, God is brought in
taking a strict Survey of Mankind, before he sent his Son into the World, to
see if there were any that stood in no need of him. q. d. If there be any such,
let him come forth and show himself. David answers for himself, ver. 7. Not I
Lord, not I Lord, I wait for Christ, I long for Christ. O that the Salvation of
Israel were come out of Zion. O that Christ were come, that the Free grace and
mercy of God were more clearly revealed, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad; this will be good news indeed. So Jer. 17.5, 6, 7. The result of
all is this, true Hope eyes God in Christ, and argues from him: this
Presumption now spoken of, eyes self, and argues from thence in all its actings.

2. The second sort of Presumption to be distinguished from Hope is that by
which we presume upon God, and his mercy. This is grown up since the preaching
of the Gospel: there is indeed too great a spice of the former Presumption
among Professors, and as that vvears off, this succeeds, nay, they unhappily
mingle together. If Legal Presumption cannot altogether shut out conviction,
yet it minces the matter, it is a little one, and my Soul shall live, and so
makes way for this credulous presumption, that brings in a Salvo for all
presently; God is gracious, mercy is promised, Christ has died for Sinners, and
all will be well, we shall go to Heaven of course without any more ado; and
so they sit down in security all their days, till they are surprised, with
their everlasting doom unawares. This is Infidelis fiducia (Bern.) a faithless
confidence, a fond credulous presumption, arising from a groundless over easy
persuasion of the mercy of God toward us; this kind of Presumption may be
joined with some sense and conviction of sin, and the dangerous consequence of
it, but presently salves all with the general air and breath of a Promise
misconstrued and misapplied.

The Mistakes are these.

1. This is more Fancy than Faith or Hope. It Is a vain imagination, that
deludes men into a belief and expectation of that which they are in no
likelihood of, in no capacity for: they promise themselves what God has never
promised, cry peace, peace, when God has not spoken peace.

2. Such an one does not rightly distinguish between the workings of natural
affection toward any good propounded, and the rational actings of Hope for the
obtaining of it in a probable or certain way, in the use of due and proper
means: Heaven, glory, and eternal Life, are good words, and better things, at
the first mention of them, we naturally desire them, and vvish for them, but
shall we be carried away with a mere sound of words? must we needs have all
we hear of? we shall quickly bring our selves into a fools Paradise this
way, dreaming we eat, and yet awake an hungry: there is more ado than so to
inherit, the Promises; we must prove our title first; the Promises give us an
interest in Heaven, but it is Christ, that gives us an interest in the Promises,
he opens the mouth of a Promise to speak comfort to us, in him they are all
Yea, and Amen, but out of him they all cry no, no, we have nothing for you,
who are out of Christ, they will deny all the world, that come not in his
Name, and never let out any thing of their treasure to such; no wringing out
of one drop of solid comfort: The bare History or outward Relation of the Mercy
of God in the letter of the Word, gives us no interest in the things promised:
the carnal Jews, as Paul observes, had the Promises and boasted of them, but
got little by them: Christ is the door of every Promise, let us not think to
make a forceable entry, to climb up at the windows like Theives to steal out
mercy, as if we cared not how we came by it; you will find what is so
gotten will thrive accordingly, and quickly come to nothing. What I drive at
is this: it is not the report of the vvorth or amiableness of a thing, but an
apprehension of the possibility of it as to us, that causes hope; till we are
clear in this, our hope cannot act rationally: if it have no other ground,
besides our own desires and natural inclinations raised and kindled in us by
the specious appearance and ravishing beauty of some taking objects, this
argues rather what we would have, than any likelihood of obtaining of our
vvishes, which is of the very essence of hope: earnest desires are very apt to
run out into a forward presuming hope, we know not well why or wherefore.
Quae volumus facile credimus.

3. Another mistake in this fond credulous presumption is, that it takes up
promises in its own sense, and not in the true sense and meaning of God. So the
Jews, John 8.33. cried they were Abraham's seed, etc. and the Promise run in
these very words, to Abraham and his seed, therefore who but they must be
included in it? but it was the Spiritual seed that God meant, not that after
the flesh; they are not all Israel, which are of Israel, Romans 9.6. No says
Christ, you are the Children of the Devil, of your Father the Devil, John 8.44.
and they took up stones and threw at him, ver. 59. being not able to bear any
contradiction to their false hopes. So when we read those Promises of salvation
to those that come to Christ, believe in him, call upon his Name, we must not
understand them, as if a bare form of Godliness, and crying, Lord have mercy
upon us, would bring us to heaven: No, My brethren, the Mystery of Religion
lies deeper than so; it is the labor of the heart, that requires the greatest
diligence, intention, and seriousness imaginable, strong workings within, great
agonies and contentions of Spirit in our dealings with God in any duty: The
life of our Worship does consist in these inward spiritual motions of the Soul
toward God. This is that coming, that believing, that praying, to which
Salvation is promised. The grace of Hope enquires after the Secrets of the
Covenant, the real intent and mind of God in every Promise, prays for a right
understanding of all particulars, Open my eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law, Psalm. 119.18. Besides the true meaning of a Promise a Child of God is
very solicitous to know, whether God do indeed mean him, and speak to him, and
offer those pearls to him; whether he be a person rightly qualified, and under
all those due circumstances, that belong to persons, entertaining such an hope,
it is a great comfort and satisfaction to a Believer, when God does own his
hope, and encourage him in it, by some sensible demonstrations of his undoubted
interest in such and such Promises; he hears God saying to him, take, eat, this
is thy portion purchased by Christ for thee, thou art my Child, and this is
childrens bread, it belongs to thee: While we are musing and praying over a
promise, God does sometimes feed us out of that promise himself, and with his
own hand puts many a sweet morsel into our mouths.

O this is overcoming kindness; this is a double, a treble welcome, to have
such fare, and the Master of the Feast standing by, and looking on, and carving
to us himself, and crying out as it is, Cant. 5.1. Eat O my friends, drink, yea
drink abundantly O beloved. When we have shut our Bibles, and have done with a
promise, and are setting down the Cup of Salvation out of our hands, God many
times makes us to mend our draught, and go deeper than ever we did: drink, yea
drink abundantly, O beloved.

But presumption is a bold guest, thrusts in uninvited, catches at this and
that in a rude manner. The word Presumption notes a taking beforehand, before
it is offered, before it is due: before he is called, he runs away with a
promise, puts his own sense upon it, and deludes himself with vain hopes from
it, and when the King comes to review his Guests shall be cast out into outer
darkness, Mat. 22.11, 12, 13.

4. Another error or mistake in presumption is, that it picks and chooses out
some Promises, and rejects others; the privileges of the Saints it catches at
freedom from condemnation, eternal life and glory; but the Promises of Grace,
Sanctification, and Holiness, it minds not; it hopes to see God without
Holiness, and to go to Heaven as well as the best, it is more for the wages
than for the work.

But the grace of Hope fastens upon every Promise, gathers honey out of every
flower, is as earnest for grace as for glory. Thou have delivered my soul from
death, will thou not deliver my feet from falling, etc. Psalm. 56.13. and
refrain them from every evil way, Psalm. 119.101. Lord I have hoped for thy
Salvation, and done thy commandments, Psalm. 119.166. But Presumption makes men
more remiss and careless in their whole course; it does not quicken our
endeavors, and make us more active for God, as hope does, by which we purify
our selves, 1 John 3.3. it puts us upon preparing our selves for the actual
possession of what we hope for, that we may be meet for the Kingdom of God, and
ready to enter in with the Bridegroom, it uses all means to attain its end. If
thy hope be not a heart-purifying hope, a life-reforming hope, it is no better
than presumption, 1 Pet. 1.13. and Psalm. 37.3.

5. Those things that presumption counts upon in a careless way, it does not
bring them so close to the Soul: it does not give us that lively taste and
sense of them as true hope does, they do not work so kindly upon the heart;
Presumption apprehends something in gross in a confused manner, pleasing it
self with the names and empty notions of things, rather than with the things
themselves, is contented with a negative happiness, and understands no more by
going to heaven and being saved, than that he shall not be damned and be
tormented in hell. A presumptuous person knows not what heaven is, what the
blessedness of the Saints is, he studies not those things, but at all
adventures he would exchange hell for heaven, and pleases himself with an
imaginary happiness. Presumption never makes men heavenly minded, for all their
high words and confident boasting, yet they are not in earnest for heaven; they
don't savor these things, something they must say, something they must pretend
to, to silence their consciences, and to keep down those fears that otherwise
would distract them. There may be an affectation of heaven, where there is no
true affection for it: Heaven, glory, and eternal life are gay things, and
signify some great good, but what they know not.

But hope brings things home to the heart, we see the substance of what we hope
for, Heb. 11.1. Faith comments upon our hope, discourses of the excellent
nature of those things we wait for, tells us many pleasing stories of heaven
and Christ, and the glory that is above, this mightily heightens hope, ravishes
the soul, makes it even leap for joy that its reward shall be so great in
heaven; faith lifts us up within the vail, gives us a strong taste of the
powers of the world to come, and so feeds and nourishes hope, encourages it to
a patient waiting for that which will quit cost at last, and fully answer our
expectations.

6. Presumption as it neglects the use of all means for the attaining its end
(as I said before) so it is signally guilty of the neglect of Prayer, Psalm.
10.4. It Is the presumptuous sinner blessing himself in his wickedness David
there speaks of, verse 3. But true Hope is full of holy breathings, and
longings after that which it hopes for, Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 5.2. That hope may
well be suspected, that puts us not upon frequent and earnest prayer; they have
little ground for their hope of Salvation, Omne desiderium post spem
impatientius.
who call not upon the Lord, Romans 10.13. If thy hope be not a praying hope,
it is a presuming hope.

7. Presumption, though it talk much of Christ, as one who must do all for us,
and will save us, yet such an one studies not the mystery of Christ, does not
make it his business to search the Scripture, to enquire after him, to satisfy
himself about him, that he is able to save. Herein appears the unreasonableness
of this sin, we trust we know not whom; for a man to commit his greatest
concern to an unknown hand, and to rest secure is very unreasonable, but true
Hope is well acquainted with Christ, much in the studies of the Mystery of
Christ, having reposed so great a trust in him is very desirous to know him
thoroughly, and can never act with confidence till then. I know (says Paul) in
whom I have believed, and am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him, 2 Timothy 1.12. I dare trust him he will not fail me. The
reason of our hope must be fetched from somewhat in Christ, rendering him
sufficient for the work he has undertaken, else it is unreasonable, nay it must
needs sink and die without Christ, without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. When God sent
Christ into the world to save us, what a high Character does he give of him,
purposely to encourage us to trust in him? I have laid help upon one that is
mighty, Psalm. 89.19. able to save to the uttermost, mighty to save, Isa. 63.1.
Isa. 49.26. Take all the promises of the Gospel, nay all the contents of the
Bible, and consider them apart by themselves, not in conjunction with God, nor
in relation to him, who is the author and owner of them, and the great
undertaker of all things mentioned therein, we shall have little ground to
believe them, but in God I will praise his word, Psalm. 56.4. In God I have put
my trust. ibid. Christ in us is our hope of glory, Col. 1.27. How glad is a
believer to hear any thing of the fullness, power and excellency of Christ, O
his heart leaps within, this is my God, my Savior, my Redeemer, what a happy
man am I? Psalm. 144.15. This is my beloved, and this is my friend O daughter of
Jerusalem, Cantic. 5.16. A believer is very proud of Christ, (if I may so
speak) this enlivens hope and raises it to a very high pitch; if our thoughts
of Christ and love to him be not raised and heightened by our hope in him, it is
not right -- There is nothing more common in the mouths of the ignorant profane
sort than to say, I hope to be saved by Jesus Christ; but who ever thou art
that say so of course, not minding what thou say, take up those words
again, and make common sense of them, if thou can, to thy own understanding:
what? hope to be saved by Christ whom thou know not, have no acquaintance
with, art a mere stranger to! O lay aside those vain hopes till thou have
learned Christ; let me enjoin thee never to utter those words more till thou
know Christ better: how possible thy Salvation may be I will not now
dispute; but I am sure thy present hopes of it are very unreasonable and
groundless.

Thus having showed the difference between Presumption and Hope, I shall in the
next place speak something but more briefly of the difference between Despair
and Hope. As I did before distinguish of a double Presumption, so I must in the
same terms distinguish of a double Despair.

Despair is either 1. Of our Selves, which is an humble, holy despair, very
consistent with hope, and a necessary preparation, and introduction to it: a
valley never to be filled up; the Gospel does by no means allow of
Self-Exaltation; no flesh must glory in his presence. 1 Cor. 1.29. we must
still seem vile in our own eyes. 2. Of God and of his mercy which is twofold.
1. Privative, which is a total privation of the habit, root, or principle of
true saving hope, as in all unbelievers. 2. Negative, a cessation of the acts
of hope, which is twofold. A total cessation (at least as to our sense and
discerning) of the actings of Hope for a time, this is temporary Despair.
Gradual, arising from a weakness in the actings of Hope; which is Despair in
opinion, counted so by weak doubting Christians: both these last mentioned are
incident to true Believers, and occasion much sorrow and sadness to them.




But this Privation or negation of hope does not fully set forth the nature of
despair, in which there seems to be somewhat positive, recessus a re desiderata
(as the Schools speak) an actual withdrawing from Christ, the heart falls off
from the Promises, does act against them, puts them from us, despair argues and
reasons the soul out of its hope, puts in a caveat against it self, cannot
think that a person under such circumstances can be within the meaning of the
promise, and so sinks and faints away, Job 17.15. This is more than mere
privation or negation, there is an evil disposition wrought in the heart by
unbelief, which fills the soul with many prejudices against the truth, makes it
pertinaciously to adhere unto its own erroneous judgment, so that it can do
nothing now but quarrel, dispute, and except against all that may be said on
the other side.

These things premised I now come to show the difference between Despair and
Hope.

1. Despair is the result of strong legal convictions, urging the sentence of
the Law against us, without any consideration of Gospel Grace for our relief
and succor. This works great consternation, fills the soul with amazing fears,
shuts it up in a dark dungeon, claps it in irons, binds it hand and foot, and
so leaves it under a fearful expectation of fiery indignation to devour it.

But Hope deals in the promises, is begotten by them, and bears up the soul
under the condemnation of the Law.

2. Despair indisposes the soul from harkening to the free grace of the Gospel
when it is offered, because it still retains those strong impressions and
dreadful apprehensions which the Law has wrought, and will not be comforted.

But Hope allayes these fears, makes the soul willing to debate the matter, to
hear what the Gospel says, to see what may be done in so dangerous a cause.

3. Despair sees more in sin than in Christ, and supposes the wound incurable,
my sin is greater than can be forgiven.

But Hope sees Grace superabounding, large enough to cover all our sins.

4. Despair is very peremptory and positive in concluding against it self; it is
resolved upon nothing but death, greater than can be forgiven, a lost undone
creature to all eternity, it cannot be otherwise. As in the highest decree of
faith and hope, there is assurance of salvation, so here there is a dismal
uncomfortable assurance of damnation.

But Hope though it may be accompanied with many fears and doubts, yet there is
some expectation of good, a patient looking for and sollicitous waiting (though
sometimes with trembling) for salvation; the soul does not give over its
pursuit after life and pardon, but when it is at the lowest ebb does apprehend
some possibility of escape through Christ; it may be (for all this) we shall be
hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2.3. it may be we shall be delivered
from the wrath to come. Thus Hope draws on the soul to Christ encouraging it to
come forward.

Directions how to avoid both extremes.
1. Against Presumption, whether of our selves, or of God.


1. Against that Presumption, that is of our selves, take these following
Directions.

1. Take up so much of a sense of sin into the mount of Hope as may keep thy
hope from swelling into presumption, or from feeding upon any thing in thy self.

2. Be much in proving thy hope, in giving thy self and others a reason of it,
1 Pet. 3.15. this is the way to keep it right: consider what that reason is,
whether it be a true Gospel-ground of hope: as natural affections in a man must
be guided by reason, so spiritual affections in a Christian must be regulated
and influenced by Faith. I believed and therefore have I spoken, 2 Cor. 4.13.
so it holds here: I believe and therefore do I hope.

3. Suspect those acts of Hope, that have their rise from any thing else but
Christ and the promises; the heart of man is deep and very deceitful; it is no
easy matter to understand our hope at all times, and to manage it aright, we
are apt to forget our selves: flesh will be putting in, and contributing
something from its self toward the support of our hope; it will be casting in
something into the scale with Christ to make better weight. This we must
carefully watch against, keeping our eye only upon Christ, as David, Psalm.
62.5, 6. When we find our hearts pleasing themselves with any self-reflections
upon our own personal worth in any kind, we should fear lest those thoughts
should gather too fast, and puff us up in a vain conceit of our selves; we
should see nothing but meanness; vileness, and unworthyness in our selves,
under the highest actings of our hope in Christ. Though I were perfect, yet
would I not know my soul, Job 8.21.

4. Begin thy Hope with an act of humble holy despair of thy self, that thy
hope may be discharged on that hand, forced to quit all expectations from
thence, and not be tempted to any sinister aspect that way, upon so poor empty
insufficient a thing as thou know thy self to be. We know not what to do,
but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Our hope, though it look never so
directly upon Christ, yet it is too too apt to take in some collateral
encouragements from self, which do cause a further dilation in the heart, and
make some secret (and if we observe our own spirit) some sensible additions to
the joy and complacency we have in our hope; we bless our selves the more, and
though we are pleased with Christ, yet we are pleased with something besides
Christ; and this spoils all, it poisons our hope, is like a Canker, eats like a
Gangrene, and is a great blemish to our hope.

5. If all this will not do, but still thy proud heart is big with expectation
of something from God upon its own account, and thou can not separate self
from Christ in the outgoings of thy hope, then my advice is -- Answer thy
foolish heart for once in its folly, and take its supposed worth into thy
serious consideration; weigh it well, prove it, examine all its pretenses, that
the truth may appear: and that you may do this, consider your selves out of
Christ; it is necessary for believers to do so sometimes: I do not say, you
should put off Christ, that must never be done, but it may be convenient as the
case stands to let the wedding garment hang loose about you, that you may see
your own poverty and nakedness, and then cover all again, and admire the free
grace of God, who has provided thee a better righteousness, than any thou
can see in thy self, to trust in, and to ground thy hope upon. This is the
way to correct the exorbitancy of thy immoderate hope, and to keep it within
its proper sphere. We never have more lively heart-ravishing thoughts and
apprehensions of free grace, than after fresh and warm apprehensions of our own
vileness and wretchedness by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. by nature the children of
wrath, and then he breaks out into a great admiration of the mercy of God,
verse 4.

2. Directions against that kind of Presumption that is of God and his mercy,
which I called a fond credulous presumption.

1. Study the doctrine of Election, that tells us, that God is the Sovereign
Lord of the whole world, has put a vast difference between man and man; there
are some that he hates, as well as some that he loves: of the same lump of
clay, some made vessels unto honor, and some unto dishonor, some vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction, some vessels of mercy prepared unto glory, Romans
9.20, 21, 22, 23. That God is a free voluntary Agent, not necessarily bound to
choose thee or me rather than others, No, he has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, verse 18.

Whence is it then that men are so confident of the favor of God? you may be
in the number of the many that are called, and yet not in the number of those
few that are chosen, for all your confidence: has Electing Redeeming Love set
any peculiar mark upon thee, by which thou may be known and distinguished
from the reprobate world at the last day? if not, it is strange presumption in
thee to nourish such vain hopes.

2. Consider the strict limitations and provisoes of the Covenant of Grace, by
which all obstinate impenitent sinners remaining such are shut out from mercy;
and art not thou such an one? examine thy self, has grace taught thee to deny
ungodliness? till then it will never save thee.

3. Consider the difficulty of Salvation, it is not so easy a matter to get to
Heaven as you imagine; narrow is the way, strait is the gate, and few there be
that find it. The righteous are scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. Things that are
arduous and difficult are not easily swallowed, will not in reason admit of a
rash credulous hope, but call for serious counsel and debate. There are in such
cases many agitations in the mind, accessus and recessus (Aquin.) the soul goes
and comes, backward and forward, off and on, cannot presently fix and settle it
self in an even, steadfast, constant hope. Most Christians do pass through such
fluctuations and perplexities to a quiet comfortable hope of Salvation.

4. Consider this also, have the promises thou boastest so much of begot fear
in thee as well as hope? A Christian's hope is a heedful, careful, sollicitous
hope, 2 Cor. 7.1. Heb. 4.1. Hope without fear is presumption.

5. Let thy hope be grounded upon some inward experience of the mighty saving
power of Christ put forth upon thy soul; experience works hope, Romans 5.4.
Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you
will perform it, Phil. 1.6. To him that has shall be given, Mat. 13.12. What
pledges then of divine favor, what love tokens have thou by thee? what taste
and sight of the goodness and grace of God? we hope for the complement and
perfection of that which in some measure we have already attained; when we see
God pursuing us with his kindness in any particular expression of his love,
this begets hope, that we shall have all at last, those greater things that are
promised. God's end in bestowing lesser mercies upon us, is to quicken and
strengthen our hope of greater: it is strange presumption for persons, who never
received the least token of special grace from God, to expect such great things
as heaven and glory. God gives many things before he gives heaven, don't think
at first dash to have heaven; there are many preparatory mercies always
antecedent to that; the Saints are compassed about with mercy and Songs of
deliverance, Psalm. 32.7, 10. And from those experiences they argue as David
did, 1 Samuel 17.32. He will do this and that for us, and not destroy us after he
has done us so much good.

But if thou have nothing to show as a convincing evidence of Gods love and
good will to thee, it looks too much like presumption, to hope for pounds, for
the whole sum, before we have received the earnest-penny. Hope is not the first
work of the Spirit upon the heart, it is a secondary grace, the natural result
of faith, which gives very satisfactory intimations of God's love to us, and so
begets hope in us. Consult therefore the experiences of God's goodness to you
in some measure, before you soar too high in the actings of your hope.

Secondly, Directions against Despair.

1. To those in Christ who are sometimes liable to these fainting fits, and
find their hope shaken, are to seek of it, being suddenly struck with an
amazing sight and sense of sin, and wrath, they conclude their case desperate,
and cry out as Job did, Job 44.19, etc.

The devil has two ways or methods, by which he seeks to undermine and
overthrow the hope of a Christian. I shall discover both to you, and endeavor
to secure you against both.

1. If thy Hope be strong and lively, he will slander it with the name of
presumption, that he may shake thy confidence, and discourage thee from those
eminent actings of thy hope wherein thou have had so much comfort: he does envy
thy happiness, he would fain clip the wings of thy faith and hope, that he may
rob thee of the joy of thy Salvation, and keep thee at a low ebb all thy days;
he would take off thy helmet, that he may knock thee down at one blow.

Groundless fears of presumption do exceedingly bauk and check our hope, bring
it into suspense, which is negative despair.

In such conflicts, and fierce assaults, gird up thy self, stand fast, and hope
to the end, hold fast thy confidence; and that you may do this, Call in thy
faith to maintain and justify thy hope, as rightly grounded upon
Gospel-promises, and consequently capable of no excess. Let it run in the right
Channel never so swiftly, and rise never so high, it is so much the better; true
grace is not confined to such a scantling or degree, it can never be overgrown,
its beauty and comeliness do increase with its stature; the greater, the
larger, the fuller, the higher it is, the more conspicuous and glorious. Hence
are those commendations of grace, where it is in any eminency; So great faith,
no not in Israel, Mat. 8.10. O woman great is thy faith, Mat. 15.28. The
Scriptures do exhort us to grow in every grace. Let these things be in you and
abound, 2 Pet. 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. More and more, we can never have too much.
Paul prays, Romans 15.13. that we may abound in hope. Presumption does not lie
in having too high thoughts of the mercy of God in Christ, for that is
infinite, beyond all our conceptions; but in a vain expectation of that from
God, which is inconsistent with his justice and holiness, and contrary to his
revealed will: it is not the Great hope, but the Groundless hope that is
presumption: therefore tell the Devil to his face thou will hope more and more,
Psalm. 71.14. That thy hope is a growing hope, so far from being too great, that
thou do judge it yet too little, daily praying for its further increase, this
is the way to quench those fiery darts. We may observe that when temptations do
work so contrary to the Devils intentions, that instead of drawing us into
evil, they incite us to more watchfulness, and prove occasions of good, and
provocations to duty, they presently vanish and die; the Devil would have it
so, and usually it is so, unless God by a special hand do continue us under
them for the further exercise of grace.

2. If thy Hope be small and weak the Devil will call it Despair, he would make
thee believe a little grace is no grace; he will argue from thy weakness in
grace to thy total want of it.

If under such temptation thou find thy spirit sinking, ready to faint away,
rouse up thy self and bespeak thy Soul, as David did, Why art thou cast down O
my soul? and take these following directions.

1. Consider, it is not the degree of grace, but the truth of grace, to which
Salvation is promised.

2. Put a just value and estimate upon the lowest degree of grace, that it may
not seem contemptible, and as nothing in thy sight; it is more worth than the
whole world; a pearl of great price.

3. Labor to distinguish aright between the weakness of thy grace, and the
grace it self that is under that weakness; and whilst thou art mourning under
one, be sure you rejoice in the other; do not throw away one corn with the
chaff, do not sweep up one groat with the dust behind the door, but light thy
candle, and find it out; don't bury thy talent because it is a single one, but
be faithful over a little, and thou shall be made ruler over many things, Mat.
15.21.

4. Consider the many promises that are made to the lowest degree of grace; if
there be any good thing in thy heart toward the Lord thy God, he accepts of
the Will for the Deed, of the day of small things; he will not quench the
smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed; to whom little is given, of them
little is required: the widow's mite is a great deal in the account of God.
Therefore think and judge of thy self not according to any thing inherent in
thee, be it more or less, but according to the measure of acceptance thou have
with God; it is his kindness that makes thee great, 2 Samuel 22.36. his favor is
better than life; if he has wrought that in thee which is beautiful in his
fight, why should you so much except against his workmanship, as to blot all
out again, drawing the black lines of dismal despair upon the comely features
of true and saving hope, though weak and small for the present? the high esteem
God has of the lowest degree of true grace in his Saints, should make them not
to droop so much under it, but rather be better pleased with what God is so
well pleased with.

5. Consider how ill God takes it of his children, when they suffer them selves
to be persuaded by the Devil out of all good liking and esteem of those smaller
measures of grace, that God has given them; when they are brought out of
conceit of themselves, and of every thing that God has done for them, as if
their case were now desperate. Why say thou, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel,
my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God? Isa.
40.27. Let me speak my thoughts out: My brethren, to deny the least measure of
grace in us, or to us, against plain demonstrations and evidences brought to
convince us of it, is a kind of denying Christ himself, which we would be loath
to be guilty of for a thousand worlds; and yet, may not Christ say? I have sent
in provision into such a soul, and have often invited my self to come and sup
with him; I have come into my garden to gather my myrrh, and to eat of my
pleasant fruits, which my own hand had planted there, Cantic. 5.1. But I had no
entertainment, no welcome, they would be known of nothing that ever they had
from me, plead nothing but poverty, and bare walls; and did I not know it to be
otherwise, that I have laid in a sufficiency of grace, and that there is that
in the house which I love, and could feed heartily upon, I should not take it
ill that they set nothing before me; but it is great unkindness not to give me
of my own, not to entertain me at my own cost, but to tell me to my face, that
all my fruit is rotten fruit, all my meat unsavory meat, all my wine
adulterated wine, nothing fit for them or me to feed upon, all is stark naught,
they are never the better for any thing I have yet done for them, to seek of
every thing, their faith is dead, their hope is presumption, or else quite
vanished into despair, their love is cold and false, every grace is
counterfeit, Christ must needs take this very ill: many of the Children of God
are greatly guilty in this thing. I would press this consideration upon those
who do too too much indulge themselves in these despondencies, still
multiplying objections against themselves, and meditating evasions how to put
off Christ and the promises, how to distinguish themselves out of the favor of
God. I know there is a great deal of pity and commiseration due to such, but
when other means will not prevail, they must not take it ill, if we endeavor
to fright them out of their fears and doubts, telling them plainly what an
offense, what an affront it is to Christ, to have all his kindnesses overlooked
and slighted as nothing worth by a froward, habitual, querulous scrupulosity,
which is jealous of every thing but it self.

6. When the Devil is urging thee to conclude thy weak hope to be downright
Despair, instead of disputing with the Devil about the truth of any grace,
labor through the help of the Spirit to act it in that degree which thou have
attained; then if it be as a grain of mustard seed, it will remove mountains;
it is not imaginable what great things a little grace will do, when stirred up
and acted; the strength of God is in it: out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings he ordains strength, Psalm. 8.12. The smallest degree of true grace is
able to secure it self against the gates of hell, at least so far as to prevent
a total overthrow: Nay let me say further (though with submission) I am
persuaded that never any child of God fell before a temptation, under the
actual exercise of that measure of grace, (be it more or less) that God has
given him to withstand it. I do not Arminianize upon facienti quod in se est,
etc. I speak not of the power of nature, but true grace acted to the highest
degree of attainment, it is that which does great things, and has the blessing;
he that is faithful in a little, shall be ruler over much; but if the good man
slumber and sleep, no wonder if the enemy break in upon him: when we are
putting forth our selves to the utmost in any conflicts with Satan, God with
the temptation will find out a way of escape, that we may be able to bear it, 1
Cor. 10.13. in that very hour it shall be given, Mark 13.11. Mat. 10.19. when
we seem to be surpised and over-matched by a temptation, God will come in with
more strength, and out of weakness we shall become strong, Heb. 11.34. thus
little David overcomes great Goliath with a sling and a stone: the Devil himself
flies from the Children of God, when they resist him in the strength of that
grace they have. -- to him that has, shall be given, the weak shall be as
David, and David as God (vel, as the Angel of God.)

Many times weak Christians don't put forth that strength which they have:
would they but lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, Heb.
12.12. their spirits would return, and their courage would increase, and
something might be done: but alas! they give way to their fears, and despairing
thoughts, lie flat upon the ground, and give up all for lost; they don't attend
to the actings of their hope whilst it goes by another name, all is despair,
as good never a whit, as never the better; it is to no purpose for them to do
any thing, they are past recovery, undone for ever. O, my brethren, don't give
the Devil such an advantage against you, but set your selves to act that grace
you have, be it never so little, look among the ashes, blow up the least sparks
you see; you don't know how soon it may break out into a flame; and remember
this, that repeated acts of weak grace are equivalent to strong grace, both as
to thy success, and God's acceptance; who requires no more of thee, than what
is proportionable to that which he has given to thee.

7. Consider, that all graces are joined with their contraries in this state of
imperfection here below; no faith but is unequally yoked with some unbelief, no
hope without some despair and desponding: that which is perfect is not yet
come, and that which is imperfect is not yet done away: we are flesh as well as
spirit, and they two are contraries: As there is some kind of hope in
presumption, so there may be some kind of despair in hope; no degree of true
Christian hope is consistent with the damning sin of final despair; but some
degrees of despondency, and that which thou call despair, and which in a
degree is so, may be consistent with saving hope; and so it holds true in all
other graces, from that mixture of corruption wherein the weakness of every
grace does lie, yet grace is grace still, has all its essential parts, and
deserves not that nickname which thou put upon it; all dimness is not
stark blindness, every cloud does not make midnight; what must you have all or
none? it is indeed a sign of sincerity to covet all grace, and as true a sign of
humility and submission to the will of God thankfully to accept of a little,
owning those first fruits of the Spirit, which in due time will be seconded
with an after increase to thy plenary content and satisfaction; our heavenly
Father waters every plant of his own planting, that it may bring forth more
fruit: therefore do not call every weak act of Hope, despair, do not call every
fit of despair, final despair: what if the Sun be set, must it never rise more?
if thou art cast down, art thou utterly forsaken? if mercy is at present gone
out of thy sight, must it be clean gone for ever? these are but the breakings
out of those peccant humors, that will be predominant sometimes in the best of
men.

By what has been said, we may answer those Objections, which the Devil makes
against our hope from the weakness of it.

I have but one thing more to add by way of direction to weak Believers, who
are never in more danger of being drawn into despair, than when they are musing
upon their sins, examining and judging themselves by the Law; charging
themselves home with all that guilt that lies upon them, in order to their
further humiliation in the sight of God; then does the Devil many times strike
in and suggest such frightful considerations to them, that make them start back
further than God would have them: Therefore I shall now show, how we should
prepare our selves for, how we should order and manage our selves under a deep
and serious consideration of our sins and unworthyness, which we are called to,
and it is requisite (the swelling temper of our proud hearts requiring it)
sometimes to set our selves apart for this work, Zach. 12.12.

The Direction is this, Take down along with thee into the Valley of
conviction, contrition, and self-abhorrency, so much of a sense of Gods love
and free grace in Christ, as may keep thee from being overwhelmed, and from
sinking into despair; before you set out be sure you have some hold (at least
of the hemm) of the garment of Christ's righteousness; you know not what foul
weather, what storms and tempests, what thunder and lightning you may meet with
before you return; carry your cordial along with you, though you never smell to
it, or taste it, but in a fainting fit: my meaning is, you should take (at
least) some general view of mercy before you take a strict particular view of
sin: usually they are the deepest and truest humiliations, that are occasioned
by some previous sense of Gods love to us, Ezekiel. 16.61, 63.

A man that is to go down into a deep pit, he does not throw himself headlong
into it, or leap down at all adventures, but fastens a rope at top upon a cross
beam, or some sure place, and so lets himself down by degrees: So, let thy self
down into the consideration of thy sin, hanging upon Christ, and when thou art
gone so low that thou can endure no longer, but art ready to be overcome with
the horror and darkness of thy miserable estate, dwell not too long at the
gates of hell, lest the devil pull thee in, but wind thy self up again by
renewed acts of faith, and fly for refuge unto the hope that is set before
thee, Heb. 6.18. And all the way thou go admire the infinite grace and love
of God to thee in delivering thee from so great a death. My brethren, there is
no entering into the maze and labyrinth of sin without this clew in your hands.
Solitary considerations of sin, if we dwell too long upon them, will work too
violently: therefore we should make frequent transitions from sin to free
grace, from the Law to the Gospel, from our miserable and wretched selves, to
our merciful and mighty Redeemer -- But you will say, how can this be? to pass
from one contrary passion to another, who can make such transitions? The
Schools tell us, it must be per magnum conatum, by some great endeavor, that
is a strain beyond ordinary, and such endeavors we must put forth, counting it
as much our duty to rejoice in mercy, as to mourn for sin, and we cannot do
both at once: though there be a connection of divine Graces as well as moral
virtues, yet this implies rather a successive continuation, than any
simultaneousness (at least) as to the intense actings of different graces: it is
true, where there is one grace, there is every grace, that is, in semine, in
the seed or root of it, and it may be also, as to some weaker, latent, actual
influences; yet those particular graces which upon different distinct
considerations do work contrary passions in us, they cannot be both intensely
acted at the same time, sed per vices and intervalla: there is a time to mourn,
and a time to rejoice, a time to fear, and a time to hope, particular graces do
take their turns in the soul, and act sutably unto the present occasion.

2. Direction against despair for unbelievers convinced of sin, but
unacquainted with Christ and free Grace. The distraction, fear, and amazement
of spirit that seizes upon such is unexpressible; till God break in upon them,
and begin with them, speaking peace to them, man can do little, yet means must
be used. I shall name a few things.

1. Look upon this conviction of sin thou lie under, rather as a mercy than a
judgment, as a token for good, in as much as God has given thee timely notice
of thy danger, and fair warning to flee from the wrath to come.

2. Look upon thy self now in a far greater capacity for grace and pardon than
ever heretofore.

3. Set thy self with all seriousness to study the doctrine of free grace in
Christ, never more need than now, meditate much upon the great goodness of God,
and his excellent loving kindness, Psalm. 31.19. Psalm. 36.6. Intense thoughts of
sin, and slight perfunctory thoughts of mercy drive us to despair.

4. Be persuaded to come to Christ under all thy fears. Have thou been as a
Dove of the valley, mourning on the mountains for thy iniquity, Ezekiel. 7.16.
come down from those mountains, those solitary places, and go weeping to the
Lord, Jer. 50.4.

Bemoan thy self at the feet of Christ, he will hear thee, Jer. 31.18, 19. tell
God all thou have to say of thy miserable condition: complaining to thy self
and to men signifies little, it heightens thy fear, but God sympathizes with
thee, Jer. 31.20. put thy self into his hands, he will lead thee, ver. 9.
refreshing will come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 3.19. there will be a
lifting up, Job 22.29. what ever the issue be, thou can be no worse than thou
art in thy own judgment; to sin is mors animae, but to despair is descendere
in infernum; sin is death, and despair is hell; cry out of the belly of that
hell to Christ, and see if he do not bring thee forth.

But alas! those who are under a spirit of bondage and fear, have a thousand
objections against this I have been pressing them to: I shall go over some of
these and answer them as I go. -- they come to Christ? they will tell us;

They cannot come.

Tell the Lord then thou art willing to come, but can not be persuaded to
come as thou can; can thou not go into thy chamber, into thy closet, and
shut thy door, and throw thy self down in the dust before the Lord? this is
coming, and this thou can do I am sure: do it then, and call upon the name of
the Lord. But,



Psalm. 10.17. if thou can not utter thy mind as thou would, pray as thou
can; and if thou have nothing to say, if no one savoury expression drops from
thee, it may be it is because the inward sense thou have of sin is too big for
utterance, it may be so sometimes, and it is best when it is so, and then out of
the abundance of thy heart weep and mourn out thy inward meaning, Lacrymae
pondera vocis hahent; groan and sigh, and look wishfully toward heaven, and
believe that God sees thee when thou have no sight of him: this is prayer. But,



as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his thoughts above thy
thoughts, Isa. 55.8, 9. do you think and say what you will; Christ will act
like himself, and do that for thee that never entered into thy heart to conceive
of; his ways are unsearchable and past our finding out, his love passes
knowledge; thou do not know, thou can not tell beforehand what infinite
rich grace is able to do for thee; O come then and make a trial, and know for
thy further encouragement, that poor humble sinners are always welcome to
Christ, but never more welcome than at their first coming, Luke 15.22, etc.
There are two jubilees kept in heaven, one at the conversion of a sinner here
on earth, Luke 15.7. the other at his glorification in heaven, Jude 24. Christ
does then present us to glory with exceeding joy; how glad is Christ when he
has brought a sinner safe and sound to heaven, and secured him there to all
eternity. I mention this to show the great delight Christ takes in showing
mercy to poor sinners, in opposition to those evil surmizes and hard thoughts
which thou have of him: but yet it may be thou replyest,



for another; but I am loath to leave thee behind me in the very bottom of the
pit, let me then reach down a helping hand to thee once more, let me give thee
one lift more; and I hope in answering this objection I shall answer all, and
silence thy unbelief for ever -- Is it so, that thou art the worst of men, the
greatest of sinners, under matchless guilt -- be it so, we will admit all this
to be true, and take thee under that black character, which thou have now given
of thy self, and yet I say there is hope; my advice to thee in short is this,
-- come as the greatest sinner that ever was in the world to Christ, and I dare
undertake for thy welcome; let that which has been hitherto thy
discouragement, turn now to thy great encouragement. Christ came not to the
whole, but to the sick, not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance,
even the greatest of sinners, and since thou take thy self to be so, obey
this loud call, and come immediately to Christ, though thy sins be as scarlet,
and as crimson, they shall be as white as snow and as wool, Isa. 1.18.
therefore turn thee to thy God, and wait continually on him, Hosea 12.6. etiam
cum ad culmen perveneris omnium peccatorum, as Zanch. upon the place, lib. 1.
de relig. when thou art come to the height of all sin and wickedness. Thus
whoever thou art, O poor trembling doubting soul, remember, that God has once
more called thee to come to Christ this day, to come as thou art, in thy rags,
in thy poverty, in thy emptiness and insufficiency, that he may be all in all
to thee: though means and ordinances do not presently take off our doubts, and
overcome our fears, and fully satisfy our souls, but still we remain hopeless,
and heartless, and unbelieving; yet if they do so far prevail with us, as to
put us upon the trial and use of those means we are directed to, compelling us
to comply with the counsel that God gives us by his Ministers, this may be a
sign for good, that God has taken a secret hold of thy heart, and is drawing
thee on in the way wherein he will be found. Go home then and say, though I am
as cloudy and dark as ever, unsatisfied as ever, though I have no heart to come
to Christ, no expectation of any success in coming, yet I will come however, if
it be but to satisfy the importunity of others, of the Ministers of the
Gospel, who in Christ's name and in his stead do so earnestly beseech me once
more to make trial of the freeness of his grace. -- Tell Jesus Christ, who sent
you, we will own it at the last day, and justify our message to you; -- tell
him then, what thou have heard this day, and that thou could not make away
with thy self, and throw thy self headlong into hell, till thou have once more
exposed thy self to his wonted pity and commiseration to such as thou art --
tell him, thy soul is ready to break for the longing desire it has after
Christ; cry out and say, how long Lord, holy and true? when will thou shine out
upon thy poor creature, who is walking in the valley of the shadow of death,
and can see no light? O make have to help. O arise and save me; come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly with relief and succor to my poor soul: offer thy self in
this manner to Christ, present thy self thus before the Lord; and if thou
find thy self pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch as thou
despairest even of life, as 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. O then cast thy self, burden and
all upon Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.28. and when thou can not gather comfort from
any present sensible impressions made upon thy heart, then argue from promises
made to thy coming, take them as an answer from God to thee; and make thy best
of them as David did, Psalm. 119.81. My soul faints for thy salvation, but I
hope in thy word: has not Christ said? John 6.37. Him that comes to me I will
in no wise cast out: if he should never speak one word more to thee all thy
days, here is enough said already to support thee: we say omne praeteritum est
necessarium, that which is past can never be recalled, Christ will never unsay
what is passed out of his lips; keep thy hold here, and thou art safe to
eternity. Nothing but raptures and particular revelations, some strong sensible
feelings of comfort will satisfy some, whereas indeed God has revealed his
whole counsel to us in the Scriptures, and has nothing more to say to sinners,
than what is already expressed in the Gospel: the particular answers that God
gives his people sometimes, what are they but inward repetitions of
Gospel-promises to the heart, sealed up there by the Spirit?

How a Christian may get such a faith that is not only saving but comfortable
and joyful at present? Sermon. XXV.
1 Peter 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love: in whom though now ye see him not,
yet believing, you rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.


THE Question, which this Text was chosen to resolve, is, How a Christian may
get such a Faith, as is not only saving at the last, but comfortable, and
joyful at present?

This case has two things in it; one it takes for granted, the other it does
suppose may, and sometimes does come to pass: it takes (first) for granted,
that joy and comfort arise from Faith, (viz.) Faith unfeigned (as the Apostle
speaks,) which purifies the heart, and sets love a work to obey the Law, and so
the commandment has the end for which it was made, 1 Timothy 1.5. and this is
very sure, for all comfort must begin in God, and be derived from him, he is
the father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. and he has
given us everlasting consolations through grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2. last. but it is
not from God absolute, or without a Mediator, alas there is no comfort in that!
What comfort can a malefactor that has myriads of inditements against him upon
the file, the least whereof must take away his life, expect from a just and
righteous judge? the case is thine and mine, infinitely more dreadful than
between a malefactor and a magistrate: my sins are innumerable, the least is
mortal, God is judge; and hell is the prison; wrath, horror, fire, the worm,
and all endless, that is the punishment; the judge is, and cannot be otherwise
than most true and righteous, what comfort can I think to find now from God
absolute, (i. e.) without relation to Christ? behold instead of comfort, a
devouring flame, and instead of joy, a consuming fire. I speak this because of
abundance of our people, they say God is merciful, and they do their best, they
hope God will be their comfort, and they serve him, and all this while they
think not of Jesus Christ: we are all naturally Socinians, those that never
heard their names, much less read their books, live in their heretical and
blasphemous principles. O the amazing stupidity of the world, called Christian,
that we can smile and laugh, and hug our selves in deceiving comforts upon the
brink of hell! there can be nothing comfortable to us, without the God of all
comfort, and no comfort can be to us from God, but by the Lord Jesus; and no
Jesus to us without Faith; we rejoice in God, (says the Apostle) but how? by
Jesus Christ, why? by him we have received the atonement, he has made it by
his blood, and we receive it by Faith, Romans 5.11. he is the Salvation of God,
Luke 2.30. and the consolation of Israel, verse 25. he is our comfort by being
God's Salvation. That the business of Christ in the world was to teach us no
more humbling precepts than Plato or Moses, and then to seal them with his
death, there is little comfort; this comfort and joy is the affections, it is
wrought by the blessed Spirit, joy in or by the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. the
fruit of the Spirit is joy, Gal. 5.22. it is joy in the Father by the Mediator,
through the Comforter: this tells that joy and comfort are noble and divine
goods, they are not little debonnaires, or complacency with some facetious or
gentle garb, that is but thin and beggarly, nor are they friends to a sour face
and cloudy countenance, 'twas inward comfort that made Stephen's face to shine
as an Angel, this joy is not a joy in the face and not in the heart, as some
did rejoice, who put on a good face under the strokes of an angry conscience,
and reproached Paul for a frantic, 2 Cor. 5.13.

Neither is this comfort a floating thing in the mouth; when persons without
good cause are prating their assurance, and comfort, it seems to argue too much
froth, and lightness, (res severa (says Seneca) est verum gaudium, the richest
mines lie deep, and the deepest rivers minimo labuntur sono make the least
noise,) but it is marrow and fatness to the soul, the joy of the Lord is your
strength. I cannot express the excellency of it, the Text says it is joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. The sum is this, a Christian, that would live
comfortably, must live holily, if he will live holily, he must live so
primarily by the faith of the Son of God, and he must endeavor after such a
degree of faith as to say, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.
that comfort in life, and to, and in death, is the joy of Faith, the victory of
Faith, the triumph of Faith, all joy and peace in believing, Romans 15.13. a
special application of the righteousness of Christ to a man's own soul, there
is the rise and origin of joy and comfort, if the Scripture may take place.

(viz.) here is a noise of Faith, Faith believing, and the righteousness of
another is the way to drive all good works out of the world.

Answ. Romans 7.4. or he might as well plead against the riseing of the Sun, and
say it was the way to drive all light out of the world, and to bring in
darkness, it is the same case, 2 Cor. 4.6. he may as well say, that eating of
bread is the way to drive out all vigor and strength of the body out of the
world, the way to bring in starvedness, it is still the same case, Joh. 6.54.
the truth is, Children before marriage are spurious, the world without the Sun
is darkness, and without eating no living, so without union to and interest in
Christ Jesus, who is Jehovah our righteousness, there is no holiness or comfort
in the world. To set up any thing for righteousness in the sight of God but the
righteousness of Jesus, that is the way indeed to drive the Doctrine of the
Church of England, and all the Reformed Churches, with all their most eminent
Doctrines out of the world, nay to drive all good works and all comfort out of
the world, nay to drive the Gospel and Christ and Salvation by him out of the
world; if the Galatians, that were professed believers, received Paul as an
Angel, received the Spirit, shall turn aside to their own works, and make them
concurrent with Christ, though but as a less principal part (which was their
case) then mark the issue, the grace of the Father is frustrated, the death of
Christ is in vain, frustra sine fructu, Gal. 2.21. Christ is of none effect,
they are fallen from Grace, Christ profits them nothing: and all this Paul does
testify with a great deal of vehemence and Solemnity, once and again, and with
such Apostolical majesty, as seldom occurs, Behold I Paul testify unto you,
Gal. 5.2, 3, 4. I suppose that no man that understands Paul will say, that he
disputes only against the ceremonial Law: therefore I will leave it, and
conclude this with that, 1 John 5.12. he that has the Son has life, he that
has not the Son has not life, and this is written to them that believe, that
they might know that they have eternal life, and they that know it cannot
altogether want this in my Text, joy unspeakable and glorious.

The second thing in the question is supposed, (viz.) that a Christian may have
Faith that is saving in the end, which is not comforting in the way. I Answ. 1.
You must not so understand it, as though saving Faith and comforting were two
kinds of Faith, nor secondly, as if saving Faith in the close were in some
believers altogether, and always void of all light and comfort, but how a
Christian, who is saved when he dies, may live comfortably while he lives, then
the resolution of the case is this, that, that Faith which is saving in the
end, is also sanctifying in the way, and would be comfortable also, if the
Christian did not Ponere obicem, hinder it himself, and therefore that he may
live joyfully, he must remove these hindrances, and use the means proper to the
end, of which anon: at present he must do as these believers in the Text did,
and he shall find comfort as they did, in these four particulars.

1. They did persist in the simplicity of the Gospel, as it is in Christ, 2
Cor. 11.2. false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Ministers of Christ began then, v. 13. Paul was jealous of the Church of
Corinth, lest that chaste Virgin should be corrupted, v. 2. as the Churches in
Galatia were bewitched with these juglers, Gal. 3.1. the great design of the
old serpent from that day to this has been to adulterate the Doctrine of faith
in a crucified Redeemer, knowing full well that this is the most effectual
course to ruin all true holiness and solid comfort.

But these believers received the grace of God in truth, as it was fully and
plainly proposed to them, they did not spin out the high and vital truths into
needless disputes, nor darken them with nice distinctions, and subdistinctions,
this serves for little else but to distract the mind, and disturb the quiet of
men's souls.

2. They did taste that the Lord (viz.) Christ is gracious, to whom coming as
the living stone, they as lively stones were built upon him a spiritual house
for God, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. they did not content themselves with orthodoxy, to rest
satisfied in this, that they were not Simonians, or Ebionites, or Menandrians,
or the sectators of them that did destroy Christ's righteousness, by dividing
it: let us not only profess Christ, but feel him; it is one thing to preach
Christ and another thing to feel him, were the last words of Mr. Ash.

3. They minded the mystery of the Gospel, the eternal Deity, grace, and
righteousness of our Lord Jesus, as Peter prayed for them, 2 Pet. 1.3. and
exhorts them to grow in this, 2 Pet. 3. last. as for Church modes and
membership, and privileges, they did enjoy them without censuring and
animosity, but knowledge of and communion with Jesus Christ accompanied with
love, and obedience, and peace of conscience, was the main business of their
life, this is the way to comfort, let us do so. Assure your selves there is
little joy in a ceremony to a dying man; modes and membership are but sorry
comforters.

Lastly, As they had Faith and Love, so they did exercise them, they did
believe, and they did go on to believe, and so to be acquainted with the
righteousness of God from Faith to Faith: you may observe how the Apostle
remembers the works of Faith, Love, and Patience, in Christ of the Thessal. 1.
cap. 1.3. and in the 2. Epistle, cap. 1. verse 3. He thanks God their Faith did
grow exceedingly, there was but a little time between the writing of these two
Epistles, this latter being written shortly after the first, to rectify their
mistake about the day of Christ. The primitive Christians did not content
themselves with habits, and let them be as fire under the ashes, or as seed
under the clods, but did stir them up that they might warm, and they did water
them that they might spring, and blossom like a rose. If a man that has the
power of seeing should walk up and down the streets from morning to night with
his eyes shut, without any actual seeing, would you not suspect him to be
distempered? what comfort can this man take in the light of the Sun? much like
this is a believer that has Faith habitual, he rises in the morning, and lies
down at night, and has not an act of Faith upon, nor a privy thought of
blessing Jesus all the day; how can any comfort be expected in such a
strangeness as this is?

So then the sum is this, these believers received the Gospel of Salvation by
Christ, pure as it was proposed to them, they gave the Apostle this honor,
that they had wisdom enough to express themselves plainly, fully,
significantly; and honesty enough, that they would not deal fallaciously, or
ambiguously, they valued not the tradition of their fathers, nor the fancies of
Philosophers, they had no vain janglings amongst themselves, but coveted the
sincere unmixed milk of the word that they might grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2.

The Gospel came to them not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance, Assurance of understanding, assurance of Faith: their
communion was with the Father, and fellowship with Jesus Christ, that made
their joy to be rich and plentiful: their privileges and ordinances were their
delight, but not their confidence, they came to God by them, and waited upon
God in them in dangerous times, for the enlarging and confirming of their
knowledge, Faith, and comfort: let us be exhorted to do as they did, and
doubtless we shall speed as they sped. My business now is to speak something to
the Text, and then more to the practical case in hand, only first I would crave
leave to speak a few words to the context; for this reason, because as my Text
is the true pourtraiture of practical godliness, so the context gives us a
system of godliness doctrinal.

The Epistle is written to the strangers, v. 2. Jews and Gentiles, (say some)
but especially Jews scattered in four now Roman provinces, not long before
distinct and considerable Kingdoms together with Asia, sc. the proconsular or
less Asia, yet including also those parts in and about Chaldea: Peter was at
this time in or about Babylon, in which parts were many myriads of the Jews, of
whom he was the Apostle with James and John, Gal. 2.9. 1 Pet. 5.13. That
Babylon in the Text should mystically be Rome is a mere conceit, and a
groundless fancy, this Epistle was written thirty years at least before John
had received the revelation, Grotius and others are quite beside the truth,
it is forty to one odds that Peter was never there; well, these Jews were
effectually called, according to Gods election; the terminus or the thing to
which, not for which, or upon which, but to which they were chosen and called,
is said to be this: sc. to obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus; the
great efficient of this in them is the blessed Spirit, through the
sanctification of the Spirit; the same verse: being thus sanctified, they had
hope, where observe, the property of this hope, it was a lively hope. 2. The
term or object, an inheritance. 3. The way whereby they obtained this hope,
they were begotten of God as a father to it. 4. The cause moving God to this,
his abundant mercy. 5. The ground of this hope, it was the resurrection of
Christ from the dead, then the fruit of it, which was great joy, v. 3. And then
6. here is their perseverance, and how that is effected, they were kept by the
power of God to Salvation, v. 5. No doubt but holiness is loseable, the Angels
lost theirs, and we lost ours, and the Saints at this day would quickly lose
theirs totally and finally, if they were left to a stock of grace received, to
trade for another world; to grace received there must be grace supplied, the
grounds of perseverance are without us: viz. the promise of the Father, the
purchase and intercession of the Lord Jesus, the power and supply of the
blessed Spirit, a Doctrine full of comfort, but for certain, as full of grace
and humility too, indeed if the comfort were not sanctifying it were not found.

So that here we may see the Doctrine of the glorious Trinity, and every person
in his work, according to the most wise, and divine Economy, and propriety in
working toward fallen men quite dead in sin, and dead in law, and that
irrecoverably as to themselves, or any created power in heaven on their behalf,
here is, I say, the Father electing to life and glory, here is Jesus Christ
dying and rising, here is the blessed Spirit sanctifying, here the three
Graces, Faith, Hope, and Love, inseparably accompanied with obedience,
cherished with joy and comforts, and crowned with perseverance by the power of
God, all arising from the Sovereignty of God's will, and his rich abundant
mercy, to the praise of the riches of his glorious grace, that they that glory
should glory in the Lord. Pelagius was the first that set up nature, for which
the Church of God abhorred him, says Austin, and the Fathers call it virus
illud Pelagianum, the most learned Usher called it detestandam illam haeresin,
that pestered the Church of Christ olim and body, says that holy man in his
Hist. Pel.

But to proceed, these strangers notwithstanding their holiness were under
manifold temptations, v. 6, 7. persecutions in a tumultuary way were raised
against them by the unbelieving Jews, who were egged thereto by the Priests,
Priests who did stir up the people against them, there was no Imperial Edict at
this time against the Christians. Nero was the first, he was dedicator
damnationis nostrae; I need not quote Tertullian, every Lad of the upper form
may know this out of Suetonius and Tacitus. God kept the Gospel in the first
publishing of it free from any disturbance by the civil powers about 34 years;
that Claudius banished John into Patmos, and that then he had the revelation is
a mere figment of the learned Grotius, and his Annotations built upon it have
neither sap nor sense.

Under these persecutions their Faith did not only continue but shine, and
their love was evident, and their comforts were so far from abating, that they
did rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.

But you will say, what is this to the question? I answer, here are two
directions how a Christian may get that Faith, whereby he may live comfortably
as well as die safely.

1. Be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. ascribe all thy gifts, and graces,
thy profiting under afflictions, ordinances, thy peace and comfort, wholly to
the grace of God by Jesus Christ through the Spirit of holiness. If there be
any way in the world to get special Faith, and to live comfortably, it is this,
to live humbly; the evangelically humble soul is the serene cheerful soul;
heart-pride does not only deprive believers of comfort, but brings vexations,
disappointments, and disgusts, which are a torment to pride where ever it is;
it is a sin that is very incident, very pleasing to us, very displeasing to God,
and very disquieting; it is an easy thing to preach, and hear, and discourse
humility, but believe it, it is not so easy to live it; a man's soul is never
so fit to receive the shines of Gods love, as when he is nothing in himself, be
sure to crush the sprawlings and motions of this cursed pride, see God in all,
bless him for all, see the Lord Jesus the purchaser of all, and the blessed
Spirit the Sanctifier of all, study this well, and live that Text in Romans 11.
last. God is Principium, efficiens, and finis; of him, through him, and for
him, are all things, give him the glory, reduce this to practice, this is every
day practicable, and were it practiced, would make every day comfortable,
envyings and provokings arise from vainglory, Gal. 5. last. Inde nata sunt
schismata, quippe (Hierome) cum dicunt homines nos justificamus impius, nos
sanctificamus immundos, we would be some-bodies, away with these thoughts, let
God have the glory, and thou will have the comfort; in this way God will give
Faith special, and that is the Faith that brings comfort.

2. The way to comfort is to do as these believers in my Text did, they did
choose rather to forego their earthly comforts than their consciences, made
choice of affliction rather than iniquity, esteemed the reproaches of Christ
rather than their safety, prisons are not so terrible as they are imagined, the
best men have rejoiced in the honor of suffering, they suffered joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, all patience and long-suffering with joyfulness, Col.
1.11. Scripture-History primitive and modern abound with instances of all
Sexes, Ages, Conditions in this particular. The noble Galeacius had that joy in
Christ at Geneva beyond all the Marquisates in Italy or the whole world. In
suffering comes assurance, and that is comfort. You will say we are not called
to suffering; and I say the God of peace give us truth and peace always: but
then if you would live comfortably, live in religious honesty, choose poverty
before knavery, an honest meanness before secretly sinning gains. Conscience is
the best friend next to Jesus Christ. Our rejoicing is this, not that we are
Preachers, so was Demas; nor an Apostle, so was Judas; but the testimony of our
conscience, that not in fleshly wisdom, but in godly sincerity, through the
grace of God we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. Light, i.
e. comfort, is sown for the righteous, and joyful gladness for the upright,
Psalm. 97.11. Now I come to my Text.

The words contain the essence of Christianity or godliness. The constituent
parts of it are Faith and Love: the necessary consequences are obedience
evangelical, and joy unspeakable. Faith in Jesus is the great command of the
Gospel, Joh. 1.5, last. It Is the work of God, Joh. 6.29. this is that work.
Love is the great command of the Law, Matthew. 22.36. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy soul. Faith acts upon Jesus and sets Love on work. Love
desires after him and delights in him, and sets obedience on work: divine
comfort flows in proportionably. In this is the formal nature of Christianity,
and what ever is not this in truth is but nature. The revelation left in nature
tells us that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, that the soul is
immortal, that there is a state of bliss in another world, that righteousness
is the way to that bliss. Now as there are but two righteousnesses, the
righteousness of Christ; (of which the whole Creation is silent, and nature
altogether ignorant, and Angels knew it not until it was revealed to them) and
a man's own righteousness: So there are but two Religions in the world, sc.
Christianity and nature. Call Religions by what names you list, Judaism,
Turcism, Paganism, Popery, common Protestantism, it is still but nature. The Sea
has many names from the Countries and shores, but still it is the same Sea.
These two righteousnesses cannot be mixed in the business of justification in
the sight of God. If it be of Christ as the Scripture faith, it is no more of
works: if it be of works, as nature says, it is no more of Christ: we cannot
be justified in his sight partly by the righteousness of Christ's obedience,
and partly by our own. The Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3.13. as many as are of
the works are under the curse, v. 10. the just shall live by faith, ergo not by
law. This is Paul's Logic, v. 11. A man cannot be Son of two mothers. Gal. 4.
lat. end. Cast out the bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of the bondwoman
shall not be heir with the Son of the freewoman. And a woman cannot be wife to
two husbands together, Romans 7.4. There is but one strait gate, Matthew. 7.13. one
door, Joh. 10.9. one way, Joh. 14.5. one name, Acts 4.12. Paul is the most
lively instance in this great case: while he was alive to the Law, he was dead
to Christ; and when he was alive to Christ, he was dead to the Law, Gal. 2.19.
dead to the Law as a rule of righteousness, and alive to the Law as a rule of
obedience, dead to the Law in point of dependence, and alive to the Law in
point of love and practice: his Christianity did ennoble and heighten his
morality: he was just and sober, and temperate, blameless, while he was a
Pharisee; but when he was a believer, he did the same things from a noble
principle, in a spiritual manner, for the right ends: before he did act from
himself, for himself, now from Christ and for Christ. The deduction from hence
is this.

If we would live in true comfort, we must be true Christians. A man may be a
Protestant, yet not a Christian indeed; a man may be blameless, and Christless,
and by consequence Godless. Remember the parable of the foolish Virgins: they
were not harlots, profane, but Virgins: they were not persecutors, or
blasphemers, or malicious, but foolish, i. e. supine, careless, negligent: they
had lamps in their hands, but no oil in their hearts: the parable of the
builders, the sandy believers, of the Kings supper, the man that had not on a
wedding garment. Indeed most of the preaching of the Lord Jesus tends this way,
and these parables live to this day, and as much at this day. Let us look to
our selves, the oil of Faith and comfort go together, the oil of holiness and
the oil of gladness, true Christians are anointed with both. Consider the man
that wanted the wedding robe was not discerned by any at the table, the Lord
espied him quickly: who would have thought such a professor should go to hell?
bind him hand and foot: he did pretend to Christ, and it was but a pretense. I
may dispute for, preach up Christ's righteousness active and passive, and the
imputation thereof according to the Scripture, and the judgment of the best
learned that ever the Churches have had, and yet I may go about to establish
mine own; I may lift up Christ to you, and pull him down in mine own heart. The
sum is this.

Nullum bonum sine summo bono, Austin. I will expound it thus, No good work
without God, no God without Christ, no Christ without heart-Faith, no Faith
without love, no love without obedience, no such obedience without comfort,

1. First, It is their property, they, and all they, and always, and none but
they: there is no man in the world that loves God, and the Redeemer Jesus, but
a believer; the Philosophers were haters of God, Romans 1.30. the Gentiles and
their wise men, for it is plain that the Apostle speaks of them, (not of the
Gnostics, that is an idle conceit) and I am bound to believe Paul's Characters
of the Gentiles and their Philosophers, before Diogenes, Laertius, Plutarch, or
any man else: the Jews hated Jesus Christ, John 15.24. the world hated him,
John 7.7. Luke 19.14. All Gospel-Atheism (said that incomparable Dr. Twisse) is
against Jesus Christ.

So for joy, there is never a joyful man alive but a believer. Will you say that
men take pleasure in their sins? why, that is the Devil's joy; or that they
rejoice in full barns, and bags? that is the Fool's joy; or that they rejoice
in wine, i. e. all dainties that gratify the palate? that is a Bedlam joy. I
have said of mirth, thou art mad. Read and believe Eccles. 2.3. indeed from the
first v. to the 11. The whole book, but especially that Chapter, is the
divinest Philosophy that ever was or will be.

2. It Is their practice, they love the Lord Jesus in incorruption or sincerity,
Ephesians. 6. last. The Church, i. e. Believers jointly and singly say of Jesus, that
he it is whom their soul loves, Cant. 1.7. in the 3. chap. the 4 first ver. we
have it four times, and none but that: I sought him whom my soul loves, v. 1.
I will arise and seek him whom my soul loves, v. 2. I said to the watchmen,
saw ye him whom my soul loves? v. 3. after a little while I found him whom my
soul loves, v. 4. here is no supernumerary repetition, every believer's soul
bears a part in this divine song: so for joy, that is their practice too, we
have no confidence in the flesh, but rejoice in Christ Jesus; which joy in him
did plainly flow out of their confidence of an interest in him, Phil. 3.3. as
sorrowful yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6.9. we rejoice in hope of the glory of
God, Romans 5.2. and we rejoice in God by Jesus Christ, v. 11. with many more
Texts to the same purpose: there need no more, only observe, it is we rejoice,
it is not only Paul or the Apostles, but the Philippians, Romans, and so all
believers, we rejoice. I shall speak something. 1. For the explication of the
Doctrine. 2. For the vindication of the truth. 3. For the resolution of the
case.

1. For explication: these two affections Love and Joy will be best described
by their properties, objects, causes. Love is the return of an holy affection
to Jesus Christ, with desires after him, and delight in him, whose properties
are these: 1. It Is a sovereign love: he it is whom the soul loves, as before
out of the Canticles, chap. 1.7. a transcendent love, arising out of some due
apprehension of his own excellency, and those most inestimable benefits
procured by him: he is the standard bearer amongst ten thousand, Cant. 4.10. as
the apple tree for shade, and fruit to the weary travelers, above all the
trees of the forest, Cant. 2.3. Saints and Angels are but shrubs and fruitless
things to him, they have fruit for themselves from him, but none for us.

2. It is unsatisfiable with any thing besides him: love is a restless
affection, therefore compared to the grave and death, Cant. 8.6, 7. amor semper
quaerit nova; it cannot say I have enough, till it be terminated on Jesus
Christ and God by him.

3. It Is ardent; and therefore it is compared to coals of fire in the Text,
Cant. 8. it is not a flat and faint thing, but it warms and enlarges the heart.

4. It Is very chaste; it is not to be frighted away by the troubles and
affrightments of the world, neither is it to be bribed off by the blandishments
and allurements of it, many waters cannot quench it, and if any would offer all
the substance of his house to corrupt it, to withdraw it, it would be utterly
contemned, ibid.

5. And chiefly it is obediential: what would not a man do or suffer for such a
Savior? for such a Salvation as from sin and hell, and such a Salvation as
into grace and eternal glory? it is the fulfilling of the law, Romans 13.10. A
man that loves the Lord Jesus would fulfill every one of his commands, the law
of his God is in his heart, Psalm. 37.31. and his heart is to the law: there is
a kind of perfection secundum intentionem, and he goes on gradually quoad
perfectionem. Love makes the yoke easy; his commands are not grievous, i. e.
They are precious: Oh how I love thy Law! says David, Psalm. 119.97. I delight
in the Law of God in my inner man, says Paul, Romans 7.22. Try your selves by
this: compare your selves with that of Christ in his farewell Sermon, Joh.
14.15, 21, 23. withal remember and dread that Text, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man
love not the Lord Jesus, i. e. malign him, oppose him, let him be accursed till
the Lord comes.

2. The object of this love, we have it in the Text (viz.) the Lord Jesus, and
all of him: he is altogether lovely. A believer loves him as King, loves his
Laws and institutions, and none but his; loves him as Priest, in the holiness
of his nature and life, in the suffering of his soul, and death; how precious
is Jesus? 1 Pet. 2.7. loves him as a Prophet, revealing the mystery of
Salvation, the glorious mystery of the Gospel hidden from generations, hidden
from the wise and prudent. Believers love him most intimately as a King for
holiness, as a Priest for righteousness, and as a Prophet for wisdom. Lust like
the harlot divides him; but love like the true mother will have him whole, as
well holiness to save from sin, as righteousness to save from hell.

3. The cause of it is the blessed Spirit: the fruit of the Spirit is love,
Gal. 5.22. The Lord thy God shall circumcise thy heart, and cause thee to love
the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Alas it is not in corrupt nature, the wisdom of
the flesh; the best in that hedge is enmity; not a bare enemy, but enmity
against God; it is not subject, i. e. ordinarily, regularly subject to his Law,
neither can be; there is a remotio actus and posse too, it is a divine work.

The other holy affection is joy: in the Text we have the properties of it.

First, It Is unspeakable: the joy of harvest, rich spoils, great treasures,
when they are right, i. e. when they are derived from God by Jesus Christ, they
have their weight, but what are these to the joy of a pardon to a trembling and
condemned man? and what is this to the joy in Christ to a man that understands
and is sensible what damnation is? what hell is? what eternity is? the
highness, the sweetness, the revivement is indeed ineffable, no man that feels
it can find words fully to express it. 2. It Is full of glory, i. e. (say some)
a stander by cannot judge of it. That is true, but is too short, it is initium
vitae aeternae, it is glorificatum gaudium, it is a part of heaven: Austin seems
to think that is too much: our present comfort (says he) is rather Solatium
praesentis miseriae, than gaudium futurae beatitudinis, rather a collation or
refreshment upon our journey, than a set meal at our journeys end. What if we
should take the word here glorious, for strong, full of glory, full of divine
power, a holy joy, an heart-enlargeing joy, strong to do, and strong to die?
certainly sin is never more odious, the heart is never more soft, the
commandments never more precious, the World never more regardless, Jesus never
more glorious, than when we humbly rejoice in the sense of God's love by Jesus
Christ, through the witness of the blessed Spirit. If our comforts be not
heart-enlarging to love and duty, they may be suspected for unsound.

I will add one property, viz. The joy of Believers is soul-satisfying joy, it
fills the heart and every chink of it, it is abundantly, nay victoriously
satisfying the Soul of it self without praying in the help of the Creatures.
Light all the candles in the world, and they will not, cannot make it day: let
the Sun arise, and that will do it without their help. Read Hab. 3. the latter
end, in our phrase, our manner of speech it is this, if no bread in the
cupboard, nor money in the purse, nor Friend to help, yet I will rejoice in the
Lord, and glory in the God of my salvation.

The Object of this Joy is present interest in Jesus, and a lively hope of
Glory, or Glory hoped for: the cause efficient is the blessed Spirit, joy in
the Holy Ghost, i. e. by him: the inward instrument is Faith, Faith special, or
Assurance, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. The outward
instrument is the Gospel, the Angel called it, Tidings of great joy. I pray you
try again, where is your joy? whence does it arise? upon what is it fixed? of
what kind is it? what is the power of it? joy is natural and pleasing, every
man seeks it, many there be, that say, who will show us any good? they are for
sensible, palpable good, Corn, Wine, or Oil, Riches, Honors: here they think
to find joy and comfort. Alas they seek the living among the dead, they suck an
empty breast. David had all this, but he sought far higher, he was of a more
noble and heavenly temper, lift up the light of thy countenance, cause thy face
to shine upon thy Servant, that will put gladness into my heart, Psalm. 4.5.

Out of these premises we conclude that Christianity is a glorious thing:
which is the second particular, 2. Particular or vindication.
which I call a Vindication of the Truth. Religion is not a little formality in
duties joined with some morality in life; but it consists in the new creature,
or Faith working by love, Gal. 5.6. and 6.16. It consists in the exercise of
Repentance, self-loathing, hatred of Sin as such, (for these are necessarily
implied) Faith actual in Jesus, love to him, obedience before him, communion
with God by him, peace and comfort from him, and well grounded hope of eternal
life through him; the smell of his garments, Psalm. 45.8. the savor of his
ointment, Cant. 1.3. the taste of his preciousness makes a Believer think he
can never do enough for Jesus. If his Holiness were as an Angel, and his days
as the days of Heaven, yet all were too short, too little for such a Savior,
the love of Christ constrains him. He is a debtor to the Spirit, to live after
the Spirit, and what ever is not this in truth (there is a difference in
degrees) is (as you heard before) but nature raised, and varnished, and
modified with distinctions, still it is but nature. Wash and dress a Swine as
you please, it is a Swine still. The Fathers (when the breaking out of
Pelagianism made them more studious in the point of grace, and more wary in
their expressions) have left us their judgment in this case: you bring in a
kind of doctrine (says Austin to the Pelagians) that men do righteousness, and
please God without Faith in Christ by the Law of nature: this is that for which
the Church does most of all detest you, Hoc est unde vos maxim Christiana
detestatur Ecclesia. Lib. 4. Cap. 3. contr. Again, (says he) far be it from us
to think that true virtue should be in any man, unless he were righteous, and
far be it from us to think, that any man should be truly righteous, unless he
did live by Faith, for the just shall live by Faith, absit autem and sit justus
vere, nisi vivat ex fide: and again, who would say that a man Diabolo
mancipatus, a slave to the Devil, were a righteous man, though he were
Fabricius or Scipio? To cloth the naked, (says he) is not sin as the fact is
considered in it self; but of such a work to glory, and not in the Lord, none
but a wicked man but will grant this to be sin: thus far Austin, with more to
the same purpose in the same place: and upon this account he did correct some
expressions, Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Retract. The whole Chapter is seasonable; the sum
this, Austin had called the Muses Goddesses, had highly advanced the liberal
sciences, now corrects it upon this reason, (viz.) that many Godly men knew
them not, and many that did know them were ungodly: the same he does about
Pythagoras his books, in which (says he) are Plures, many errors, iidemque
capitales. Especially this he recants, that he formerly said the Philosophers,
who were not pious, were yet shining in virtue; no Faith in Christ, no virtue,
it is spectrum, it is but simulacrum, but imago virtutis, it is not virtue;
painted fire, is not fire: Hierom to the same purpose in Cap. 3. Galat. Paul
(says he) blameless did not live; he was dead while blameless. Paul the
Christian was indeed alive. Men speak of temperance and justice without Faith;
that cannot be; none live without Christ, sine quo omnis virtus est in vitio:
without Christ all virtue is accounted vice; thus he.

It Is most evident, there dwells no virtue in the minds of ungodly men: their
wisdom is not heavenly but earthly, not from the Father of lights, but from the
prince of darkness; ac sic vitium, quod putatur virtus, and so that is a vice
which is accounted virtue. Non Deo serviunt sed diabolo, they serve the devil
not God, Prosp. Con. Coll. Cap. 28. tota vita infidelium est peccatum, the
whole life of unbelievers is sin, idem sent. 106. to the same purpose says
Fulgentius with others. The Scripture is full and clear, an evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit. The carnal mind cannot please God, Romans 8.7. 1 Cor.
1.2.3. the Apostle does raise his discourse to the highest strain, Though I
speak with the tongue of Angels, which no man does; if I had all knowledge,
which no man has; if I could move mountains, which no man can; if I give all
my goods to feed the poor, the highest beneficence; and my body to be burnt,
the greatest suffering; yet if I have not love, I am nothing: he does not say,
these things are nothing; he does not say, knowledge is nothing, or giving to
the poor is nothing, but I am nothing, I have no profit, I am a hollow tub, an
empty vessel, I make a noise amongst men while I live, and go to hell when I
die.

And according to Scripture and Fathers the doctrine of our Church has
determinated in her thirteenth Article thus, Works done before the grace of
Christ and the Inspiration of his Spirit are not pleasing to God; forasmuch as
they spring not from Faith in Jesus Christ, yea rather for that they are not
done, as God has commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
nature of sin: and this is the judgment of the reformed Churches also. Sirs, be
sure you get and exercise this Faith unfeigned in Jesus Christ, and love
sincere to him. A fair deportment with great gifts, and splendid performances
without Christ, is but a more gentile way to perdition everlasting.

3. Resolution of the case.
I come now to the resolution of the practical case, How a Christian may get
that Faith by which he may live comfortably as well as die safely. Where this I
think fit to premise: first, he must not only get such a Faith, but he must
keep it in exercise, for without this there is no living comfortably: then,
this also I premise, that to get and keep comfort, or that a Christian may have
comfort, two things are necessary, viz. proportion and propriety; ex part
objecti, it must be a good proportionable; and then ex part subjecti, it must
be mine: it must be commensurate and adaequate to the soul, and it must be the
souls own, toll meum, and toll gaudium. The comfort and sweetness of the
Gospel lies in pronouns (as the common saying is) as for instance; suppose the
conquests of Alexander, and triumphs of Pompey, nay all the world were thine,
there is propriety, it is thine; but herein would be no comfort at all to thee,
because here is no proportion, no sutableness to an immaterial, vast and
immortal soul; on the other side, Christ is proposed to thee, and in him there
is proportion, for in him dwells all fullness, he is an infinite, spiritual
and eternal good; but what comfort is this without propriety, unless he be
thine? my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 2. I will rejoice in the God
of my salvation, Hab. 3. your Father Abraham saw my day, and did rejoice to see
it: the plain English is this, Abraham saw Jesus Christ in the promises, sc.
his obedience, and sufferings, and the glory that came by Christ's
righteousness, and did apply it to himself by Faith, and was assured of his
interest in it, which made him to rejoice in that sight.

Though a Prince may have a legal right to a treasure hid in the field, yet
till it be discovered to him, there is no joy: the love of God is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and so we rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God, Romans 5.2, 5. I will not dispute whether assurance be of the nature of
Faith: our Reformers were of renown, and other learned men since at home and
abroad, that are for assurance, do not at any hand exclude adherence; some
think that Faith is a mixed habit, adherence and assurance are two acts of the
same Faith, two flowers from the same root. It Is true, there may be adherence
without assurance, but it is as true, that there cannot be assurance without
adherence. If I know and believe that Christ died for me, I should stick to it
in negotio justificationis, without taking notice of any inherent holiness
either in men or Angels: how do the stars disappear at the rising brightness of
the Sun, yet no disparagement to the stars at all? But I say I will not
dispute, and if I could, it were both unseasonable and needless; for whether
assurance be of the nature of Faith, or whether it be an effect of Faith, is
all one in this case before us, for there must be something of assurance that
must bring in joy and comfort.

The believers here in my Text they loved Christ, and in whom after they
believed, they did rejoice with joy unspeakable: their first acts of Faith
might be recumbency, afterward evidence, then joy; so the Ephesians, after
they believed in Christ, they were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise as an
earnest, Ephesians. 1.13, 14, 15. The note of the old learned and pious Piscator
is, unusquisque fidelis verus est, not esse potest, or esse debet, but est
certus suae salutis, I will name but one Scripture more, it is Cant. 2.6. my
beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds among the lillies: my beloved is mine,
there is the Gospel with its marrow in the heart of a believer, there is
assurance: and I am his, there is the law in the same heart, there is
obedience: he feeds among the lillies, there is joy and comfort: he died for
me, and I am his, soul and body for his service. Hence comes joy, and sometimes
such that even overwhelms. This for the entrance, now to the directions.

First, If you would get Faith, comforting in life as well as saving at death,
you must not sit down satisfied with a bare recumbence on Jesus Christ. Mistake
me not, I do not discourage, and I dare not disparage it. If it be right (as I
take that for granted) it is a grace more precious incomparably than all
treasures, and happy is the bosom that wears so inestimable a Jewel. But when
Christians sensible of their sin and hell do attain to this, they rest
satisfied here. They are told (and that is truth) that their state is safe,
there they acquiesce, set up their staff behind the door, and go no further,
they do not press on for assurance, they will rather argue against it, thus,
Object. That assurance is not so necessary. Answ. So necessary, what do you
mean? is it not commanded? is it not promised? is it not purchased? is it not
attained by the people of God? sure it is necessary to the vigor of grace, and
to the being of joy and comfort; be of good comfort, thy sins are pardoned,
Object. 2. Yea, but many do live and die and do well without it. Answ. Who told
you so? the Scripture says, the Spirit himself does bear witness with our
spirits that we are the children of God, Romans 8.16. and we know and believe the
love that God has given us, 1 John 4.16. with many very many more Texts to
that purpose. A tempted believer may bear false witness against himself: sure
such a position as this with mercy upon uncertainties is not the way to comfort
him: the sure way were to advise him to see his sins more, and humble his soul
more for them, and to study Jesus Christ, and to come to him more, with the
like, and God will return and speak peace: they that sow in tears shall reap in
joy.

Object. 3. But this joy is not so necessary. Resp. What do you mean again? so
necessary, why? 1. It is frequently commanded, take one Text, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord, (i. e. Christ) always, and again I say rejoice. 2. It is
frequently promised, I will make them joyful in my house of prayer, Isa. 56.7.
I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes
from you. 3. It is practiced frequently, we rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.3.
4. It is often prayed for, the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing, Romans 15.13.

5. It is Christ's office to give the oil of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, Isa. 61.3. 6. It is the special work of the blessed Spirit, who is
therefore the Comforter. Take the word (...) in what notion you will, his work
is either comforting or tending to comfort. Lastly, It is the privilege of the
Gospel Ordinances to feast the soul with marrow and fatness, and with wine well
refined, i. e. God has not given us the spirit of bondage to fear again, (as
formerly) but the Spirit of adoption, whereby (or rather by whom, i. e. cujus
open) we cry abba Father. Surely joy and comfort is necessary for the measures
of grace. If you had a child infirm, sickly, hard-favoured, and a friend should
say, this strength, quickness, and comeliness is not so necessary, your child
is alive, is it not? you would think this were hardly suitable, much less
comfortable.

Object. 4. A Christian that does come to, and rely on Christ for righteousness
may have comfort: Answ. yes, but then it must be by the way of a practical
syllogism. He that comes to Christ shall never perish, Joh. 6. but I do so,
therefore. Here his coming, together with repentance and obedience, which are
concomitants, beget evidence, and from thence comfort.

Object. 5. but many good people want this joy and comfort.

Answ. confessed; but then it is our own fault: did we use the means,
especially secret duties, meditation, prayer, which we neglect, it would be
otherwise.

Object. Last. But those that do these yet are in great darkness.

Answ. Yea, for sometime. The holy spirit teaches many lessons, excellent ones
in this School, chiefly these three. 1. They learn what dismal creatures they
must have been for ever without Jesus Christ. 2. They learn to give a guess,
what were the unintelligible amazements and consternatious that were upon the
soul of Jesus Christ in their room. 3. The blessedness that comes by Jesus
Christ. And when they have learned their lessons in this School out of the word
by this ever blessed Tutor, God brings them out with silver, joy, and gold, and
comfort.

2. Direct. Make serious use of marks and signs. The best search is in a man's
own heart, and there, the greatest case of conscience is, whether Christ be in
you, 2 Cor. 13.5. One of the best uses the preacher can make, is a use of
trial. Skilful ones lay open these marks with much evidence and vehemence;
beseech, require, charge that impartial search be made: And Christians hear and
affect, and say it is a home-Sermon; but do not seriously upon retirement bring
themselves to the truth. The Minister may preach his lungs out of his body, and
it is not minded. If self-tryal were impartially practiced, the blessed spirit
in this way would give in evidence, and by that comfort: for instance, Jesus
Christ tells us, he lays down his life for his sheep, John 10. there he gives
the marks of his sheep: as first, They do not follow the voice of strangers. i.
e. Strange doctrines, duties, worship; as Socinianism, Popery, Pelagianism new
or old, Quakerism; they fly from them: they know not the voice of strangers, v.
5. 2. They know Christ with an high appreciating and obedient knowledge, v. 14.
3. They hear his voice, and they follow him; not a stranger. v. 28. Now if you
would try your selves by these and many, very many such like, if you would
impartially see the complexion of your souls in the glass of the word, this
would beget certainty, and that would beget comfort.

3. Direct. Be not slothful in the business of Faith, remove away far from you
a sluggish frame, stir up, blow up the coals, exercise thy Faith, exert new
acts of application of Jesus Christ to thee daily. We want comfort, and why?
Jesus Christ is not in our serious thoughts all the day. We eat bread daily for
life natural, and cloth our selves daily to cover our nakedness before men:
sure the soul has as much need of food and raiment as the body: Jesus
crucified is the only, the Heavenly food and raiment; stir up thine appetite,
Mitte sidem, put forth thine hand, put him on; repeated acts of recumbency and
application will rise up into acquaintance and evidence, and will let in this
precious joy and consolation. Believe it, Sirs, it is a sin of a far greater
nature than we are aware of, a sin of horrid unkindness, neglect, slighting of
our best friends, (viz.) that we make sure of every thing, but Jesus Christ. A
little land, a small Tenement, a little money, there we cry fast bind, and fast
find; there we have a male in the flock, and can defend our diligence very
smartly: but in the great concern of our souls we are at uncertainties, and hap
hazard; there the blind and the lame is for sacrifice. What a noise is there
about a civil propriety in mint and cummin? and what a Silence and remisness
about the soul's propriety in the Son of God? it is a prodigious and inexcusable
indiscretion and folly; and an unspeakable mischief into the bargain.

4. Direct. Take heed of thy heart, fetch not thy comforts from, and terminate
not thy joy upon any creature; this were clear idolatry: therefore check thy
joy about these things, cut off the suckers, and the boughs will be laden with
fruit, stop these back-ditches and the stream will be strong. Remember Job
could approve his sincerity by this, that he did not rejoice because his wealth
was great, and because his hand had gotten much. Cap. 31. v. 24. Remember our
Lord Christ abated his disciples joy, Rejoice not in this that the Devils are
subject to you; (a man may cast out Devils and go to hell.) but rejoice rather
in this, that your names are in the book of life. Act Faith to see God the
giver, Christ the purchaser of your daily mercies, and thence fetch your joy
into them: My clothes first must have warmth from my body, and then they warm
me.

5. Direct. If a Christian would attain to that Faith ( viz. certainty) that
will make his life comfortable, he must go on to be more holy in both the parts
of it: he must die to sin more. The Scripture calls upon us every where to
hate, abhor, mortify, crucify (viz.) to death, lay aside as a dead corpse, put
off as filthy rags, cast away as a plague sore, what all this while? why,
lusts, filthy lusts, wrath, anger, vainglory, pride, impatience, filthy wanton
thoughts. You know the Apostle presses these things as the main use of the
Doctrine of Jesus: Paul is abundant in this in his Epistles to the Churches; do
it then, dwell upon these Scriptures much, daily let them dwell in you, be
docrs of the word. Your ministers are afraid, either of the rickets, the head
is big with airy notions, or but notions, and the joints be weak; or
Childdishness, that people are more taken with a little gaudy trimming than
with the substance of the cloth. Study these truths, and look to your hearts,
and conform to them, this is the way for to get, and when you have gotten to
keep some assurance, and that will comfort your hearts; the pure in heart shall
see God, and any glimpse of that is a most comfortable sight. The Scripture
says, especially in Gospel times, that the people of God should walk in the
light of his countenance: if thou put away iniquity from thy heart, thou shall
lift up thy face; the more conscience, the more sense of love, and the more
sense the more comfort; the less clouds the more fun. The old Puritans had a
great deal of feeling, and much Serious joy.

6. Direct. Look well to the other part of holiness, live to righteousness,
live in it, live the Col. 3.17. read it over and over, as many as walk
according to this rule, peace shall be upon them, Gal. 6.16. to such a one
Christ will manifest himself, Joh. 14.21. his Father and himself will come to
such a one and will make their abode with him v. 23. the Father will love him
(it is meant of love manifestative, not initial) he will manifest his love,
there is joy indeed to the upright, I will show the Salvation of God, not I
will begin to be, but I will show, Psalm. 50. last.

Look to your trades, let there be holiness to the Lord upon your weights and
measures; look to your family duties; study well and observe your
relation-duties: family-passions cloud Faith, disturb duty, darken comfort.

7. Direct. All this while I take it for granted that thou art a Christian. Why
then, if thou will get and keep this Faith that will get and keep comfort
alive, The seventh direction is, To be much and frequent in Divine meditation;
Faith is enlarged and grows up by converse with divine objects: meditate upon
these things, 1. Christ's Deity. Be well stored with Scriptural knowledge of
this great truth, set thy heart to it, and let it be fixed in the midst of thy
heart, assure your selves that the eternal Godhead of Jesus is the most
practical point in Heaven, and will be so while Heaven is Heaven.

2. Be intimately acquainted with Christ's righteousness; that it is the only
righteousness that can present us holy, unreprovable, unblameable, in God's
sight; that it was his business in the world to bring in this everlasting
righteousness; that it is done and finished; that he has nothing to do with
this righteousness now in Heaven, but to cloth us with, to present us in,
before God.

3. Meditate on God's righteousness, that it is not only his will, but his
nature to punish sin; sin must damn thee without Christ, there is not only a
possibility or probability that sin may ruin, but without an interest in
Christ it must do so; whet much upon thy heart that must, God cannot but hate
sin, because he is holy; and he cannot but punish sin, because he is righteous.
God must not forego his own nature to gratify our humors.

8. Direct. Be well skilled and settled (as it becomes a Christian) in the
great article of justification before God: thy Faith, and duties, and comforts
depend might and main upon this. Know that no servant of God, be he Abraham,
Moses, or Paul, if God enter into judgment with him, can stand justified in his
sight, God will not justify us without a righteousness, and that righteousness
must be unblamable; and therefore in all numbers perfect: God will not call
that perfect which is not so, for his judgment is according to truth, Romans 2.2.
where shall we find this perfect righteousness, but in Christ, who is Jehovah
our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and made of God to us righteousness? 1 Cor. 1.30.
how shall this become ours, but by imputation? Romans 4.6. how shall we receive
this gift of righteousness, but by Faith? Romans 5.17. be well skilled in the
good old way, go in the foot steps of the flock, and feed besides the shepherds
tents. Believe it, Sirs, there is no way but Christ, unto the Father; his blood
is that new and living way, Heb. 10.19. there is no standing in God's presence
but in him, no acceptance but by him, no comfort but from him.

Be wise and wary; there are many adversaries. Only give me leave to say this,
I think that the Socinians had never set up man's obedience for his
righteousness, if they had not with wicked hands, quantum in illis, first
pulled down Chist's Deity: and as they are abhorred for this blasphemy of
blasphemies, so I cannot abide them for dawbing over man's obedience in this
affair so deceitfully, and deceivingly, (viz.) in saying it is not only causa
sine qua non in our justification, as if the material cause or the matter which
God imputes for righteousness, were only a poor causa sine qua non; but no more
now of this juggling.

9. Direct. If you would preserve a right understanding of the nature of Faith
take heed of advancing it into Christ's place, as if God should impute the act
of Faith for righteousness, or that God should impute Faith and obedience as
the condition or matter of our righteousness and not Christ's obedience; for
both cannot be imputed: if God imputed Christ's obedience, then not ours; if
ours, then not Christ's. The nature of Faith consists in coming to Christ for
righteousness and pardon: only; the man hurt with the fiery sting, looks to the
brazen Serpent for cure. Fides que, that Faith which is justifying takes in
Christ as Lord, with all the heart; but qua justificat, in the business of
justifitation qua sic, it looks only to Christ as crucified: This plain old
distinction will stand. If the nature of Faith did consist in Christianity, I
say, if this were true, I believe all believers could be contented to have it
so, for any harm they should have by it, for they willingly devote themselves
to the obedience of God; only they cannot make this Faith, or Christianity to
be the condition or matter of justification, for this were to fall from grace,
to make of none effect the death of Christ; and to drive Christianity and
comfort out of the world.

10. Direct. Get and keep this Faith, specially by a constant and conscionable
living in duty, and living above it. Say to the commandments you are my rule,
and love, and joy; to Christ thou art my life, Col. 3.4. It Is the height of
Christianity to live in duties, and to live above them. It Is quickly said, it is
an easy matter to distinguish in the Schools or pulpit, but to distinguish in
the conscience, practically to distinguish, is not so easy: qui novit
distinguere inter legem and evangelium, sciat se esse edoctum a Deo. Had I all
the holiness of the Saints from the beginning to this day, I would bless God
for the least, and prize it above all treasures; yet I would lay all aside and
be found in Christ. In the midst of thy duties ask thy soul the question, soul,
what is thy title, thy plea? If I were to dye this day, what have I to plead?
in what shall I stand before God? what have I to plead, why I should not perish
in hell? ask thy self, what is thy righteousness? ask it solemnly, frequently;
is it not Christ and he only? this would much conduce to confirm thy Faith,
such a Faith that would bring in comfort. The thoughts of this so affected Dr.
Mollius, that he seldom names Jesus with dry eyes,

11. Direct. Be much in secret prayer, ejaculations; this will breed
acquaintance, and that comfort; the non exercise of this breeds a strangeness
between God and the soul, and that is uncomfortable. This and meditation who can
hinder? The soul is active, breathings and thoughts are quick, it is soon done,
it will never hinder your business, and in this way the blessed spirit causes
us to know and believe the love that God has to us, 1 John 4.16. and
refreshes the soul with joy and comfort in believing. Do not only pray for the
comforts and supplies of the holy spirit, but pray to him to this purpose:
Blessed spirit convince me of my sins more, and convince me more and more of
Jesus Christ; Holy Spirit take of Christ's and show it unto me, and the like.
To pass by the profane scoffs of many, and the gross ignorance of more, I take
it to be a very great neglect in believers, that they do not glorify the Holy
Spirit, as the Lord and giver of Faith and comfort. Remember this, qui unum
honorat, and omnes, he that honors one person aright, honors every one;
and he that does not honor every person honors none, qui non omnes, nec
unam.

12. Direct. If you would get and keep this special comforting Faith, then keep
a good conscience in evil times; choose suffering before secular safety;
remember who did shrink from the truth, and lost this Faith and comfort, even
to the gates almost of despair and self violence for twelve months together,
and never did recover till some hints of mercy to him, he began to revive and
have some quiet. Spira said with tears running down his face, that time was
when he could have called God Father, but now he could not.

13. Direct. You may and ought to get this special rejoicing Faith out of
sanctified afflictions, thus: whom God does correct, and teach, him he loves,
he is blessed, Psalm. 94.12. Heb. 12. but God does so to me, ergo: here are
bills and prayers for mercies, but who looks after the issue? The teaching, the
holy use, sanctified affections are very good evidences, and so very
comfortable.

There are that would not have lost their bussetings, temptations, various
temptations, afflictions for any good: the blessed spirit has taught them that
way, many a divine truth by heart out of the word, they are sensible of it, and
from it conclude the love of God in Christ to them, and thence they have joy
and comfort, that joy that Angels cannot give, and Devils cannot take:
sanctified troubles are tokens of special love.

14. Give diligent attendance upon the ordinances, set thy self in the sight of
God to hear what God will speak as Cornelius did, Act. 10.33. and rejoice to do
it, such shall walk in the ight of God's countenance, Psalm. 89.15. Take heed of
the common humor, we begin to be very sqeamish, and carnal; one is of Paul,
another of Apollo; we attend more the man and his artifice, than God and his
word. Mr. Bolton, in his florid, but profane wit, thought Perkins was a
sneaking fellow; But when God changed his heart, he was of another mind.

Lastly, Be more intent upon your duty, then upon your comfort, and comfort
will follow. Order your steps in the paths of Divine precepts, walk in all
relations according to the rule, and be not so earnest after comfort, so
sollicitous in that behalf. Walk uprightly, and the face of God will behold the
upright. You pray for assurance, be sure your ends be right, let it be more for
holiness that the name of Jesus Christ may be glorified by you, than for
comfort. I think some good people are too carnal in their prayers for
assurance; they desire it not so much for holiness, as for safety. I have known
such; take heed, look well to your aims.

I will conclude with Paul's prayer. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17.

Now our Lord Jesus, and God our Father, who has given us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you
in every good word and work.

How Christians may learn in every State to be content. Sermon. XXVI.
Phil. 4.11. For I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.


OUR Apostle makes this profession of his high seize in the grace of
Contentation upon a very weighty Reason, The Occasion of the words.
or Motive: (viz.) that he might obviate all misconstructions, and bad
interpretations, which possibly some might put upon what he had said in the
foregoing verse, (and should further say in the 14, 15, and 16. Verses) In
every of which we have him expressing his great and affectionate resentment of
the Philippians bounty and liberality to him, I rejoiced in the Lord greatly,
that now at the last your care of me has flourished again; ye have well done,
that you did communicate with my afflictions, etc. No Church communicated with
me, as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only; For even in Thessalonica
ye sent once and again unto my necessity. Now he foresaw, that this his just
acknowledgment might have some base and ugly censures put upon it, which
therefore he makes it his business to prevent. And he enters a double Caveat
about them; Not because I desire a gift, v. 17. (q. d.) O Philippians, I have
received your Gifts, and I am very thankful to you for them; but do not think I
do this out of any Gratam sibi esse testatur eorum beneficentiam, etc. li a
tamen orationem temperans, ut ab omni sordium suspicione se purum esse --
testetur Beza.
base spirit, as if I desired thereby to be enriched or advanced in worldly
possessions; No (says he) it is not so with me; all that my eye is upon in
your kindness to me is this, I desire fruit that may abound to your account.
Again, Not that I speak in respect of want, as if I were so exceeding low in
the world, that I could not live without your supply; or as if I were a person
so tender and delicate, that I could not bear a little want or hardship: No, it
is not so with me neither; for let my outward condition be what it will, never
so low as to outward things, yet I have one Reserve always by me, a contented
Mind; I cannot have so little, but that little shall suffice: So Non quod
penuriam passus sim, id dico; didici enim ut Sufficiat mihi id quod habeo, V.
Sir.
the text comes in, Not that I speak in respect of want; for I have learned,
etc.

In the words (wherein I am concerned) we have,

The Text divided.
1. A Lesson to be learnt, to be content. A rare and excellent Lesson! than
which there is scarce any one higher and harder in the whole compass of
Christianity.

2. Paul's great proficiency in this lesson; I have learned, in whatsoever
state I am (or as it is in the (...) In quibus sum, i. e. qualiscunque sit mea
conditio, etc. Calvin. It Is more than if he had sa^d. In iis quae habeo. Vide
Muscul. in loc.
Greek, In whatsoever things I am,) therewith to be content: He had in the
course of his life passed through various states, and some of them were bad
enough, (according to the account which he himself gives of them, 2 Cor. 4.8,
9, 10. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5. 2 Cor. 11.23.) But no condition came amiss to him, his
spirit was always composed and calm, he lived in the constant practice of
divine Conrentment; I have learnt (says he, and we may believe him) in
whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. What an apt Scholar, what an
admirable proficient, was this blessed man in this high and difficult piece of
practical knowledge! Surely he that can master such a lesson as this, may well
be placed in the highest form of Christ's school.

Of the supernaturalness and Mysteriousness of contentment.
When he says he had learned to be content, two things are implied in that
expression; the Supernaturalness, the mysteriousness of Contentment. The
Supernaturalness of it; I have learnt it, (q. d.) 'twas not a thing known by me
from the first, I brought not this frame with me into the world, 'twas not
ingenit, or connate with me, I had it not from nature or natural light: No, it
was purely adventitious, being in part infused by God, and in part acquired by
my self; I was not made with it, but I was taught it. Where and how did he
learn it? not at the feet of Gamaliel, not in the Schools of the great
Philosophers; but in the school of Christ, and by the teachings of the Spirit.
He might say of this what he says of his Office, Gal. 1.1. it was not of man,
nor by man; but of God, 1. He attained unto it, not by the teachings of man's
wisdom, but by the teachings of the holy Ghost, (to allude to that 1 Cor.
2.13.) This blessed Spirit set up a supernatural light in him, wrought a
supernatural work in him, gave in divine and supernatural discoveries to him;
and so he arrived at his Contentment. And further he learnt it (in a
subordinate sense) by his own prudent observation, Christian experience, daily
and constant (...). Chrysostom. Homil. 15. in C. 4. ad Philip. 41. (...). Oecum.
(...), etc. Phot. Dicens didici significat hanc rem esse disciplinae and
exercitationis: atque hujus rei habitum longo usu se assecutum, Estius.
exercise: all of which, when Sanctified and blessed by God, do contribute much
to the making of the heart quiet in every condition.

The word notes also the mysteriousness of heavenly Contentation. I have learnt
it, (says the Apostle) as a great Secret, as a thing that lies out of the
Common road, and is not so easy to be understood. This notion is not so fully
reached by the word [(...)] here used, as it is by another word used in the
next verse; Every where, and in all things, I am instructed, etc. It Is [(...),]
which we render by instructed, others by initiated; It implies Initiatus sum
Beza Utitur verbo quod rebus Sacris convenit, ut significet pio esse ad haec
omnia a spiritu sancto sanctificatos and consecratos: (...) enim est sacris
initiari. Est igitur Sacra institutio Zanch. I am consecrated to this knowledge
of Contentment in all estates, Dr. Sibbs Saints-Cordial, p. 4. Est proprie
initiari mysteriis, Erosm. Dicit institutus sum, ut in sinuet hanc ratio nem
vitae velut sacrum mysterium se divinitus edoctum esse. Est enim in Graeco
verbum a quo mysteria dicuntur, Estius. Initiatus sum i. e. institutus: Non
formidavit Apostolus vocem Graecae superstionis ad meliores usus transfer;
Nam and (...) vox hinc venit. In Glossario (...), initio, imbuo. Diod. Siculus,
(...) Grot. Usurpavit hoc verbum omnium pertinentissime. Nam omnino sacra est
haec disciplinae Christianae Scientia, etc. Et institutio illius non est
simpliciter (...), sed sacra (...) Muscul Innuens Apostolus hanc vitae rationem
velut grande sacrumque mysterium a Deo divinitus accepisse, Velasquez.
both initiation, and also instruction in things sacred and mysterious (as is
commonly observed.) Now (says Paul) I am instructed both to be full and to
suffer hunger; as if he had said, This indeed is a very mysterious thing, yet
God has brought me to the knowledge and practice of it. So that Contentment is
not a facile, or common matter, such as is open and obvious to every person;
but it is an abstruse, hidden, secret thing: there are mysteries in it which
only some few do discern; it carries an holy art and skill in it, which he that
has learned is one of the greatest Artists in the world. Paul had arrived at
this Art, for he had learned in every, etc.

The observations from the words are four. Observations raised.


Obs. 1. Such who are true Disciples of Christ, partakers of the true spirit of
Christianity, they have learned to be Content.

Obs. 2. True Contentment is a divine and supernatural thing: It Is a flower,
which does not grow in nature's garden, but God plants it in the Soul. He only
knows and lives it, who is taught of God, and who learns it, by the teaching of
the Spirit. Some of the Plutarch. (...). Seneca de tranquil. animi. As Austin
speak of Seneca upon another account. Libertas, quae Scribenti affuir, viventi
defuit.

See this opened in M. Buroughs of Contentment. P. 17. etc.


Heathen Moralists have spoke much and wrote very well of it; but yet they,
('it is to be feared) were great strangers to the practice of it: It Is the
sincere Christian only who does indeed live it. There must be a Divine light
beamed into the Soul, the communication of special grace from Christ, the
supernatural workings of God's Spirit in the heart; or else there can be no
true Contentment.

Obs. 3. Christian Contentment has great mysteries wrapped up in it: A
contented life is a mysterious life. The Apostle speaking of the Doctrine of
Godliness, says, it is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. We may say the same of
the practical part of godliness (as it lies in Contentment,) it is a great
mystery. Here is a man that has very much, and yet he is not contented; here
is another that has little, or nothing, and yet he is contented, surely there
is a mystery in the case.

Obs. 4. Then a man does truly know and live Contentment, when he has learned
in every state and condition therewith to be content. Paul's contentment was
universal, extending to all occurrences of Providence; I have learned in every
state, etc. every where, and in all things I am instructed, etc. It Is not
enough in this or that want and cross to be contented, but in every thing that
befalls us we must be so; and then we have indeed learnt this heavenly lesson.

These are the Doctrinal Truths which the Text presents us with: I have named
them, but shall not fall upon the prosecution of all or any one of them. It Is
the Duty it self which I am only to speak unto; And concerning that too, I am
not to lanch out into the General handling of it, so as to treat upon the
several Heads which are proper to it, (which work is already done fully and
profitably by many of our own Writers:) I am confined to one Particular about
it, which will be mainly directive; to show, How, and by what means, this
blessed Contentation may be attained.

The main Question propounded and answered.

A threefold notion of Contentment.


It Is a very important Question which I am to answer this Morning, (viz.) What
are all Christians to do, that they, with Paul, may learn in every state to be
content?

For the more distinct answering of which, I will consider Contentment in a
threefold notion, as it consists, 1. In self-sufficiency. 2. In the bounding of
the Desires. 3. In the calmness and quietness of the spirit in every condition.

How it may be attained as it lies in self-sufficiency.
1. As it lies in self-fulness, or self-sufficiency. So it is opposed so
emptiness, want, indigence, and to that vexation and dissatisfaction of mind,
which arises from that emptiness. Contentment is a blessed Autarchy, or
self-sufficiency. When may a man be said to be contented? why, when his soul is
full in his possessing of that good which is commensurate, nd adequate to all
his desires and wants. This is one explication of Contentment, and it is that
which the notatio nominis directs us unto; for the Greek word, by which it is
set forth, is (...) (rendered by sufficiency 2 Cor. 9.8, by contentment; 1 Timothy
6.6.) It Is the word used in my Text, I have learned in whatsoever state I am
[(...)] therewith to be content: So that Paul's being contented was his having
a fullness and sufficiency in himself, in so much that he wanted nothing. And
this is the happiness of every Believer; he is (...), self-sufficient, (and
therein lies his Contentment, if not formally, yet fundamentally:) Prove. 14.14.
A good man shall be satisfied from himself. It Is very emphatical that of the
Apostle, in 2 Cor. 9.8. that ye always having all sufficiency in all things,
may abound to every good work; (he is speaking to the Corinthians of God's
supplying of them in temporal blessings, that they might always have a stock
by them, and be thereby in a capacity to relieve the poor:) I take the
expression more generally, and bring it to the thing which I am upon: A Godly
man has sufficiency in himself, and that too [(...)] in all things, always,
all sufficiency; (for so full it is in the Original.)

It may be objected, how can this be? can any creature be self-sufficient? is
not that a thing peculiar to God himself? are not all here in themselves
indigent and necessitous? I answer, Original and inherent self-sufficiency
belongs only to God; but there is a dependent, derived, and borrowed
self-sufficiency, and that every gracious person has. He having God for his
God, and he possessing this God (the Catholic and universal Good,) in and from
him, he has all that ever he can desire or need: and so in a borrowed sense he
is self-sufficient. Jacob told his Brother he had all (for so it is in the
Hebr.) Genesis 33.11. As having nothing and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor.
6.10. I have all and abound, I am full, etc. Phil. 4.18.

Now let us bring the Question to Contentment in this notion, How may men come
up to this self-sufficiency? Answ. By their getting a Covenant Interest in God,
and then by their improving and living upon that God, who is theirs by
Covenant. Till this be done, there is no self-fulness, nothing but want and
emptiness; and consequently no contentment, or satisfaction. Whatever good is
in the creature, it is a finite, scanty, defective good; and therefore that can
never fill up all the desires, or answer all the wants of a soul. We see even
where there is much of that good, yet the heart is restless and unsatisfied,
Job 20.22. In the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits: But God
is a perfect, complete, comprehensive good; all goodness whatsoever concenters
and concurrs in him, and thereupon, when a man is once brought to have and to
possess God, he is satisfied, all his desires are answered; in the having of
God he has all, and this must needs content him. This explication of
Contentment is not so much taken notice of; but it points to that which is the
highest and most excellent part of it. Oh, to be self-sufficient, for the poor
Creature to have all in himself, (he having that God who is All,) how near does
this bring him to that which is the incommunicable glory and perfection of God
himself! As ever you desire to be partakers of this, follow the Direction here
given you. We should be contented ( i. e. quiet and composed) under the least
of the Creature; but men shall never contented ( i. e. fully satisfied) under
the all of the Creature. The Aug. Conf. L 1. c. 1. and de Civit Dei. L. 12. c.
1. Non nisi beatitudine animae indigentia expletur, nec eidem explendae nisi
Deus sufficit. Solil. c. 13. Omnis copia, quae non est Deus meus, mihi est
egestas.

How, as it lies in the b unding of the desires after earthly things.


Soul being made by God, and for God, nothing can fill it but God. Let a man
enjoy never so much of the world, yet if there be but some petty thing (which
his fancy is much set upon) withheld from him, this is the bane of his
contentment; (as we see in Ahab and Haman:) On the other hand, let a Child of
God enjoy never so little of the world, yet he having and knowing God to be his
God, and he by faith living upon this God, his soul is at rest, he has full
contentment and satisfaction.

2. Contentment lies in the bounding and moderating of the desires after
earthly possessions; so that the heart is not still craving and desiring more
and more, but well contented with the present proportion allotted by God. So it
is opposed to Covetousness, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. A covetous person
never thinks he has enough; Crescit indulgens sibi dirus hydrops, Nec sitim
pellit. Horat. Carm. L. 2. Ode. 2.
like one that is hydropical (the more he drinks the more he thirsts,) so it is
with the man I am speaking of, the more he has, the more he desires to have:
he is like the four things spoken of by Solomon, Prove. 30.15, 16. that are
never satisfied, that never say it is enough: an insatiable greediness of
wealth possesses him, so that his pounds must be Hundreds, his Hundreds,
Thousands (and so in infinitum) Contentment now suppresseth these exorbitant
and extravagant desires; it makes a person to enjoy with cheerfulness what he
has, and not to be always reaching after more. O, (says the Contented
person,) the Lord has very well provided for me, I have enough for me and
mine; God gives me food and raiment, it is enough; I have as much as I need, a
great deal more than what I deserve, and had I more, it would be but
burdensome; it is very well, God has made a good choice for me; Others may have
more, I have that which is sufficient: here is Contentment.

Let Us bring the Question to it, as thus stated; How may persons learn to be
content with what they have, so as not to be covetously greedy of having more?
I answer, this must be attained

1. By the mortification of that imbred Lust or natural Corruption, from which,
all these inordinate desires after more wealth do proceed.

2. By a deep conviction of the greatness of the sin of Covetousness, as also,
of the greatness of the folly that accompanies that sin.

3. By frequent and serious meditation upon death, and the eternity which
follows upon it.

4. By the getting true notions of the vanity of riches and all things here be
low.

5. By the turning the desires into the right channel, and the placing of them
upon their proper Objects, God and Christ and Spiritual things.

6. By Considering how well others do, who have but a slender proportion of
these things, and how thankful they are for that little which God measures out
to them. I do not at all enlarge on these things, both because this is not that
notion of Contentment which I most design, as also because I shall have
cccasion to speak more to them in what will follow.

How, as it lies in the quietness of the mind, etc.
3. Therefore we are to consider Contentment, as it imports a calmness and
composedness of mind in every condition; stilness and sedateness of spirit
under all occurrences of Providence. When a man likes whatsoever God does to
him or with him, does quietly submit unto and acquiesce in God's dispose of
him, this is contentment; And so there is a great affinity (though not a
perfect identity) 'twixt it and Patience; so it is opposed to all vexing,
fretting and murmuring, to all undue perturbations of mind under God's
dispensations toward us, (though they be never so cross to our natural
desires.) Unquestionably this was one thing (if not the main) intended by our
Apostle, when he says, I have learned in every state to be content: It Is as if
he had said, I am brought to this, always to think well of God, and of every
state into which he is pleased to bring me; whatever pleases him, pleases me,
be it imprisonment, poverty, sickness, reproach, death it self, let but God's
will be done and I am content; I am taught to bear all things with great A.
Christo omnia aequanimiter far Sum edoctus Hieron.
equanimity or eavenness of Spirit.

The Question then will come to this; How may we, and Others, get this
excellent frame, to have the heart in every state calm and quiet, without being
disturbed and discontented under any thing that does befall us? (the resolving
of this Question will be my present work.)

Three Helps to Contentment.
For answer to it, I will reduce all to these three Helps or Means;
Consideration, Grace or Godliness, Prayer. He that would learn and live
Contentment, must be a Considering man, a godly man, a praying man.
Consideration will do much, Godliness will do more, Prayer will do most of all.
In the former we have what Reason and Judgment can do; In the second, we have
what a Divine Principle can do; in the third we have what God himself can do.
In consideration, we have the strength of the Man; In grace, the strength of
the Christian; In prayer, the strength of God: all of which being united they
must needs do the work effectually.

Now (as to these three Directions) it is with me, as it sometimes is at the
head of a spring; where the stream at first is so narrow, that with ease any
may stride over it, but afterward it does very much widen and dilate it self,
in so much that the little stream is turned into a vast river. So here, take
these three Heads in the General, and at the first naming of them, so my work
seems to lie in a very small compass; but when I come to make a further, and
more distinct inquiry into them, truly there is a vast sea before me, where
it is hard to find any bounds or limits. I shall go over them with as much
brevity as the Subject will admit of, and as may best conduce to the great end,
(the furtherance of Contentment.)

The first means is Consideration. By which I understand, Of the past help,
viz. Consideration.
not only that which is rational and proper to a Man, (as a Man,) but that
which is religious and divine; both together, but especially the latter, have a
great influence upon contentment. Few do live Contentation, because few do act
consideration: we are passionate, because we are inconsiderate. Were there but
more considering doubtless there would be less murmuring. David said in his
haste, All Men are liers; Men are hasty and sudden and indeliberate, Psalm.
116.11.
they do not duly weigh and ponder things, and thereupon passion and discontent
prevail over them. It Is good advice, that in Eccles. 7.14. In the Day of
adversity consider: when we meet with any thing which runs cross to our desires
(which makes it a day of adversity,) did we but sit down and consider about the
matter, this would much tend to the quieting of our spirits. Consideration is
an excellent help to Contentation. He who is not thoughtful, will never learn
the lesson of the Text. Discomposures of mind are not to be kept off by any
Spells or Charms, but by solid and judicious consideration.

But we must leave the General and come to Particulars; and now I am going
out of the Straits and lanching out into the main Ocean. The enquiry is, How is
a Christian to manage consideration in order to his attaining of contentment?

For your direction in this, I will

1. Set before you that special Matter, Directions how to manage Consideration
in order to Contentment.
which you are to consider upon for this end.

2. Instance in some of those common Cases, wherein Contentment, or Discontent
are usually acted, and show, what those considerations are which are proper to
each, for the promoting of the one, and the preventing of the other.

3. Speak a little to the Manner, wherein Consideraion is to be managed.

For the first. Of the special matter of it.
Would you know what is that special and proper Matter which your
Consideration is to work upon, to further contentment in every state? then
bring it to to these three Heads; Consider.

1. Who it is that orders the State. 2. What there is in the State it self. 3.
The excellency of a contented frame.
Who orders the state, and how it is ordered.
1. Who it is that orders the estate: surely the Supreme, Sovereign, all
disposing God. My times are in thy hands, Psalm. 31.15. It Is so with every man
in the world, and with every thing about every man; all is in God's hands.
There is an hand above which directs all Events here below. He that numbers our
hairs, orders our state. Good and Evil do not come by chance, or happen in a
casual and fortuitous way; but both are disposed by God's Providence, and
according to his Will. This we seem to give a full assent unto, and yet (in
practice) we do either wholly forget it, or flatly deny it. My advice therefore
is this; when at any time your hearts begin to storm and fret at your
condition, pray sit down and seriously consider, who it is that orders that
condition; let your thoughts dwell upon that, and see if it be not to your
advantage for the suppressing of all undue perturbations of mind. Psalm. 39.3.
David tells us, while he was musing the fire burned (that is the fire of
passion as many do expound it;) There is indeed a musing which tends to
heart-disquietment, (when all our thoughts are taken up in poring upon that
which troubles us;) but that musing (which I am now urging) has a quite other
effect; Vide Boeth, de Cons. Philos. l. 1 Prosa. 6.
it will quench the fire, not kindle it, Methinks that Christian should not
easily be disturbed at what befalls him, who considers, let it be what it will,
it is all of God. What? believe and own a Providence, (as carving out every
condition,) and yet be discontented? that is very sad! Is it fit for the
Creature to be angry with God, as Jon. 4.9. Is. 43.9. Romans 9.20.
Jonas was? shall man dispute with God? the clay say to the Potter, Why have
thou made me thus? must Providence be arraigned at our tribunal? and our Will
clash with God's? by no means. There Is all the Reason in the world, that
whatsoever pleases God, should please the Creature. It Is the Lord, (says 1 Samuel 3.18.
Eli) let him do what seems him good. I was dumb (says Psalm. 39.9
David) and opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it. The Lord gave
(says Job 1.21.
Job) and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. I do not
know a more effectual Help to stilness of Spirit, than the consideration of
this, that all is ordered by God: And certainly he that is quiet and composed
upon this, that frame demonstrates him to have not only a good, but a great and
a noble spirit. It Is an excellent passage that of Seneca, Magnus est animus qui
se Deo tradidit, pusillus and degener qui ob. lectatur, and de ordine murdi
male existimat, and Deos mavult emendare quam se. Ep. 107.
It Is a great soul which surrenders up it self to God; but that is a poor low
soul which contends, and thinks ill of the ordering of the world, and which
would rather mend the Gods than it self.

But here in our considering (in order to the having of the heart smooth and
calm,) it is good to take in more; viz. not only to employ our thoughts upon the
thing, but also upon the modification, and circumstances thereof; not only to
think of this that all is ordered by God, but how and in what manner all is
ordered by him. Oh this (if duly weighed and digested) would be of great
efficacy to further Contentation.

Now take an account of this in four things.

1. All is ordered by God irresistibly Is. 43.13. I will work, and who shall
let? It Is applicable to God's providential dealings with every single person in
the world; these are carried on with such a mighty power, that it is a vain
thing for any to go about to resist and hinder God in what he will do. If Man
will be cross, and thwart and control him, what does it signify? God's will
shall be done for all that: He will do all his pleasure: there is no contending
with him. Job 34.33. Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it,
whether thou refuse or whether thou choose, etc. Christian! Thou passionately
desire such a mercy; thou shall have it never the sooner for that: If God
will bestow it, thou shall have it; If he will withhold it, all thy earnestness
and striving will do no good. Or thou would fain have such an affliction
removed; that will not do thy work: If God will take it off from thee, there is
an end of it; If he will continue it, thou must bear it still. Humble
Contentment may do much; but proud contending will do nothing. God knows what
he has to do, and he will not be hindered in what he sees fit to do. Pray
therefore, whenever passion begins to rise in the soul, think of this speedily:
If it be thus, that the tide of Providence will have its course, that there is
no hindering of the Almighty and Soveraign-acting God, (for he does whatsoever
pleases him, Eccl. 8.3. and works all things after the counsel of his own
will, Ephesians. 1.11.) then our Reason and judgment will tell us, that it is best to
yield and submit to this God, and to comply with that which we cannot alter.

2. All is ordered by God righteously. He is righteous, and he does nothing,
but what is righteous; shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Gen
18.251 Psalm. 145.17. Rev. 15.3. Psalm. 97.2. Job 34.23.
the Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works: Just and
true are all thy ways, O thou King of Saints. Clouds and darkness are round
about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne: He will
not lay upon man more than right, that he should enter into judgment with God.
This is an excellent subject for our Thoughts to dwell upon when any thing
troubles us. Well may there be our contentment in every state, when there is
God's righteousness in every state. Providence may sometimes be dark and
mysterious, yet it is always just and righteous. God may sometimes cross us,
but he never wrongs us. He does not see it good in all our desires to gratify
us; but it is good for us in all his dispensations to Psalm. 51.4. Lam. 1.18.
justify him. Does he remove a mercy, which we have not forfeited? Does he
lay on an affliction, which we by sin have not deserved? and if so, does it
not become us to be silent before him? Lam. 3.39. Mic. 7.9.
Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Oh
(says the Church) I will bear the indignation of the Lord, for I have sinned
against him. It Is a smart passage that in Prove. 19.3. The foolishness of man
perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord: we provoke God to
afflict us, and then we are angry with him; whereas we have reason only to be
angry with our our selves, our own sins being the procuring cause of all our
miseries. We have often too just Grounds of being troubled with our own hearts,
(because of their pride, carnality, unthankfulness, unbelief, etc. this is good
discontent;) but we never have any just Grounds of being disturbed at what God
does; he being in all his actings holy and righteous. Bring it to this in your
consideration, such a good I want, such an evil I feel; but is God unrighteous
in either? surely no; For do I deserve the one, and do I not deserve the other?
why then should I quarrel or fret against God? Discontent is a bold impeachment
of God's righteousness; and is not that a thing of a very heinous nature,
grounded upon the greatest falsehood that is imaginable? Oh take heed of it.
When you are wronged, then complain; but do not do it till then, and then I am
sure you will never complain. In a word, let this Heart-quieting Consideration be
much upon your thoughts, all is Righteously ordered by God; and therefore, all
must be contentedly undergone by you.

3. All is ordered by God wisely; He Is a God of Judgment, Isai. 30.18. We read
of the rings, Ezekiel. 1.18. that they were full of eyes; take the several rounds,
and windings of Providence, they are all full of wisdom. As God at the first
made all things with infinite wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. so he does also dispose and
govern all things with infinite wisdom. And this holds true, not only with
respect to the whole Creation, in the general lump and mass thereof; but also
with respect to every part and parcel of the Creation: especially to man, and
to every individual man in the world. Now if this was believed and considered,
it could not but much conduce to make us contented in every condition; for
certainly it must be most absurd folly in us to find fault with, or dislike
that which is done by God in admirable wisdom. In our worldly affairs, wherein
we have to do wtth men, if we apprehend them to be persons endued with
understanding and prudence, we can upon this wholly refer our selves and our
Concerns to them, and quietly acquiesce in what they advise and order. The
Patient likes the Physic (though never so nauseous) which his skilful
Physician prescribes: If the Pilot be skilful, the passenger says, Let him
alone, he knows how to order the vessel; (and so in several other Instances:)
And why do not we in all our Concerns carry it thus toward God, whose
wisdom and faithfulness does infinitely transcend what is in man? shall we
not contentedly rest in what he sees to be fittest and best for us? Vain man
would be wise, Job 11.12. he thinks he could order things better than God does;
he will be finding faults in God's disposal of him; but this his wisdom is
the highest folly. What a wise Choice does God always make for men? the Saints
shall see it when they come to Heaven, if not before; may they not therefore
quietly resign up themselves to him, saying Thou shall choose our inheritance
for us, (as it is, Psalm. 47.4.)? On the other hand; what a sad choice do men
make for themselves, when in their discontent they will be their own choosers?
Rachel must have a Child, or she dies; she had her desire, but it cost her her
life. Jacob cannot stay God's time for the blessing; by which hastiness, in
what a world of troubles did he involve himself? Poor Creature! thou need
nothing more to undo thee, than to be left to choose thy own condition. Did
thou but consider this, would thou not be contented when the wise God
chooses for thee? Qui create noverat, ordinare non noverat? Aug.
Reason with thy self in secret thus, Did God know how to make my person, and
does he not know how to order my condition? He that has wisdom enough to steer
the great Vessels of the World and of the Church, has he not wisdom enough to
steer my little Boat? He that has by an unerring Providence brought so many
Saints safe to Heaven, does he not know the best way to bring me safe thither
also? shall he mistake in my case, who never yet, in all the works that hvve
passed through his hands, was guilty of the least mistake? I say reason thus,
and it is to be hoped this will lay all storms of passion. Oh what a blessed
security of mind should we have in every state, did we but live in the steady
belief, and ferious considrration of God's unsearchable wisdom!

4. All is ordered by God graciously. Psalm. 25.10, All the paths of the Lord
are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies. Is it
Poverty, Pain, Sickness, loss of Relations, worldly crosses? all is in mercy,
or in order to mercy to God's Vovenant People. I do not say, that all is mercy
to these formally (as to the things themselves which befall them,) but I say
all is mercy, or in order to mercy. Afflictions are not mercy in their formal
nature, but they are of mercy originally (they coming from God's love,) and for
mercy finally, (God by them designing good, and nothing but good to them that
love him.) This is a thing in special to be thought of by those who belong to
God; Others have the Sovereignty and Righteousness of God to awe them, but
Saints have the mercy and goodness of God to work their hearts to a quiet
submission to his Will. And how much is there in this for the furtherance of
such a frame of heart in them, could they but by consideration draw it out and
work it home upon the soul! What? a Child of God to vex and fret at this, or
that? when all is intended for his good, and shall be for good to him?
(according to that great Promise Romans 8.28.)

God always knows what is best for his (such is his wisdom,) and he always
does what is best for his (such is his mercy:) what a heart composing
meditation is this! There Is much in the other Attributes before mentioned to
suppress inward perturbations; but there is more in that which I am now upon. Is
mercy and goodness the ingredient in every condition? then be it never so
bitter, the sense of this must needs sweeten it. Is all ordered by a Father? in
love? not to hurt men, but to do them good? Oh, why then should I give way to
discontent? The truth is, it is too low for the Saints in every state barely to
be content; there is something higher that they should come up unto, namely to
rejoice evermore in the Lord, and in every thing to be giving thanks. Phil. 4
4. 1 These. 5.18.
So much for the first thing that I would have you fix upon, as the special
matter of your Consideration, in order to the learning of Contentment: And I
beseech you put it in practice: when ever heart-disquietment begins to rise in
you, sit down, consider, pause upon it, Who it is that orders your Condition?
and how he orders it? irresistibly, righteously, wisely, graciously.

2. Secondly; Act your Consideration upon the state it self in which you are;
Consideration about the state it self.
for out of that much may be fetched to further Contentment. Paul (our great
Instance in the Text) weighed and considered every state into which he was
brought, and by that means he learnt in every state to be content. Let us take
the same course, and (through the blessing of God) we shall find the same
effect.

How is a Christian to manage Consideration with respect to his state? I answer,

1. Let him consider that his state is mixed. Its neither purely good, It Is mixed.
nor purely evil, but there is a mixture of the one with the other; it is sweet
and bitter mingled together: It Is not all mercy (that is reserved for Heaven;)
nor all misery (that is reserved for Hell;) but something of both (that is proper
to the middle state of earth) Eccl. 7.14, God has set the one over against the
other (Prosperity and Adversity, Comforts and Crosses, Mercies and
Afflictions,) to the end that man should find nothing after him (so as to find
fault with what God does, or to say this and that might have been better
ordered by him.) Now if men would but let their thoughts dwell upon this, how
would it tend to the quieting of their minds in every Condition! For shall we
receive good at the hands of God and shall we not receive evil? Job 2.10.
Especially when we consider, (1.) That the good is much more than the evil; and
(2.) That the evil is our desert, the good of mere grace. We take but a partial
view of our condition, eying the dark side of it only, and then we vex and
repine under it: whereas did we view the whole, and think of our mercies as
well as of our afflictions, we should not carry it so disingenuously toward
God. Hezekiah had a sad message sent to him, but he received it with all
submission; because there was a mixture of mercy in it; Isa. 39.8, Good is the
word of the Lord, etc. for there shall be peace and truth in my days. There Is
Acquiescendum conditioni suae, and quam minime de illa querendum; and quicquid
habet circa se commodi apprehenden dum est. Nihil tam acerbum est, in quo non
aequus animus solatium inveniat. Sen. de Tranq. Anim. and ad Helvid: c. 10.
no state so sad, in which a good man may not pick out something to comfort and
quiet him: therefore, Christian, deal wisely, and faithfully in this, set the
good against the bad, and there will be no discontent.

2. This is to be thought of, be the estate what it will, it is but common:
whatsoever your troubles are, you have many sharers and companions therein. 1
Kin. 19 14, 18. (...), Euripid. vide Plut. (...). p. 475.
The Prophet fancied he was left alone (which made him the more froward in his
condition;) but God told him he had reserved some thousands in Israel, who had
not bowed their knees to Baal: And so some in their trials are apt to think
they are alone, their case is singular, none so crossed, so afflicted as they;
when God knows, there are many thousands who drink of the same Cup. 1 Cor.
10.13, There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to men;
((...):) 1 Pet. 5.9. Knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your
brethren that are in the world. If this was but considered by persons under
afflictions, their Spirits would not be so disturbed as they are; when it is but
with me as it is with others, why should not I be content? men will quietly
submit to that which is the lot of others as well as their own; Far quam
sortem patiuntur omnes Nemo recusat. The Greek Tragaedian brings in one as
heightning his misery, and crying out, Woe is me! but why (says he) Woe is me,
when we suffer nothing but what is incident to all Mortals? Did we but in time
of need revive this upon our thoughts, it would much alleviate our grief and
obviate all heart-disquietment.

That which is proper to the present life.
3. This state does but agree and suit with the present life. Thou can not
expect it should be much better whilst thou art here below; consider this and
be content. We forget where we are, and look for that here on earth which we
cannot have; and this betrays us to impatience and discontent. Did we but
remember and urge it upon our selves, that this life is the time of Trials;
that we are born to trouble here; that it is vanity to expect rest, and ease,
and comfort, and felicity in this world; surely we should not be much disturbed
at any trouble that does befall us: Shall Israel, when in the Wilderness,
murmur, if there they meet with hardship? Shall they who are at Sea be angry,
if they meet with storms? shall the Traveller be offended at a little bad way?
in the lower region would we have nothing but serenity and calmness? It Is a
thing no less foolish and absurd, for Christians to be discomposed in their
minds, if here troubles and afflictions seize upon them: Alas! these are
inseparable from the present life.

4. No state is so bad as it might be: ponder upon that, It might be worse.
and it will teach you in every state to be content. It Is bad, but it might be
worse; yea, it is worse with many: their wants are more pinching than thine,
their pains more acute than thine, their losses greater than thine, etc. thou
have cause rather to be thankful than impatient, in as much as a lesser evil
carries mercy in it. But why do I instance in these lower matters? thy state is
an afflicted state, but it is not a damned estate; it is chastning, but it is not
condemning; it is some temporary cross, but it is not the everlasting curse; it is
affliction for a moment, but it is not eternal misery: It might be Hell,
separation from God for ever, burning in that fire which is unquenchable; thou
that art freed from these tremendous things, will thou fret because of some
petty trials or calamities? Oh think of this, and be still. Shall the
malefactor fret at his Judge for sentencing him to some corporal punishment,
when he might have passed the sentence of death upon him? shall the offending
son be angry with his father for correcting him, when he might have
disinherited him? Oh Christian! this is thy case toward God; act thy reason
and consideration upon it to suppress all passion.

3. The third thing, Consideration of the frame of contentment.
that thoughts must dwell upon and be employed about in order to Contentment,
is Contentment it self; in considering what an happy and excellent frame that
is. And indeed the due consideration of what it is to be Content, as e contra
what it is to be discontented, is not only a strong motive but also a very
proper means to further the exercise and practice of Contentment.

As to the large handling of this subject (the excellency of a contented
frame,) I must not engage therein, (for that I refer you to others, who have
done it fully;) I will but hint a few things for your thoughts to work upon as
occasion shall require: Contentment therefore,

1. Is a frame that carries much grace in it. It Is a holy, It Is a gracious
frame. (...). Laert. in vit. Epicuri. Genesis 32.10.
good and gracious temper of Soul: It speaks the creature to have a due sense
of God in his Sovereignty, righteousness, wisdom, goodness, etc. It speaks the
creature to have a due sense of what he is in himself, a poor, vile, worthless
nothing, less than the least of all the mercies of God. It speaks the due
subjection of the creature's Will to the Will of his Creator, and that he lives
in an entire surrender and resignation of himself to the dispose of his Maker.
Is not this holy and gracious? wherein does grace more show it self than in
such things as these? Contentment evidenceth much grace, Coffeehouse much
sin. The former is a compound of several graces, the latter a compound of
several sins; In a contented frame there is Humility, Faith, Hope, Patience,
Heavenly-mindedness, Crucifixion to the world, etc. in a discontented frame,
there is Pride, Unbelief, Impatience, Carnality, nay practical Atheism it self.
The truth is, contentment is better than any comfort which we want, Discontent
is worse than any evil which we feel: no outward enjoyment is comparable to the
good of the one, no outward affliction is comparable to the evil of the other.

Highly pleasing to God.
2. It Is a frame highly pleasing to God. When a man is once brought to this, to
lay himself and all his Concerns at God's feet, to say It is the Lord, let him
do (with me and mine) what seems him good, I Will like well of whatsoever he
does; O this pleases God greatly. We are well pleasing to him, when his
Providence are well pleasing to us. The discontented Person is angry with God;
for which to be sure God is angry with him. Nothing provokes God more than a
murmuring and fretful spirit; nothing pleases him more than a quiet Spirit.

Great advantages so our selves.
3. The advantages of it to our selves are very great; it fills with comfort. He
never wants comfort that lives Contentment. A contented spirit is ever a
cheerful spirit. It Is an heaven upon earth, (as the opposite to it is an Hell
upon earth.) It Is the mind at rest in every condition. A contented man has not
only the comfort of what he has, but also of what he has not. What he wants
in outward possession is made up to him in inward submission.

It fits for Duty: Lord! When the heart is repining and mutinying against God,
how unfit is a man for Duty! but when the spirit is still and quiet, all is
done well. Passion unfits us for converse with men, much more for converse with
God in holy Duties. It Is sad praying, when discontent prevails.

Animus aequus optimum est aerumnae condimentum, Plaut.
It always procures that very mercy which we desire, or some other that is
better for us. Discontent makes us to lose what we have; Contentment gets us
what we want. Fretting never removed a Cross nor procured a comfort; quiet
submission does both. The Father continues to correct the froward Child, but
when once it yields and is quiet, he gives it any thing.

It sweetens every bitter Cup. This ingredient takes off the bitterness of
every State, (as the wood cast by Moses did the bitterness of the Waters.)
Nothing can come amiss to him, that has learned to be content.

Many such advantages do accrue from Contentment: but as to the contrary vice,
it is a thing greatly mischievous. It Is a sad inlet to Sin: what will not a man
do, when he is under the power of discontent? he will shift for himself, use
unlawful means, do any thing to better his condition; if nothing will do this
for him, he can even lay violent hands upon himself; (Oh that we had not too
many sad examples of this)! It Is a sad preparation to all temptations: the
Devil will be sure to be fishing where the waters are troubled; as Flies settle
upon the galled back, so the Tempter betakes himself to the man that is in pain
with his condition. It deprives of Happiness; for the discontented person
always thinks himself miserable, and so he can never be happy: Nemo felix est,
qui suo judicio miser est; (Salvian. de Provid.) It exposes to dreadful
judgments: What severe punishments did the Israelites murmuring bring upon
them? (Read Numb. 14. per. tot. Psalm. 106.24, 25. 1 Cor 10.10.

Now if these things were but laid to heart, and seriously considered by
Christians, would not the consideration thereof much conduce to their attaining
and living of Contentment? Certainly the due fixing and working of the thoughts
upon the excellency of this frame, of the Sin and evil of the contrary frame,
would be of great use, and very effectual toward the composing and quieting
of their spirits, in every condition. Suppose it pleases the Lord so or so to
afflict me, to exercise me with such or such things, which are very cross to my
desires, and hereupon I find my heart to begin to be moved; what is now to be
done to prevent the further growth of Passion? why I Will retire, and weigh with
my self what a gracious temper of Soul contentment is, what a sinful and
cursed temper of Soul discontent is; how much I shall please God and profit my
self by the one, how much I shall offend God and prejudice my self by the
other: this my thoughts shall stay upon, and I Will reason with my self, Why art
thou, O my Soul, thus disquieted within me? Psalm. 42.11.
This is the Course which I resolve to take in my afflicted condition to keep
my heart still and composed, hoping that God will bless it to the end. Ay and
so do, for it is a good one; and many by experience have found the benefit of it.

But to close this Head; We are undone for want of Consideration; the world
groans under the mischievous effects of inconsideracy (which might be made out
in several particulars;) I shall go no further^ than that one thing, which I
am upon. Whence is it that there is amongst Men, amongst Professors, so little
of Contentment? that so few have learnt in every state to be content? that
impatience, repining, quarelling with God, discontent, are so epidemical? that
the most live in the dislike of their condition? I say, whence is this? I
answer, it is (in a great measure) from the general neglect of Consideration.
Could we but bring men to this, Contentation would not be so rare a thing as
now it is. I do not assert this one Means to be sufficient, but (believe me) it
would go very far. Well, as any of you desire for the time to come to be, as
here Paul was, vvhenever any thing troubles you, see that you fall upon
consideration; and draw it to these three Heads, Who orders your state, How
your state is circumstantiated, What the frame it self is.

So much for the first thing in the Direction, the special Matter upon which
Consideration is to be acted in order to Contentment. I go on to the second,
Particular cases wherein Consideration is to be acted in order to Contentment.
viz. to instance in some of those special Cases unto which contentment does
mainly refer; and to show, how Consideration is to be managed to help on the
practice of the Duty in each of them. I have (in what has gone before) seldom
made any particular mention of these Instances, because I designed to speak
particularly and apart to them under this Head. To speak to all (and that too
according to the copiousness of the subject) would be a vast work; I shall
only single out some few of the most usual Cases, and be also but very brief
upon them.

Heart-inquietude or Discontent does too often arise from what is in and about
the inner man, and is of a spiritual nature; as lowness of gifts, weakness of
grace, the continuance and strength of sin, temptations by Satan, God's
withdrawings, want of Assurance and of the Comforts of the Spirit, (and the
like.) But most commonly it arises from things of a worldly nature, wherein
the outward part is concerned, (for that is our tenderest part, and therefore,
if we be troubled there, we are most apt to complain:) such as lowness of
Estate, crosses in Relations, bodily Infirmities, badness of the Times,
injuries and bad usages of Men, meanness of rank and Quality in the world, etc.
These are the things which usually disturb and disquiet us: But now for each of
them, there is that Consideration which is proper for the settling and
composing of our minds: I must speak only to the two first,

Lowness of Estate.
As to lowness of Estate, how is the world filled with Discontent about that?
Poverty is an affliction which few do with patience undergo: When the belly
pines, the backstarves, it is hard to keep the heart in a submissive frame. It Is
an easy matter, for them that are full to advise them that are in want to be
content; but if they themselves were in wants, they would not find it so easy
a matter to follow their own advice. To live Faith and Patience under straits
as to worldly things, is sooner spoken of than done.

The several disc^ntents of several men about worldly things.
But to take in more than what th^s Head (in strictness) leads me to, (because I
would speak a little to the several discontents of men about their earthly
Estates,) I will consider them as thus diversified: Some are poor indeed,
having little or nothing of this world's goods; some have a competency; some
have abundance, but yet they are not satisfied; and some lose what once they
had: Now all of these (though in different circumstances) are to endeavor
after contentment; how? by Consideration. How is that to be managed? thus:

Such who are in poverty, what they are to consider of in order to contentment.
1. Is extreme poverty the case? Consider then,

1. The Lord makes poor and he makes rich, 1 Samuel 2.7. God measures out to
every person his proportion of these things. He makes what Dividend, and gives
what Allowance he pleases to every man in the world. Is this considered? I wish
we could see it, in the calmness of their minds who are under a low estate. The
Father divides his estate among his children, giving to every one of them his
share (more or less) as he thinks meet, and this being his act and will, they
all submit and acquiesce therein: And shall your heavenly Father's allotting to
you what he thinks meet signify nothing to the making of you contentedly to
rest in his will? may not this great dispenser of Blessings do with his own
what he pleases?

2. None so poor but they have more than what they deserve. Who can claim or
challenge any thing at God's hands? surely he that merits nothing must not
murmur because he has but little. Thy apparel is very mean, thy diet is very
course, thy habitation very uncomfortable; be it so, yet even in these there is
mercy; it is from the wisdom of God that thou have no better, from the mercy of
God that thou have so good.

Mat. 20.15.
3. As low as you are in these things, hitherto the Lord has provided for you
and yours; and assuredly (you being his people, walking in his fear, trusting
of him) he will still provide. You have in the promise what you want in the
visible estate. Discontent is in part founded in distrust; take but this out of
the heart, and the other vanishes. Now why should God's poor (I sp^ak only of
such) distrust his provision? what abundant assurance has he given thereof?
read Psalm. 73.3. Psalm. 39.10. Psalm. 111.5. Mat. 6.25. ad finem cap. Romans 8.32.
Heb. 13.5. with many other Scriptures.

4. A little with God's blessing will go very far, and do very well: Psalm. 132.
15. I will abundantly bless her provision, I will satisfy her poor with bread.
Exodus 23.25. Ye shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy bread and
water. Daniel (and his companions) fed upon nothing but pulse and water, and
yet their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, than all the
children which did eat the Kings meat, Dan. 1.12.15. 1 Kin. 17.12.
The widow was reduced to a low ^bb, there was left but a little oil in the
cruise and a little meal in the barrel; yet these held out, and the more she
spent of them the more they increased: what strange things are done with small
pittances where the blessing of God is!

5. The Saint's Little is better than the Sinner's All. Prove. 15.16. Better is
a little with the fear of the Lord, than great treasure and trouble therewith,
Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of
many wicked.

6. No man can judge of God's love or hatred by these things; for he often
Eccles. 9.1. Et iratus dat, and propitius negat Aug.
gives riches to those whom he hates, and denies them to those whom he loves.
It Is very usual, for those who have most of his love to have least of worldly
things: Joseph and Mary themselves could bring but a pair of Turtle doves (the
poor man's offering,) Luke 2.24. Nay how poor was our Lord himself! The foxes
have holes, etc. Math. 8.20. 2 Cor. 8.9.

7. God keeps you low in earthly possessions, but how is it with you in higher
and better things? You are poor without, are you not rich Intus dives, foris
Pauper; Pauper in cella, dives in conscientia; arcam respicis au^o inanem,
conscientiam respice Deo plenam. Aug. in Psalm. 36. In animo divitiae sunt, non
in patrimonio. Senec.
within? Prove. 13.7, There is that makes himself rich, yet has nothing: there
is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches. Rev. 2.9. I know thy
poverty, but thou art rich. No riches like to Soul-riches; To be rich in faith,
Jam. 2.5. in good works, 1 Timothy 6.18. toward God, Luke 12.21. this is to be
rich indeed: Mountains of gold are nothing to one dram of true grace in the
Soul.

8. You think God is strait-handed toward you in temporal; but is he not
abundantly gracious in spiritual and eternal blessings? He denies the pebble,
but gives you the pearl, withholds shadows and trifles, but gives you what is
solid and substantial; you have not worldly wealth, but you have the Pardon of
sin, the Love of God, Adoption, Union with Christ, etc. You have no inheritance
here, but you are heirs of the Dejectae mentis est, qui familiaris rei meminit
cum vocatur ad regnum, Chrysolog. Sermon. 22.
Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. the inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled, that
fades not, away (1 Pet. 1.4.) is yours; you have little in the stream, but all
in the fountain; God is yours, and in him Semper est dives Christiana
paupertas, quia plus est quod habet qua^^ quod non habet; nec pavet injusto
mundo indigentia laborare, cui donatum est in omnium rerum Don ino omnia
possidere. Leo. Sermon. 4. de Quadrag. Such who have better Estates, what are
they to consider in order to contentment?
all is yours.

And are these things true? certainly then you have no reason to complain or to
be discontented because of your poverty. Pray, under heart-risings because of
this, turn your thoughts upon what has been hinted, work these and such like
Considerations home upon your hearts, be intent upon them, weigh them
thoroughly; and I hope this will very much settle and quiet your spirits under
the lowness of your Estates.

2. Secondly, There are Some with whom it is much better; they have a good
Allowance from God, a comfortable supply in these things, so that they want
nothing convenient or necessary: Nay there are some who abound in wealth,
riches flow in upon them, their coffers are full of silver and gold, their
in-comes vast and great; and yet neither of these have learned to be content,
no not in their good state. Discontentedness lodges not only in the breasts of
them who have nothing, but of some who have a competency, yea of some who have
abundance of these things: both are dissatisfied with their Condition, as
thinking they have not enough, and therefore are full of vexatious desires
after more. Now if this be your condition without, and your frame within, then
it is a most necessary Enquiry, how and wherein you are to act Consideration so,
as thereby to arrive at contentment? For answer to which I shall direct you to
a few things: Consider therefore,

1. The greatness of the sin of discontent in you above what it is in the
persons spoken of before. It Is in them who want what is necessary very sinful;
but in you to whom God is so good and bountiful, it is out of measure sinful. We
blame the beggar that is angry, though we give him nothing; but if we give him
something (be it never so little,) especially if we give liberally to him, and
yet he grumbles and repines, this aggravates his crime exceedingly: So here,
it is a great sin in the poorest to murmur against the Lord; but in you, to
whom he is so liberal (at least to give you enough,) the sin is much greater.
This speaks you to be guilty of prodigious ingratitude to God, and of very
inordinate love to the world, (both of which are sins of a crimson tincture.)

2. How contented and thankful would many be, if it was but with them, as it is
with you! Had they but pence for your shillings, shillings for your pounds,
Quam multos esse conjectas, qui sese caelo proximos arbitrentur, si de fortunae
tuae reliquiis pars iis contingat; Boeth de Cons; Phil. l. 2. pr. 4.
and pounds for your hundreds, they would think themselves well provided for,
and serve the Lord with joyfulness: Nay, you yourselves in your first entrance
upon the world, when your beginnings were very low, when ( Jacob like) you had
little more then a staff in your hands; Genesis 32.10.
did not you then think, if you might but have that measure of worldly things
which now you have, you would look upon God as dealing very graciously with
you? And now he has answered your expectations and desires, and yet you are
not contented.

3. Christians are to bound their desires after things below, not to seek great
things for themselves here, Jer. 45.5. If God will give them but what is
necessary, they are not to quarrel for the want of what is superfluous. The
Covenant-indenture goes no further than food and raiment; therefore, (...)
Isidor. Nihil habet dives de divitiis nisi quod ab illo postulat pauper, victum
and vestitum: caetera omnia superflua sunt. August. de Verb. Dom. Cibus and
potus sunt divitiae Christianorum. Hieron.
having food and raiment let us be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8. Jacob went no
higher than those, Genesis 28.20, 21. Christ directs us to go no further in our
prayers than daily bread, Math. 6.11. If we may be supplied with these, we
have no reason to be discontented for the vvithholding of what is more. A
competency is all that we can or should expect. The Israelites murmur if they
have not Quails, Manna would not content them: they had their Quails, but they
had better have been without them.

4. A little suffices Nature, less suffices Grace; Satis est populis
fluviusque Ceresque Lucan. Cito expletur naturae necessitas; frigus and fames
simplici vestitu and cibo expelli potest. Hieron. in Jovin. Ad manum est quod
sat est; Senec. Parabile and expositum quod natura desiderat. Id. Quod naturae
satis est, homini non est Id. Ep. 119. Discite quam parvo liceat producere
vitam. Lucan.
but Covetousness is never satisfied. Was it not for this, how happy might we
be, and always say, as to God's allowance, it is enough? Nature is content,
Grace is thankful, Corruption only is ravenous and querulous.

5. A great and overgrown estate is not the best estate; which if men did
consider, they would not be greedy to have it or discontented upon the not
having of it. As to the truth of this, do but set Ambition and Avarice aside,
and let Reason, Experience, prudent Observation be consulted, and the thing
will be unquestionable. Optimus pecuniae modus est, qui nec in paupertatem
cedit, nec procol a paupertate discedit. Sen. de Tranq. animi.
There is a middle state (both as to honor and riches) which certainly is the
best state. Agur made a wise choice, when he prayed, Give me neither poverty,
nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, Prove. 30.8. A full estate is
not best for Duty; for we often see (through the naughtiness of men's hearts,)
that they who have most in the way of Mercy do least in the way of Duty. I deny
not, but that some who are very rich are also very good, living in all due
picty toward God, and doing much good in their places toward men (and it is
pity it should be otherwise;) but I fear this conjunction is somewhat rare. The
ground that lies lowest usually is most fruitful; the earth that has the
richest mines in it commonly is most barren: Who serves God less than they who
are most wealthy? (to their shame be it spoken.) You would have more of this
world, and fret that God keeps you so much under; alas! you know not what you
desire: had you more it would be hurtful, if the estate was better the heart
would be worse. Again, Eccl. 5.13.
as it is not best for Duty, so neither for Safety: who are exposed to so many
dangers as they who swim in earthly treasures? Saepius ventis agitatur i^gens
Pinus, etc. Horat.
The higher is the building the more it is endangered by fierce winds; great
Vessels strike where lesser go with safety; the Ship that Sails with a full
wind, and all its fails up, is apt to overset; such who feed high are in most
danger of Fevers and Surfeits: Every condition has its snares, but the high
condition is exceeding full of them. And (once more,) it is not the best for
Comfort: the poor envy the rich when in truth they have more cause to pity
them. Oh the cares, distractions, hurries that they live under! In all their
great enjoyments how little do they enjoy either God or themselves! Pauperes
diti^ribus eo plerumque laet^ores, quo animus eorum in paucioribus distringitur
Sen. ad Helvid. c. 12
(and can any state be comfortable without these?) Luke 12.15. Take heed of
Covetousness; for a man's life (i. e. the comfort of his life) consists not
in the abundance of the things which he possesses. Tantis parta malis cu^a
majore metuque Servantur; misera est magni custodia census. Juven. Sat 14.
The easiness of the garment or shoe does not lie in its bigness, but in its
fitness: And so, it is not the greatness of the Estate that gives comfort; but
the suiting of the mind and of the elate (be it what it will.) There often is
that serenity of mind in a poor cottage which is not enjoyed in the stately
palace: The mean man sleeps better on a hard bed than he who lies upon his bed
of down; and there is a more cheerful spirit where the fare is course than
where there are the greatest dainties. You fondly imagine, could you but skrew
up your estates to such an height, then you should (and would) live with
comfort: but (I pray you) why may you not do so now, under what you have
already? (as that Commander answered Pyrrhus, designing so and so to enlarge
his conquests which when he had done then he would fit down and be quiet and
live merrily:) should you arrive at what you aspire after, you would find your
selves then to be as far from what you promise to your selves as now you are.
It appearing then that the great Estate is not the best, why should any vex and
be disturbed because that is denied to them?

Cui cum paupertate been convenit dives est. Sen. Non qui paru^ habet, sed qui
pl^s cupit, pauper est. Idem. Ep. 2. Nihil interest utrum non desideres an
habes, Ep. 119. Desunt inopiae multa, avaritiae omnia. Ep 108, Nunquam parum
est quod satis est, nunquam multum est quod satis non est. Ep. 119. -- Semper
inops quicunque cupit -- Claud. Multa petentibus desunt multa; been est cui
Deus obtulit parca quod satis est manu, Horat. -- etc. (...) -- Plato.
6. The contented man is never poor (let him have never so little,) the
discontented man is never rich (let him have never so much.) He is not rich who
possesses much, but he who desires no more than what God gives him. The way to
be rich indeed, is not to increase the wealth but to lessen the covetings of
the heart after more: He that is ever desiring is ever wanting, and he that is
ever wanting is ever poor.

7. What are these earthly riches that any should be thus insatiably greedy of
them? Surely there is but little in them (fancy, mistakes, ignorance, being laid
aside:) they are no better than unsatisfying, perishing, uncertain things;
Eccles. 5.10. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he
that loves abundance with increase. Men may fill their bags and chests with
silver nnd gold, but they cannot with them fill their Souls: no, the Soul is a
thing too great to be filled with such little things as these are. Had you all
that you desire you would be but where you are, dissatisfied still; for your
Auri naque fames parto fit major ab auro. Prudent. Crescentem sequitur cura
pecuniam, Majorumque fames Horat. Inflammatur lucro avaritia, non restinguitur.
Ambros.
desires would still grow as fast as your riches should grow; yet more must be
had, and that is the banc of satisfaction. Est uat insoelix augusto limite
mundi. Unus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis.
Alexander could conquer the World, but the world could not satisfy him; he
wept because there was no more worlds to conquer: Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity and vexation. I say too, they are perishing and uncertain things; that is
the Epithete of the Apostle, trust not in uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make
themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. This we see
verified every day; and if so, does it become a man, much more a Christian, to
be discontented because he has but little of such vain things as these are?
Methinks such should scorn to have their generous minds discomposed for such
trifles.

8. As they are dying things, so we are dying Persons. What though we be
straightened in them? it is not necessary our Estates should be very large when our
Lives are not like to be very long. A little money serves the Traveller that
has but a short journey to go; Parum viae, quid multum viatici? Might we
either always live, or when we die carry with us into another world what we
have laid up in this, then our greediness of these things would be more
excusable: but neither of these are to be expected. Job 1.21. Naked came I out
of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither. 1 Timothy 6.7. For we
brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out.
Grace will accompany us into the other World, but other things must be all left
behind. And (which I would further add) Is it not stupendous folly for dying
men (who yet have never-dying souls) to trouble themselves so much about dying
things? have not they other things to mind? and should not all their
sollicitudes be employed about those things? such as the things above, Col.
3.1. Math 6.33. Math. 6.20.
the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, treasures in Heaven, etc. If eternal
things and the eternal state was but thought of, every state here would be good
enough.

9. The less any have, the less they are to account for at the Great Day. Every
man is accountable to God for what he has of this world's good; for that is
but a Trust, and he that is the Lord and owner of all will reckon with men how
this trust is fulfilled: and according to the proportion which they are
entrusted with so will the account be taken: They therefore who have great
Estates, and do but little good with them, will have a sad account to make at
the Great Day. Now how little is this considered? We are always grasping at
more, not considering that the more we have the more we stand accountable for
when we shall be judged. Do we improve what we have? if we do not, it is mercy
that the Lord intrusts us with no more. One Talent will be too much if that be
not traded for God: why then should we be angry if we have not five? All would
live in large houses, but will they be able to pay the Rent that such houses
are set at? if not it is better for them to content themselves with a meaner
habitation: and so it is with the thing which I am upon. Many at the Great Day
will rejoice they had no more, whilst many will wish they had not had so much.

10. To conclude this Head, does any man better his Estate by discontent?
Plutarch, (...)
Is that the way to improve it? certainly No; It often makes us to lose what we
have, but it never gets us what we want, (as was said before in the general.)
In the distribution of his blessings God will not be dealt with in this way. He
that will eat or drink more than what is sufficient, often vomits up all; so he
that will have more than what God sees convenient for him, loses all by this
greediness.

I have been large upon this because of the Commonness of discontent in this
Case, and the exceeding great sinfulness of it. You whom the Lord has blessed
with competent Estates, especially You whom the Lord has blessed with full
Estates, be sure you learn and live contentment: and whenever the heart begins
to be unquiet about the proportion allotted to you go over in your thoughts
what has been propounded for you to consider of, and I trust you will find
good by it.

3. There is a third Case, viz. Some have lost what once they had, C
nsideration to further Contentment under L^sses.
or God pursues them in the way of their Callings with Loss upon Loss. This is
a trial under which means hearts are prone to be enflamed; it is no easy thing
to bear it with patience and contentment: Especially when losses come thick and
go very deep; Cogita^dum est quanto levior dolor sit non habere quam perdere,
and intelligemus paupertati eo minorem tormentorum quo minorem damnorum esse
materiam: Senec. de Tr-An.

Tolerabilius est faciliusque non acquirere, quam amittere; ideoque laetiores
videbis quos nunquam fortuna respexit, quam quos deseruit, idem ibid.


when a considerable part of the estate is taken away, nay (as it often falls
out) the whole: Oh! this is greatly afflictive and wounds the spirits of men
very much. Of the two, we find it by experience an easier matter to be
contented under that poverty which a person has always been in, than under
that which he is brought into by some severe interposures of Providence: Former
plenty puts more bitterness into present penury; it is a greater affliction (to
common sense) to have an estate and to lose it, than to be without an estate
where it was never had; this fuisse foelicem is a great aggravation of misery.
But to the thing it self; It pleased the Lord lately to lay this City in ashes;
and O how great, how universal were the losses then sustained! your houses were
burnt down, many of your goods consumed by the merciless flames, the great
supports of your livelihood removed; and many thousands of you had that Wound
then given you that you must halt of all your days: Since that you feel the
sad effects of War, losses at Sea, decay of Trade, etc. upon which it is not
with you as formerly it was; there is a great diminution in your estates. Now
was, and is, all this undergone with contentment? In these dispensations of
Providence have you learnt contentment? would to God it was so! If it be not
so as yet, I would desire you to fall upon Consideration; and I hope for the
future it will be so.

How, or wherein is Consideration to be acted, so as that under worldly losses
you may be contented? why thus: Consider: God's hand is in them, and they all
issue out of his will. Men may be the instruments, but that is all; they do but
accomplish that which God will have to be done. Therefore whatever thy loss be,
for the matter and degree of it, however it befalls thee, eye God in it, see it
as ordained and ordered by him; let thy thoughts fix upon this, and thy heart
will not dare to murmur. What are thy losses to those which Job underwent? all
was swept away from him in a moment; yet he considered the Supreme Agent in all
this, and this kept down all passion, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken,
Job. 1.21. Abstulit, sed and dedit. Sen. Ep. 64. Hos. 2.9.
blessed be the name of the Lord: O (says he) it is the Lord, and the Lord who
gave; I submit. May not the great Sovereign of the world do with us and ours
what he pleases? may not he diminish and withdraw all our blessings as he he
sees good? he that gives may not he take? has not he a greater propriety in
what we have than we our selves? It being his corn, his wine, his wool and
flax, may not he dispose of it at his pleasure? does it not become us
contentedly to Quandocunque redde^e jubebitur, non queretur cum fortuna, sed
dicet, gratias ago pro eo quod possedi habuique Idem de Tranq. An.
return what he sees meet to lend us but for such a time? Pray think of this,
or you will never learn in a losing state to be content.

2. Possibly something is taken away, but all is not; more is left than what is
taken: He that might have stripped thee to nakedness has only cut off a skirt of
thy garment; have thou any reason to fret against the Lord? (that would be
highly base and dilingenuous:) He to whom all was forfeited takes but a part
instead of the whole; surely thou art not to impeach his justice, but to admire
his goodness,

3. Whenever we meet with these rebukes 'twould be well to consider, whether we
did not need them? A full diet is naught for distempered bodies, 1 Pet. 1.6.
therefore these Physician prescribes a more sparing diet. When we are full fed
with these comforts, have no losses or crosses in the world, we are apt to grow
proud, secure, wanton, to forget God, to cast off Duty, to dream of an earthly
paradise, to say it is good being here, to neglect spiritual and divine things;
it is high time therefore for God by these ways to cut us short, thereby to
reduce us to a little better temper of soul. If the sap run out too much into
the branches, there is no way to preserve the root but by the cutting off the
luxuriant branches. God will have a thousand Estates to be lost rather than
that one soul should be lost: the burning of Cities is nothing, if that be
necessary to the saving of souls.

4. Suppose all be lost, in that All we lost but little; for the All of this
world is but one remove from a mere Nothing. Perdidit infoelix totum nil is
applicable to the losses of the rich as well as of the poor. Is there any thing
in this but what might be expected from the nature of the thing? therefore
there should be no disturbance about it. Who will be concerned at the melting
of snow? what wise man will be moved for the breaking of a glass? It Is strange
that a Jonah should be in such a pet for the withering of a gourd; Prove. 27.24.
Riches are not for ever, and does the Crown endure to every generation? 1 Cor.
7.31. The fashion of this world passes away. All the estate here is made up of
Movables: that usual distinction which is good in Law is not so in Divinity.

5. Again, thou say all is lost, -- perdiderat omnia quae dederat Deus; sed
hahuit ipsem qui omnia dederat Deum. August.
but if thou be a child of God the best is yet secure. God, and Christ, and
Grace, and Heaven are yet thine; and no loss is very considerable so long as
these are safe. O believer! in all thy losses be quiet and cheerful; God who is
thy portion is the same for ever. Job lost all he had from God, but God himself
he did not lose; and in him he had all that he had lost. Never complain till
God be lost: Fas tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Caesare (said Seneca to
Polybius.) Let the stars disappear, if we may have the Sun who will be
troubled? let earthly things vanish, so long as God abides it is enough. Had we
the whole world to lose, one God would abundantly recompense the loss of all of
it. Many are inward gainers by their outward losses; by having the less of the
Creature they have the more of God; O happy exchange! the worse their condition
is without, the better it is within (in respect of grace and comfort.)

6. It Is an excellent frame of spirit under losses to be patient and contented.
All the possessions of Job, when he was in the height of them, did not reflect
so much glory upon him, as his blessed submission when he was deprived of them;
then God blessed him, now (in another sense) he blessed God: All are convinced
they should do this when God gives, but it is very rare for any to do it when
God takes away. Micah's mother had some shekels of silver taken from her and
she falls a cursing, Judge. 17.2. this precious Saint had all taken from him yet
no cursing (as Satan had belied him;) no, nothing but blessing God. It Is an
excellent temper, comfortably to enjoy outward blessings whilst God shall
continue them, contentedly to part with them when God shall remove them. Suave
est si quid das; parvus dolor hoc ubi tollis. When I see any carrying it thus,
I conclude, that earthly things are not too fast rivetted in their hearts, (as
it is a sign the tooth is loose which is drawn out without much pain;) and that
they are duly affected toward God, heaven, and heavenly things.

These are some of the things the due consideration whereof would much help on
Contentment under Losses. And so much for the using of this Means toward the
furtherance of tranquillity of mind, with respect to what may disturb it in and
about the Estate.

How Consideration ought to be acted in order to Contentment under cr ss^s in
Relations.
2. Secondly, I Will instance in Relations. In and about whom, there is as much of
mercy or affliction, of comfort or discomfort, and (consequently) of content or
discontent, as in any one thing whatsoever.

The Discontent usually is occasioned and vented in these three Cases The want
of Relations much desired. The death of Relations much beloved. The
uncomfortableness of Relations who are spared.


Now Consideration, wisely and faithfully managed, would be of great use to
allay all storms and to keep the heart even and calm in all these Cases: and
therefore my next work is to show, what we are, under each of them, to consider
in order to the promoting of this frame. But I must of necessity be briefer
under this Head than I was under the former, that I may not draw out this
Discourse to too great a length. Wherefore I will but shortly set the
Particulars before you that you are to consider of, and leave the enlargement
of them to your selves in your consideration.

1. When Relations are much desired, but denied and withheld, there is too
often discontent. How as to the want of Relations desired.
As to instance only in Children: what daily inquietudes of spirit are there in
some because of the want of these! they have many other Comforts, but the not
having of this imbitters all. Abraham himself was much troubled about it, Genesis
15.2, 3. Lord God, what will thou give me seeing I go childless? Behold to me
thou have given no seed, and lo one born in my house is mine heir. But Rachel's
passion rose very high, Give me Children (says she to her husband) or else I
die, Genesis 30.2. Children are very great blessings; they are promised as such,
Psalm. 128.3, 4. (and in other places;) and indeed they are one of the sweetest
flowers that grow in the garden of earthly comforts; hence it is hard for
persons contentedly to bear the want of them. But whoever you are upon whom
this affliction lies, pray labor after a contented mind under it; and in order
thereunto Consider.

1. It is the Lord who withholds this mercy; for he gives it or withholds it as
seems good to him. Providence is not more seen in any of the affairs and
Concerns of men, than in this of Children; that there shall be many or few,
some or none, Genesis 32.
all falls under the good pleasure and dispose of God. When Rachel was so
passionate under the want of these, Jacob rebuked her sharply, am I in God's
stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of thy womb? Psalm. 127.9. Lo
children are an inheritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is his
reward, Psalm. 113.9. He makes the barren woman to keep house, and to be a
joyful Mother of children. Now if this was duly thought of, would it not quiet
the heart? when the thing is ordered by God, shall we dislike and fret at what
he does? may not he dispense his blessings where he pleases? Oh if he will
give, we should be thankful in the owning of his Goodness; if he will deny, we
must be patient in the owning of his Sovereignty.

2. Sometimes this mercy is denied, but better are bestowed. God does not give
Children but he gives himself; and is not he better than ten Sons (as Elkanah
said of himself; to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8.?) There is a better name, than that of
Sons and Daughters (promised, Isa. 56.3.4.) they who have that better name have
no reason to murmur because they have not that which is worse. They who have
God for their Father in heaven may well be content to go childless here on
earth. If God will not give me the lesser, yet if he gives me the greater Good,
have I cause to be angry? surely no more than he has to be angry with me, to
whom I deny a brass farthing and give him a purse of Gold.

3. Children sometimes are withheld a long time, but they are given at last;
(of which we have many Instances.) The case is never desperate so long as we
can submit and wait; it is to be hoped God designs to give us that comfort under
the want of which we can be contented.

4. If Children be given after froward and irregular desires of them, it is to
be questioned whether it be done in mercy, and it is to be feared this frame
will very much spoil the mercy. What we get by discontent we seldom enjoy with
comfort. How many Parents have experienced the truth of this? they were not
quiet till they had Children, and less quiet after they had them; they proved
so undutiful, stubborn, naught, that there was much more of vexation in the
having than there was in the wanting of them.

5. Many wanting the comfort of this Relation, it pleases God to fill up the
comfort of their other Relations: The Husband or the Wife are the better
because there are no childrn; and so the Lord recompenses what is denied in one
Relation by doubling the comfort of another Relation.

6. Children are great comforts but they are but mixed comforts. The Rose has
its sweetness, but it has its pricks too; and so it is with Children. Oh the
cares, fears, distractions, that Parents are filled with about them! they are
certain cares, uncertain comforts, (as we usually express it.) We eye the sweet
only of this Relation (and that makes us fretful:) did we eye the bitter also
we should be more still and calm.

7. Had we this mercy in the height of it filled up in all respects according
to our desires and expectations, it is a thousand to one but our hearts would be
too much set upon it. And that would be of fatal consequence to us upon many
accounts; and therefore God foreseeing this, it is out of kindness and love that
he withholds it from us.

These things being considered as to this affliction, methinks they should very
much dispose the heart to contentation under it.

2. Secondly: when dear Relations are taken away by death then it is a time of
Discontent. To lose a tender Husband, an affectionate Wife, an hopeful Child,
How as to the loss of Relations.
a faithful Friend, oh! this is a cutting trial, a very smarting rod! under
which it is no easy thing to keep the spirit sedate, free from all passion and
discomposures: Yet as hard as it is, Consideration would much facilitate it;
Consider therefore,

1. About the true stating of this affliction. It Is great to us because of the
greatness of our affection; but otherwise as to the thing in it self, is it
more than the breaking of a pitcher? than the dying or withering of a flower?
than the nipping of a blossom? and will any considerate person be much moved
at such things as these? The Heathen bore the death of his child very well upon
this consideration; when news thereof was brought to him he was not disturbed,
for (said he) I knew I begot my child mortal. We forget what these comforts are
and then we fret at the loss of them.

2. Think of the commonness of this affliction. You think never was any sorrow
like to yours, never did any lose such a Husband, or such a Wife, or such a
Child as you have done; alas! this is but the fondness and excess of love. Many
have lost as dear Relations as you have lost (let them be what they will;) you
are not the first, nor will be the last, who are thus exercised. When a Mercy
is common in our eye, we set it too low; when an Affliction is singular in our
eye, we set it too high,

3. It Is God himself who makes this rod: If a sparrow does not fall to the
ground without him, Math. 10.29.
certainly a dear Relation does not; shall we not be silent before him? He that
gave he has taken; he that has a greater right to Husband, Wife, Child, than
any of the Possessors have, he has seen good to call back what is his own;
shall any vex at this? Dead Relations are not (...),
lost, but restored to their first Owner; and though it is our Affliction to
lose them, yet it is Sustulisti liberos quos ipse dederas: non contri. stor quod
recepisti ago gratias quod dedisti.

Hier^n. ad Julian. Non moeremus quod talem amisimus, sed gratias agimus quod
habuimus. Idem.


mercy that ever we had them: both must be put together and then the heart
will be quiet.

4. Is all taken? if not, thou have no reason to complain. The child is taken,
but it is but one of many; but the Husband is yet spared; thou must not be
impatient for what is removed but thankful for what is continued; as
Themistocles when Amyntas took away some of his dishes, bore it contentedly,
saying, he might have taken all. And pray keep down all passion, for this may
make you lose what you have, though it will not regain you what you have
lost. Oh but (some will say) my only child is dead: Is it so? thy affliction is
the greater, but thy contentation must be never the less. He that gave an only
son to thee may take an only child from thee: Isaac was an only son, and yet
Abraham willingly offered, him up to God.

5. 'Twas high time for God to make a breach upon you. It Is the wisdom of God
to his, he will not let them have long what they over love: had you loved less
the child might have lived longer. When these comforts are too much in our
hearts, they must not be long in our hands. It Is infinite mercy that God will
secure our love to himself, and take that away from us which would take off our
affections from him.

6. It Is that temper of soul which Christianity calls for, quietly and readily
to resign up all our comforts to God's dispose. Christian, it is a great part of
thy religion to be content under these crosses; not to have thy comforts Omnia
ista nobis accedant non haereant, ut si abducantur, fine ulla nostri
lacetatione discedant Senec. Ep. 74.
torn from thee (as the plaster is from the flesh) but to come off easily (as
the glove does from the hand.

5. Where there is ground of hope that the everlasting state of dead Relations
is secured (as there is for the Adult who lived in the fear of God, for
Children descending from Parents in covenant with God) there it is mere
self-love which must cause discontent. For had we true love to the dead we
should rejoice in their advancement, as Christ says, Joh. 14.28. if ye loved
me, ye would rejoice, because I go to my Father. You are troubled because they
are not with you, but you should joy in this that they are with Christ (which
is far better. Phil. i. 21.
)

8. Think how others have undergone this trial. Aaron had his sons cut off by a
dreadful Judgment; but it is said of him, he held his peace: Levit. 10.3. Job
1.21. 2 Samuel 12.15. etc. See Val. Max. l. 5. c. 10.
So it was with Job, and yet he blessed the Lord: So long as there was hope of
the life of the child, David prayed and fasted; but when he saw God's will was
done, he rose up, and eat, and afflicted himself no more. Nay I might recite
several examples of Heathens, who did (to the shame of us Christians) bear the
death of dear Relations with great equanimity and undisturbedness of spirit.
Well, I hint these several things to you, when any of you are thus tried, I
allow you a due and regular grief and sense of God's afflicting hand; but there
must be no vexing or discontent under it: which the Considering of the
forementioned particulars may very much prevent or remove.

3. Thirdly, Wben Relations continued prove uncomfortable; How as to
uncomfortable Relations?
this occasions daily risings of heart and much discontent. O the sad fires of
passion which hereby are kindled in many (too many) hearts and houses! The
comfort of Relations is grounded upon suitableness; where that is not, the rose
is turned into a briar or thorn: What is unsuitable is uncomfortable, (as the
yoke that does not suit or fit the neck is always uneasy.) Now this
unsuitableness refers either to the natural temper or to something of an higher
nature, in both it is very afflictive; but especially in the latter.

There is an unsuitableness in respect of the natural temper or disposition. I
intend in this principally, Husband and Wife; the one is loving, mild, gentle,
of an even and calm spirit, sweet and obliging in his (or her) converse; the
other is quite contrary, froward, passionate, choleric, hard to be pleased,
always quarelling, etc. Here Is a cross now, and a heavy cross too; but what is
to be done by them that bear it, so as that they may learn Contentment under
it? why, let them be often in considering these things:

1. That God has a special hand in this affliction: It Is he who brings persons
together in this relation; he made the match in Heaven before it was made on
earth; and therefore he is to be eyed in all the Consequences that attend it:
if it be comfort, he is to be blessed for it; if it be discomfort, he is to be
submitted to under it.

2. Though this be a sharp trial, yet it is for good where it is sanctified. It
drives many nearer to God, weans them more from the world, keeps them humble,
draws out their graces, gives them experience of supporting mercy, learns them
to be more pitiful to others (and the like.)

3. May be this is the only affliction with which some are exercised. In all
things else it is mercy, only in this thing God sees it good to afflict: surely
such have little reason to be discontented. What? under such variety of signal
mercies can thou not bear contentedly one signal affliction?

4. The Cross is heavy, but patience and contentedness will make it lighter.
Levius fit patientia quod corrigere est nefas: The more the Beast strives the
more the yoke pinches, the more quiet he is, the less it hurts him: and so it
is in that Case which I am upon.

5. Possibly more suitable Relations were once enjoyed, but forfeited. So that
if you will be angry it must be with your selves not with God.

6. Death will soon put an end to this Cross; and we shall shortly be in that
state wherein we shall have nothing unsuitable to us.

But (2.) There is an unsuitableness in higher things: such as do more
immediately concern the honor of God and the everlasting condition of Souls;
as Grace and no Grace, Holiness and sin, Godliness and Ungodliness. Here now I
principally intend Parents and Children, (though other Relations may be
included also.) Here is a Parent that fears God, that lives an holy and godly
life, that owns the good ways of God, and walks in them, etc. But his Child or
Children are of a quite other Spirit, and take a quite other course: oh! they
live in sin and wickedness, in open enmity to God, carrying it as the Sons of
Belial; they curse, swear, drink, defile their bodies, profane Sabbaths,
neglect duties, scoff at Godliness, puff at all good counsel, discover a Spirit
obstinately set against God, etc. This is an affliction of a very great
stature, taller by the head and shoulders than several that have been spoken
unto before; yet many godly Parents groan under it, whose head and hearts are
broken by ungodly Children, (and never was this affliction more common than now
when youth is so much debauched.) I verily believe, many good Parents could
with much less grief bear the death of their Sons (were they but fit for it,)
than that which they daily undergo through the wickedness of their lives.
Truly these are much to be pitied; yet I would desire them to labor to be
contented, and submissively to bear this heavy cross. In order to which frame
let them consider.

1. That it is no new thing for good Parents to have bad Children, Sometimes it
so happens that when the Father is bad the Son is good, but it more frequently
happens (and God suffers it to be so, that the world may see Grace does not run
in a blood) that when the Father is good the Son is bad. It has been so from
the beginning; Adam had his Cain, Noah his Cham, Abraham his Ismael, Isaac his
Esau, David his Amnon, (and so in many others:) and it will be so to the end of
the world. Pray think of this, though it is a cutting yet but common affliction.

2. Children are ungodly, yet there is hope at last they may be reclaimed. As
stubborn as they are, God can make them yield: he can change their hearts, and
alter their course; and who knows at what day or hour he will come? So long as
there is Life there is hope of their Conversion. What a wicked Son was Manasse?
yet God wrought upon him at last: What a sad life did the Prodigal live? yet he
returned to his Father at last. God can turn notorious Sinners into eminent
Saints; wait therefore, but do not fret.

3. The Case is sad, but discontent will do no good in it. Earnest prayer and
quiet submission may do much, but impatience will do nothing. It troubles me
much when I see gracious Parents vexing themselves for their ungracious
Children: Alas, by this they do but hurt themselves, but do no good to them.

4. I suppose it to be but your affliction, not your sin. You have done your
duty in godly education, in setting a good example, in exhorting, (...)
Metrocles to Stilpo concerning his bad daughter in Plutarch's Moral^. p. 458
reproing, etc, in praying to God for your Children: if after all this they
will be naught, their blood will be required of themselves; you have freed your
souls from their eternal ruin and perdition.

5. God will secure, and advance his own glory. That Is the thing that cuts you,
that God should be dishonored by any that descends from you; but as to that
satisfy your selves, he will even by your sinful Relations one way or other
promote his honor. If he be not glorified by them (which we should desire,) he
will be glorified upon them (which we must submit unto.) It Is (to many Divines)
an unquestionable truth, that, when at the day of Judgment the sentence of
condemnation shall be pronounced upon wicked Children, their Godly Parents
shall so rest in God's will and be so swallowed up in his glory, that they
shall not grieve at this sentence but rather rejoice at it. Now then if God
here will harden their hearts, and give them up to their own Lusts, though you
are not to rejoice at this, yet you ought quietly to submit to it.

6. It Is good to reflect upon the grace of God to your selves; and to consider
that it is infinite mercy that you are not as bad as they. Discriminating grace
if duly thought of, would be an excellent Antidote against Passion in the
present trial. But I must say no more of this.

I have as briefly as I could (for the matter would have admitted of far
greater enlargement) gone over two grand Cases, the one referring to the
Estate, the other to Relations; (...) Nazianz. Orat. 16. H w Consideration is
to be managed for the manner of it.
and shown under each how consideration is to be acted in order to Contentment.
There is a third referring to the Body. (1.) With respect to deformity. (2.) To
defects. (3.) To infirmittes, pain, sickness, (an affliction, both very common
and also very great) to which I would fain have spoken something, but I must
forbear, lest I should too much exceed the bounds of such a discoutse as this
is.

Only there is a third General which I propounded at the first to say
something of, which I will but just touch upon, and so dispatch this first Help
or Means to the learning of Contentment. Hitherto I have been directing you as
to the matter of consideration; Now I am to direct you as to the manner of it.
He that would so consider, as thereby to get and keep his heart settled and
composed under every trouble, he must be therein frequent, speedy, serious.

1. Frequent. If you be but seldom in the practice of this duty, you will never
arrive at being masters of the divine art of Contentment. You must consider
again and again, by repeated thoughts to work upon your hearts that which is
proper for the quieting of them. By much chasing the ointment pierces into the
part affected, and so it gives ease. When the disease is hard to be cured or
apt to return, the remedy must be often useds and so it is here. As to the
prevention or removal of Discontent the mind must be often in consideration.
Plutar. (...).
The fiercest creatures by frequent converse become more tame and governable;
Dogs bark not at those to whom they are used: The Moralist applies it to the
Passions of the mind; which do in a great measure lose their fierceness, and
are more easily brought under command, when a man inures himself to
consideration.

2. Speedy. As soon as ever the hellish fire of Discontent begins to kindle in
thy heart, presently think of that which may be as water for the quenching of
it. If you let it alone, like other fires 'twill get such a head that it will
be too hard for you. Impatience is the soul in mutiny against God; now Mutinies
in an Army must be suppressed speedily. It Is good to take the distemper at the
beginning; as soon as there is any commotion in the spirit because of this or
that cross, immediately retire, ply the heart with consideration, reason with
your selves, Is not all of God? Shall not all be for good? (and so on, as has
been directed. Nay indeed, 'twould be of great advantage to us to be before
hand with the affliction, not only to see it before it comes, but to lay up
heart-quieting thoughts for it against it shall come. How is an evil (res
adversas) infregit quisquis prior vidit. Senec. de Tra^q. An.
lessened by the foresight of it! praevisi mali mollior ictus: how patiently
is it undergone when one has had some forecast in his thoughts about it! Few
are so fit for consideration after a trouble as they are before it; the
foregame is much easier to be played than the aftergame; And its efficacy too is
the greater when persons are so early at it. Before God strikes the blow cast
with your selves, What if my Child, or my Estate, should be taken from me? how
should I bear such an affliction contentedly? why, things stand thus or thus
and therefore I must be contented. What would follow upon this? Why, matters
being digested beforehand, the mind would be the more still when the evil shall
actually seize upon you.

3. Serious. Loose, and careless, and sudden thoughts signify but little to a
froward heart; but when they are intent and fixed, so as to dwell upon what
lies before them, then they have a good effect. The plaster must lie upon the
sore and then it works the cure: When consideration is managed with the utmost
intention of the mind, with the staying of the soul upon the proper object,
then (and never but then) does it further contentation. So much for the first
Help or means.

The second Help to contentment, viz. Godliness.
2. The second is Godliness. The Apostle links them together 1 Timothy 6.6.
Godliness with contentment is great gain; what may be the reason of this
connection? Not only because they do ever accompany each the other; or because
they being conjoined do make the Christian Complete, (in Godliness he
submitting to the Praeceptive, in Contentment to the Providential will of God;)
or because Godliness gives the highest motives to contentment; and that again
reflects a great beauty, and luster upon Godliness: but chiefly because
Godliness issues out in contentment and causes that blessed frame of heart, and
because without Godliness there can be no Contentment. He that is not a Godly
man ( i. e. a sanctified and gracious man; for I shall consider Godliness
principally in its habitual notion,) cannot be a contented man (in that sense
wherein the Apostle speaks of it in the Text.) Many of the old Heathens seemed
to go very far in contentment, to have a great mastery over passion, in all
occurrences to be very sedate and calm: They notably improved their Reason and
consideration (if not wholly to suppress Discontent yet however to keep it in,
so as that Others should not perceive it;) and many of them, through the
firmness and greatness of their spirits, could and did bear much with great
tranquillity of mind, (for the spirit of a man may bear his infirmity, Prove.
18.14.) But yet as to true Evangelical Contentment they knew nothing of it; for
that necessarily requires a divine principle within, and a divine and special
assistance from above, to both of which they were altogether strangers. And so
it is still with all mere Moral men, such as are destitute of Grace and of the
Spirit. So that as ever you desire to learn in every state to be content, you
must look to this, that ye be renewed and sanctified. All motives without (let
them be never so high,) all consideration within (let it be never so serious,)
will not prevail to the keeping of the heart quiet under crosses, unless there
be a work of saving grace there. The true and only way to be content, is to be
godly; for indeed Contentment is the daughter of Godliness.

For the better opening of this Direction, How God^iness does further
Contentment.
it will be requisite that we enquire, How Godliness (or Grace) does produce
this effect of Contentation. Ans. It does it by these ways or methods.

1. As it rectifies and works in and upon the several Faculties of the Soul.
For this is necessary to be done in order to Contentment; and it being done,
Contentment cannot but follow upon it. Let me make this out particularly:

1. Grace rectifies the Understanding: which it does by dispelling its natural
darkness, and setting up a clear and saving light in it. Now this light has a
great influence upon Contentment; for the Understanding being thus enlightened,
Fancy and Imagination do not carry it in the soul as before they did; and
hereupon the heart is brought to a more quiet temper. Our inquietudes of mind
are founded in the power and prevalency of Fancy: We fancy such and such things
to be evil, when in truth they are not so, (at leastwise as God sanctifies
them,) or to be more evil then in truth they are; and upon this, when those
things are laid upon us, we fret and vex: whereas do but take away this vanity
and mistake of fancy, Nihil est miserum nisi cum putes. Boeth. de Consol. l. 3.
Phil. 3.8.
there would be no such great evil in what we suffer; Nihil admodum atrox
passus es nisi id tu tibi fingis (as he of old truly said.)

And again, we fancy such and such things to be good, yea good in a very high
degree; and then upon the want of them we are disturbed: Whereas (if Fancy did
not delude us) they have but very little good in themselves, and as to us (in
our special circumstances) may be none at all: and therefore why should we be
troubled about them? The winds then arising from this point, Grace lays them by
freeing the person from the power of fond imagination, and instead thereof by
setting up solid judgment in him; so that he shall be able to judge aright of
things, and not to perplex himself (one way or another) further than the nature
of the thing before him will bear. Men generally are unquiet because they are
injudicious; if sanctifying grace therefore, by that heavenly light which it
brings into the Understanding, shall make them more judicious, by doing of this
it must also make them more quiet. An enlightened head promotes a submissive
heart; when it is right counting about worldly things then it is contentedness.
No wonder that Paul had learned in every estate to be content, he having before
learned to count all things but loss for Christ.

2. Grace rectifies the Will, thus; in causing it to comply with and yield unto
the Will of God. Whenever this supernatural habit is infused into a man there
is a melting of his will into God's Will; so that there is but one and the same
will between them. Now by this means it does the work which I am speaking of;
for when it is thus, certainly there can be nothing but Contentment. What can
put the spirit into disorder when it is come to to this, Not as I will, but as
thou will? When wind and tide go contrary ways then the waters are rough and
boisterous, but when they both go the same way then all is calm and smooth: So
here when God's will and Ours differ then storms of passion rise; but when they
agree, there is nothing then but evenness and stilness in the spirit. Oh! we are
never discontented but it is from the jarring and clashing of our wills with
God's: Quod si^, esse velis nihilque malis.
As he said, Cesset voluntas propria, non erit infernum; so say I, Let but
Christians lay aside their own will, and rest in the will of God; and assuredly
there will be no perturbation of mind in them. Indeed the duty of universal
contentment is unpracticable till it come to this; and grace bringing the
Creature to it, so it works Contentment.

3. Grace rectifies the Affections; in taking away their inordinacy toward
earthly things, in keeping of them within their due bounds and limits; and so
it works Contentment. What is it that causes unquietness in us? for the most
part we may resolve it into the unmortifiedness of some affection or other.
Lust is the fuel that kindles and feeds this fire, that makes us to quarrel and
fall out with God, because our conditions are so and so. Great Vessels must
have much water or else they split themselves. Where the love is too great to
earthly things, if much of them be not possessed there is great danger of
discontent, but where it is duly bounded, a little of these things suffices (as
smaller vessels sail well enough even in shallow waters) The pain in the head
proceeds from the foulness of the stomach; Purge but that, and the head has
ease: Purge but the heart from its unholy affections and a man has ease and
comfort in every condition. That which indangers impatience, is the greatness
of the Affliction? but what puts a greatness into the affliction? why, the
greatness of the Affection: If the Relation was not overloved, the loss of him
would not amount to such an affliction as it is usually made: he that over-loves
will over-grieve (Qui nimis amat nimis dolet,) and he that overgrieves will be
apt to murmur. Grace then confining the Affections to these sublunary things,
so it furthers Contentment.

4. It makes the Conscience good: And a good conscience is that Ark into which
God uses to put the manna of concentment. It carries joy in it, it is a
continual feast, Prove. 15.15; now he that has this joy within is not easily
(or much) moved at any trouble without; let the weather be what it will there
is nothing but serenity in his soul. If the part be sore you cannot touch it
but it is in pain; let it be but firm and sound and it can bear a smart blow
without complaining: when Conscience is sound and good a man can bear any
thing; but when it is not so, he can bear nothing without being under great
anguish of mind.

2. Secondly, Godliness works Contentment by making a person to have a powerful
sense of God's Glory, so as always to rest in that as his ultimate end and
most desirable good: (this is that glorious effect which Grace produces in the
heart.) And thereby it does effectually further quietness of spirit in every
condition. Pray observe it, Selfishness and lowness of men's ends is at the
bottom of all their discontent: they look no higher than their sensual ease,
delight and satisfaction; and if they be crossed in these then they storm and
are angry: But now a Godly man (living up to his Godliness) his eye is upon
God's glory, as the thing which he chiefly aims at and mainly centers in, and
upon this he is content in every state. For (says he) let my state be what it
will, God will glorify himself by it; and it is that state which God did see
would most tend to his glory, (otherwise he had not put me into it,) oh!
therefore I Will like it, yea rejoice in it; in as much as it is most conducive
to that which is better than all my little comforts, namely the Glory of God.
Methinks he should live in all contentedness who knows and minds these two
things, that all occurrences tend to the promoting of God's Honor, and then
too of his Own Good: but the knowing and minding of these is proper only to one
that is Godly; how necessary therefore is Godliness to contentment? Take an
unregenerate man, these neither do nor can signify any thing to him: for as
to the First, the advancement of the Honor of his Creator, he being all for
Self (for so every one is before conversion,) the honor of God is nothing to
him; and so it can have no influence upon him for the quieting of his heart
under troubles: and as to the second, the advancement of his own good, he, not
being in Covenant with God (on which the sanctification of all Providence does
depend) can have no assurance of this; and therefore cannot from this fetch
that which may quiet and comfort him: but both of these have their full power
and strength where grace is, and thereupon it becomes an effectual means to
contentment.

3. Thirdly, In the general habit of Grace there are contained certain special
Graces which do very much further Contentment. I Will instance in Humility,
Faith, Repentance, Heavenly-mindedness, Self-denial.

1. Humility. The humble man is always a contented man, the proud man is
always of a contrary temper. Pride puts us upon contending with God, Humility
upon yielding and submitting to him. Pride makes us think we are wiser than
God, can order our conditions better than he; Humility dreads this
heart-blasphemy. Pride must be at the top of the pinnacle, no condition, no
mercy is high enough for it, a proud person cannot bear a low state, he looks
upon himself, as wronged if he be not chief (as he said to his Daughter, Si non
dominaris injuriam te accipere existimas: Sueton.
) Humility accepts of the lowest condition and the lowest mercy; Oh! (says the
humble person) what can be too low for me who deserve to be in H^ll? what too
little for me who am less than the least of all mercies? Pride is for charging
God; Genesis 32.10.
Humility is altogether for admiring God: that will be finding faults with what
God does, this only finds faults with what we our selves do. Pride is the
heart-disquieting sin; Humility is the heart-quieting grace. It Is never well
enough with the proud (the Angels that fell even when they were in Heaven, and
Adam even in Paradise in all his Glory, were (...) ^f his: (...) always very
well with the humble. Well, Godliness work^ (...) by ^he ^oo^ing out of pride
and planting humility in the (...)

2. Faith. That Is another Grace which does eminently help on Contentation: how
readily, and how aptly, does it interpose upon all occasions for the keeping
down of all turbulent risings in the heart! Does the man begin to be froward?
What will become of me and mine? be still, says Faith, God will provide for
thee and thine. Oh but such and such blessings are denied me; yet be still, Of
the pride and vanity of this speech of Alexander, see Philo. l. de Cherubim. p.
91.
says Faith, thou have all in God; thou may say that truly, which the great
Conqueror once vainly said (when he had Europe and Asia in his eye,) and haec
and haec mea sunt; these and these blessings, yea all are mine, for God is
mine. But the Providence of God toward me are very bitter; yet be still,
says Faith, there is abundant sweetness in the Promise to take off that
bitterness that is in the Providence. But it is at present very ill with me;
yet be still, says Faith, wait but a little and it will be better. But what
have I to comfort me? why, says Faith, enough and enough; the unchangeable
love of God, the pardon of all thy sins, the Covenant-state, eternal life, etc.
They (says an holy Writer) never felt God's love, or tasted the forgiveness of
sin, who are discontented. Thus Faith with great readiness and strength answers
all Objections which tend to the disturbing of the spirit. It Is the Grace which
keeps from Psalm. 27.13.
fainting, and from Psalm. 42 11.
fretting also.

3. Repentance. He that truly mourns for sin does not easily murmur because of
some outward cross. Where sin is heavy nothing besides, comparatively, 2 Cor.
4.17.
is heavy. What light things are afflictions to him who groans under the burden
of sin! Godliness turns the grief and anger into the right channel, it works
Contentment by diversions: when the sinner would be grieving and complaining
because of poverty, sickness, etc. this makes him to look into the naughtiness
of his heart, and to grieve for that pride, and passion, and unbelief that is
within, and so it prevents or puts a stop to inordinate sorrow for what is
externally afflictive, (as bleeding at the arm stops bleeding at the nose.)
Where it is repenting there it is not repining.

4. Heavenly mindedness. The more a man does mind things above the less he is
concerned about things below; he who has his heart and conversation in heaven,
will not be sollicitous or querulous about what befalls him here on earth:
Math. 6.21. Phil. 3.20.
Nihil sentit crus in nervo cum animus est in coelo, (Tertul.)

5. Self-denial. A grace that has a great tendency to Contentment, because it
takes men off from their own wisdom, will and affections, and causes them
wholly to resign up themselves to the wise and gracious dispose of God. Oh
(says the self-denying Christian) I am not fit to be my own chooser, God shall
choose for me; I would not have my condition brought to my mind but my mind
brought to my condition; I would not have God give me what I desire, (...),
Iambl. in V. Pythag. L. 1. C. 28.
but I would desire nothing but what God sees good to give me: (As that
Philosopher, when one wished for him that he might have from the gods whatever
he would; nay rather, says he, wish for me that I may will nothing but what
the gods will give me.) Surely when it is once come to this, it must needs be
Contentment.

These are some of the ways, ( others there are but I must pass them over,) by
which Godliness does promote and work Contentment. So that as you desire to
learn it you must look to this, that you be gracious and godly persons; without
Grace (in the habit and exercise thereof) it cannot be composedness and
tranquillity of spirit in every state. I do not affirm, that he who has grace
is so constant and universal in this frame, as that he is never under
discontent, (for even such a one has his infirmities and surprisals, and pro
hic and nunc corruption may be too hard for grace;) but this I say, he, as to
the general course, and when he is himself, is contented; and that he is the
person who is fitted and qualified to live contentment.

The Third and last Means is Prayer. The third Help to contentment, viz. Prayer.
without this the two former will be ineffectual. Let a man be never so
considerative, yea never so Godly, yet Prayer is necessary to his being
contented. Humility, Faith, Repentance, Heavenly-mindedness, self-denial, are
the heart-quieting Graces. and Prayer is the heart-quieting Duty. He that has
not learnt to pray, will not learn to be content. When God is seldom spoke to,
he will be often hardly thought of. There must be good striving with God in
prayer, or else there will be bad striving with him in the way of Discontent. O
Sirs! are you afflicted? pray: Jam. 5.13.
do you meet with crosses? pray: does the Estate decay, the Relations die, the
Body consume by pain and sickness? pray. The best way to be content in every
state is to pray in every state. We study this hard lesson best upon our knees.

Prayer furthers contentment,

1. As it gives a vent to the mind under trouble. Vessels that are full, if
they have not some vent, are apt to burst; and so when the heart is full of
grief, if it has not a vent it breaks. Sorrow kept in overwhelms the spirit:
Strangulat inclusus dolor; -- let it be vented a little and the spirit is much
at ease: Now prayer is the best vent; the poor Christian goes to God, tells him
his case, pours out his heart before him, upon this his heart (that was ready
to break before) is now greatly relieved. When Hannah had prayed under her
trouble, she went away and did eat, and her countenance was no mo^e sad, 1 Samuel
1.18. What sad work does the wind make where it is pent up? whence come the
dreadful shakings of the earth, but from its being shut up in the cavities
thereof? And so here, when we keep in our troubles, do not open them, (first to
the Lord in prayer, and then to some experienced Christian,) what commotions
and perturbations of mind is that the occasion of?

2. As it obtains Grace and strength from God to enable the creature to be
contented. For it is he, and he only, that can work up the heart to this
excellent frame; he that stills the sea when it rages does also still the soul
in all its passions and discontents. When Paul had spoken thus high of his
Contentment, lest any should think he ascribed this (...) Theophyl. Quia de
maximis ^e^us gloriatus f er^t, ^e superbiae id tribueretur, vel ne aliis
jactantia^ occasionem daret, su^jicit, ha^ fortitudine se a Christo instrui
Calvin. in loc.
to himself or had it from himself, immediately he subjoyns, I can do all
things through Christ strengthening of me; to note, that the quietness of his
mind was divine and supernatural. We read of our Savior how (he being at sea,
and a great tempest arising) he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a
great calm; And the men marvelled, saying, what manner of man is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey him? Matthew. 8.24, etc. Truly the calming of the
heart in its inward storms is a thing every way as mavelous as what Christ
here did; and that which requires as great a power to effect it. If therefore
you desire to arrive at this even temper of mind in every condition, often go
to God and beg it of him: Say, Lord, I have a Peevish, froward discontented
heart, that is ready upon every cross to vex and fret against thee: this I hope
is my burden, I would fain have it otherwise; but I cannot get victory over my
passion, I cannot bring my self to a calm and submissive frame: wherefore I
seek to thee to enable me thereunto. Blessed God, do thou help me; through the
power of thy grace let there be evermore a contented mind in me; such and such
crosses I meet with, but Lord, under all let me be patient: here is an hard
lesson for me to learn, but through the teachings of thy spirit let me learn
it. Oh do but thus pray, and in due time God will give you what you pray for.

Thus I have answered this weighty Question, What Christians are to do that
they may learn in every state to be content?

Now (to close all) I leave it with your selves to enquire what your
seize are as to this Contentment. It Is a sad thing that even amongst
Christians there is so little of it; that many mere Heathens (who had nothing
but reason and the dim light of Nature) seem herein to outstrip those who have
far greater helps to it: Nemo facile cum fortunae suae condition concordat.
Boeth. de Co^sol Phil. l. 2. prosa 4. Quis est tam compositae foelicitatis, ut
non aliqua ex Part cum status sui qualitate rixetur? Idem ibid.
Oh this is much to be lamented! Let us bring it down to our selves. Paul had
learnt in every state to be content; we have scarce learnt in any state to be
content: We are not well either full or fasting: When it is Summer then it is too
hot, when it is winter then it is too cold. Every condition is (more or less)
uneasy to us. If it be Mercy we complain it is not enough, if affliction we
complain it is too much; and so we are always in statu querulo and moroso (as
he in Seneca expresses it.) The great God is willing to be pleased with what
we do, but how hard are we to be pleased with what he does? He finds no fault
with our duties (though attended with many defects) if done in sincerity; we
will be finding fault with his Providence (though there be nothing in them but
what speaks infinite Wisdom and Goodness.) The generality of men carry it as if
the fretting leprosy was upon them; yea many, even of those who belong to God,
are too much sick of this disease. Surely if he was not a long-suffering and
compassionate Father, he would not bear as he does with such froward Children.
The most like their inward state too well, and their outward state too ill.
Such who have the world are contented without God, Such who have God are not
contented without the world.

It being thus, is it not highly necessary that we should for the time to come
set our selves with our utmost diligence to get a Contented spirit? May be, we
dare not let the fire of our passion break forth; but it lies smothering and
hid in the heart; when shall it be quite extinguished? oh that that might be
wholly cast out, and that instead thereof, sedateness of mind, submission to
God, contentation in every condition, might come in into the soul! My Brethren,
will you fall upon the studying of this excellent lesson of Contentment? You
have learnt nothing in Christianity till you have learnt this: you are no
better than Abcedarians in Religion if you have not mastered this great piece
of practical knowledge. You have heard much, read much of contentment, but have
you learnt it so as to live in the daily practice of it? pray take up with
nothing short of that.

The design of this Sermon has been to help you herein, to direct you what you
are to do in order to Contentment, Now will you make use of the Directions that
have been given? viz. to be considerative, godly, praying persons. These are
the best remedies that I could think of against that Spiritual Choler that does
so much trouble you: Use them and (I hope) you will find the virtue and
efficacy of them to this end. Look to your state and course that you be godly;
when any thing troubles you, retire for Consideration and Prayer: hold on in
this way, and in tim you also will be able to speak these great words as to
your selves, that you have learnt in every state to be content. --

How to bear Afflictions. Sermon. XXVII.
HEB. 12.5. My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him.


Prove. 3.12.
THe words are an excellent passage from the Book of the Proverbs; wherein the
Supreme eternal Wisdom is represented giving instruction to the afflicted, how
to behave themselves under troubles, so as they may prove beneficial to them:
the counsel is that they should preserve a temperament of Spirit between the
excess and defect of patience and courage, and neither despising the
Chastenings of the Lord by a sinful neglect of them, as a small unconcerning
matter, nor fainting under them, as a burden so great and oppressing that no
deliverance was to be expected. To enforce the exhortation Wisdom uses the
amiable and endearing title, My Son, to signify that God in the quality of a
Father, afflicts his people; the consideration whereof is very proper to
conciliate reverence to his hand, and to encourage their hopes of a blessed
issue.

The Proposition that arises from the words is this,

It Is the duty and best Wisdom of Afflicted Christians to preserve themselves
from the vicious extremes of despising the chastenings of the Lord, or fainting
under them.

To illustrate this by a clear method, I shall endeavor to show. 1. What it is
to despise the chastenings of the Lord, and the causes of it. 2. What fainting
under his rebukes signifies; and what makes us incident to it. 3. Prove that
it is the duty and best wisdom of the afflicted to avoid these extremes. 4.
Apply it.

1. To despise the chastening of the Lord imports the making no account of
them, (...)
as unworthy of serious regard; and includes inconsiderateness of mind; and an
insensibleness of heart.

1. Inconsiderateness of mind with respect to the Author or end of Chastenings.

Job. 5.6.
1. With respect to the Author, when the afflicted looks only downwards, as if
the rod of affliction sprang out of the dust, and there were no superior cause
that sent it. Thus many apprehend the evils that befall them, either merely as
the productions of natural causes, or as casual events, or the effects of the
displeasure and injustice of men, but never look on the other side of the veil
of the second causes to that invisible providence that orders all. If a disease
strikes their bodies, they attribute it to the extremity of heat or cold, that
distempers their humors; if a loss comes in their estates, it is ascribed to
chance, to the carelessness and falseness of some upon whom they depended: but
God is concealed from their sight by the nearness of the immediate agent;
whereas the principal cause of all temporal evils is the overruling Providence
of God. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6.
They come not only with his knowledge and will, but by his efficiency. Exodus
10.13, 19.
The Locusts that infected Egypt were as real an effect of God's wrath, as the
most miraculous Plague, although an East Wind brought them, and a West-wind
carried them away. The arrow that was shot at a venture, and pierced between
the joints of Ahab's armor, was directed by the hand of God for his
destruction. 1 King. 22.34.
Shimei's cursing of David, though it was the overflowing of his Gall, the
effect of his malignity, yet that holy King looked higher, 1 Samuel 16.11.
and acknowledged the Lord has bidden him. As the Lord is a God of power and
can inflict what judgments he pleases immediately; so he is a God of Order,
and usually punishes in this world by subordinate means. Now where ever he
strikes, though his hand is wrapped up in a cloud, yet if it be not observed,
especially if by habitual incogitancy men consider not with whom they have to
do in their various troubles, this profane neglect is no less than a despising
the chastenings of the Lord.

2. Inconsiderateness of the end of the Divine discipline is a great degree of
contempt. The evils that God inflicts are as real a part of his providence, as
the blessings he bestows; as in the course of nature the darkness of the night
is by his order; as well as the light of the day: therefore they are always
sent for some wise and holy design. Sometime though more rarely they are only
for trial, to exercise the Faith, humility, patience of eminent Saints, for
otherwise God would lose in a great measure the honor and renown, and his
favorites the reward of those graces, afflictions being the sphere of their
activity. But for the most part they are castigatory, to bring us to a sight
and sense of our state, to render sin more evident and odious to us. They are
fully expressed by pouring from vessel to vessel, that d^scovers the dregs and
sediment, and makes it offensive that before was concealed. The least
affliction even to the godly is usually an application of the physician of
spirits for some growing distemper, every corrosive is for some proud flesh
that must be taken away. In short they are deliberate dispensations to cause
men to reflect upon their works and ways, and break off their sins by sincere
obedience, Therefore we are commanded to bear the voice of the rod, and who
has appointed it. It Is a preacher of repentance, Micah 6.9.
to lead us to the knowledge and consideration of our selves. The distress of
Joseph's brethren was to revive their memory of his sorrows caused by their
cruelty: now when men disregard the embassy of the rod, are unconvincible
notwithstanding its lively lessons, when they neither look up to him that
strikes, nor within to the cause that provokes his displeasure, when they are
careless to reform their ways, and to comply with his only will, as if
afflictions were only common accidents of this mutable state, the effects of
rash fortune or blind fate without design and judgment, and not sent for their
amendment, this is a prodigious despiseing of God's hand. For this reason the
Scripture compares men to the most inobservant creatures, to the wild asse's
colt, Job 11.12. Psalm. 58.4. Hos. 7.11.
the deaf adder, to the silly dove without heart; and the advantage is on the
beasts side, for their inconsideration proceeds merely from the incapacity of
matter, of which they are wholly composed to perform reflex acts, but man's
incogitancy is in sole fault of his spirit, that wilfully neglects his duty.
The Prophet charges this guilt upon the Jews: Lord, when thy hand is lifted up
they will not see. Isa. 26.11.


2. Insensibility of heart is an eminent degree of despising the Lord's
chastenings. A pensive feeling of judgments is very congruous, whether we
consider them in genere Physico or Morali; either materially as afflictive to
nature, or as the signs of divine displeasure: for the affections were planted
in the humane nature by the hand of God himself, and are duly exercised in
proportion to the quality of their objects. And when grace comes it softens the
breast, and gives a quick and tender sense of God's frown. An eminent instance
we have in David; though of heroical courage, yet in his sad ascent to mount
Olivet, 2 Samuel 15.30.
he went up weeping with his head covered and his feet bare, to testify his
humble and submissive sense of God's anger against him. Now when men are
insensible of judgments either considered as natural or penal evils, if when
they suffer the loss of relations or other troubles they presently fly to the
comforts of the Heathens, that we are all mortal, and what cannot be helped must
be endured, without the sense humanity requires, that calm is like that of the
dead sea a real curse: or suppose natural affection works a little, yet there
is no apprehension and concernment for God's displeasure, which should be
infinitely more affecting than any outward trouble how sharp soever, no serious
deep humiliation under his hand, no yielding up our selves to his management,
this most justly provokes him. Of this temper were those described by Jeremiah,
Jer. 5.3^
Thou have stricken them but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them but
they refused to receive correction.

2. The causes of this despiseing of God's chastenings are,

(1.) A contracted stupidity of soul, proceeding from a course in sin. There is
a natural stubborness and contumacy in the heart against God, a vicious quality
derived from rebellious Adam: we are all hewn out of the rock, and dig'd out of
the quary, and this is one of the worst effects of sin, and a great part of its
deceitfulness, that by stealth it increases the natural hardness, Heb. 3.13.
Zech. 7.12.
by degrees it creeps on like a gangrene, and causes an indolency. The practice
of sin makes the heart like an adamant the hardest of stones that exceeds that
of rocks. For hence proceeds such unteachableness of the mind, that when God
speaks and strikes yet sinners will not be convinced; that briars and thorns
are only effectual to teach them; and such untractableness in the will, that
when the sinner is stormed by affliction, and some light breaks into the
understanding, yet it refuses to obey God's call.

2. Carnal diversions are another cause of slighting God's hand. Luke 21.34.
The pleasures and cares of the world as they render men inapprehensive of
judgments to come, so regardless of those that are present. Some whenever they
feel the smart of a cross, use all the arts of oblivion to lose the sense of
it. The affliction instead of a leading them to repentance, leads them to vain
conversations, to Comedies and other sinful delights to drive away sorrow.
Others although they do not venture upon forbidden things to relieve their
melancholy, yet when God by short and sensible admonitions calls upon them,
they have presently recourse to temporal comforts, which although lawful and
innocent in themselves, yet are as unproper at that time, as the taking of a
cordial when a vomit begins to work: for whereas chastisements are sent to
awaken and affect us by considering our sins in their bitter fruits, this
unseasonable application of sensual comforts wholly defeats God's design. For
nothing so much hinders serious consideration as a voluptuous indulging the
senses in things pleasing; like opiate medicines they stupifie the conscience
and benum the heart. It Is Solomon's expression, I said of laughter it is mad:
for as distraction breaks the connection of the thoughts, so mirth shuffles our
most serious thoughts into disorder, and causes men to pass over their troubles
without reflection and remorse.

And as the pleasures so the business of the world causes a s^pine Security
under judgments. We have an amazing instance of it in Hiel the Bethelite, 1
Kings 16.
who laid the foundation of his city in the death of his firstborn, and set up
the gates of it in his youngest son, yet he was so intent upon his building,
that he disregarded the Divine Nemesis, that was apparent, fulfilling the
terrible threatening prophesied against the builder of Jericho. Josh. 6.26.


3. An obstinate fierceness of spirit, a diabolical fortitude is the cause that
sometimes men despise afflicting providence so far as to resist them. There is
a passive malignity in all, an unaptness to be wrought on and to receive
spiritual and Heavenly impressions from God's hand; but in some of the sons of
perdition there is an active malignity whereby they furiously repel judgments
as if they could oppose the almighty. Their hearts are of an anvil-temper, made
harder by afflictions and reverberate the blow: like that Roman Emperor who
instead of humbling and reforming at God's voice in thunder thundered back
again. All judgments that befall them are as strokes given to wild beasts, that
instead of taming them enrage them to higher degrees of fierceness. Isai. 3.9,
10.
The Prophet described some of this rank of sinners, who said in the pride and
stoutness of their hearts, the bricks are fallen down, but we will build with
hewn stones, the sycomores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars:
And thus many, though not explicity, yet vertually declare a resolution,
notwithstanding the most visible discouragements from Heaven, to proceed in
their sinful courses with more greediness, and from a sullen secret atheism are
more strongly carried to gratify their lusts when they are in afflictions.

2. I shall proceed to consider the other extreme of fainting under God's
rebukes.

(...)
The original word signifies the slackening and relaxing of things that were
firmly joined together. The strength of the body proceeds from the union of the
parts, when they are well compacted. By their disjoynting it is enfeebled, and
rendered unfit for labor. In this notion the Apostle in the 12 verse, Exhorts
them to lift up the hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees: That
is to encourage and strengthen their souls by a real belief of the promises
made to afflicted Christians.

2. It may respect the sinking, and falling away of the soul like water, being
hopeless of overcoming troubles. When water is frozen into hard ice, it will
bear a great burden; but when it is dissolved and melted, nothing is weaker: So
the Spirit of a man confirmed by religious Principles, Prove. 19.14.
is able to sustain all his infirmities: Si fractus illabitur orbis, if the
weight of the heaviest afflictions fall upon him, yet his mind remains erect
and unbroken, and bears them all with courage and constancy: But if through
impatience under tribulation, and diffidence in the divine Promises, we shrink
from our duty, or reject the comforts of God as if they were small, and not
proportionable to the evils that oppress us, This is to faint when we are
rebuked by him.

The causes of this despondency are usually,

1. Either the kind of the affliction: when there is a singularity in the case,
it increases the apprehension of God's displeasure, because it may signify an
extraordinary guilt, and singular unworthiness in the person that suffers, and
upon that account the sorrow swells so high as to overwhelm him.

2. The number and degrees of afflictions: when like those black clouds which
in winter days join together and quite intercept the beams of the sun, many
troubles meet at once, and deprive us of all present comfort. Job lost his
children by a sudden unnatural death; and was tormented in all the parts of his
body, and reduced from his rich abundance to the dunghill and a potsherd to
scrape his boils. Indeed his heroical spirit was supported under those numerous
and grievous troubles, but such a weight were enough to sink the most.

3. The continuance of afflictions: when the clouds return after rain, and the
life is a constant scene of sorrows; we are apt to be utterly d^jected, and
hopeless of good. The Psalmist tells us, all the day long I have been plagued,
and chastened every morning, and from thence was strongly tempted to despair.

Psalm. 73^^4.
4. The comparing their great sufferings with the prosperity of those who are
extremely vicious, inclin^s some to despair. For not only their p^esent evils
are heightened and more sensibly felt by the comparison, but the prosperous
impiety of others tempts them to think there is no just and powerful providence
that distributes things below, and looking no higher than to second causes that
are obvious to sense, they judge their state past recovery.

The next thing is to prove that it is the duty and wisdom of the afflicted not
to despise the chastenings of the Lord, nor to faint under them.

1. It Is their duty carefully to avoid those extremes, because they are very
dishonorable to God.

1. The contempt of chastisements is a high profanation of God's honor, who is
our Father and Sovereign, and in that quality afflicts us: It Is our Apostle's
argument, Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh, Heb. 12.9.
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much more be
subject to the Father of Spirits, and live? It Is a principle deeply planted in
the humane nature, which the most barbarous Nations have kept inviolable, to
express humble respects to our Parents, from whom we derive our life, and by
whose tender care we have been preserved, and educated, although their
discipline be rigorous: But it is infinitely more just and reasonable, that we
should reverently submit to the Father of Spirits, who has the highest right
in us. As much as the immortal spirit excels the infirm corruptible flesh,
proportionably should our reverence to God, when he most sharply rebukes us,
exceed our respects to our earthly fathers when they correct us. The manner of
the Apostle's expression is very significant, Shall we not much rather? if
there be any vital spark of conscience remaining in our breasts; if reason be
not wholly declined to brutishness, we cannot do otherwise.

2. Fainting under chastenings reflects dishonourably upon God. It Is true in
some respect, those who are extremely dejected are not so guilty as the
despisers; for usually they acknowledge the order and justice of his
providence. But that false conception of the Father of mercies, either that he
willingly afflicts the children of men, or that he hates them, because he
afflicts them here, is so contrary to his holy nature, and injurious to his
goodness, 1 John 4.9.
the special Character of his nature, that it is an equal provocation, with the
slighting his Sovereignty.

It Is the best wisdom not to despise God's chastenings, nor faint under them: I
will not insist upon the consideration, that it is the counsel of the supreme
wisdom to us, nor that it is the avoiding the vicious extremes, which is the
chiefest point of moral prudence; but it is the only way to prevent the
greatest mischiefs that will otherwise befall us. It Is said, He that is Wise is
profitable to himself, that is, either in obtaining good, or preventing evils.
Job 22.21.
Now it will appear how pernicious those extremes are, by considering,

1. The contempt of chastenings deprives us of all those benefits which were
intended by them. God's end in them is to imbitter sin to our taste, and make us
disrellish that deadly poison: for as according to the rules of physic,
contraries are cured by contraries; so sin, that prevails by pleasure, by
something delightful to the carnal part, is mortified by what is afflictive to
sense. Repentance is a duty that best complies with affliction: for when the
spirit is road sad, and brought to the sobriety of consideration, it will more
readily reflect upon the true causes of troubles: when the springs overflow,
it is but directing the stream into a right channel, the changing the object of
our grief, viz. mourning for sin instead of sorrowing for outward trouble, and
we are in the way to happiness. Sensible sorrow leads to Godly sorrow. The
natural is first, then the spiritual. Now the despisers of God's hand, that are
unaffected with judgments, are incapable of this benefit. For if they do not
feel the blow, how shall they take notice of the hand that strikes? if they are
not softened with sorrows, how shall they receive the divine impression? if
they have no sense of his displeasure, how shall they fear to offend him for
the future? if the medicine does not work, how can it expel noxious humors?

2. The neglect of chastenings does not only render them unprofitable, but
exposes to greater evils.

1. It provokes God to withdraw his judgments for a time. This the sinner
desired, and thinks himself happy that he is at ease: miserable delusion! 1.
This respite is the presage of his final ruin. 'Twas the desperate state of
Judah, Isa. 1.5.
as God expresses it, Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more
and more: The words of an anxious Father that has tried all methods, counsel,
kindness, corrections, to reclaim a rebellious obstinate son, and finding no
answerable effect gives him over, to follow the pernicious swing of his corrupt
desires. No severity is like the suffering him in his licentious courses. Thus
when God has used many gracious ways to reduce the sinner by his Word,
Spirit, and judgments, but he is inflexible to the calls of the Word,
impenetrable to the motions of the Spirit, and insensible of afflicting
providence, when after a combat with the rod sin comes off unwounded, and the
rod retires; this calm is more dreadful than the fiercest storm: Nothing can be
more fatal to the sinner; for by this divine desertion he is given over to a
reprobate mind and vile affections, he goes on undisturbed in his sins, and
every day increases his enmity against God, and provokes God's enmity against
him. It Is not conceivable that one who is not made pliable to the grace of God
by afflictions, should submit when he is in pleasant circumstances, and
disposed to enjoy sensual satisfactions. If the whip and spur cannot break and
tame the unruly beast, certainly the rich pasture will never make him
manageable. So that God's ceasing to punish the sinner at present is so far
from being a favor, that it is the effect of his deepest displeasure; for it
contributes to his hardening. 'Twas the case of Pharaoh, when any of the plagues
were removed, indulgence occasioned his induration. As water taken from the
fire freezes sooner and harder, because the thinner parts are evaporated by the
former heat, so when men are taken off from the fire of affliction, they are
more confirmed in their vicious courses, ^han if they had never been afflicted.

3. The slighting of lighter strokes provokes God sometimes to bring more
dreadful judgments in this life upon sinners. No man can endure that his love
or anger should be despised. Nebuchadnezzar commanded the furnace to be heated
seven times hotter for those who contemned his threatenings. Lev. 26.23, 24
God tells the Israelites, If ye will not be reformed by me by these things,
but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and
will punish you yet seven times more for your sins. He will change the rods
into scorpions, and scourge them for their continued rebellions. Amos 3.5.
It Is the intent of that expostulation, Shall one take up a snare from the
earth, and have taken nothing at all? Shall God remove his judgments while
sinners are careless and unreformed, as if they might be final conquerers over
them? no, he will multiply and greaten them. It may be at first God blasts part
of the estate, and the sinner is not apprehensive of his hand; then he comes
nearer and snatches away a dear relation; if still the sinner is unaffected, he
strikes his body with a lingering or acute disease; if still he be not concerned
for God's displeasure, he wounds his spirit, makes him sick in sense and
conscience at the same time, fills him with terror by the reflection upon his
wicked ways, and the foresight of that dreadful Tribunal before which he must
appear: So that although he cannot live, he dare not die; though his earthly
tabernacle be ready to fall upon him, he is afraid to go out and meet the
supreme Judge. And if this does not work a sincere through change, God casts him
into hell to the company of the Giants, Prove. 21.16. Vid. Mr. Mede in loc.
those bold rebels that fought against God. Briefly, as under the law, an
incorrigible son that neglected his father's reproofs was to die without mercy,
so an unreformed sinner who kicks against the pricks, and refuses to submit to
God's corrections, shall be cut off in his obstinacy. Justice will proceed to
excision, and acts of vengeance against him.

2. Fainting under chastenings is pernicious to sufferers: for it renders them
utterly indisposed for the performance of duty, and incapable of receiving the
comforts proper for an afflicted state.

1. It renders them utterly indisposed for the performance of duty. Hope draws
forth all the active powers of the soul, it is the great motive to diligence,
and instrument of duty: Despair, like extremity of cold that checks the spring,
and binds up the earth that its fruits cannot appear, hinders the free exercise
of reason and grace, and cuts the sinews of obedience. He that is hopeless of a
good issue out of troubles, will neither repent, nor pray, nor reform, but
indulges barren tears instead of real duties.

Besides it often falls out, that the same affliction is sent from God's
displeasure upon his people for their sins, and is the effect of the rage of
men against them, upon the account of their professing his Name. Such is the
Wisdom and Goodness of God, that by the same fiery trial he may refine his
servants from their dross and impurities, and render the Glory of the Gospel
more Conspicuous. The hatred of Religion, and a blind fury may transport men to
acts of Cruelty against the Saints, but it is by the permission of the universal
Sovereign, who has the hearts of all in his hands, and suffers their rage for
holy ends. The enemy designs against their Faith, but God's aim is to make
them change their lives. Now if either through strong fears, or the stinging
sense of troubles, upon the account of Religion, our Courage fails, we are
presently in danger of falling away, and denying our Master. The faint-hearted
person is usually false-hearted, and for want of resolution, being frighted out
of his Conscience and duty, chooses sin rather than suffering, and thereby
justly deprives himself of the Crown of life, that is promised only to those
who are Faithful unto the death. Besides not only the loss of heaven, but the
torments of hell, are threatened against those who withdraw from the service of
God to avoid temporal evils. Rev. 21.8.
The fearful and unbelieving are in the front of those that shall have part in
the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Now what folly is
it, when two evils are propounded, to choose the greatest; that is, eternal
death rather than temporal? and of two goods, to prefer the less; a short life
with its Conveniences on earth, before that which is eternally glorious in
heaven? By which it appears, how much it concerns us to fortify and fix our
minds, by a steadfast belief of God's supporting presence with us in all
troubles, and of his gracious promise, that in due time we shall reap, if we
faint not in well-doing.

2. They are incapable of the Comforts proper to an afflicted state. Those
arise from the apprehension that God loves whom he chastens: Rev. 3.
for the least sin is a greater evil than the greatest trouble, and his design
is to take that away, and from the expectation of a happy issue. Hope is the
anchor within the vail, that in the midst of storms and the roughest seas
preserves from shipwreck. The character of Christians is, Romans 12.12.
that they are rejoicing in hope: But when the afflicted are under fearful
impressions that God is an irreconcilable enemy, and sadly conclude their
miseries are past redress, those divine Comforts that are able to sweeten the
most bitter sufferings to believers are of no efficacy; their deep sorrows are
not like the pains of a traveling woman, that end in a joyful birth, but the
killing tortures of the stone, that are fruitless to the patient. An obstinate
grief and rejecting the Consolations of God, is the beginning of sorrows, the
first payment of that sad arrear of mourning that shall be exacted in another
world.

The Use shall be to excite us to those duties that are directly contrary to
the extremes forbidden, viz. to demean our selves under the chastenings of the
Lord, with a deep reverence and humble fear of his displeasure, and with a firm
hope and dependence upon him for a blessed issue, upon our complying with his
holy Will.

1. With a humble reverence of his hand. This temper is absolutely necessary,
and most congruous with respect to God, upon the account of his Sovereignty,
Justice and Goodness, declared in his chastenings; and with respect to our
frailty, our dependence upon him, our obnoxiousness to his Law, and our
obligations to him, that he will please to afflict us for our good.

This is the reason of that expostulation, Will the Lion roar in the forest
when he has no prey? Shall God's threatenings and judgments have no effect?
Who ever hardened himself against him and prospered? Amos 3.4.
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? the most sensible and severe attribute,
when it is incensed, Are we stronger than he? Can we encounter offended
Omnipotency? Can we with an army of lusts oppose myriads of mighty Angels? It Is
not courage, but such a prodigious degree of folly and fury, that one would
think 'twere impossible a reasonable creature were capable of it. Yet every
sinner unreformed by afflictions is thus desperate: Job 15.25, 26
He stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty, he runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers. Such a furious rebel was Ahaz, who in the time of his distress did
trespass more against the Lord; This is that King Ahaz. But God has most
solemnly declared, that he will be victorious at last over the most fierce
obdurate enemies. 2 Chronicles. 28.
As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me. His power is infinite,
and anger puts an edge upon his power, and makes it more terrible. If our
subjection be not voluntary, it must be violent. It Is our wisdom to prevent
acts of vengeance by humble submissions. The duty of the afflicted is
excellently expressed by Elihu: Job 34.31, 32
Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have born chastisements, I will not
offend any more: that I know not teach thou me, if I have done iniquity I will
do so no more.

Add further, upon another account reverence is due to God's chastenings: for
when love is the motive that incites one to give us counsel, though it be mixed
with reproofs, and his prudence is not great, yet a respect is due to the
affection. Now God who is only wise, chastises men from a desire to make them
better and happy: he intends primarily to refine, not to consume them by
afflictions; so that a serious regard to his hand is the most just and
necessary duty of the creature. Briefly, every chastisement should leave deep
and permanent impressions upon us, the sense of God's displeasure should make
our hearts mournful and mollified, broken and contrite, that his will may be
done by us on earth as it is in heaven.

2. Let us always preserve an humble dependence and firm hope on God for a
blessed issue out of all our troubles: The support and tranquillity of the soul
arises from hence; Christian patience suffers all things as well as charity,
being encouraged by a continual expectation of good from him. Patience confirms
all other graces, and is to the whole armor of God, what the temper is to
material weapons, that keeps them from breaking in the combat: Now to maintain
a constant hope in affliction, it is necessary to consider the reason of the
Exhortation, as it is admirably amplified by the Apostle.

1. The relation God sustains when he afflicts believers. He is a Judge
invested with the quality of a Father. The Covenant of grace between God and
Jesus Christ, our true David, contains this observable cause, If thy children
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments, if they break my statutes, Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32.
and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with a
rod, and their iniquity with stripes. The love that arises from this relation,
though it cannot hate, yet it may be displeased, and chastise them for their
follies. Moses tells the Israelites, Thou shall consider in thy heart, Deuteronomy.
8.5.
that as a man chastens his son, so the Lord thy God chastens thee. In children
reason is not fully disclouded, they are not capable to govern themselves, and
are only taught with sensible pleasure or pain; so that a father is obliged to
join correction with instruction to form them to virtue. This is so far from
being inconsistent with paternal affection, that it is inseparable from it. For
a parent to suffer a child to go on pleasantly in sin without due punishment is
pure cruelty disguised under the mask of pity; for by the neglect of discipline
he is confirmed in his vicious courses, and exposed to ruin. The Apostle
therefore adds, Whom the Lord loves he chastens. As from the severest wrath he
sometimes forbeareth to strike, so from dearest love he afflicts. Humble
believers through a cloud of tears may see the light of God's countenance; for
having elected them by special love to a glorious inheritance above, he
dispenses all things here in order to the preparing them for it, and all
temporal evils as means are transformed into the nature of the end to which
they are subservient. So that the sharpest sufferings are really from God's
favor, since they are beneficial for our obtaining real hap^iness. The devil
usually tempts men in a paradise of delights, to precipitate them into hell;
God tryes them in the furnace of afflictions, to purify and prepare them for
heaven.

2. It Is a strong cordial against fainting to consider, that by virtue of the
paternal relation; He scourges every son whom he receives; for no troubles are
more afflictive and stinging, than those that are unexpected: Now when we are
assured that there is no son whom the heavenly father does not chasten, we are
less surpised and less troubled when we meet with crosses. Indeed there is
hardly any kind of affliction that may befall us, but we have some instance in
Scripture of the Saints suffering the same. Are we poor and mean in the world?
we should consider that poverty with holiness is a divine complexion, Jesus
Christ the holy and beloved Son of God had not where to lay his head. Are we
under bodily distempers? good Hezekiah was struck with an uncomfortable disease
as to the quality of it, and Gaius had a flourishing soul in a languishing
body. Are our dear relations taken away? Aaron and David lost some of their
sons by terrible strokes. Are our spirits wounded with the sense of God's
displeasure? Job and Heman were under strong terrors, yet the favorites of
heaven. Briefly, how many most dear to God were called forth to extreme and
bloody trials for the defense of the truth? How many deaths did they endure in
one torment? How many torments in one death? Yet they were so far from
fainting, that the more their pains were exasperated, the more their courage
and joy was shining and conspicuous; as the face of the heavens is never more
serene and clear, than when the sharpest north wind blows. It Is the Apostle's
inference, Seeing we are compassed with such a cloud of witnesses, let us run
with patience the race that is set before us.

If ye be without chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are you bastards
and not sons. If God does not vouchsafe us the mercy of his rod, it is evident
we are not part of his fatherly care. The bramble is neglected, while the vine
is cut till it bleeds. It Is a miserable privilege to be exempted from divine
discipline, and by ease and prosperity to be corrupted and made fit for
destruction. Saint Austin represents one expostulating with God, O Deus, ista
est justitia tua, ut mali floreant and boni laborent? In Psalm. 25.
O God, is it righteous with thee that the wicked should prosper and the good
suffer? Dicis Deo, ista est justitia tua? and Deus tibi, ista est fides tua?
haec enim tibi promisi, ad hoc Christianus facius es, ut in seculo isto
floreres, and in inferno postea torquereris? God replies to him, is this your
faith? did I promise you temporal prosperity? were you a Christian for this,
that you might flourish in this world, and be miserably tormented in hell?

They for a few days chastened us for their own pleasure; humane love is a
troubled irregular passion, mixed with ignorance and prone to error in the
excess or defect. Sometimes parents are indulgent, and by a cruel compassion
spare their children when they are faulty; sometimes they correct without
cause; sometimes when the reason is just, yet they err in the manner or measure
of the correction, so that their children are discouraged. But in God there is
a perfect union of wisdom and love, of discretion and tenderness; his affection
is without the least imperfection, his will is always guided by infinite
wisdom. If his children offend, he will chastise them with the rod of men, that
is, moderately: 2 Samuel 7.14.
For as in Scripture things are magnified by the Epithet, divine, or of God, so
they are lessened by the Epithet, humane; accordingly the Apostle declares to
the Corinthians, that no temptation had befallen them, but what was common to
man; 1 Cor. 10.13.
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. As a prudent Physician consults the strength of the patient as
well as the quality of the disease, and proportions his medicine: so all the
bitter ingredients, their mixture and measure, are dispensed by the wise
prescription of God, according to the degrees of strength that are in his
people.

4. The Apostle specifies the immediate end of God in his chastenings: But he
for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness. This is the supreme
excellency of the divine nature; and our conformity to it is so valuable, that
it renders afflictions not only tolerable, but so far desirable, as they
contribute to it. In the present state our graces are imperfect, and our
conformity to the divine purity is like the resemblance of the Sun in a watery
cloud, very much beneath the perfection and radiation of that great light. Now
God is pleased to fashion us according to his image by afflictions, as a statue
is cut by the Artificer, to bring it into a beautiful form. He is pleased to
bring us into diverse temptations to try our faith, to work in us patience, to
inflame our prayers, to mortify our carnal desires, to break those voluntary
bands whereby we are fettered to the earth, that we may live with those
afflictions wherewith others die. And certainly if we make a true judgment of
things, we have not the least cause to suspect the love of God, when he
chastises us to take away sin, the only abominable object of his hatred and
deep detestation, and to render us partakers of the divine nature. And the
present peaceable fruit of righteousness is the product in those who are duly
exercised by their troubles. It is an allusion to the reward of the conquerers
in the Olympic games, who had a crown of Olives, the emblem and shadow of
peace. But true peace, a divine calm in the conscience, shall be the recompense
of all that exercise the graces suitable to an afflicted state. In short, the
Apostle assures Believers, 1 Cor. 11.32.
that they are chastened of the Lord, to prevent their condemnation with the
world. It Is this rod truly delivers them from hell, it is this consideration
that changes thorns into roses, and extracts honey out of wormwood. If the way
be stony or flowery that leads to blessedness, a Christian should willingly walk
in it. To conclude, from the consideration of what the Scripture declares
concerning temporal evils, Let us lift up the hands that hang down, and the
feeble knees, and make straight paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way, but let it rather be healed, i. e. in our affliction let
us take courage and resolution from the promises, and live in a holy conformity
to God's will, that the weak or faint may be restored.

The first and last ^^sson of Pagan Philosophy was to support men under the
storms to which (...) are liable in this open state, to render the soul velut
pelagi rupes im^^^^, ^s a rock unshaken by the waves. But all their directions
were unsuccessful, and so could not secure them from impatience or despair; but
the Gospel that assures us of the love of God, in sending afflictions for our
spiritual and eternal good, is alone able to compose the mind: And when ever we
faint in troubles, it is either from infidelity or inconsideration. It Is
impossible a person should be a Christian, and be incapable of comfort in the
most afflicted state, for we are really so by the holy Spirit who is the
Comforter. When we speak sometimes to those we judge infirm, we speak to
Infidels, who only receive remedy from time, which they ought to receive from
Faith; they have the Name of God only in their mouths, but the world is in
their hearts; their passions are strong and obstinate, not subject to
sanctified reason; the difficulty they have of being comforted, discovers the
necessity of their being afflicted; they need conversion more than consolation.
Others who are sincere in the Faith, yet are apt to faint under troubles, from
an error, like that of the Apostles, when their Lord came upon the waters in a
stormy tempestuous night to their assistance, they though he was a spirit; so
they look on God as an enemy, when he comes to sanctify and save them. The
sovereign remedy of our sorrows is to correct the judgment of sense by a
serious belief of God's promise; thus we shall reconcile the roughness of his
hand with the sweetness of his voice: He calls to us from heaven in the darkest
night, it is I, be not afraid; he corrects us with the heart and hand of a
Father. A due consideration of these things will produce a glorified joy in the
midst of our sufferings: Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

How we may bring our Hearts to bear Reproofs. Sermon. XXVIII.
Psalm. 141.5. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him
Reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head: for
yet my Prayer also shall be in their Calamities.


IT is generally agreed by Expositors, that this Psalm, as that foregoing, with
two of those that follow, were composed by David in the Time of his Banishment,
or slight from the Court of Saul. The state wherein he describes himself to
have been, the matter of his Pleas and Prayers contained in them, with sundry
express circumstances regarding that season and his condition therein, do
manifest that to have been the time of their composure.

That the Psalmist was now in some distress, whereof he was deeply sensible, is
evident from that vehemence of his spirit, which he expresses in the
reiteration of his request, or Supplication, v. 1. And by his desire, that his
Prayer might come before the Lord as Incense, and the lifting up of his hands
as the evening Sacrifice, v. 2. The Jewish Expositors guess not improbably,
that in that Allusion he had regard unto his present exclusion from the Holy
services of the Tabernacle, which in other places he deeply complains of.

For the matter of his Prayer in this beginning of the Psalm (for I shall not
look beyond the Text) it respects himself, and his deportment under his
present condition, which he desires may be harmless and holy, becoming himself
and useful unto others. And whereas he was two ways liable to miscarry; First,
by too high an exasperation of spirit against his Oppressors and Persecutors;
and Secondly, by a fraudulent and pufillanimous compliance with them in their
wicked courses; which are the two extremes that men are apt sinfully to run
into in such conditions: he prays earnestly to be delivered from them both. The
first he has respect unto, v. 3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, keep
the door of my Lips; namely, that he might not under those great provocations
which were given him, break forth into an unseemly intemperance of speech
against his unjust Oppressors, which sometimes fierce and unreasonable
Cruelties will wrest from very sedate and moderate spirits. But it was the
desire of this Holy Psalmist, as in like cases it should be ours, that his
heart might be always preserved in such a frame, under the conduct of the
Spirit of God, as not to be surprised into an expression of Distempered passion
in any of his words or sayings. The other he regards in his earnest
Supplication, to be delivered from it, v. 4. Incline not my Heart unto any evil
thing, to practice wicked works with men that work iniquity; and let me not eat
of their Dainties. There are two parts of his request unto the purpose
intended. (1st.) That by the Power of God's grace influencing his mind and
Soul, his heart might not be inclined unto any Communion or Society with his
wicked Adversaries in their wickedness. (2ly.) That he might be preserved from
a liking of, or a longing after those things, which are the baits and
allurements whereby men are apt to be drawn into Societies and Conspiracies
with the workers of iniquity; And let me not eat of their Dainties. See Prove.
1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. For he here describes the condition of men prospering
for a season in a course of wickedness: They first jointly give up themselves
unto the practice of iniquity, and then together solace themselves in those
Satisfactions of their Lusts, which their power and interest in the world do
furnish them withal.

These are the Dainties, of which an impotent longing and desire do betray the
minds of unstable Persons unto a Compliance with ways of sin and folly: for I
look on these Dainties to comprise whatever the Lust of the eyes, the Lust of
the flesh, or the pride of life can afford. All these David prays to be
delivered from any inclination unto; especially when they are made the
Allurements of a course of sin. In the enjoyment of these Dainties, it is the
common practice of wicked men to sooth up, approve of, and mutually encourage
one another in the way and course wherein they are engaged. And this compleats
that goodly felicity which in this world so many aspire unto, and whereof alone
they are capable. The whole of it is but a Society in perishing sensual
enjoyments, without control, and with mutual Applauses from one another.

This the Psalmist had a special regard unto; who casting his eye toward
another Communion and Society which he longed after, v. 5. that in the first
place presents it self unto him, which is most opposite unto those mutual
applauses and rejoycings in one another, which is the salt and cement of all
evil Societies; namely Rebukes and Reproofs for the least miscarriages that
shall be observed. Now whereas the Dainties, which some enjoy in a course of
prosperous wickedness, are that alone which seems to have any thing in it
amongst them that is desirable; and on the other side Rebukes and Reproofs are
those alone which seem to have any sharpness, or matter of uneasiness and
dislike in the Society of the godly, David ballanceth that which seems to be
sharpest in the one Society, against that which seems to be sweetest in the
other, and without respect unto other advantages, prefers the one above the
other. Hence some read the beginning of the words, Let the Righteous rather
smite me, with respect unto this Comparison and Balance.

Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him Reprove me, it
shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head; for yet my Prayer
shall be in their Calamity. The view of our Translation will evidence the words
to be Elliptical in the Original by the various Supplements which we make to
fill up the sense of them, and render them coherent. And this has put some
difficulty on the Interpretation of the Text, and caused some variety of
apprehensions in sober and Learned Expositors.

It is not unto my present purpose to engage into a discussion of all the
difficulties of the Text, seeing I design to found no other Doctrine thereon,
than what all will acknowledge to be contained in the words and their
coherence: I shall only therefore briefly open them, with respect unto our
present purpose, and its concernment in them.

(...) The Righteous, is any one opposed to the workers of Iniquity, v. 4. any
Righteous person whatever, any one who is of the Society and Communion of the
Righteous ones: For all the World falls under this distribution, as it will one
day appear. Let him smite me: The word (...) is seldom used in the Scripture,
but to signify a severe Stroke which shakes the Subject smitten, and causes
it to tremble. See Prove. 23.25. 1 Samuel 14.6. Psalm. 74.6. And as it is used for
the stroke of the Hammer on the Anvil in fashioning of the Iron, Isa. 41.7.
Wherefore the word (...) following may be taken adverbially as a Lenitive of
that Severity which this word imports. Let him smite me; but Leniter,
Benign, Misericorditer: Gently, Kindly, Friendly, Mercifully; And so some
Translations read the words; Let the Righteous smite me friendly, or kindly.

But there is no need to wrest the word to such unusual sense; for the Psalmist
intends to show, that so he may be delivered from the Society of ungodly men,
and enjoy the Communion of the Righteous, he would not deprecate the greatest
severities, which according to Rule, might be exercised in rebuking, or
reproving of him. And this he does with so full a satisfaction of mind, with
such an high valuation of the advantage he should have thereby, that he says
not he would bear it patiently and quietly, but (...) it will be unto me a
Benignity, a Mercy, a Kindness, as the word imports. And as it seems that some
reproofs, at least some regular dealings of Righteous persons with us, may come
as a stroke that makes us shake and tremble; so it is a good advance in
Spiritual Wisdom, to find out kindness and mercy in those that are so grievous
unto our natural spirits, unto Flesh and Blood.

(...) And let him reprove me. This manifests what he intends by smiting in the
foregoing words. It is reproofs that he intends; and these he calls smiting in
opposition unto the flattering, compliance of wicked men with one another in
the enjoyment of their Dainties, and with respect unto that smart unto the mind
and Affections, wherewith some of them are sometimes accompanied. But this word
directly expressing that subject matter whereof I intend to treat, must be
again spoken unto.

(...) These words have a double Interpretation; for they may be either
deprecatory of an evil implied, or declaratory of the Psalmist's sense of the
good he desired. Kimchi on the place observes, that his Father Joseph divided
the words of the Text, and began here a new sense, wherein the Psalmist returns
unto the close of the fourth verse; Let me not eat of their Dainties, and let
not their precious Oil, that is, their flatteries and soothings in sin, break
my Head; but let the Reproofs of the Righteous preserve me. And this sense is
followed by the vulgar Latin; Oleum autem peccatorum non impingat caput meum;
but the other Construction and sense of the words is more Natural: (...) Oleum
capitis, the Oil of the Head, we render an excellent Oil; and countenance may
be given unto that Interpretation from Exodus 30.23. where (...) Spices of the
Head, is well rendered Principal Spices. But I rather think that (...) Oil
powered on the Head, which was the manner of all Solemn Unctions, is intended.
This being a great privilege, and the Token of the Communication of great
mercy, the Psalmist compares the rebukes of the Righteous thereunto; and
therefore he adds (...) it shall not break my Head. Considering Reproofs in
their own Nature, he calls them smitings; some of them being very Sharp, as it
is needful they should be, where we are obliged to rebuke (...), in a piercing
and cutting manner, 2 Cor. 13.10. Tit. 1.13. But with respect unto their use,
benefit and advantage, they are like unto that anointing Oil, which being
poured on the Head, was both gentle and pleasant, and a Pledge of the
Communication of Spiritual privileges, whence no inconveniences would ensue.

The last clause of the words belonging not unto our present design, I shall
not insist on their explication.

Some few things must be further premised unto our Principal intention,
concerning the nature of those Reproofs which are proposed as a matter of such
Advantage in the Text. And,

1. The word (...) here used, signifies to Argue, to Dispute, to Contend in
judgment, as well as to reprove, rebuke, or reprehend. Its first signification
is to Argue, or to plead a Cause with Arguments. Hence it is used as a Common
Term between God and man, denoting the Reasons real or pretended only on the
one side and the other. So God himself speaks unto his People (...) Isa. 1.18.
Go to now and let us Plead, reason, or argue together. And Job calls his Pleas,
or Argument in Prayer unto God (...) Chap. 23.4. I would fill my mouth with
Arguments. Wherefore that only has the true Nature of a Reproof, which is
accompanied with Reasons and Arguments for the evincing of what it tends unto.
Rash, groundless, wrathful precipitate Censures and rebukes are evil in
themselves; and, in our present case, of no Consideration. Nor indeed ought any
one to engage in the Management of Reproofs, who is not furnished with Rule and
Argument to evince their necessity, and render them effectual. Sometimes things
may be so Circumstanced, as that a Reproof shall so carry its own Reason and
efficacious Conviction along with it, as that there will be no need of arguing,
or Pleas to make it useful. So the look of our Blessed Savior on Peter under
the Circumstances of his case, was a sufficient Reproof, though he spoke not
one word in its Confirmation. But ordinarily Cogent Reasons are the best
conveyances of Reproofs to the minds of men, be they of what sort they will.

2. Reproofs do always respect a Fault, an evil, a miscarriage, or a sin in
them that are reproved. There may be mutual admonitions, and exhortations among
Christians, with respect unto sundry things in the course of their Faith and
Obedience, without a regard unto any evil or miscarriage. The general nature of
a Reproof is an admonition, or exhortation, but it has its special nature from
its regard unto a fault in Course, or particular fact. And hence the word
signifies also to Chastise, wherein is a Correction for, and the means of a
recovery from a miscarriage; 2 Samuel 7.14. I will reprove him by the Rod of men,
that is, Chastise him. This therefore is that reproof which we intend, a
warning, Admonition, or Exhortation given unto any, whereby they are rebuked
for and with respect unto some moral evil or sin in their course, way,
practice, or any particular miscarriage, such as may render them obnoxious unto
Divine Displeasure, or Chastisement: for it is essential unto a regular
reproof, that in him who gives it, it may be accompanied with, or do proceed
from an apprehension, that the person reproved is by the matter of the reproof
rendered obnoxious unto the displeasure of God.

3. It may also be considered, that Reproving is not lest arbitrarily unto the
wills of men. Whatever seems to be so, it loses its nature, if it be not a
duty in him who Reproves, and come short of its efficacy. No wise man will
reprove, but when it is his Duty so to do, unless he design the just reproach
of a busy body for his Reward. The command is general with respect unto
Brother and Neighbor, Deuteronomy. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine
heart; Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him; But as to the particular discharge of this work as a Duty, there must be
either an especial Office, or an especial Relation, or a concurrence of
Circumstances for its warranty. God has in his wisdom and care given Rules and
bounds unto our Engagement unto Duties; without a regulation whereby, we shall
wander in them with endless Dissatisfactions unto our selves, and unnecessary
Provocations unto others. But the Duty of reproving with the love, wisdom,
tenderness and compassion required in the discharge of it; its Motives, Ends
and Circumstances; its proper Rules and Limitations, fall not under my present
consideration; but these things in general were necessary to be premised unto
what do so,

That which the Text instructs us in may be comprised in, this general
Observation,

Reproofs, though accompanied with some sharpness, if rightly received and duly
improved, are a mercy and advantage incomparably above all the satisfactions,
which a joint consent with others in sin and pleasures can afford.

The latter part of the Proposition I have mentioned only to express the
balance, that is proposed by the Psalmist, between the best and most desirable
advantages of wicked society on the one hand, and the sharpest or most
displeasing severities that accompany the communion of thc Righteous, or godly.
But I shall not at all handle the comparison, as designing only some Directions
how men should behave themselves under Reproofs, that they may be a kindness
and an Excellent Oil unto them; or how they may by them obtain Spiritual
benefit and Advantage unto their own Souls. And this, however at present the
matter may be managed, is of it self of great Importance. For as in the state
of weakness and imperfection, of mistakes and miscarriages wherein we are,
there is no outward help or aid of more use and advantage unto us, than
seasonable Reproofs: so in the right receiving and improving of them, as high a
trial of the spirits of men, as to their interest in Wisdom and folly, does
consist, as in any thing that does befall them, or wherewith they may be
exercised. For as scorners of Reproofs, those that hear them unwillingly, that
bear them haughtily and impatiently, with designs of revenge, or disdainful
Retortions, have the Characters of Pride and Folly indelibly fixed them by the
Holy Ghost; so their due Admission and Improvement is in the same infallible
Truth represented as an evident pledge of wisdom, and an effectual means of its
increase. This is so much and so frequently insisted on in that great Treasure
of all wisdom, Spiritual, Natural and Political, namely, the Book of Proverbs,
that it is altogether needless to call over any particular Testimonies unto
that purpose.

Two things we are to enquire into, in compliance with our present Design.

1. How Reproofs may be duly received.

2. How they may be duly improved; whereunto the Reasons shall be added why
they ought so to be.

I. That we may receive Reproofs in a due manner, three things are to be
considered. (1) The general Qualification of the Reprover; (2) The Nature of
the Reproof; And (3) The matter of it.

1. The Psalmist here desires that his Reprover may be a Righteous man. Let the
Righteous smite me, let him reprove me. To give and take reproofs is a Dictate
of the Law of Nature, whereby every man is obliged to seek the Good of others,
and to promote it according to their ability and opportunity. The former is
directed by that love which is due unto others; the latter by that which is due
unto our selves: which two are the great Rules, and give measure to the Duties
of all Societies, whether Civil, or Spiritual. Wherefore it does not evacuate a
Reproof, or Discharge him who is reproved, from the duty of attending unto it,
that he by whom it is managed, is not Righteous, yea is openly wicked; For the
Duty it self being an effect of the Law of Nature, it is the same, for the
substance of it, by whomsoever it is performed. Yea oft-times such Moral, or
rather immoral Qualifications, as render not only the Reprover less
considerable, but also the Reproof it self, until thoroughly weighed and
examined, obnoxious unto prejudicate Conceptions, do occasion a greater and
more signal Exercise of Grace and Wisdom in him that is reproved, than would
have been stirred up, had all things concurred unto the exact Regularity of the
Reproof. However it is desirable on many accounts, that he who Reproves us be
himself a Righteous person, and be of us esteemed so to be: For as such a one
alone will or can have a due sense of the evil reproved, with a right Principle
and End in the Discharge of his own Duty; so the minds of them that are
reproved, are by their sense of his Integrity excluded from those insinuations
of evasions, which prejudices and Suggestions of just causes of Reflections on
their Reprover will offer unto them; especially without the exercise of
singular Wisdom and humility, will all the Advantages of a just Reproof be
lost, where the allowed practice of greater sins and evils than that Reproved,
is daily chargeable on the Reprover. Hence is that Reflection of our Savior on
the useless, Hypocritical Diligence of men in pulling the mote out of their
Brother's eyes, whilst they have beams in their own, Mat. 7.3, 4, 5. The Rule
in this Case is, If the Reprover be a Righteous person, consider the Reprover
first, and then the Reproof; if he be otherwise, consider the Reproof, and the
Reprover not at all.

II. The Nature of a Reproof is also to be considered; and this is threefold:
for every Reproof is either Authoritative, or Fraternal, or merely Friendly and
occasional.

Authoritative Reproofs are either (1) Ministerial; or (2) Parental; or (3)
Despotical.

1. There is an especial Authority accompanying Ministerial Reproofs, which we
ought especially to consider and improve. Now I understand not hereby those
Doctrinal Reproofs, when in the Dispensation of that Word of Grace and Truth,
which is profitable for Correction and Reproof, 2 Timothy 3.16. they speak and
exhort and rebuke the sins of men with all Authority, Tit. 2.15. but the
occasional Application of the Word unto individual persons upon their
unanswerableness in any thing unto the Truth wherein they have been instructed.
For every Right Reproof is but the orderly Application of a Rule of Truth unto
any Person under his miscarriage, for his healing and recovery. Where therefore
a Minister of the Gospel in the Preaching of the Word does declare and Teach
the Rule of Holy obedience with Ministerial Authority, if any of the Flock
committed to his charge shall appear in any thing to walk contrary thereunto,
or to have transgressed it in any offensive Instance, as it is his Duty, the
discharge whereof will be required of him at the great Day, particularly to
apply the Truth unto them in the way of private, personal Reproof: so he is
still therein accompanied with his Ministerial Authority, which makes his
Reproof to be of a peculiar nature, and as such to be accounted for: For as he
is thus commanded as a Minister to Exhort, Rebuke, Admonish and reprove every
one of his charge as occasion shall require; so in the doing of it he does
discharge and Exercise his Ministerial Office and Power. And he that is wise
will forego no considerations, that may give efficacy unto a just and due
Reproof; especially not such a one as, if it be neglected, will not only be an
aggravation of the evil for which he is reproved, but will also accumulate his
guilt with a contempt of the Authority of Jesus Christ. Wherefore the Rule here
is, The more clear and evident the representation of the Authority of Christ is
in the Reproof, the more Diligent ought we to be in our Attendance unto it, and
compliance with it. He is the great Reprover of his Church, Rev. 3.19. All the
use, Power, Authority, and efficacy of Ecclesiastical Reproofs, flow Originally
and are derived from him. In Ministerial reproofs there is the most express and
immediate Application of his Authority made unto the minds of men; which if it
be carelessly slighted, or proudly despised, or evacuated by perverse
cavillings, as is the manner of some in such cases, it is an open evidence of
an Heart that never yet sincerely took upon it his Law and Yoke.

These things are spoken of the Personal Repoofs that are given by Ministers,
principally unto those of their respective Flocks, as occasion does require,
wherein I shall pray, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the
Sheep, would yet make us all more Faithful and diligent, as the season wherein
we live does abundantly require it. But moreover Church Censures in Admonition
and Excommunication have the nature and ends of Ministerial reproofs. But the
handling of their nature and use, with the Duties of those persons who justly
fall under them, and the benefit which they may reap thereby, is too long and
large a subject to be here diverted unto.

2. Authoritative reproof is Parental. Reproof is indeed one of the greatest
and most principal Duties of Parents toward Children, and without which all
others for the most part do but pamper them unto slaughter and Ruin. Neglect
hereof is that which has filled us with so many Hophni's, Phinease's, and
Absolom's, whose outrageous wickednesses are directly charged on the sinful
lenity and neglect in this matter even of godly Parents. And indeed whereas
some Parents are openly vicious and debauched even in the sight of their
Children, in a sensual neglect and contempt of the Light of Nature, whereby
they lose all their Authority in reproving, as well as all Care about it; and
whereas the most have so little regard unto sin as sin, whilst things are
tolerably well in outward concerns, that they neglect the reproof of it as
such; and many through a foolish contemptible prevalency of fond Affection,
will take no notice of the sinful follies, extravagancies and miscarriages of
their Children, until all things grow desperate with them; but sooth up and
applaud them in such effects of Pride, Vanity and Wantonness, as ought to be
most severely reproved in them, the woeful and dreadful degeneracy of the Age
wherein we live owes it self much unto the horrible neglect of Parents in this
Duty. That Parental reproof is a Duty taught by the Law of Nature, confirmed in
the Scripture, enjoined under severe threatenings and penalties, exemplified in
Instances of Blessings and Vengeance on its Performance or neglect, rendered
indispensably necessary by that Depravation of our Natures, which works in
Children from the womb, and grows up in strength and efficacy together with
them, I should not need to prove, if it lay directly before me; it being a
matter of universal acknowledgment. I shall only say, that whereas there is on
many accounts an immediate impress of Divine Authority on Parental reproofs,
that which Children ought to consider and know for themselves is, that a
continuance in the neglect, or contempt of them, is a token that seldom fails
of approaching temporal and eternal Destruction, Prove. 30.17.

3. Authoritative reproof is Despotical; namely that of Governors, Rulers, and
Masters of Families. This also partakes of the Nature of those foregoing, and
being a Duty founded in the Law of Nature, as well as enforced by positive
Divine commands, casts a peculiar obligation to obedience on them that are so
reproved. And where Servants regard not sober and Christian reproofs, as the
Ordinance of God for their good, they lose the advantages of their condition,
and may be looked upon as unsanctified Sufferers in a state of Bondage, which
has an especial Character of the first curse upon it.

2. Reproof is Fraternal, or such as is mutual between the members of the same
Church, by virtue of that especial Relation wherein they stand, and the
obligation thence arising unto mutual watchfulness over each other, with
Admonitions, Exhortations and Reproofs. As this is peculiarly appointed by our
Savior, Mat. 18.15. in confirmation of the Ordinance in the Church of the Jews
to that purpose, Lev. 19.17. and confirmed by many Precepts and Directions in
the New Testament, Romans 15.18. 1 These. 5.14. Heb. 3.12, 13. Chap. 12.15, 16. So
the neglect of it is that which has lost us, not only the benefit, but also
the very nature of Church Societies. Wherefore our improvement of Rebukes in
this kind depends much on a due consideration of that Duty and Love, from
whence they do proceed: For this we are by the Royal Law of Charity obliged
unto the belief of, where there is not open evidence unto the contrary. And
whereas it may be those things, for which we may be thus reproved, are not of
the greatest importance in themselves, who that is wise will by the neglect of
the reproof it self contract the open guilt of contemning the Wisdom, Love and
Care of Christ in the Institution of this Ordinance?

III. And Lastly, Reproofs are Friendly or occasional, such as may be
Administered and managed by any Persons, as Reasons and Opportunities require,
from the common Principle of universal Love unto mankind, especially toward
them that are of the Household of Faith. These also having in them the entire
Nature of Reproofs, will fall under all the ensuing Directions, which have a
general respect thereunto.

If then we would duly make use of, and Improve unto our Advantage the
Reproofs that may be given us, we are seriously to consider the nature of them,
with respect unto those by whom they are managed, for all the things we have
mentioned are suited to influence our minds unto a regard of them, and
compliance with them.

2. The matter of a Reproof is duly to be weighed by him who designs any
benefit thereby. And the first consideration of it is: whether it be true, or
false. I shall not carry them unto more minute Distribution, of the Substance
and Circumstances of the matter intended, of the Whole, or Part of it; but do
suppose that from some Principal consideration of it, every Reproof, as to its
matter, may be denominated, and esteemed true or false. And here our own
consciences with due Application unto the Rule are the proper Judge and Umpire.
Conscience, if any way enlightened from the Word, will give an impartial
sentence concerning the Guilt or Innocence of the Person, with respect unto the
matter of a reproof. And there can be no more infallible evidence of a
miscarriage in such a condition, than when Pride, or Passion, or Prejudice, or
any corrupt Affection, can either out-brave, or stifle that compliance with a
just reproof, which Conscience will assuredly tender. Romans 2.14.

If a Reproof, as to the matter of it, be false, or unjust, and so judged in an
unbiassed Conscience, it may be considered in matter of Right, and of Fact. In
the first case the matter may be true, and yet the reproof formally false and
evil. In the latter the matter may be false, and yet the reproof an acceptable
duty.

1. A Reproof is false in matter of right, or formally, when we are reproved
for that as evil, which is indeed our duty to perform. So David was fiercely
reproved by his Brother Eliab for coming unto the Battle against the
Philistines, ascribing it to his Pride and the Naughtiness of his Heart:
whereunto he only replied, What have I done? Is there not a Cause? 1 Samuel
17.28, 29. And Peter rebuked our Lord Jesus Christ himself for declaring the
Doctrine of the Cross, Mark 8.33. And so we may be reproved for the Principal
Duties that God requires of us. And if men were as free in reproving, as they
are in reproaching, we should not escape from daily rebukes for whatever we do
in the worship of God. Now though such reproofs generally may be looked on as
Temptations, and so to be immediately rejected, as they were in the cases
instanced in; yet may they sometimes, where they proceed from Love, and are
managed with moderation, be considered as necessary cautions to look heedfully
unto the Grounds and Reasons we proceed upon in the Duties opposed, at which
others do take offense.

2. If the Reproof be false in matter of Fact, wherein that is charged on us,
and reproved in us, whereof we are no ways guilty, three things are to be
considered, that it may not be unuseful unto us.

I. The Circumstances of the Reprover; as (1) Whether he do proceed on some
probable mistake; or (2) Credulity and easiness in taking up reports; or (3) On
evil, groundless surmises of his own; or (4) From a real godly jealousy, which
has been imposed on, as easily it will be, by some appearances of Truth.
Without a due Consideration of these things we shall never know how to carry it
aright toward them, by whom we are reproved for that whereof we are not guilty.

2. Consider aright the difference between a Reproof, and a Reproach: for they
may be both false alike, and that whereof we are reproved, have no more truth
in it, than that wherewith we are reproached. Yea, we may be honestly reproved
for that which is false, and wickedly reproached with that which is true; so
Augustine calls the Language of the Maid unto his Mother about drinking of Wine,
durum convitium, though the matter of it were true enough. But a Reproach is
the Acting of a mind designing of, and rejoicing in evil. Unto a Reproof it is
essential that it spring from Love. Whom I love I rebuke, is the absolute Rule
of these things. Let a man rebuke another, though for that which indeed is
false, if it be in Love, it is a Reproof; but let him rebuke another, though
for that which is True, if it be from a mind delighting in evil, it is a
Reproach, and if it be false, it is moreover a Calumny.

3. Where a man in such cases is fully justified by the Testimony of his own
Conscience, bearing Witness unto his Integrity and Innocence, yet may he
greatly miscarry under the occasion, if he attend not diligently unto his own
Spirit, which most men judge to be set at the utmost liberty under such
injurious Provocations as they esteem them. Wherefore to keep our minds unto
Sedate, Christian moderation in such cases, and that we may not lose the
Advantage of what is befallen us, we ought immediately to apply them unto such
other Duties as the present Occasion does require: As,

1. To Search our own Hearts and ways, whether we have not indeed upon us the
guilt of some greater evils, than that which is falsely charged on us, or for
which we are reproved on mistake. And if it appear so upon examination, we
shall quickly see what little reason we have to tumultuate, and rise up with
indignation against the charge we suffer under. And may we not thence see much
of the Wisdom and goodness of God, who suffers us to be exercised with what
we can bear off with the impenetrable Shield of a good Conscience, whilst he
graciously hides and covers those greater evils of our hearts, with respect
whereunto we cannot but condemn our selves?

2. To consider that it is not of our selves that we are not guilty of the evil
suspected and charged. No man of sobriety can on any mistake reprove us for any
thing, be it never so false, but that it is merely of sovereign Grace that we
have not indeed contracted the guilt of it. And humble thankfulness unto God on
this occasion for his real preserving Grace will abate the edge and take off
the fierceness of our indignation against men for their supposed injurious
dealings with us.

3. Such Reproofs, if there be not open malice and continued wickedness
manifest in them, are to be looked on as gracious Providential warnings, to
take heed lest at any time we should be truly overtaken with that which at
present we are falsely charged withal. We little know the Dangers that
continually attend us, the Temptations wherewith we may be surprised at
unawares, nor how near on their account we may be unto any sin or evil, which
we judge our selves most remote from, and least obnoxious unto. Neither on the
other hand can we readily understand the ways and means whereby the Holy Wise
God issues forth those hidden provisions of preventing Grace, which are
continually administered for our Preservation. And no wise man, who understands
any thing of the deceitfulness of his own heart, with the numberless Numbers of
invisible occasions of sin, wherewith he is encompassed continually, but will
readily embrace such Reproofs as Providential warnings unto watchfulness in
those things whereof before he was not aware.

4. When the mind by these Considerations is rendered Sedate and weighed unto
Christian moderation, then ought a man in such cases patiently and peaceably to
undertake the Defense of his Innocence, and his own Vindication. And herein
also there is need of much Wisdom and Circumspection; it being a matter of no
small difficulty for a man duly to manage self, and Innocence, both which are
apt to influence us unto some more than Ordinary vehemence of Spirit.

But the Directions which might, and indeed ought to be given under all these
particular Heads, would by no means be confined unto the Limits fixed to this
Discourse.

3. If the matter of the Reproof be True in fact, then it is duly to be
considered, whether the offense, for which any one is reproved, be Private, or
Public attended with scandal.

If it be private, then it is to be weighed, whether it was known unto, and
observed in and by the Person himself reproved, or no, before he was so
reproved. If it were not so known, as we may justly be reproved for many
things, which through Ignorance, or Inadvertency, or Compliance with the
Customs of the World, we may have taken no notice of; and if the reproof bring
along light and conviction with it, the first especial improvement of such a
peculiar reproof is thankfulness to God for it, as a means of deliverance from
any way, or work, or path that was unacceptable in his sight. And hence a great
Prospect may be taken of the following deportment of the mind under other
Reproofs. For a readiness to take in Light and Conviction with respect unto any
evil, that we are ignorant of, is an evidence of a readiness to submit to the
Authority of God in any other Rebukes that have their Convictions going before
them; so the heart that is prone to fortify it self by any Pleas or Pretenses
against convictions of sin, in what it does not yet own so to be, will be as
prone unto obstinacy under Reproofs in what it cannot but acknowledge to be
evil.

If it were known before to the person reproved, but not supposed by him to be
observed by others, under the covert of which imagination sin often
Countenanceth it self, that Soul will never make a due improvement of a
Reproof, who is not first sensible of the Care and kindness of God in driving
him from that retreat and hold, where the Interest of sin had placed its
chiefest Reserve.

Sins, so far Public as to give matter of offense or scandal, are the ordinary
Subject of all orderly Reproofs, and therefore need not in particular to be
spoken unto.

Having showed the Nature of Reproofs in general, with such considerations of
the matter of them, as have afforded occasion unto sundry particular Directions
relating unto the duty under Discussion, it remains only that we farther
explain and confirm the two generals comprised in the observation deduced from
the Text; namely, (1) Why we ought to receive reproofs orderly, or regularly
given unto us, esteeming of them as a singular privilege? and (2) How we may
duly improve them unto their proper end, the Glory of God, and the Spiritual
Advantage of our own Souls? As to the first of these we may observe,

1. That mutual reproofs for the curing of evil, and preventing of danger in
one another, are Prime Dictates of the Law of Nature, and that Obligation,
which our Participation in the same Being, Offspring, Original and End, to seek
the good of each other, does lay upon us. This God designed in our Creation,
and this the rational Constitution of our Natures directs us unto. To seek and
endeavor for each other all that good, whereof we are capable in Time, or unto
Eternity, was indelibly implanted upon our Natures, and indispensably necessary
unto that Society among our selves, with the great end of our joint living unto
God, for which we were made. All the mutual evils of mankind, whether of
Persons, or of Nations, designed or perpetrated against one another, are
effects of our fatal Prevarication from the Law of our Creation. Hence Cain,
the first open violent transgressor of the Rules and bounds of Humane Society,
thought to justify or excuse himself by a Renunciation of that Principle,
which God in Nature had made the Foundation of a Political or Sociable life
with respect unto Temporal and Eternal ends; Am I, says he, my Brother's
keeper? Genesis 4. Yea, God had made every man the keeper of his Brother so far,
as that they should in all things in their opportunities, and unto their Power,
seek their good, and Deliverance from Evil. In those things which are good unto
us, those which are Spiritual and Eternal have the Preeminence. These nothing
can prejudice but Sin and Mortal evils, whose prevention therefore in one
another, so far as we are able, is a Duty of the Law of Nature, and the prime
effect of that Love which we owe unto the whole Offspring of that one Blood,
whereof God has made all Nations. And one of the most effectual means for that
end are the reproofs whereof we treat. And the Obligation is the same on those
that give them, and those to whom they are given, with respect unto their
several Interests in this Duty. Wherefore to neglect, to despise, not
thankfully to receive such reproofs, as are justly and regularly given unto us
at any time, is to contemn the Law of our Creation, and to trample on the prime
effect of Fraternal Love. Yea, to despise Reproofs and to Discountenance the
discharge of that Duty, is to open a Door unto that mutual hatred and dislike,
which in the sight of God is Murder. See Lev. 19.17. with 1 John 3.15. Let us
therefore look to our selves, for there is no greater sign of a degeneracy from
the Law, and all the ends of our Creation, than an unwillingness to receive
reproofs justly deserved and regularly administered; or not to esteem of them,
as a blessed effect of the Wisdom and goodness of God toward us.

2. Whereas the light of Nature is variously obscured, and its directive power
debilitated in us, God has renewed on us an Obligation unto this Duty by
particular Institutions both under the Old Testament and the New. The Truth is,
the efficacy of the Law of Creation, as unto Moral Duties, being exceedingly
impaired by the entrance of sin; and the exercise of Original native love
toward mankind being impeded and obstructed by that confusion and disorder,
whereinto the whole state of mankind was cast by sin, every one thereby being
made the enemy of another, as the Apostle declares, Tit. 3.3. not being cured
by that coalescency into evil Societies which respects only Political, and
Temporal ends, the discharge of this Duty was utterly lost, at least beyond
that which was merely Parental. Wherefore God in the Institution of his Church,
both under the Old Testament and the New, did mould men into such Peculiar
Societies and Relations, as wherein way might be made meet again for the
exercise thereof. He has so disposed of us, that every one may know every one
whom he is obliged to reprove, and every one may know every one whom he is
obliged to hear. And as he has hereby cured that confusion we were cast into,
which was obstructive of the exercise of this Duty; so by the Renovation of
positive commands, attended with Instructions, Directions, Promises and
Threatenings, enforcing the giving and receiving of Reproofs, with respect unto
Moral and Spiritual ends, he has relieved us against that obscurity of Natural
light which we before labored under. Should I go to express the Commands,
Directions, Exhortations, Promises and Threatenings, which are given in the
Scripture to this purpose, it would be a work as endless, as I suppose it
needless to all that are conversant in the Holy Writings. It may suffice unto
our present purpose, that, there being an express institution of God for the
giving and taking of Reproofs, and that an effect of infinite Goodness,
Benignity and Love toward us; not thankfully to receive Reproofs, when it is
our Lot to deserve them, and to have them, is to despise the Authority of God
over us, and his gracious Care for us. When therefore it befalls any to be
justly and orderly reproved, let him call to mind the Authority and love of God
therein, which will quickly give him that sense of their worth and excellency,
as will make him thankful for them; which is the first step unto their due
Improvement.

3. A due consideration of the use, benefit and advantage of them, will give
them a ready admission into our minds and affections. Who knows how many Souls,
that are now at rest with God, have been prevented by Reproofs, as the outward
means, from going down into the Pit? Unto how many have they been an occasion
of conversion and sincere turning unto God? How many have been recovered by
them from a state of backsliding, and awakened from a secure sleep in sin? How
many great and bloody sins has the perpetration of been obviated by them? How
many snares of Temptations have they been the means to break and cancel? What
revivings have they been to grace, what disappointments unto the snares of
Satan, who can declare? The Advantage, which the Souls of men do or might
receive every day by them, is more to be valued than all earthly Treasures
whatever: And shall any of us, when it comes to be our concern, through a
predominancy of Pride, passion and prejudice, or through cursed Sloth and
Security, the usual means of the defeatment of these advantages, manifest our
selves to have no interest in, or valuation of these things, by an unreadiness
or unwillingness to receive Reproofs, when tendered unto us in the way, and
according to the mind of God?

But now suppose we are willing to receive them, it will be enquired in the
last place, what Considerations may further us in their due Improvement? and
what Directions may be given thereunto? An Answer to this enquiry shall shut up
this Discourse. And I shall say hereunto,

1. If there be not open evidence unto the contrary, it is our Duty to judge
that every Reproof is given us in a way of Duty. This will take off offense
with respect unto the Reprover, which unjustly taken is an assured entrance
into a way of losing all benefit and advantage by the Reproof. The reason why
any man does regularly reprove another, is because God requires him so to do,
and by his command has made it his Duty toward him that is reproved. And do
we judge it reasonable that one should neglect their Duty toward God and us,
and in some degree or other make himself guilty of our sins, for no other
cause, but lest we should be displeased, that we are not suffered to sin
securely, and it may be to perish eternally? And if we are convinced that it is
the Duty of another to Reprove us, we cannot but be convinced that it is our
Duty to hearken and attend thereunto. And this will fix the mind unto a due
consideration of the present Duty that lies before us, and what is our just
concernment in the Reproof. Besides if it be done in a way of Duty, it is done
in Love; for all orderly rebukes are effects of Love. And if we are convinced
of any one, that he does reprove in a way of Duty, we must be satisfied that
what he does proceeds from Love, without by-ends or Dissimulation. For what
does not so, be it what it will, belongs not to rebuking in a way of Duty. And
this will remove all obstructing prejudices in all who have the least gracious
ingenuity. Ahab despised the warning of Micaiah, because he thought they
mutually hated one another; he knew how it was with himself, and falsely so
judged of the Prophet by his necessary sharpness toward him. But where there
are such surmises, all advantages of reproofs will be assuredly lost. Where
therefore our minds are satisfied that any reproof is an effect of Love, and
given in a way of Duty, Dimidium facti, we are half way in the discharge of the
Duty directed unto.

2. Take heed of cherishing habitually such disorders, vices and distempers of
mind, as are contrary unto this Duty, and will frustrate the design of it. Such
are (1) Hastiness of Spirit. Some men's minds do with such fury apply themselves
unto their first apprehension of things, that they cast the whole Soul into
disorder, and render it incapable of further rational considerations. There may
be, it is possible, some failures and mistakes in useful and necessary
Reproofs, in matter, manner, circumstance, some way, or other. This immediately
is seized on by men of hasty Spirits (a Vice and Folly sufficiently condemned
in Scripture,) turned unto a Provocation, made a matter of strife and dispute,
until the whole advantage of the Reproof is utterly lost and vanishes. A
Quiet, Gentle, Considerative, Sedate frame of Spirit is required unto this
Duty. (2) Pride, and Haughtiness of mind, Self-conceit, Elation of Spirit,
which will be inseparably accompanied with the contempt of others, and a scorn
that any should think themselves either so much wiser, or so much better than
our selves, as to reprove us in any kind, are a fenced Wall against any
benefit, or advantage by Reproofs; yea, things that will turn Judgment into
Hemlock, and the most sovereign Antidote into Poison. No wild Beast in a toil
does more rave and tear and rend, than a Proud man, when he is reproved. And
therefore he who manifests himself so to be, has secured himself from being
any more troubled by serious reproofs from any wise man whatever. See Prove.
9.7, 8. (3) Prejudices; which are so variously occasioned, as it were endless
to recount. If now we make it not our constant business to purge our minds from
these depraved Affections, they will never fail effectually to exert themselves
on all occasions to the utter defeatment of all use in, or benefit by the most
necessary and regular reproofs.

3. Reckon assuredly, that a fault, a miscarriage, which any one is duly
reproved for, if the reproof be not received, and improved as it ought, is not
only aggravated, but accumulated with a new crime, and marked with a dangerous
Token of an incurable Evil. See Prove. 29.1. Let men do what they can, bear
themselves high in their expressions, grow angry, passionate, excuse or
palliate, unless they are seared, and profligately obstinate, their own
Consciences will take part with a just and regular Reproof. If hereupon they
come not up to amendment, their guilt is increased by the occasional excitation
of the Light of Conscience to give it an especial charge, and there is an
additional sin in the contempt of the Reproof it self. But that which
principally should make men careful, and even tremble in this case is, that
they are put on a Trial whether ever they will forsake the evil of their ways
and doings or no: For he who is orderly reproved for any fault, and neglects or
despises the Rebuke, can have no assurance that he shall ever be delivered
from the evil rebuked; but has just cause to fear that he is entering into a
course of hardness and impenitency.

4. It is useful unto the same end immediately to compare the Reproof with the
Word of Truth. This is the measure, standard and directory of all Duties,
whereunto in all dubious cases we should immediately retreat for advice and
counsel. And whereas there are two things considerable in a Reproof; First, the
matter of it, that it be true, and a just cause or reason of a rebuke; and
Secondly, the right which the Reprover has unto this Duty, with the Rule which
he walked by therein; if both these for the substance of them prove to be
justified by the Scripture, then have we in such a case no more to do with the
Reprover, nor any of his circumstances, but immediately and directly with God
himself: for where he gives express warranty and direction for a Duty in his
Word, his own Authority is as directly exerted thereby, as if he spoke unto us
from Heaven. Hereby will the mind be prevented from many wanderings and vain
reliefs, which foolish imagination will suggest, and be bound up unto its
present Duty. Let our unwillingness to be reproved be what it will, as also our
prejudices against our Reprover, if we are not at least free to bring the
Consideration and Examination of the one and the other unto the Word of Truth,
it is because our deeds are evil, and therefore we love Darkness more than
Light. No milder, nor more gentle censure can be passed on any, who is not free
to bring any Reproof that may be given him unto an impartial Trial by the Word,
whether it be according to the mind of God, or no. If this be done, and
conviction of its Truth and necessity do then appear; then let the Soul know it
has to do with God himself, and wisely consider what answer he will return,
what account he will give unto him. Wherefore

5. The best way to keep our Souls in a readiness rightly to receive and duly
to improve such Reproofs as may regularly be given us by any, is to keep and
preserve our Souls and Spirits in a constant awe and reverence of the Reproofs
of God which are recorded in his Word. The neglect, or contempt of these
reproofs is that which the generality of mankind do split themselves upon, and
perish eternally. This is so fully and Graphically expressed, Prove. 1. that
nothing can be added thereunto. And the great means, whereby much hardness
comes upon others through the deceitfulness of sin, is want of keeping up a due
sense or reverence of Divine Reproofs and Threatenings on their Souls. When this
is done, when our hearts are kept up unto an awful regard of them, exercised
with a continual meditation on them, made tender, careful, watchful by them,
any just Reproof from any, that falls in compliance with them, will be
conscienciously observed, and carefully improved.

6. We shall fail in this Duty, unless we are always accompanied with a deep
sense of our frailty, weakness, readiness to halt, or miscarry, and thereon a
necessity of all the Ordinances and Visitations of God, which are designed to
preserve our Souls. Unless we have due apprehensions of our own state and
condition here, we shall never kindly receive warnings beforehand to avoid
approaching dangers; nor duly improve Rebukes for being overtaken with them.
It is the humble Soul, that fears always, and that from a sense of its own
weakness, yea, the treacheries and deceitfulness of its heart, with the power
of those Temptations whereunto it is continually exposed, that is ever like to
make work of the Duty here directed unto.

Wherein does appear the Blessedness of Forgiveness? and how it may be
obtained? Sermon. XXIX.
Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered.


OF all the pains or torments that any of the Children of Men do or can feel in
this Life, none are comparable to those which proceed from the lashes and
wounds of a guilty conscience, under the apprehensions of the anger of a
Sin-revenging God, and the impression of some scalding drops of his wrath upon
the Soul. Prove. 18.14. The Spirit of a Man will sustain his infirmity, but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? David had ventured to transgress, and that very
hainously: and in his breaking of God's Law, he had broken his own peace; in
his dishonouring of God's Name, he had wounded his own Conscience. After his
sin, David is shy of God, and keeps silence for a while, makes no confession;
God is highly offended, and hides his face from him, but lays his hand sorely
upon him, making such a deep impression of his displeasure upon his Spirit,
that he sunk under the weight of it; and it became so very grievous unto him,
that he roareth out all the day under the horrible anguish which he felt
hereby; yea, he complains that his moisture was hereby turned into the
drought of Summer. In this condition David could find no relief, no ease, or
asswagement of his grief, until upon acknowledgement of his Sin he had obtained
forgiveness, and God through his free grace, and tender mercy, had covered his
iniquity, as we shall find in the 3, 4, and 5. verses of this Psalm; which I
take to be the occasion of the joyful acclamation, and sweet expression in my
Text, the first verse of the Psalm, concerning the blessedness of remission, or
happiness of the man that has, with him, obtained so great a privilege; which
privilege none have a greater sight of, than those that have felt the wounds
and smart, and roared under the horror of an accusing Conscience, and been
terrified with the furious rebukes of God's angry Countenance. And because this
was David's case, therefore he might the more feelingly Pronounce those to be
Blessed, whose Sins were pardoned. Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered.

Blessed] The word in the Original signifies Blessedness, (...)
and it is read in the plural number, because as one says: That Man is many
ways blessed, he is blessed in this world; Vir ille est multis modis beatus,
nempe in hoc mundo, and in altero est beatissimu^, and faelicissimus, ut
propriae videantur beatitudines and ad eum singulariter pertinere. Genebrardus.
Quia multa bona debent concurrere ad beatitudinem; vel ut ostenderet t^lem
cumulate beatum esse. Pol. Synop.

Alii (...) est interjectio sive adverbium, and sic Rhetorica exclamatio ex
abrupte, vel laeta exclamatio, de faelicitate ejus. O beat illum! Sic
Schindler.

(...)

Quibus remissa est iniquitas. Calvin.

Condonati praevaricationis cui demittitur praevaricatio. Pagnin. Qui levetus a
defectione. Jun. Trem. Vel qui exoneratus a transgressione; a quo ablata
transgressio. Pisca. absolutus a crimine. Pol. ex Gei.


and in the other world, he is most blessed and happy; So that Blessedness
seems most properly to be his, and singularly to belong to him; and it is the
plural number, because many good things concur to true Blessedness; or to show
that such a one is cumulatively happy, he has a heap of blessings upon him;
Thus our learned Mr. Pool in his Synopsis. The same Author observes, that some
take the word Blessed in the Hebrew to be an Interjection, or Adverb: And so
make this to be a Rhetorical, though abrupt, exclamation, or a joyful
acclamation at the happiness of such.

Whose transgression is forgiven] There are diverse versions of these words. One
translates them out of the Hebrew, whose iniquity is remitted. Another, whose
prevarication is forgiven. Others, and that nearer the sense of the Hebrew
words, who is eased of his defection, or unburdened of his transgression.
Another, from whom his transgression is taken away. Another, who is absolved
from his Crime; all which versions agree in the same sense with our
Translation, whose transgression is forgiven; for remission of Iniquity, or
Prevarication, is the same as the forgiveness of Transgression; to have the sin
taken away, to be eased and unburdened of the transgression, what is it more
than to have the sin forgiven? forasmuch as the weight and load of guilt is by
forgiveness removed, whereby alone the Conscience is truly eased; and so to be
absolved from Crime, is as much as to be acquitted from all Obligation of
punishment; and this is done in forgiveness of sin.

Whose sin is covered] He is Blessed whose sin is covered, (...)
not he whose sins are covered by himself; So Prove. 28.13. He that covers his
sins shall not prosper; all ought to acknowledge unto God without hiding any, as
v. 5th. of this Psalm. I acknowledged my sins unto thee, and mine iniquity have
I not hid. But he is Blessed whose sin is covered by God. Psalm. 85.2. Thou have
forgiven the iniquity of thy People, thou have covered all their sin. Sin is
covered, when it is covered by God; and when it is covered from God; not as if
any sin were or could be covered from the Eye, and view of his Omnisciency; but
sin is covered from him, when it is covered from his angry Eye, and his
wrathful, revengeful Countenance: That is, when God cease to be angry for the
sin, through his reconciliation to the Sinner. Piscator notes upon the place,
that sin is here compared to filthinesses, which use to be covered, that they
may not offend the Eye. When the offense of God's Eye is removed, then sin may
be said to be covered. And it is observed, that in the Hebrew the same word,
Tectum ab irae vel ultionis Dei fa^te. Pol. ex Gei.

Peccatum comparatur serdibus, quae tegi solent, ne oculos offendant. Piscator.

Vt operculo illo lex tegehatur per quam cognitio pec^ati: Sic Christus peccata
tegit, remittit and expiat, ne lex ultra accuset and condemnet, placatum Dei
Patris irae per Filium, tectum est (seu opertum) peccatum per Christum scilicet
prepitiatorium nostrum. Merc. in Pasco.


which signifies a covering, does signify also an expiation: and the covering
of the Mercy-Seat, which here may be alluded unto, which was called the
Propitiatory, comes from the same Root; which Propitiatory, or Covering, did
cover the Tables of the Law, the Handwriting against us; and this was a Type
of Christ our Propitiation; who having appeased his Fathers anger does cover
our sins, that the Law shall not accuse or condemn us. Sin is covered by God,
when he hides his Face from it. Psalm. 51.9. when he casts it behind his Back.
Isa. 38.17. when he throws it into the depth of the Sea. Mic. 7.19. So that
this covering of sin is of the same import as the former expression, namely,
the forgiving of it.

Quest. 1. Wherein does appear Blessedness of forgiveness?

Quest. 2. How forgiveness may be obtained?

Quest. 1. Wherein the Blessedness of forgiveness does appear? To evidence
this, I shall give the Reasons, why such must needs be Blessed whose
transgressions are forgiven.

Reas. 1. Such must needs be Blessed whose transgressions are forgiven, because
God does pronounce them Blessed, as in the Text, Blessed is he whose iniquities
are forgiven, whose sins are covered. David wrote these words not from himself,
but as he was inspired by the Holy Ghost; and if any saying in the whole Book
of the Scriptures be the Word of God, (as all of them are) this is his Word,
and this is his Sentence, which is confirmed in the New Testament, Romans 4.7.
the Apostle Paul quoting these very words to prove the Doctrine of
justification by Faith without works; God pronounces such to be Blessed
whose Iniquities are forgiven, and therefore they must needs be Blessed,
because God speaks of things as they are; never did a lie, falsehood, or
mistake proceed out of his Mouth. God, who alone gives the Blessing,
pronounces pardoned Persons Blessed, and therefore they are Blessed. When
Isaac gave his Fatherly Blessing unto Jacob, though it were upon a mistake, he
supposing him to have been Esau his firstborn Son; yet afterward did not, he
would not retract it, but tells Esau, who too late sought for it, Genesis
27.33. I have Blessed him, and he shall be Blessed. Surely then, where God,
who never mistaketh, does pronounce the Blessing upon any, he does not, he
will not retract it, but they are Blessed, and shall be Blessed.

Reas. 2. Such must needs be Blessed whose iniquities are forgiven, because
they are delivered from the greatest evil, and that which does expose them to
the greatest misery, and which alone can deprive them of eternal happiness.
Pardoned persons are delivered from the greatest evil, and that is sin, which
is the greatest evil in it self, because most opposite to the chiefest good,
and forasmuch as it is the cause of all other evils, that either do or can
befall mankind. Besides the miseries of this life, it is sin, and only sin,
which exposes unto future miseries, and the vengeance of eternal fire in Hell:
The curse of the Law is for sin, whereby the Law is broken Gal. 13.10. Cursed
if every one, that continues not in all things, which are written in the Book
of the Law, to do them. The threatenings of eternal destruction are for sin,
especially for sins against the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel; who shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from
the Glory of his power. Guilt for sin, in the Nature of it, is Obligatio ad
paenam, an Obligation to punishment, not Temporal only, but such as may bear
Proportion to the demands of God's infinite justice, which therefore must be
eternal. Such whose iniquities are forgiven, are delivered from the guilt of
sin, they are free from Obligation to punishment, and so are no longer exposed
thereunto: through Christ they have remission, being by Faith interested in his
merit and satisfaction; and God's justice cannot require the satisfaction again
of them, which he has already received of Christ, and accepted for them.
Christ is their surety, who has paid their Debts, in forgiveness they are
discharged, and God will not require the Debt any more of them. Therefore there
is no Condemnation to them, Romans 8.1. Jesus having delivered them from the
wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.8. It is sin also which can alone deprive any of
eternal happiness; In the first Covenant God promised life and everlasting
felicity upon the condition of perfect obedience; it is only disobedience which
does hinder the fulfilling of this promise. It was sin which threw man at the
first out of Paradise, and which still does keep men out of Heaven; nothing
does hinder men's happiness here, nothing can deprive them of happiness in the
other world, but this evil of evils, Sin; hence then it will undeniably follow,
that pardoned Persons, who are delivered from sin, must needs be Blessed, there
being nothing which can procure their misery or prevent their Blessedness,
because in the forgiveness of sin their sin is removed with the evil
consequences and effects thereof. Psalm. 103.12. As far as the East is from the
West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.

Reas. 3. Such men must needs be Blessed whose iniquities are forgiven because
they are taken into Covenant with God; God is their God, and they are his
People. The promise of the New Covenant, I will forgive their iniquity, and I
will remember their sin no more, is coupled with the other promises, I will be
their God, and they shall be my People, Jer. 31.33, 34. Where ever God fulfils
the one promise, he does fulfill the other too. God forgiveth iniquity to none,
but at the same time he becomes their God, and brings them into the Blessed
relation of his Vovenant People. They are Blessed that have the Lord for their
God. Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that People that is in such a case, yea, happy is
that People whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is the Nation whose God
is the Lord, and the People whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance. Such
as are taken into Covenant with God are Blessed, because 1. They are taken into
God's favor. 2. They are taken into God's family. 3. They are under God's
providence. 4. They have free access unto God in Prayer. 5. They have Communion
with God in all his Ordinances; and thus it is with all pardoned Persons, and
therefore they are Blessed.

1. Pardoned Persons being taken into Covenant are taken into God's favor.
Nothing does hinder God's special favor but unpardoned sin, nothing but that
which is the only Object of his hatred, and cause of his displeasure; and this
is nothing else but sin. Although God's love have many Objects, yet his hatred
has but one, and that is sin; God hates none of his Creatures, as they are
Creatures, but as they are sinful; never did any thing offend or displease God
but sin; nothing else has power to enkindle God's anger, and to blow it up
into a flame. When God forgiveth sin, his hatred cease, his anger is removed,
and he receives them whom he pardons into the arms of his special love.
God's favor is the peculiar privilege of God's pardoned People. Psalm. 106.4.
Remember me with the favor which thou bear to thy People: O, visit me with
thy Salvation. Therefore all pardoned Persons being in God's favor, they are
Blessed; because his favor is the Fountain of Blessedness: In his favor there
is life, Psalm. 30.5. Yea, his loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63.3.
The favor of an earthly King is counted a great Privilege, but the favor of
the King of Heaven is really a great Blessedness. The God of Heaven who is so
Powerful, Wise, Faithful, Good, Merciful, has a special favor and kindness
for them, and does love them with an incomparable, incomprehensible,
unchangeable, and eternal Love, therefore they must needs be the happiest
People on the Earth.

2. Pardoned Persons being in Covenant are taken into God's family; being
reconciled by the Cross of Christ, Ephesians. 2.16. they are no more strangers and
foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God,
v. 19. And being of God's Household they are God's Children. 1 Cor. 6.18. I will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty. This is a privilege which renders all those, above all others, most
Blessed who partake of it. Joh. 1.12. To as many as received him, to them gave
he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. To
them gave he power, The Original word signifies Right or Privilege, (...).
it is the greatest privilege in the World to be numbered amongst God's
Children; hence it is that John writing of it in his Epistle, does break forth
into an exclamation of joy and wonder: 1 John 3.1. Behold, what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! He
seems to be in an ecstasy of joy at the greatness of this privilege, and the
happiness of such as had attained it. If beggars were lifted up from the
Dunghill, to be adopted Children of the greatest Prince upon the Earth, it would
not be so great an honor to them, as this honor and dignity which is
conferred upon pardoned Persons, in their being advanced into the number of the
adopted Children of the great Jehovah, the Lord of Heaven and Earth; and will
any question whether they are Blessed?

3. Pardoned Persons being in Covenant are under God's special Providence.
There is a General Providence that does attend all the Children of men, but
God's especial Providence does attend his own Children, and his peculiar
People, who are reconciled unto him by Jesus Christ; such are under God's
especial Providence, they dwell in the secret place of the most High, and under
the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. God's Name is their strong Tower, unto
which they run and are safe, Prove. 18.10. God is frequently called their Rock,
and Fortress, Buckler, Shield, and Deliverer, and has made many Promises unto
them of Defense, and Deliverance. They are under God's special Provision; as a
Father provideth for his Children, so God provideth for his People: he
provideth for their Bodies, When the young Lions lack, and suffer hunger, they
shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34.10. He promises to Feed them, and
Clothe them, and to withold no good thing from them; and if they always have
not as much in the World as they wish, they shall be sure to have as much as
God sees they do really need; but more especially he provideth for their
Souls, the Robes of his Son's Righteousness to Clothe them, sweet and precious
Promises to Feed and Nourish them, Jewels of Grace to enrich and adorn them,
the guard of Angels to attend them, himself and his Son to be Companions to
them, the Peace and Joys of the Holy Ghost to cheer them, and to sweeten their
passage through the valley of the World, and the dark entry of Death. This is
the privilege of pardoned Persons, and surely then they are Blessed.

4. Pardoned Persons being in Covenant have free access unto God in Prayer:
Ephesians. 2.18. Through him we have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Chap.
3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the Faith of him.
Heb. 4.16. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. Being pardoned and
reconciled through Christ, they may with boldness and confidence come daily to
the Throne of Grace, and there by Prayer and Supplication make known their
requests unto God, and they shall be sure to have both acceptance and audience.
God who has given them a pardon, will deny them nothing that is really for
their good; having interest in Christ, who has such interest in Heaven,
whatever they ask of the Father in his Name, if it is according to his will,
they may be assured, because Christ has faithfully promised it, that he will
do it for them. Surely then such Persons are happy.

5. Pardoned Persons being in Covenant have Communion with God in all his
Ordinances, not only in Prayer, but hearing of the Word, Singing, and at the
Table of the Lord; when others rest in the outside of Ordinances, they meet
with God there; Sin being removed, which before made a separation, they now
attain Communion with God, and their hearts close with him as their chief good.
There is nothing more sweet in the World than Communion with God; hence David
does account those most happy that had the liberty of God's House, and
Ordinances, where they did or might enjoy so great a privilege. Psalm. 84.4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy House. And Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man
whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
Courts; he shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House, even of thy Holy
Temple. Such only are truly Blessed that find satisfaction; it is not the
Enjoyment of Creatures will give this; but in the Enjoyment of and Communion
with God in his Ordinances, which is the goodness of God's House, true
satisfaction may be found; and therefore pardoned Persons, who do attain this,
are truly and the only Blessed Persons.

Reas. 4. Such must needs be Blessed whose iniquities are forgiven, because
they are in a better state than Adam was in his first Creation. None will deny,
who read and believe the Scriptures, that Adam was Blessed before he sinned;
there was no Curse of the Law upon man, until the Law was broken by him; and as
God made all other things good, so man as he came out of God's hand was made
both Good and Happy.

The primitive Blessedness of Adam consisted chiefly in two things.

First, In the Innocence which was in him. Secondly, In the Image of God which
was upon him; whereby he was capacitated for, and had a nearness of Communion
and fellowship with God. In both respects pardoned Persons are in a better
estate than Adam. 1. In respect of Innocence, although they cannot so properly
be called Innocent in themselves, doubtless they are not so Innocent as Adam
before his fall; yet upon their pardon they are guiltless, they are reputed
Innocent in the sight of God, and (however God may chastise them for sin here)
they shall no more be punished for any sin in the other World, than if they had
never offended, than if they had never committed any the least sin from their
Birth unto their Death, but had been as white and clean, as pure and Innocent
as the first Adam before his fall, or the second Adam who never fell: and
herein their condition is better than that of Adam in Innocence, because no
guilt shall be charged upon them unto their Condemnation; whereas Adam had no
such security against Condemnation; for afterward he falling into sin, would
certainly have fallen into Hell, had not pardoning mercy prevented it. 2. In
regard of the Image of God, that is repaired in all those that are pardoned;
when God forgiveth their sin, he changes their nature; and that Faith which
justifies the Person, does also purify the heart. Acts 15.9. Indeed pardoned
Persons are renewed but in part; and the inherent Righteousness and Holiness,
which they attain unto in this life, is but imperfect; yet in this they are in
a better condition than Adam was at first, because, although Adam's inherent
Righteousness were perfect, yet it was left to his own keeping, and he quickly
lost it, and fell quite off from God, putting himself out of God's favor and
out of Covenant together, and there was no Salvation attainable by him, until
God had promised Christ, and made a New Covenant of Grace with him: But the
inherent Righteousness of pardoned Persons, although it be far short, many
degrees, of absolute perfection, yet it is committed to the keeping of Christ
by the Spirit in them, who is both able and has promised to bring it unto
perfection; so that they shall never totally fall from Grace, but grow up from
one degree of Grace unto another, until they arrive unto Heaven, where they
shall be absolutely perfect both in Holiness and happiness; and in the mean
time they are accepted as complete and perfect in their head, the Lord Jesus
Christ, whose perfect Righteousness is through Faith imputed unto them, whereby
the defects of their righteousness are supplied, and they adopted to eternal
Life. Pardoned persons are in a better state than Adam, therefore they are
blessed.

Reas. 5. Such whose iniquities are forgiven are blessed because they shall be
blessed; the blessedness of pardoned persons is chiefly in hope of future
blessedness, without which hope in some circumstance of time, they would be, as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.19. of all Men most miserable; and therefore I
shall chiefly speak of the future blessedness of the pardoned; and here 1. Show
what the future blessedness is which pardoned persons shall have. 2. Prove that
pardoned persons shall most assuredly attain this blessedness. 3. Show how this
future blessedness does render them blessed at the present; and this will be a
full proof that pardoned persons are blessed.

1. The first thing is to show, what the future blessedness is which pardoned
persons shall have; and here I must premise that there is but little of this
future blessedness revealed in comparison of what it really is, and what
pardoned persons will find it to be; Ministers have preached and written much
concerning it, but they have not told one half, no nor the thousand part of the
Glory and excellency thereof; and it must be but little then that I have time
or room to speak of it in this discourse; yet something I must say, and it is
no difficult thing to set it forth by Scripture Light and in a few words, as
far exceeding all outward happiness, and earthly felicity. The blessedness
which pardoned persons shall have, does lie in three things. 1. In the blessed
and glorious place where they shall live. 2. In the blessed and glorious
company which they shall converse withal. 3. In the blessed and glorious state
which they shall attain to.

1. Pardoned persons shall live and take up their eternal abode in a most
blessed and glorious place; Here they have no continuing City, but they seek
one to come, Heb. 13.14. The most strong and flourishing Cities in the World
may be demolished by the hands of Men, or overthrown by Earthquakes, or
consumed and turned into ashes by the devouring flames of fire; but the City
they shall dwell in cannot be demolished, overthrown, or consumed; that City
will abide and continue so long as God shall abide, the Maker of it; They look
for a City which has Foundations whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10.
The Foundations of this City are sure and strong, such as shall never be moved;
the Cities and Houses they now dwell in are made by man, and therefore are but
mean; but the City they shall dwell in is of God's Building and Making, and
therefore is very glorious. It is the New Jerusalem which they shall hereafter
inhabit, the Jerusalem which is above, the Walls and Gates thereof are Pearls,
and the Streets thereof pure Gold, as it is described, Rev. 21. at the latter
end of that Chapter: But the place is beyond all comparison, and does exceed in
glory whatever description may be made of it.

2. Pardoned persons shall have most blessed and glorious company to converse
withal in Heaven.

1. In Heaven pardoned persons will have the company of all the Saints, there
they will find all their godly friends and acquaintance, and that both such as
die before them, and those that die after them; in whose Society they will
have a mutual sweet complacency, and their joy one in another will exceed
what tongues can express. There they shall have the company of all those Godly
Ministers, either whom they have known and heard, or whose Writings only they
have seen and read; and how will the spiritual children delight to see the
glory, and live always in the company of their spiritual Fathers, whom God
has made instrumental for their conversion? then they will rejoice indeed
that ever they saw their face, that ever they heard their voice, that ever they
believed their report, that ever they were persuaded by them to repent of
their sins, and accept of God's Son, to come into, and to keep in God's vvays,
when they see vvhither those vvays have brought them. There they will meet
with all the Holy Martyrs, so famous in their generations for their courage
and constancy; with all the Holy Prophets and Apostles, the Penmen of the
Scriptures, so famous in their time for the large and plentiful effusion of the
Spirit of God upon them; with all the good Kings and Princes, and all the
righteous persons whatever, that have lived in all ages and generations, of
all kinreds, Nations, and Languages; they shall then be gathered all into one
body under Christ their head, and join together in blessing, and praising, and
singing Hallelujah's unto the Lord for ever.

2. In Heaven pardoned persons will have the company of all the glorious
Angels; here the Angels guard them, and are ministering Spirits unto them, Heb.
1.14. Hereafter they will be their companions, and there will be mutual and
most sweet converse between them. Some delight in the company of Nobles, and
the great ones which belong to the Courts of great Princes; they shall have the
company and conversation of the glorious Angels, who are the Nobles of Heaven,
and Courtiers of the King of Kings. How the Angels and Saints will converse
together, and communicate their minds one to another, is too high for us to
conceive, and too difficult for us to determine; but surely the converse will
be very sweet, and full of love and delight.

3. In Heaven pardoned persons will have the company and fellowship of the
glorious Spirit, the Holy Ghost; here they have his presence and powerful
operations; they feel now, especially at some times, his sweet breathings and
powerful operations, which do wonderfully enlighten them, greatly quicken and
inflame their hearts with divine love, yea, and fill their hearts with
spiritual and heavenly joy: But in Heaven they shall have a fuller, sweeter,
more powerful and constant presence of the glorious Spirit; they shall there be
filled with the Holy Ghost, as full as they can hold, yea, beyond their present
capacity; they shall be under the sweet breathings of the Spirit, whereby the
flame of divine love will be kept alive in them perpetually in the greatest
height, and heat of it, and this shall abide to Eternity.

4. In Heaven pardoned persons shall have the company of the Lord Jesus Christ
in his glory. Here they have heard of him, there they shall see him; here they
see him with the eye of Faith, there they shall see him eye to eye, and face to
face. Austin did wish to have seen three things, above all other things that
were to be seen in the World; Rome in its Glory, Paul in the Pulpit, and Christ
in the flesh; The righteous in Heaven will see that which is far beyond
Austin's wish, they will see Zion in its Glory, Paul in his Glory, and Christ
in his Glory. They will see Zion in its glory, which will far exceed Rome in
its greatest splendor, when it was most illustrious for wealth and riches,
through the spoils of so many conquered Kingdoms which were brought into it,
when it was most illustrious for stately houses, and sumptuous buildings, for
wise and learned Men, famous and valiant Captains and Soldiers. The new
Jerusalem, Mount Zion which is above, will outshine Rome in glory, more than
the Sun does outshine the smallest Star in Heaven, or the faint light of a
Candle here upon earth. They shall see Paul in his glory, they shall hear him
praising God with triumphant acclamations of joy, which will be far more than
to hear him preach in a state of weakness and infirmity; but chiefly they shall
see Christ in his glory, the sight of Christ in his humiliation was nothing in
comparison of a sight of him in his state of exaltation. They shall see him
then as he is, 1 John 3.2. Behold now are we the Sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. Christ was never seen on earth as he
is; his glory was shadowed, his Divinity was veiled, and his humanity was most
evident to the view, which had its infirmities: but hereafter his humanity will
appear to be lifted up into such glory as does exceed all created glory of Men
or Angels, and his Divinity will be most illustrious to the view of the Saints,
at the sight of which they will be astonished with admiration and love; and O
how will they gaze and wonder at his mavelous beauty, and shining excellency,
when they see him come down from Heaven attended by all the holy Angels, and
when they shall not only see him, but meet with him, be owned and welcomed by
him, and be taken to live with him! 1 These. 4.16, 17. The Lord himself shall
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with
the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet
the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. It was a great
privilege which the Apostles had to live with Christ when he was humbled and
vilified here on earth; what a privilege then will it be which all the
righteous shall have to live with Christ when he is glorified in Heaven, and
that not for a few years, but for ever? What a happiness will it be to see the
glory which Christ had with the Father before the World was, and not only to
see it, but to share in it?

5. In Heaven pardoned persons shall have the company of the Father; they have
his gracious presence here on earth, they shall have his glorious presence in
Heaven; there they shall have the immediate Beatifical vision of him, and the
full most blessed fruition of him. The sight of God's back-parts, the glimpses
and glances of his eye at a distance, the mediate enjoyment of him in and by
Ordinances does sometimes even transport them, and strangely fill them with
wonder and delight; but O what Soul-ravishing admirations, what transports and
ecstasies of joy will they have, when in Heaven they shall behold God's face, be
always under the beams of the light of his countenance, and have continual,
close, intimate, full enjoyment of him, fellowship and communion with him, and
this to abide for ever and ever! In Heaven they shall dwell with God, and God
will dwell with them, Rev. 21.3. I heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying,
behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they
shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
This, this will be happiness indeed, to have God himself to dwell with them,
and manifest himself not only in his grace, but in his glory unto them,
therefore it follows, v. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes; There will be no grief where God's presence is, in his presence there
being fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor ^^^ing, neither any more pain, the full sight of God
will cure of all pain and sorrow, and fill with delight and joy, as Herbert in
his Poem called, The Glance.

If thy first glance so powerful be,
A mirth but opened, and sealed up again;
What wonders shall we feel, when we shall see
Thy full eyed love.
When thou shall look us out of pain,
And one aspect of thine spend in delight,
More than ten thousand Suns disperse in light,
In Heaven above.
3. Pardoned persons shall in Heaven attain a blessed and glorious state; a
state of peace and tranquillity; a state of wealth and plenty; a state of
honor and dignity; a state of holiness and purity; a state of perfect
happiness and glory, in Soul and Body.

1. In Heaven pardoned persons shall attain a state of peace, of perfect peace
and tranquillity: they shall have perfect peace without them, and they shall
have perfect peace within them; here they have Wars about them, and rumors of
Wars; and when they don't hear of Wars, except it be afar off, they have jarrs
near at hand, and that every day; they see Men and Women fighting, wounding and
murdering one another with the Sword of the Tongue, and many are the thrusts,
which they themselves have received on every side; and howsoever desirous they
are of peace, and follow after it, yet they cannot attain it, but are forced to
complain with David, Psalm. 120.6, 7. My Soul has long dwelt with him that
hates peace, I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for War. But in Heaven
they shall be hid for ever from the vvounds and scourge of the Tongue; Heaven
is a Kingdom wherein dwells righteousness, and wherein dwells peace. In Heaven
they shall be freed from all strife and contention, from all bitterness,
clamor, and evil speaking, no unpeaceable Spirit shall be admitted into the
new Jerusalem, and never shall any the least quarrel arise between the
Inhabitants of that place. And as they shall have perfect peace without them,
so they shall have perfect peace within them. Here they are often wounding
themselves, and that more deeply and sorely than any Man can do, I mean, they
too often wound their consciences by their sins; and if peace be attained by
them, through faith in Christ's blood, this peace is often interrupted and
broken by them through their renewed provocations; and at the best their peace
it is but imperfect in this life: But in Heaven they shall have perfect peace
within, such a calm and serenity, such a quiet and tranquillity of Spirit, as
shall never have the least disturbance any more. In the upper region of the Air
there are no storms or tempests, all that be are in the middle or lower region;
and when they are exalted unto the highest Heavens, that region which is beyond
the Stars, they shall be removed beyond all those storms of consciences within,
and all those tempests of troubles without, which are common and ordinary in
the lower region of this World; there they shall have most sweet rest for their
Souls for ever in the bosom of God.

2. In Heaven pardoned Persons shall attain a state of wealth and plenty;
however poor some of them are as to this World's riches, yet they shall be
Rich, yea, they are Rich in Faith; the Riches which they have in hand, or heart
rather, are great, but the Riches which they have in their eye or hope are far
greater, their Grace is beyond the worldling's Gold, their Peace is beyond the
worldling's Jewels, the privileges which they are here invested with, are far
more excellent than the largest earthly Possessions, which any worldlings have
or hope to have; but the Riches which they shall have are far more
transcendent; here they have only an earnest Penny, in Heaven they shall have
large sums; here they have the first Fruits, in Heaven they shall reap the
Harvest; here they have the Deeds of Conveyance which give them title, in
Heaven they shall have possession of the uncorrupted and glorious Inheritance,
1 Pet. 1.4. They shall have treasures in Heaven, which neither Moth nor rust
can corrupt, nor thieves break through to steal them away, Mat. 6.20. In Heaven
every want will be supplied, every defect removed, every desire satisfied; in
their Father's House there is plenty, and bread enough, which they shall be
enriched and filled with, and which they shall live upon to all eternity; when
Death shall turn others out of their houses, rob them of their Estates, and
bereave them of all that they have in the World, Death will befriend them, and
convey them to the place where their Treasure and Inheritance lies, which they
then shall be admitted to the possession of, and never be turned out of
possession.

3. In Heaven pardoned Persons shall attain a state of honor and dignity; here
some of them, yea, all of them, are slighted and disesteemed, vilified and
accounted as the filth and offscouring of the World, and yet they are really
and in God's esteem the most honorable, they are the Sons and Daughters of the
Lord Almighty, as has been said; but they shall be advanced far higher than
they are, not to a high Seat upon earth, but a high Seat above the earth, yea,
above the Stars and visible Heavens, they shall sit with Christ on his Throne,
Rev. 3.21. They shall have a Crown, not an Earthly Crown, but an Heavenly; not
a Crown of Gold, but a Crown of Glory, which fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. They
shall have a Kingdom, in comparison of which all the Kingdoms of the World are
not worthy to be named, it is the Kingdom that is promised to them, Mat. 5.3.
At the day of Christ's second appearance they shall be honored, when they are
sent for by the Angels, and caught up in the Clouds to meet their Lord in the
Air; then he will own and Crown them, and take them to live and reign with
them for ever in Heaven.

4. In Heaven pardoned Persons shall attain a state of Holiness and purity:
here they are renewed but in part, and their Holiness is imperfect, they find
corruption remaining, and feel it daily vvorking in them, which is the
greatest grief and trouble to them in the World: but in Heaven they shall be
made perfect in Holiness; they shall have not only perfect Peace, but also
perfect purity, the being of sin shall be removed, and all the spots and stains
of it shall be vvashed away; in Heaven, as they shall sigh no more, so they
shall sin no more; as they shall grieve no more, so they shall offend no more;
nothing in Heaven shall offend them, and in Heaven they shall no more offend
God; nothing in Heaven shall break their Peace, and they shall no more break
God's Laws; in Heaven they shall be like the Angels, not only without
Marriage, but without sin, they shall be like to them in Holiness and in
happiness; and this will be their happiness to attain perfection in Holiness.

5. In Heaven pardoned Persons shall attain a state of perfect happiness and
Glory in Soul and Body; their Souls shall be glorified and their Bodies
glorified in Heaven.

1. In Heaven the Souls of pardoned Persons shall be glorified; a shining
excellency and mavelous spiritual beauty shall be put upon them, the Image of
God will there be drawn to the life in them; all the faculties of their Souls
will there be elevated, ennobled, and beautified with wonderful perfections,
and filled brim full with glory, such as does far exceed their present
capacity; they shall have the brightest beams of light in their minds, the
purest and sweetest flames of love in their hearts, and that with such
heart-ravishing joy as is to us unconceivable, but to them will both be full
and everlasting. Psalm. 16.11.

2. In Heaven the Bodies of pardoned Persons will be glorified; their vile
Bodies will be fashioned into the likeness of Christ's most beautiful and
glorious Body. Phil. 3.21. All the defects and deformities which some of their
Bodies have here will be removed, and they shall shine like the new burnisht
Heavens; what a rare mixture of colors, what an exact Symetry of parts their
Bodies shall have, what lovely Proportion and feature in their Face, what
sparkling motions in the eye, what graceful gestures in the whole Body there
will be, it is not for us to describe, for the beauty of glorified Bodies
will be beyond all descriptions. And thus much concerning the future
blessedness it self which pardoned Persons shall have.

3. The second thing is to prove that pardoned Persons shall assuredly attain
this future blessedness. This will appear by several Scriptures, and several
Arguments drawn from the Scriptures.

1. The Scriptures which prove that pardoned Persons shall assuredly attain
future blessedness are these, Ephesians. 1. v. 7, and 11. compared. v. 7. In whom we
have redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sin according to the
riches of his Grace. v. 11. In whom also we obtained an Inheritance. This
Inheritance here spoken of can be no other than the Heavenly Inheritance, and
the Apostle plainly asserteth that such who had obtained the forgiveness of
sin, they had also obtained the Inheritance: in whom we have obtained, that is,
they shall as certainly obtain it, as if they had it already in Possession. A
more full proof is in Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called,
and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified; This is that Golden chain, so much spoken of by Divines, the links
of which are so fast joined together, that all the power of men or Devils can
never be able to pluck them asunder. As such whom God has Predestined before
time, shall certainly be called and justified in time; so those who are called
and justified and so pardoned in time, shall certainly be glorified at the end
of time, and when time shall be no more. And the third Scripture to prove this
is, Romans 5.10. For if when we were sinners we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son; much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life.
Pardoned persons are reconciled persons, and if when they were sinners they
were reconciled through Christ's death and satisfaction, surely when
reconciled, taken into favor, and become friends, they shall be saved not with
a temporal, but with an eternal Salvation, by Christ's life and intercession,
which has sufficient efficacy and prevalency to effect this thing for them.
Here besides the Apostle's assertion, he does insinuate an Argument for the
proof of it; but I shall add some other Scripture-Arguments to prove that
pardoned persons shall most assuredly attain future blessedness.

Arg. 1. The first Argument may be drawn from God's decree of predestination or
election. Whom God has predestined or elected to the blessedness of Heaven,
they shall most assuredly attain it; But God has predestined or elected all
pardoned persons to the blessedness of Heaven, therefore they shall certainly
attain it. That all such whom God has predestined or elected unto the
blessedness of Heaven shall certainly attain it, is evident to any who
impartially do read and weigh the Scriptures, which clearly do reveal the
eternity of God's decree of particular predestination or election. Ephesians. 1.4.
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the World. Ver.
5. Having predestined us according to the good pleasure of his will. God's
decree of predestination or election (which is to eternal happiness, therefore
called an ordination to eternal life, Acts 13.48. an appointment and election
to Salvation, 1 These. 5.9. 2 These. 2.13.) being eternal is therefore
unchangeable, and therefore shall certainly be accomplished. If any thing
hinder the accomplishment of God's decree, it must be either something within
him, or something without him; 1. Nothing within him can hinder its
accomplishment, unless he should change his own mind, and alter his decree, and
this would infer a changeableness in God, which is against both reason and
Scripture; and besides other imperfection, it would infer an imperfection in
God's knowledge and wisdom, that he did not foresee or consider those
after-reasons, which should incline him unto a change from his first
determination, and this is inconsistent with his infinite fore-knowledg, and
eternal counsel of his wisdom, in his vvilling and decreeing this thing; Men
may change their purposes upon this account, but God so infinitely wise and
sore-knowing, cannot do it. If he had foreseen reason to have altered the
thing, he would never have decreed or determined it. 2. Nothing without God
can hinder the accomplishment of his decree, because of his infinite power to
effect what he has designed, and against infinite power no resistance can be
made; the Elect which the Apostle Peter vvriteth unto, 1 Pet. 1.2. As they are
chosen to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for them, V. 4. So they are sure to be kept by the power of
God to Salvation, V. 5. And surely there can be no hindering of the Salvation
and Blessedness of the Elect, who are kept for it or unto it by the Almighty
power of God. And thus I think it is very clear, that all whom God has
predestined or elected to blessedness shall certainly attain it. Hence are
the words of the Apostle, which may put all out of doubt, Ephesians. 1.11. In
whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will.

That all pardoned persons are predestined or elected unto the blessedness of
Heaven is also evident, because pardon of sin is the effect of predestination,
Romans 8.30. Whom he has predestined, them he also called and justified;
Because pardon of Sin is the means, and a necessary means of obtaining the
blessedness of Heaven, which God does elect some of the Children of Men unto;
and as vvhere-ever God does elect to the end, he does elect to the means,
without which the end could not be accomplished; so vvhere-ever he does elect
to the means, he does elect to the end, without which the means would be in
vain: pardoned persons having therefore obtained the means of blessedness,
which is remission of sin, without which they could have no admission into
Heaven, it is an evident sign that they are chosen to this blessedness of
Heaven; and moreover all pardoned persons are true believers, it being alone
through Faith that any are justified and pardoned. Romans 5.1. Being justified by
Faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 10.43.
Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. And all true
believers are elected, true Faith being called the Faith of God's Elect, Tit.
1.1. And such are ordained to Eternal Life, Acts 13.48. As many as were
ordained to Eternal Life believed. Faith is the fruit of our election; and our
Savior tells the Jews, They did not believe because they were not of his
Sheep, Joh. 10.26. Therefore all pardoned persons being true believers are
elected, and therefore they shall certainly be saved, and attain the Eternal
blessedness of Heaven.

Arg. 2. The Second Argument may be drawn from God's Covenant and promise. All
those to whom God is engaged by Covenant, and has promised to give Eternal
blessedness, they shall certainly attain Eternal blessedness: But God is
engaged by Covenant, and has promised to give Eternal blessedness unto all
pardoned Persons; therefore all pardoned Persons shall certainly attain Eternal
blessedness. That all such to whom God is engaged by Covenant, and has
promised to give Eternal happiness, shall certainly attain it, is evident,
because of God's truth and faithfulness. Heb. 10.23. He is faithful that has
promised. Numb. 23.19. God is not a Man that he should lie, nor the Son of Man
that he should repent: has he said it, and will he not do it? has he spoken
it, and will he not make it good? Tit. 1.2. In hope of Eternal Life, which God
that cannot lie, promised. Heb. 6.17, 18. Wherein God, willing more abundantly
to show to the Heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it
by an Oath; That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong consolation. Therefore God's Covenant is called an
everlasting Covenant, and the mercies thereof, sure mercies. Because of his
faithfulness; Isa. 55.3. I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David. It is clear then, that all those to whom God is engaged
by Covenant, and has promised to give Eternal blessedness, they shall
certainly attain it; because otherwise God would prove unfaithful and a liar,
which is impossible. And it is clear that God has engaged by Covenant, and
has promised to give Eternal blessedness to all pardoned persons, because they
are all taken into Covenant, as has been already proved; God is engaged by
Covenant to be their God; and as our Savior does prove the Resurrection of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, because God was their God, so might I, by the same
Argument, prove the Eternal blessedness of all pardoned persons, because God is
their God, which relation does engage him to make them perfectly and Eternally
happy; but besides this God has expressly promised Eternal happiness. 1 John
2.25. This is the promise which God has promised us, even Eternal Life. Joh.
3.16. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life.
Many other promises there are of the same import, all belonging to the Covenant
of Grace, and all pardoned persons being in this Covenant, they belong to them;
they are made to believers, and all pardoned persons are believers, therefore
God is engaged by Covenant, and has promised to give Eternal Life and
blessedness unto them, and therefore they shall certainly attain it.

Arg. 3. The Third Argument may be drawn from the union of all pardoned persons
unto Christ, and his undertaking for them, to bring them unto Eternal
blessedness. All those who are united unto Christ, and whom he has undertaken
to bring to Eternal blessedness; they shall certainly attain Eternal
blessedness: But all pardoned persons are united unto Christ, and he has
undertaken to bring them to Eternal blessedness; therefore they shall certainly
attain Eternal blessedness. All pardoned persons being true believers, are by
Faith united unto Christ, and so made members of the Body, whereof Christ is
the Head, and Christ will not suffer any of his members to perish: his body
would not be complete in Heaven, if he should miss any of his members there;
they are espoused unto Christ, and Christ will certainly bring his Spouse to
his Father's house. The union between Christ and believers is indissoluble; and
therefore as certainly as Christ is there, he will bring them thither too in
the appointed time; they, by virtue of this union, are said to be already in
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. They are there in their head, who
has for them taken possession of those places, and therefore he will surely
give them possession: He has undertaken to do it, Joh. 10.27, 28. My Sheep
hear my voice and they follow me, and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out of mine hand. And
Christ will make good his undertaking. As he has made good his undertaking in
purchasing blessedness for them; so he will make good his undertaking to give
them possession of this blessedness; Therefore pardoned persons shall certainly
attain unto it.

Arg. 4. The fourth Argument may be drawn from the Right, which pardoned
persons have unto Eternal blessedness: having a Right to it, they shall
certainly attain it, God will not, cannot do them that wrong to keep them out
of that Inheritance, or deny them that blessedness, which they can show a right
unto. Pardoned persons have a double right to Eternal blessedness. 1. The right
of Justification. 2. The right of Adoption.

1. They have a right of Justification, wherein they are not only acquitted
from guilt, but accepted as perfectly Righteous in God's sight, through the
imputation of Christ's perfect Righteousness; and so they have received in the
second Adam that right to Eternal Life, which they lost in the first Adam; and
it is a Righteous thing with God to give them this Eternal Life and
blessedness, which perfect Righteousness does entitle unto.

2. They have the right of Adoption as believers, they are the Children of God,
Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ. And as
Children they are heirs, Romans 8.17. If Children, then heirs of God, and joint
heirs with Christ; and as heirs they have right to the Eternal Inheritance, and
they shall certainly attain it.

Arg. 5. The fifth Argument may be drawn from the certainty of all pardoned
persons perseverance in Grace unto the end. All such as persevere in Grace unto
the end, shall certainly obtain Eternal blessedness, Mat. 24.15. He that shall
endure to the end, the same shall be saved, Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Romans 2. 6, 7. Who will render to
every Man according to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life. All
pardoned persons shall persevere in Grace unto the end; they shall not only
persevere through Faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. but they shall persevere in it. God will
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness in believers, and the work of
Faith with power. 2 These. 1.11. God will keep them in his hand, out of which
none is able to pluck them. Joh. 10.29. He that has begun a good work in them,
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6. God has promised
them to enable them to persevere. I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, and I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40. The
Scripture is very full and clear in the Doctrine of the true believer's
perseverance: and all pardoned persons being believers, as I have already
showed, all pardoned persons shall persevere to the end, and therefore shall
certainly attain future Eternal blessedness of Heaven.

3. The third particular to be spoken unto is, to show how this future Eternal
blessedness of Heaven does render pardoned persons blessed here upon the Earth;
this will appear in these following particulars.

1. Pardoned persons have a sight of their future blessedness, and the
excellency of it. 1. They have a sight of the Eternal blessedness it self, 1 Timothy 1.10. Christ has abolished death, and brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel. The Lord has made a clear Revelation in his Gospel
unto them, of that Eternal Life and blessedness, which he has laid up in
Heaven for them; This in former ages and generations was not made known to the
Sons of Men, as now it is made known unto them by the Spirit of Christ in the
Gospel. Man by his fall, has lost his eyes, and cannot find the way unto
Paradise, and this is one part of his misery, that he does not know what his
chief happiness is, nor how it is to be obtained. The Heathen Philosophers have
had several hundred opinions concerning the chief good, and in all mistaken;
The Heathen Poets had foolish and groundless fancies of the Elisian pleasures
and delights, which the Souls of the virtuous should enjoy in the other world;
but they were in the dark as to the true discovery of Heaven. The Saints
themselves had the future happiness of Heaven discovered in a dark way, under
Types, Figures, and Shadows; the earthly Canaan Typifying the Heavenly Canaan;
the Jerusalem below shadowing forth the Jerusalem which is above; the Holy of
Holies in the Temple made with hands, figuring the holy place made without
hands eternal in the Heavens. But now the darkness is past, and the true light
shines, the shadows are fled, the vail before the Holiest is rent, and the
cloud in the Temple removed; so that now with open face, though still in a
glass, the glory which is above may be seen. The Gospel does reveal what Man's
chiefest happiness is, and wherein it does consist; that it does not consist in
earthly riches, nor worldly honors, nor Epicurean pleasures, nor the Stoick's
Apathy, nor the Platonist's dark contemplation of Idea's, nor the
Peripatetick's exercise of Moral virtues; but that God is the chief good of the
Children of men; the Gospel reveals God in the face of Jesus Christ, and that
man's chief happiness does consist in the Vision and fruition of him begun
here, and which will be perfected in Glory hereafter; the Gospel reveals Heaven
to pardoned sinners, discovers the Holy of Holies that is above, and the way to
it, as well as the Glories that are in it. And pardoned sinners have not only a
notional knowledge of the chief happiness hereafter; But, secondly, they have a
sight of the excellency thereof, which cannot be seen by any carnal Eye, and
this they have by the Eye of Faith and the light of the Spirit; by the Eye of
Faith Heaven is realized to them, and made evident to their view in its
transcendent excellency, Faith being the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. But this, as the Eye of Faith, is
enlightened by the Spirit of Wisdom and revelation, whereby they perceive the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. When the Apostle
speaking of those things which God has prepared for them that love him, says,
That neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither have they entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him; yet
God says, he has revealed these things to us by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.
This foresight of Heaven, and something (although comparatively little) of the
Glory and excellency thereof, does render pardoned persons blessed even in this
World.

2. That which does further contribute to the present blessedness of pardoned
persons, is not only their foresight of future blessedness, but also their
hopes of it, that they shall one day have possession of so great felicity. They
are blessed now in hopes of what they shall be; they carry about with them in
their Bosoms the greatest hopes of any in the World, and their hopes are such
as shall not make them ashamed, Romans 5.5. The hopes of worldlings make them
ashamed, in that either they fall short of the thing which they hope for, God's
providence oftentimes bringing upon them unthought of crosses and unexpected
disappointments, yea, that which is quite contrary to their hopes, disgrace
instead of honor, poverty instead of riches, trouble instead of peace, pain
instead of pleasure; yea, sudden death, which cuts off them and their hopes
together: or if they attain the thing which they hoped for, they are ashamed of
their hopes; in that they are always disappointed of that satisfaction and
contentment which they looked for in the thing; the waters of the Cistern
cannot quench the thirst of man's desire; the Creatures cannot give more than
they have, and they which hope for contentment in any thing beneath the chief
good, must needs meet with a disappointment; riches may fill the House, Gold
and Silver may fill the baggs, but none of these things can fill the heart;
honor and esteem of men may swell and puff up the mind, but the Soul cannot be
filled unto satisfaction with Air, and Wind; sensual delights may cloy the
Appetite, but the desires of the Soul are too high and capacious for such
things to fill up. So that worldling's hopes must needs one way or other make
them ashamed, and so will the hopes of the Hypocrite too: but the hopes of
pardoned persons, which they have of future blessedness, have an excellency in
them beyond the hopes of all others, and they shall never be ashamed of them.
The happiness they hope for, they shall certainly have; none can deprive them
of it; men cannot deprive them, they may take away their earthly Inheritance,
but they cannot touch their Heavenly Inheritance; Devils cannot deprive them,
they may attempt it, but they cannot effect it; Death cannot deprive them,
death will bereave of whatever riches of the world any of them have, but it
will put them into the possession of their Treasures in Heaven; none can
deprive them but God, and God will not do it, as has been already proved, and
therefore their hopes are of a certain thing, which they shall not fail of; and
withal they know that the happiness of Heaven will exceed all their
expectations, even the highest, which ever they have had of satisfaction and
contentment there, that they shall find more sweetness and joy there than ever
has entered into their hearts to conceive; and therefore their hopes shall not
make them ashamed; yea, in their very hopes of Heaven, especially at some
times, they find more real satisfaction, than ever was found by any in the
fullest and sweetest enjoyment, which they have had of the good things of this
life.

3. Pardoned persons have the beginnings of future blessedness here, in this
life, in the Work of Grace, and sometimes foretasts and first fruits of it,
through the witness, seal, and earnest of the Spirit; and this renders them
blessed in this life.

1. They have the beginnings of Heaven in the work of Grace upon their hearts.
Grace is the beginning of Glory; Grace is Glory in the bud, Glory is Grace in
the flower, and when the work of Grace is carried on, the Scripture says, that
they proceed from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face
beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: They are happy here, as
they have some degrees of that Holiness and likeness unto God, in the
perfection of which hereafter in Heaven their perfect happiness does consist.

2. They have the beginnings of Heaven in the first fruits and foretasts of it
through the witness, seal, and earnest of the Spirit; God sometimes gives them
first fruits of the Heavenly Canaan, he sends in a few bunches of those sweet
Grapes that are there, and lets them have some foretasts of those
Soul-ravishing Heavenly joys which hereafter will be full and for ever abiding;
he sometimes takes them up into the Mount, and gives them a Pisgah-sight of the
Land of promise through the prospective-Glass of his Ordinances; he brings some
even to the Gate of the New Jerusalem in their Heavenly Contemplations, and
lets out such beams of that Glorious Heavenly light, and drops into their
hearts such taste of future joys, through the sudden elapses of the Spirit of
Glory upon them, that they are rapt up into an ecstasy, and such a sweetness
they feel in their Spirits as is ineffable, such as words cannot utter, nor the
minds of any conceive, but those that have had the like; when God gives them
the witness of his Spirit, that they shall assuredly attain eternal life, and
seals them up by his Spirit to the day of Redemption, he does commonly give
the earnest also of the Spirit in some Soul-ravishing joys, in comparison of
which the softest pleasures of the flesh, and the sweetest delights that can
arise from any objects of sense, are most vain, thin, empty, and not worthy to
be named with them. And thus the Eternal blessedness which pardoned persons
shall have, does render them blessed here in this life beyond all others,
whatever confluence of good things they be surrounded withal. The foresight,
first fruits, hopes, and sweet fore-tastes of this future blessedness, do
sweeten their life; but especially they do sweeten their death, they knowing
that death will be their friend, and prove an outlet to all earthly misery,
and an inlet to their heavenly glory; that death will open the prison doors of
this world unto them, and usher them into the palace of the great King; they
know their death will be like a Ship to convey them over Sea, as it were, from
the far, strange, and Enemies Country, unto the heavenly Country, where their
glorious Jehovah, their heavenly Father, where the Lord Jesus Christ their
elder Brother and dear Savior, and where the departed Saints, their chief
kindred, are together, and where their inheritance does lie, and where they
shall take up their Eternal abode. Where pardoned persons have a clear
foresight, and strong hope of this, death is no more to them than a sleep;
they can as willingly put off their flesh and go into their graves, as they can
put off their clothes at night to go into their beds, they can as willingly
compose themselves to die, as they can compose themselves to sleep after a
weary day.

Thus much for the proof of the blessedness of forgiveness, or of all those
persons whose sins are pardoned.

Quest. 2. The second Question, wherein I must be more short, is, How this
blessedness of forgiveness may be attained?

That this blessedness of forgiveness may be attained; there are some things
must be known and believed; and there are some things must be done and
practiced.

1. Some things must be believed: I shall instance in one or two chief
Doctrines of the Gospel, which all sinners must know and believe if they would
attain forgiveness of sin. The First is, The Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction
unto God's Justice for the sins of men. The Second is, The Doctrine of
justification by the righteousness of Christ.

1. Sinners must know and believe the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction unto
the Justice of God for the sins of Men. To discourse fully of this great
Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, would require a Treatise which might fill a
great volume, but I must comprize it within a little room; who am to speak of
it, only in the direction of a Sermon. Briefly, 1. That there is absolute need
of satisfaction to God's justice for the sins of men, without which forgiveness
of sins would be impossible and utterly unattainable, is evident both from the
nature of God's justice, which does oblige him to punish all sinners Eternally
without it, and from the truth of God's threatenings, wherein he has revealed
that he will thus punish them without it. 2. That there is need of the
satisfaction of Christ is evident, because sinners themselves being finite,
cannot give that satisfaction unto God, which shall bear any proportion to the
demands of his infinite justice, and if any be in a capacity to give it, it
must be such a one, as is both innocent, and so cannot suffer for his own
faults, and whose person is of infinite dignity, that thence may arise an
equivalency of merit in his sufferings, as may prove satisfactory to God's
infinite justice; and because no mere man, being a finite creature, has this
dignity, and God cannot suffer, because this would argue weakness and
infirmity, which is infinitely removed from him; therefore it is requisite that
the person who can satisfy should be God-man, that as in one nature he may be
capable of suffering, so the other nature may put a virtue and efficacy upon
it; and such a person was Jesus Christ. 3. That Jesus Christ has done that
which is sufficient to satisfy God's justice for the sins of men, is evident
from his Death and other sufferings which we have upon record in the Gospel;
which sufferings were not for himself, he being an innocent person; and it
would have argued injustice in God, had he permitted such sufferings to have
been laid on his body, especially had he himself inflicted such dreadful inward
sufferings on his Soul, were it not that he stood in the room of sinners, and
endured all these sufferings for their sins, that he might give satisfaction to
his justice hereby. 4. That Christ's sufferings have given to God satisfaction,
and that he has accepted of this satisfaction in the behalf of sinners, is
evident from the Compact and Covenant which he made with Christ, that if he
would offer up this sacrifice of himself, he would be well pleased, and sinners
should hereby be justified; from his sending his Son into the world for this
very end, and anointing him to the office of High Priest, that he might first
make satisfaction, and then Intercession, for the people; from his owning him
when here, raising him when dead; receiving him to glory when raised, which he
would not have done, had not he accepted his satisfaction; from his Covenant he
has through him made with man, and promises therein of remission of sins
through his blood, which he would never have made, had not Christ's death given
him satisfaction. Moreover, all those places of Scripture which speak of
Christ's death as a sacrifice, as a ransom, as a punishment, which he endured
that sinners might be, and whereby believers are, actually reconciled unto God,
do clearly and abundantly prove that Christ has given satisfaction to God's
justice, and which God is well pleased withal. 5. That all sinners must know
and believe this Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, that they may attain
remission of sins is evident, because God never did, never will forgive any sin
without respect unto it; this way of remission is the chief thing which he has
revealed in the Scriptures; In the Old Testament it was shadowed under the
sacrifices for sin which were offered; in the New Testament it is the end of
the Revelation of Christ, this being the chief design of his sufferings and
death, to give satisfaction to God's justice, in order to the forgiveness of
man's sin. And they that are ignorant hereof, or do not believe this, do not
know nor believe in Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and therefore cannot
obtain forgiveness by his death.

2. Sinners must know and believe the doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness, that they may attain remission of sins. 1. They must know the
nature of Justification it self, that it does consist in the remission of our
sins, and the acceptance of our Persons, as perfectly Righteous in God's
sight; they must know that they have no Righteousness of their own to present
God withal, because guilty of sin, and the least guilt is inconsistent with a
perfect Righteousness, and therefore if they were, as some are, really Holy,
yet that they could not be accepted as perfectly Righteous in God's sight, upon
the account of a perfect Righteousness of their own, which none here do attain
unto, much less when they are naturally void and empty of all good and real
Holiness, and polluted all over with Sin.

3. They must know that the Righteousness of Christ is perfect, and was
intended for them, and held forth to them, which they must submit unto, and
accept of, if they would be justified in God's sight.

4. That the Righteousness of Christ is made theirs by Faith, God imputing it
and accounting it unto believers, as if it were their own, and they had wrought
it out in their own persons. This way of Justification by Christ all must know,
and be persuaded of, that would obtain Justification, which does include
forgiveness of sin.

2. Some things must be done and practiced by sinners, that they may attain
this blessedness of forgiveness.

1. They must get conviction of sin. 2. They must make confession of sin. 3.
They must by Faith make Application of Jesus Christ. 4. They must forsake sin.
5. They must make Supplication and earnest Prayer unto God for pardoning Mercy.
6. They must forgive others.

1. Sinners, would you attain the blessedness of forgiveness? Labor to get
conviction of sin; get conviction of your Original sin, the guilt of Adam's
first sin in which you are involved, your present emptiness of all Spiritual
good, and the Universal depravation of all the powers and faculties of your
Souls with inherent pollution, which renders you opposite unto all real good,
and naturally prone unto nothing but evil; get conviction of your actual sins,
of all your heinous breaches of God's Law, whether the first or second Table of
it, whether sins against God more immediately, his Nature, his Worship, his
Name, his Day, or against your Neighbor, whether relative sins, or sins
against the life, or chastity or estate or good name of any; and get conviction
that all inordinate motions that have not the consent of the will, and much
more inordinate affections which are influenced by it, are sinful and provoking
unto God; Get also convictions of your more heinous disobedience to the Gospel,
what an aggravation it is of all your other sins that you have repented of
none, when you have so much need, and have been so often called hereunto; what
an affront is it unto God, a disparagement unto Christ, that you have neglected
your Salvation by him, and have been guilty of unbelief in not receiving, yea
refusing Christ, so able and willing to save you, and when you have had such
frequent and earnest as well as gracious and free tenders of him? Get
conviction of the guilt of your sins, and what an Obligation you are under
hereby to undergo eternal Destruction in the flames of Hell fire for it, and
let this awaken you out of your security, let the thoughts of this pierce and
wound your consciences, and make you cry out with those Sinners which were
convinced by Peter's Sermon, Acts 2.37. When they heard this they were pricked
in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles: Men and
brethren what shall we do? Get conviction also of the horrid baseness and
ungratefulness of sin, as it dishonours and displeases that God by whom you
were at first created, are continually preserved and maintained; and who,
though he could so easily destroy you, and glorify his justice hereby, yet is
both patient with you, and willing also to be reconciled unto you, and sends
his Ambassadors in his name to tell you that he entreats you that you would be
reconciled, and let these considerations affect you with ingenuous grief for
sin. Lastly, Get conviction of the defilement of sin, how your Souls are
stained by it, and hereby degenerated and debased into a lower degree of
vileness than is in the beast that perishes, yea, that hereby you are become
without regeneration, and until your Souls are washed, more loathsome in the
eyes of God, than the most nasty thing in the World is in your eyes.

2. Make confession of sin. In some cases it is requisite you should confess
some sins unto man, but it is absolutely universally necessary in order to
forgiveness, that you should confess your sins unto God; the promise of
pardoning mercy is made to confession. Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins
shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.
David found by experience the evil of covering and keeping close his sins, and
the benefit of acknowledgment and confession. Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. When I kept
silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long: for day and
night thine hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the drought of
Summer. Selah. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and my iniquity have I not hid:
I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin. Selah. Sinners, make a full confession of your sins, that
you may have a full pardon and discharge; do not hide any sin as a sweet morsel
under your tongue; it is a vain thing to seek and endeavor the hiding of any
sin from him who is omniscient, God has knowledge of all your Iniquities, do
you therefore acknowledge all unto him. Make free confession of your sins. Stay
not till God force you by his Scourges, and even drag you unto it by his cords
of affliction; but let it be your voluntary act, and be ingenuous herein;
mingle not your confession with excuses and extenuations. Say not, though you
are bad, yet you are not so bad as others: that your hearts are good, though
your lives have been naught; that such and such gross sins were your slips and
failings; that you were overtaken, overperswaded, and drawn unto such wicked
practices by your companions; and so, by transferring your guilt, endeavor to
make your selves as Innocent as you can; this is abominable in the sight of
God, and a certain sign of sin's dominion, which is inconsistent with the
remission of it, and will shut you out from pardoning Mercy: but in confession
of your sins, acknowledge your selves to have been the chief of sinners.
Sinners, take all the blame to your selves, and set your sins out in the
deepest Crimson and Scarlet colors, and with all their heinous circumstances
and aggravations; tell God that your heart is the worst part, and if there have
been some abominations found in your lives, there are a thousand-fold more
abominations in your hearts. Confess your sins with humility and self-loathing;
say with Agur, Prove. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not
the understanding of a man; with David, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a Beast before thee; with Job, Chap. 42.6. I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes. Confess your sins with shame like Ezra, Chap.
9.6. O my God I am ashamed and blush to lift my face unto thee: for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the
Heavens. Confess your sins with grief and godly sorrow like David, Psalm. 39.18.
I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for sin.

3. Make Application of Christ by Faith, that you may attain forgiveness. There
is no other Name given under Heaven amongst men whereby you can be pardoned and
saved: Acts 4.12. And he is able to save you, and procure a pardon for you in
the uttermost extent of your most heinous guilt. Heb. 7.25. And the reason is
given in the same Verse, because he ever lives to make Intercession for
sinners; it is his Office as High Priest, wherein he is most merciful and
faithful to make Reconciliation for the sins of the People: Heb. 2.17. Christ
is near to the Father, being at his right hand in Heaven; and has great
interest in him, being his dearly beloved Son; and his Intercession for pardon
is always accepted, it being for no more than what himself has purchased, and
what his Father has promised: and therefore you that are the worst of Sinners
have great encouragement to come unto Christ, and to make Application of him;
you have his promise that whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast
out, Joh. 6.37. and if you apply your selves unto him, and apply unto your
selves his merits and Righteousness by believing, you shall certainly attain
the forgiveness of all your sins, however numerous and heinous they have been.
Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. And our Savior
himself tells us, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And the Apostle does discourse at large in the former part of
his Epistle to the Romans concerning Justification, which he proves by
manifold Arguments, that it cannot be works, that it must be by Faith;
therefore by Faith make Application of Christ and his imputed Righteousness,
and rest therein only that you may be justified, that you may be pardoned and
saved.

4. Forsake every sin, that you may attain the forgiveness of it. Prove. 28.13.
He that confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy. Isa. 55.7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and return to the
Lord, for he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon him. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of
your doing from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come
now and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as Snow, though they be red like Crimson, they shall be
as Wool. You must loath your sins, that you may be pardoned; and withal you
must leave them, you must cease from doing evil, if you would have God cease
from his displeasure: and unless you do forsake your sins, never expect that
God should forgive them; there must be a returning to God, that you may be
received unto favor, and this cannot be without a turning from sin. It would
be a dishonor unto God to pardon you whilst that you continue in your
rebellions, and wage War still against Heaven by going on still in your
trespasses.

5. Make your Supplication unto God, and be earnest in Prayer unto him, that he
would forgive you your sins; it is against God that your sins have been
committed, and it is God's Prerogative to remit and pardon, and though he
pardon freely for his Name's sake, yet he will be enquired after and sought
unto for his high favor. Isa. 43.25, 26. I, even I, am he that blotteth out
thy Transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Put me in
remembrance, etc. If you would have pardon, you must ask it; if you would find
God's favor, you must seek it; if you desire the door of Mercy to be opened
unto you, you must knock at the door by earnest Prayer, Mat. 7.7. Hence are
David's earnest cries in Prayer for pardoning Mercy in so many of his Psalms,
especially Psalm. 51. in the first verse, Have Mercy upon me O God according to
thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out
my transgressions. v. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out mine
iniquities. v. 14. Deliver me from Blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my
Salvation, etc. Be earnest in Prayer at the Throne of Grace for this
blessedness of forgiveness, wrestle with God by importunate Supplications, fill
your mouths with Arguments, plead the gracious disposition of God, the
multitude of his tender Mercies, and the riches of his free Grace; plead the
Glory of his Name, which would greatly be advanced and admired, if your great
sins might be pardoned; plead the merits of Christ, and Satisfaction given to
his justice by his Son, together with his Intercession for you at his right
hand; plead the promises of the Covenant of Grace, and his faithfulness, which
does engage him to fulfill them; humble, believing, fervent Prayer will prevail
for forgiveness.

6. Forgive others, if you would that God should forgive you: Mat. 6.11.
Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. v. 14, 15. For if you forgive
men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive
your trespasses. If you do not forgive the hundred Pence of smaller offenses
unto your fellow servants, you will be called to an account, and imprisoned in
Hell, and there tormented for the ten thousand Talents of heinous
transgressions which you have committed against your Lord, Mat. 18. at the
latter end of that Chap. If you bear hatred and malice and revenge in your
hearts against others, whatever their offenses, their wrongs or injuries have
been, you put your selves out of capacity of obtaining pardoning Mercy; Do not
say, I forgive such a one who has wronged me, but I will never forget him, for
this is a deceit of your hearts, whereby you seek to stop the mouth of your
consciences, that they may not trouble you by these Scriptures; for if you do
not forget injuries, so as to carry it toward such Persons as if they had not
wronged you, so as to love them cordially, and to be ready to show kindness
unto them, you do not forgive them, and so you cannot be forgiven by God. If
then you would be pardoned by God, you must from the heart forgive others,
receive the Exhortation of the Apostle: Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with
all malice. And be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Thus I have finished my Answer
unto the two Queries, wherein does appear the blessedness of forgiveness, and
how this blessedness may be attained; and now give me leave to borrow a little
room for some Application.

Application. I might speak much here by way of comfort unto pardoned Persons,
but the most that I have already spoken, yea all that I have spoken under the
first Query, may be turned into a Use of comfort to your selves, and therefore
referring you thither I shall pass you by, and bend my speech only unto you
that are unpardoned, too many of whom are to be found in every Assembly, and
therefore I cannot think that this Assembly is free.

I shall take leave to chide you in a Use of Reproof; endeavor to awaken you
in a Use of Terror; and in the conclusion press you to endeavor after this
blessedness of forgiveness in an Use of Exhortation.

Use 1. For Reproof; Is there such blessedness in forgiveness? Whence is it
then that so many of you neglect this blessedness, in the neglect of your
pardon? Are not all of you sinners? Have not all of you need of forgiveness?
Will not your own Consciences tell you that forgiveness is a great privilege?
And have not Ministers often told you of this privilege, and the way of
attaining it? Has not God by them held forth a pardon to you, and used many
arguments with you, that you would accept it? Whence is it then that so many of
you slight and undervalue it, as if it were of no worth? Whence is it that so
many of you are without pardon when proffered, when none of you are without sins
often committed, and those highly aggravated, and whereby your Souls are so
greatly endangered? May not Robbers, and Murderers, and other notorious
Malefactors, rise up in judgment against you that are without a pardon? When
such Persons are apprehended, found guilty, and condemned, though but unto a
temporal death, they will make all friends, and use all means to escape, and O!
how welcome is a pardon to them? And yet, though you are all guilty of sin, and
condemned for it unto eternal death, and a pardon is purchased, proclaimed, and
proffered unto you, there are too many of you that slight and neglect it, that
have no earnest desire after it, and hitherto have not been persuaded by any
arguments to make use of the means which God has appointed with any diligence
for the obtaining of it. Who is there that to any purpose does look after a
pardon? Who do diligently hear for it, earnestly pray for it? Who do make full
and free confession of sin, that you may attain remission of it? Who do prize
Christ, and by Faith make application of him, that they may have a pardon by
him? Who do forsake sin, which God absolutely requires of all to whom he does
forgive sin? Who do, when injured, heartily forgive others, as they desire God
would forgive them? Sinners, will not many of your consciences accuse you of
unpardoned guilt, unto which you have added the neglect of forgiveness? And is
not your sin hereby doubled, and most highly aggravated, and the guilt of it
fastened upon you?

Use 2. Let me tell you by way of Terror for your awakening, that God is
displeased with all workers of iniquity, but he is most highly displeased with
you that slight his mercy. Your sins are inexcusable, your condemnation is
unavoidable, and your punishment hereafter in Hell will be most dreadful and
intolerable. Possibly now you are careless and secure; sin is sweet, and
conscience is quiet; you are at ease, and conscience asleep; but will this ease
and sleep always continue? Is there not a time coming when you shall be
awakened? If you are not awakened under God's Word, may not God awaken you
under his Rod? If you are not awakened under God's threatenings, will you not
awake when he comes to execution? If you are secure in the midst of outward
peace and prosperity, can you be secure in the midst of trouble and adversity?
Think what you will do when death does approach: Think what a dreadful aspect
unpardoned sin will have, when you are brought down unto the sides of the pit,
to the brink and border of eternity, and when you are summoned to make your
appearance before the highest Majesty: O the horror that then will seize you!
O the fearfulness that then will surprise you! To have the black guilt of
drunkenness or swearing, of uncleanness or deceiving, or any other iniquity to
stare you then in the face, O how dismal will it be and affrighting! And think
with what rage and fury your consciences will then reflect upon your fore-past
sins; especially your neglect of a pardon, then unattainable, and how
tormenting will this be unto you? You may then cry out, Lord have mercy on us;
Christ have mercy on us; But will God then hear you who have refused to hearken
unto him? Will Christ regard you, who have neglected, refused, and shut the
door of your hearts against him all your days? But sinners, what will you do at
the day of judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall come in flaming fire to take
vengeance upon you for unpardoned sins? That great day will certainly come, and
it will quickly be here: Time runs away swiftly, and it will quickly be run
out; yet a little while and the Angel will lift up his hand, and cry with a
loud voice, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever that time shall be
no longer, Rev. 10.5, 6. Then the mystery will be finished, the prophecy
accomplished, and the whole frame of this visible world dissolved; the Sun then
and the Moon will be darkened, and the Stars will fall unto the earth, as the
fig tree casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind; and
the heavens themselves then shall be rolled together as a great scroll, and so
pass away with a great noise; the earth and all the elements shall be on fire,
and consume away on that day, when the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear from
Heaven with Millions of mighty Angels, in power and brightness of majesty, and
then you must come out of your graves, and will stand trembling before Christ's
great Tribunal, and none of you will be able to hide your selves under any Rock
or Mountain from his angry face. Then, then you will fully know what a
privilege it is to be pardoned, when you see where pardoned persons are placed,
when you see them gathered to the right hand of the great Judge, and there
acquitted openly, owned graciously, and crowned by him with honor and glory,
and invited by him to take possession of those eternal habitations of rest and
joy in his Kingdom prepared for them by his Father: But O the tearings of
spirit, and heart-vexing tormenting grief which you will have, that no place is
found for you amongst them, that through your neglect of pardoning mercy you
have forfeited and eternally lost a share in eternal glory; and not only so,
but have by sin also plunged your selves into a bottomless gulf of endless
misery! Think how dreadful the irreversible sentence of condemnation will be
unto you, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. Alas! Alas! sinners what will you do? no thought can conceive
what your horror will be, when you come to reap the bitter fruit of all your
unpardoned sins. It is the punishment of Hell, Sinners, which the guilt of sin
unremoved does oblige you to undergo; And therefore I am sent this day to
forewarn you, and in the name of my Master to foretell you, that if you do not
now sue out for, and obtain this forgiveness of sin, your sin hereafter will
bring eternal ruin and destruction of soul and body in Hell. Without a pardon
profaneness will be your ruin: Some of you it may be can swear and curse and
blaspheme the Name of God; hereafter God will swear in his wrath that you shall
not enter into his rest, and you shall be banished out of Christ's presence
with a curse, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Those tongues which have been so
liberal of oaths and blasphemies, must be tormented in flames of fire without
one drop of water to cool them. Without a pardon, drunkenness will be your
ruin: you that have so often enflamed your selves with wine and strong drink.
God will inflame you with the wine of his vengeance, he will make you to drink
the dregs of his wrath, which is at the bottom of the cup of his indignation.
Without a pardon, uncleanness will be your ruin: your pleasures are empty and
of short continuance, but your pains will be full hereafter, and they will
abide for ever. Without a pardon, unrighteousness will be your ruin: your
unrighteous gains one day will prove your unspeakable loss, and God will be the
avenger of all such upon you as have been wronged and defrauded by you. Without
a pardon, your neglect of Christ and Salvation will be your ruin, and if you
persevere in this neglect, it is impossible that you should escape. Sinners,
think seriously and think frequently of your unpardoned iniquities, and withal
think of the dreadful punishment they will bring upon you, think of your
eternal damnation unto the most exquisite torments of Hell; and then drink on,
swear on, and scoff your fill, be unholy and profane, unjust and unclean if you
think good; but know that for all these sins God will bring you to judgment,
know that these iniquities unpardoned will be your ruin. Should I tell you of
one that were condemned for some vile fact to be slay'd alive, or burnt alive,
or sawn asunder, or dragged to pieces with wild horses, or starved with hunger
and cold, or any other ways cruelly tortured to death; but that he might escape
all this misery, if he would accept of a pardon ready provided for him, and
withal leave off such vile facts for the future; you would count him worse than
mad, should he neglect his pardon, and expose himself to ruin and misery
through his carelessness and obstinacy: And yet though you are condemned for sin
to far worse torment and misery, that which is more dreadful than ten thousand
painful deaths, and all this mischief and punishment may be avoided and
escaped, if you will accept of the pardon which Christ has provided, and in
the Gospel is proffered unto you, and withal break off your sins by repentance;
yet no words or arguments will persuade you to use the means of prevention, but
still you live in the neglect of pardon and so great salvation, and are secure,
however great your danger be. O the folly and strange madness of unconverted
sinners! O the unspeakable sottishness and senslesness they are under! Although
we make it appear to their consciences that their condition is unutterably
miserable, they are not moved, except it be with choler against the Minister
that warns them of the sword of God's vengeance which hangs over them, and
they champ at the Bridle that would hold them from running to their
destruction: But O that you would rather turn your anger against your sins, and
say, this iniquity will be my ruin, and that sin without pardon will be my
damnation.

Use 3. Therefore in the next place let me exhort all of you that lie under the
guilt of sin, that you would labor after this blessedness of forgiveness. O
that you would pity your own souls, think what provision you have made for
them, think whither they are like to go upon their separation from your bodies,
and what you will do at the last day when Christ comes to judge and punish
unpardoned sinners; think how you will be able to dwell with devouring fire, to
inhabit everlasting burnings. Methinks you should take up such thoughts as
these, and argue thus with your selves; What! Shall I undo my self for a filthy
lust? Shall I lose my Soul to gain a little uncertain earthly riches? Shall I
forfeit a Crown of Glory for the empty honor of this world? Shall I cast my
self into everlasting horror and pain for a little vain, fading, carnal
delight and pleasure? Can I be contented to be tormented for ever in Hell to
satisfy the desires of my flesh on earth, and that when they will never be
satisfied? Shall I hugg a viper in my bosom that will kill me? Harbor lusts in
my heart that will slay me? Shall I dishonor God, and damn my own soul, to
gratify the Devil my enemy, and please my flesh, which will soon be turned
into dirt and rottenness, and withal throw away the hopes of a glorious
resurrection for my body hereby? Away then ye foolish filthy lusts, I Will no
more hearken to you, or be entangled or enslaved by you. Be gone thou deluding
tempting Devil, I Will lend my ear no longer to thy lying suggestions, nor yield
any more to thy beguiling and bewitching temptations; farewell thou glozing
flattering world, with all thy charms and allurements, thy gold is but dross,
thy wine mixed with water, thy honor but wind and vanity, thy delights are
bitter-sweets, such as will end in death and ruin, I Will choose another
portion, and look after a better blessedness, than thou can give me, even the
blessedness of forgiveness, which will bring me unto eternal blessedness.
Methinks you should take no sleep nor rest, and find no comfort in house, or
trade, or friends, or any thing, until the anger of God be appeased, your sins
all pardoned, and so your souls set in safety from all that ruin unto which
they are exposed by unpardoned iniquity. The absolute necessity of forgiveness
should quicken you to look after it; you have not so much need of food to
remove your hunger, as you have need of mercy to remove your guilt; you have
not so much need of clothes to cover your bodies, as you have need of
righteousness to cover your iniquities. Better be starved than damned, better
be hanged than burned, better be exposed to the misery of the weather, and any
bodily distemper, than to be exposed unto the storms and strokes of God's
vengeance, and the eternal ruin of body and soul in Hell, which there is no
possibility of escaping without a pardon. And that which may encourage you to
seek after forgiveness is the attainableness of it, and that by the vilest and
most guilty amongst you: others have obtained pardoning mercy that have been
found as guilty: Manasseh was pardoned who was so heinous a transgressor; Paul,
who was so Zealous a Persecutor; Mary Magdalen, who was possessed with seven
Devils; the Corinthians, some of whom were Idolaters, Adulterers, effeminate,
abusers of themselves with mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Extortioners, Drunkards,
Revilers; yet they were justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus; some of them
who had imbrued their hands in Christ's Blood, had the guilt of their sins
washed away by it. There is Mercy enough in God to give a pardon for the
greatest Transgression; there is merit enough in Christ to purchase a pardon,
and prevalency in his Intercession to procure it, whatever your offenses have
been; the invitation unto Christ for Remission and Salvation is General, none
are excluded, but such as exclude themselves; the promises are full, Crimson
sins, such as are of the deepest dye, God promises to make as Wool; and the
promises are free, the acceptance of a pardon by Faith makes it yours, without
any price or merit on your part. We Ministers have a commission to preach
Remission of sins in the Name of Christ, and to declare to you the glad tidings
of Salvation, yea, we have instructions, as Ambassadors, in the Name of God and
Christ to beseech you that you would be reconciled, that you would accept of
forgiveness. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God.
Give me leave to press this Argument upon you: the great God of Heaven and
Earth, so glorious in Holiness and Righteousness, is so infinitely Merciful and
Gracious, as to beseech you that you would be reconciled, although you are so
infinitely inferior unto him. He condescends to entreat you, not that you
would show kindness unto him, but that you would show kindness to your selves,
and accept of the greatest kindness at his hands of Forgiveness and
Reconciliation. God might command, and upon once the least refusal, he might
execute his vengeance upon you; but although some of you have stopped your Ears
so long, refused his gracious prosfer so often, though you have abused his
kindness, trampled upon his Patience, slighted his invitations, despised his
threatenings, disregarded his promises, and turning all his rich Grace into
wantonness, do continue still in your disobedience; yet the Lord does again
make suit unto you, stretches forth his hands unto you, however disobedient
and gainsaying you have been, and by me does entreat you that you would be
reconciled. Need we use entreaties with condemned Malefactors to accept of a
pardon? if we had commission to preach pardoning Mercy unto Devils would they
need entreaties to accept? would they be fooled out of such a gracious prosfer
by any as you hitherto have been by them? Sinners I beseech you in the name of
the great and glorious Jehovah, and the Lord Jesus Christ your gracious
Redeemer that you would be reconciled, and that you would befriend your selves
and accept of the forgiveness of all your sins, I entreat you that you would
not through neglect of pardon and perseverance in a sinful course irrecoverably
ruin and damn your Souls; methinks my heart does yearn over you, and Bleed for
you who are wounding your selves and rushing on inconsiderately toward the
place of everlasting weeping and woe, from whence there is no coming back, no
coming out for ever. Sinners, why should you be so hard to be persuaded,
without any further delay, to be reconciled unto God? Why do I need to use so
many entreaties? May I at length prevail with you that you would not be
miserable, and prove your own Murderers; that you would be blessed here and
hereafter, through your ready acceptance of pardoning mercy. What answer must
I carry back to my Master who sent me this day to proclaim in your ears the
blessedness of forgiveness, and to use entreaties with you in his name that you
would become thus blessed? Must I complain? Lord, there are a company of
obstinate sinners whom I have entreated to accept of pardon; but there is not
the least spark of ingenuity amongst them; nor the least sense of their sins
upon them; had I been to preach to Beasts, or Fowls, to the Earth or Stones,
they would have been as much moved as these sinners; Lord, I spent my strength
and pains, my voice and lungs for naught, I know not how to persuade; I know
not which way to prevail with them; I thought thy beseechings would have taken
with them; that the entreaties of God, like a sweet flame, would have melted
their hearts as Wax within them; I thought that when thou did vouchsafe by me
to request them to leave their sins, and be reconciled unto thee, that this
would marvellously have affected them, and that they would readily have
complied in a thing so necessary for them, and so much for their own happiness:
I did begin with terror to them, and yet they were not affrighted; but I hoped
when I came to end with Mercy and to speak in the soft and sweet Language of
thine entreaties, and to urge th s most winning Argument of thy Requests unto
them, that then they would immediately have yielded, and most thankfully have
accepted so gracious proffers made unto them; But alas, Lord, I found it far
otherwise than I expected; if their ears were open, their hearts were shut up,
and they would not receive my message, which from thee in faithfulness and
tenderness I delivered unto them; And what may I farther hope will prevail with
them, if thy entreaties be thus disregarded? Must I thus complain, or may I
have occasion to say; Lord, I have been preaching the blessedness of
forgiveness, which I backed with thine entreaties of sinners that they would
accept of it; and through thy blessing, the Arguments I used, were not
altogether in vain; some sinners that had stouted it out a long time against
thee, began at length to relent and yield, when they heard thine entreaties of
them to be reconciled: Lord, I heard scalding sighs break forth from such and
such, whose hearts were breaking within them for their sins; I saw brinish
tears trickling down from some eyes, proceeding from a spring of godly sorrow
within, newly given them by the Spirit; how did they look, and seem to long
after thy Salvation? how greedily did they hearken, even like the condemned
Malefactor, when he has first tidings of a pardon? I hope they are gone home
to entreat that of thee, which thou have by me been entreating of them to
accept of; O Lord, grant them their desires; be reconciled to that Drunkard and
unclean wretch; forgive the iniquities of that Swearer, Sabbath-breaker and
profane Sinner. What do you say Sinners? will you send me back to my Master
sadned or rejoiced? Accept of my Message, and it will be the joy of my heart;
yea, it will be the joy of Angels in Heaven; and however it will cost you some
grief and tears in your repentance of sin at the first, yet if you so seek
after this blessedness of forgiveness, as to obtain it, the issue will be joy
to your selves, you will have the beginnings of joy here, and in the other
world your joys will be full, ineffable, and eternal. Methinks some of you seem
almost persuaded; O that you were quite persuaded without further delay, to put
in practice the Directions given for the obtaining the blessedness of
forgiveness!

How we may overcome inordinate love of Life, and fear of Death. Sermon. XXX.
Acts 20.24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear to
my self, that I may finish my course with joy, etc.


THE Context tells us, that the Apostle was now at Miletus, v. 17. and from
hence he sends to Ephesus, and calls for the Elders of the Church. Now these
Elders were not Timothy and Trophimus; for they were in his company already, v.
4. and had been with him in his journey hither; but rather those twelve men on
whom he laid his hands, and bestowed the Holy Ghost, in order to their Ministry
at Ephesus, Acts 19.1, 2, 6, 7. and the rest whom Timothy had ordained whilst
he was there.

From v. 18. of this Chapter, we have the Apostle's Farewell Sermon; wherein he
clears himself by close and smart addresses to their Consciences and
Experiences, as to all charges and surmises of ministerial miscarriages among
them, v. 18.27. and works them all within the Conscience of their ministerial
charge and trust from God, to imitate his Ministerial faithfulness, by urging
such significant and cogent Arguments, as were apt and proper to startle and
engage them to and in their work. And these Arguments are drawn from the
present and instantly succeeding circumstances and concernments of the Church
of God. They were in danger of Wolves breaking in upon them, and seducers
arising from amongst them: They were the Church of God, the price of his Blood,
committed to the care and guidance of these Ministers, to whom the Apostle
spoke; and therefore the interest and worth of Souls, and their relation to
them, and all those sad and dangerous exercises, underminings and obstructions
which they were sure to meet with in their Pastoral work, did call aloud upon
them for all possible circumspection, activity and resolution in and for their
work; of all which, the Apostle was an exemplary and awakening instance and
example.

My Text is the Generous Heroicism of an awakened and prepared heart,
occasioned by the Tidings that were brought him by the Spirit, v. 23. Who told
him there, that bonds and afflictions did abide him in every City. Here you may
see those sinews cut of hopes and fears, which might obstruct his Faith,
Diligence and Perseverance; he is mortified to all that love of Life, and fear
of Death, which possibly might control his better prospect, hopes and work.

In the Words we have the Apostle concerned in reference to a double state.

1. As to this mortal Life; it is implied in the Text, and expressed in the
Context, that it is a Theater of smart contentions and miseries, and that he
was concerned in the agonistical exercises thereof.

2. As to the other Life, he had the prospect of transcendent joys, exhibited
to his views and hopes, as the determined and proposed reward of his
well-managed exercises; the influences and impressions whereof did strangely
invigorate and fix his resolutions to maintain such a Masculine frame of
spirit, as should entertain and answer all the challenges of danger,
difficulties and temptations, and to preserve that necessary liberty from, and
useful indifferency to the hopes and love of Life, and fears of Death and
Danger, which might secure the spirit and prowess of a resolved and successful
valor: (...), I make no reckoning of any thing, and he grows regardless of his
life, and has mortified the vigor of all the arguments and inducements that
can be fetched therefrom; for the utmost reach of rage and villainy is to effect
no more, and can extend no farther than the loss of Life, Mat. 10.28. And all
those Comforts, which are liable to the casualties and sequestrations of
transient time, and cannot run parallel with our capacious souls beyond the
limits of a dying breath, cannot be valued beyond the value of their end; and
therefore he that conquers and subdues the estimation of his Life, has so far
overcome all the disturbing and ensnaring influences of hopes and fears
relating to it, and derived from it.

Well, we have here an instance and example (in this great and gracious
Apostle) of a resolved and proficient Christian; yea, and a visible practical
demonstration of what Blood and Spirits are in the veins of Christianity, and
are bred there, and what an energy and force there is in one right believing
look and glance at things to come, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. Heb. 12.2. And if it be
objected, that as the Apostles course was ministerial, so were his joys which
fixed his eye; and therefore in neither can he be proposed to others as their
imitable pattern or exact encouragement, seeing all are not Ministers, neither
can all expect his Exercises, Furniture, Encouragements and Seize, and so
that we pluck not the fruit from the right tree.

I answer. This does not prevent his being our pattern, argument and
encouragement, if but these few things be seriously considered.

1. The Apostle had a double Course to run; he had the trust and business of a
Christian, as well as of a Minister to discharge; he had a God to please, a
Soul to save, an Hell to escape, an Heaven to reach, an Heart to cleanse, and
Sins to mortify, unruly Passions and impetuous Affections to be curbed and
managed by their proper Discipline, as well as others; he was a man subject to
like Passions with our selves; he dwelt in flesh, and was opposed by the Devil
as well as others; he had Corruptions to be mortified and pardoned; and loved
his Life, and what might make it comfortable, saving where Inordinacies were to
be corrected and subdued, because of inconsistency with better work and joys;
yea, he had such forcible inclinations to desire and beg some intermissions of,
and respite from his tedious Exercises, as forced him to repair to Prayer and
Arguments to get support, so that he might not Oneri succumbere; and thus I
understand that Thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7, 10. And so the Sense seems
facil, and it amounts to this; The Apostle had been laboring in the fire for
God, and for the interest of Christianity, and managed all his Exercises in the
face of danger; and growing aged, he was tempted to desire of God, that he
might spend the residue of his declining age in liberty and quietness; but when
the flesh (so weather-beaten by the storms) grew so desirous of some respite
from the severity of Travel, Chains and Labors, the messenger Satan comes
again threatening and acquainting him with designed and determined repetitions
of former Buffetings, and the renewals of Reproaches, Necessities,
Persecutions, etc. for Christ's sake: Which, when he understood, and
apprehended that Christ and his Gospel were so concerned in them, he thought
(and took them as) the matter of his Glory, in that they might be serviceable
to the Interest of Christ, and great occasions of some special Illustrations of
the remarkable Power and Grace of Christ; but this pace aliorum. The truth is,
Sirs, he had such Exercises and Temptations, as that (had not the expectations
and persuasions of these joys above, which succeeded the Course well finished;
interposed to fortify and compose his spirit) this world had never been
conquered, nor so easily forsaken and disclaimed by him; nor Death so tamely
entertained, nor Hopes and Fears so managed and subordinated as they were, 1
Cor. 15.19, 31, 32, 58. Now thus far he stands on equal grounds with other
Christians, and has the same Exercises, Arguments, Encouragements, Interest
and Obligations, that every Christian has; and if it was possible for him to
finish his course under the powerful Influences of this Prospect and Design, it
is as possible for us; for no impossibility, whilst such, can be our duty.

2. His Ministerial Work and Trust was (as to its full discharge) a necessary
and essential part of his saving Christianity. No Minister of Jesus Christ by
office, can be a sound and faithful Christian, that is unfaithful in his
Ministry; it is in so doing, that he must save himself as well as those that
hear him, 1 Timothy 4.15, 16.

3. Our accommodations being made answerable to Trust and Work, our faithful
management thereof is of equal necessity in much or little; for we must be
answerable to Relations, Trust and Places, and other Circumstances, as God has
placed us in and under them; for we must be judged, and are to act accordingly
to what we have received. No man is commanded and encouraged faithfully to
discharge his Ministry, but upon some supposition that the Ministry is his
lawful Calling; and where that is, unfaithfulness will damn him that is guilty
of it; for it is his place of Service, even as faithful service of all Servants
in general is their Duty: Yet places of Service, and the matter and measure of
their service may be different, according to the master's pleasure and affairs.

4. The close connection of his whole Course and Comforts clears the Case. For,
1. It is not imaginable that any man can be a faithful Minister, whose heart is
alienated from the true powerful Principles, Sentiments and Impressions of
Christianity. For how can any man be separated cordially to this most costly
painful Calling, and regularly bear the heat and burden of his Place and Day,
who has not well concocted the Substance, Evidence and Importance of this
great Mystery of Salvation (which is the indispensable and adequate exercise of
his Function) into deep persuasions, warm affections, and most unconquerable
resolutions? Who can unweariedly pursue the Souls of others with close and
pressing importunities to prize and prosecute that Element and State of Joys
and Holiness, which is not credited, relished and valued by himself? And
further, 2. Were it supposed also that the regular faithfulness of a Minister
was separable from the spirit and faithfulness of a Christian either in
themselves, or in the Subject, yet how can we imagine such operative
influential apprehensions and true relishes of the joy reported and proposed,
as shall prevail against all oppositions and discouragements and competitions
from the frowns and flatteries, bribes and strokes of Earth and Hell, to
animate a Minister's breast, so as to make him through in all the Enterprises
and Employments of his Function, whilst his own Work and Interest, as a
Christian, is neglected, and those influences of this joy (entailed upon a
course well finished) though they be powerful to make him faithful in the one,
shall yet be found too languid to issue in the same diligence and success as to
the other? And, 3. We must conclude, that this Eagle-eyed Apostle saw and
reckoned on it, that a Christian Minister and an Apostle, must be a
through-Christian, and something, yea, much more, or else he could not possibly
conclude, his Course would bring him to his Joys, 1 Cor. 9.24, 27. Therefore
the Sense and Errand of the Text amounts to this;

Doctr. That the comforts of a well completed course will make all discerning
serious Christians to be above the regard of Life, or fear of all afflictions,
bonds or death to compass them. Romans 8.18. and Phil. 1.20.23.

The very instance, argument, and errand of my Text, and Doctrine grounded
thereupon, imply and include several things, as that, 1. there is a state of
future joys and retributions, for we have no reason to imagine that our Apostle
was so blind as to be deceived himself: nor so wicked as to deceive others. No
man that knows and credits the existence of a Deity, but he must take him to be
the strongest, wisest, and the best of beings, and so that he must needs be
omnipotent, omniscient, and all-sufficient, and if so, then it is beyond all
controvesie, that omnipotence can at such a rate address it self to Creatures,
as to make them happy or miserable as it best becomes it self. He that ordained
and framed this state cannot be thought to have acted to the utmost of his
strength, for what can stint omnipotence? and does it suit the wisdom of God,
to make a Creature capable of an everlasting state, and of the hopes and
prospect of it, and to implant in it an expectation of it, and rule him by
those hopes and fears which do and must derive their influences from an eternal
state, and after all to make it evident, that man was only made to be imposed
on, or ruled and managed by mistakes and mere fallacious arguments and errors?
or has God afforded us the least intimation of his mind, in nature, providence
or scriptures, that this is the way of conciliating that love and honor from
his Subjects, or of implanting and maintaining those necessary fears in man,
which government requires for the seize of its ends, to make them live in
expectation of what is no ways fit to reach its ends, because it is either
false or mean? and therefore I need not go about to prove what here is granted
and improved, and what so many incomparably better pens have proved before me.
2. this state has sufficient force as to argument and motive to press us to do
and suffer all that we can meet with or be called to in our whole Christian
course. All those severe perplexities which our religion calls us to, as to
obedience in sufferings and duty, are not beyond the compensations of these
approaching expected joys: and if they obstruct the influences, and eclips the
light and glory of what is proposed and promised as our great argument and
encouragement, it is utterly and only our own fault that makes what is
sufficient to be ineffectual. 3. The comforts of a course well finished cannot
be had without the regular management and finishing of our course, and this can
never be without resolution and preparation of the heart, by which it must be
born and kept above immoderate love to life and fear of sufferings and death.
Faith is the spirit of religion: the spirit of faith is hope; and the spirit of
hope is love; and these are all the most successful preparations of the heart.
Had faith its liberty, power and prospect in the heart of all professors, it
would make them too sagacious and concerned to be imposed on by plausible
delusions, and bold pretenses in all these sublunary trifles, to that
substantial solid satisfaction and excellency, which are expected by ductile
mortals to be experienced therein, or hoped for therefrom. Did we but look
beyond the grave and wilderness, and search and see that land of promise which
is beyond them, we might be entertained and allured with such clusters from it,
as would afford us more grateful relishes and spirits, than all the feculent
extractions of these transient comforts could amount to. All our delights and
pleasures in, and great sollicitudes about these lower things would be
effectually mortified and conquered. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. what breasts of
consolation are evidence and substance? Heb. 11.1. sense and presence do
strangely invigorate and strengthen the dangerous influences of this Worlds
comforts and concernments in their addresses to the heart of man. 2 Timothy 4.10.
And because the gain and comforts of true Religion are invisible and distant,
therefore their certainty and transcendent excellency must be concocted into
deep and sound Persuasions, and be digested into answerable Affections,
Resolutions and Pursuit; and all those Arguments and Motives which must prevail
upon us to run and finish the course and race which is set before us, must be
derived from and are to be reduced to this deep persuasion of these certain and
transcendent comforts, nor is it possible that Religion should live or thrive
but in the power of and true proportion to our apprehensions and persuasions of
those fundamental truths and principles of God's existence and rewarding
excellency, Heb. 16.6 Man must be ruled as God has made him, and as fear and
love are the commanding passions and affections of every subject capable of
moral government, so something there must be reported and determined, fit for
the exercise and discipline thereof, and if transcendency, in what must
influence, ^oth be not credible and demonstrable, their influences must of
necessity prove too languid to attain their end. Equality spoils choice, as far
as i^ extends, and if the comforts of another state do not exceed what we can
meet with here, sure powerful Godliness would lose its life and breasts
together, nor could it be existent in its practice without its arguments and
motives, and (with submission to better judgments) I think, that impossibility
of pleasing God without faith, spoken of Heb. 11.6. Results, not only from
God's arbitrary ordination, but from the very frame and habitude and fitness of
means and ends themselves, and the sense is this (as I have elsewhere lately
and largely showed on the forementioned place, though not in print, nor fit to
be so) that unless I be persuaded that God's Majesty deserves, and that he can
and will reward us for the cost and exercises of Godliness to infinite
advantage, no man could be prevailed on to be Religious. The very difficulties,
burdens and temptations of Religion, under the present circumstances of
revolted man, would press too sore upon the frailty and concernments of flesh
and blood, to suffer him to obtain of himself to submit to the discipline and
severities of true and powerful Godliness. Nor can I see (if this be once
denied) where the Apostles argument prevails and pinches, 1 Cor. 15.19, 29, 23,
58. Adam in Innocence was influenced by arguments, and I do not see, that the
economy of grace destroys the frame of nature, but rather comes in by way of
Medicinal Ordination to repair it, that so Religious government may revive
again, by such energetical arguments and influences as are proper to the case.
Psalm. 130.4 Nor did the Son of God and Savior of the World appear for the
supplanting of the Father as to his Throne, and interest, but rather acted all
along in a professed state and way of delegation, and ordinate substitution to
this end, that government might flourish, and poor apostate man might be
Encouraged to seek and s^rve and please his God again; and were this well
considered, I think that all our censorious malignant flames would dye, which
have no other fuel but such confidences as are grounded on, and fomented by
our rash mistakes, and we might peaceably Credere de verbis, but not de jure
veritatis. And I confess I cannot see how the joys of Godliness can have the
vim motivam of pressing arguments to quicken us to what activity, faithfulness
and resolution and perseverance are enjoined us and expected from us, if
persevering Godliness (which is the finishing of our course with joy) be not
the great condition of our Crown and triumph; and therefore it is ignorance and
inconsiderateness that strengthens our infidelity and consequent reluctances,
to run the hazards of Religion, and entertain the work and cost of this our
Christian course, to reach its compensations. One piercing glance and sober
look within the Vail would strangely help us unto a right estimate of things,
and make our quick reflections upon our foolish former choice and trifling
carriages to minister to our present grief and shame. It Is but a dotage to
imagine that any thing short of Holiness and Heaven, or inconsistent with our
present work, can be the true enrichment or content of Souls. What man can keep
his heart below his work, that knows and credits the blessed resolutions
wherewith the all-sufficient God is fixed to recompense all self-denying,
regular and resolved Racers? see 1 John 3.3. Who can advance that life into a
competition with the present work and Will of God, which must be swallowed up
of a surpassing immortality, when he has regularly finished his course? so
that now the way is clear to lead us to answer these Queries.

Quer. 1. What is this finishing our course with joy, which is to influence us
into this regardlesness of life and death, and every thing in order thereunto.

1. Joy is the Privileg^um est Principis benef^ciu n contra jus commune
indultum, non enim est privilegium nisi aliquid indulge^t speciale. Say the
Civilians.
privilege and satisfaction of the Soul at rest in the possession and embraces
of its both adequate and desired end and object, which is the sum of what is
intended by the expression in the Text.

1. I call it a Privilege, as it imports some considerable excellency in the
object or gift, and thus it is God in Christ when he becomes the portion of once
Apostate man (though now recovered by relative and real grace) when he appears
in the perfection of his Image favor and presence, and that reciprocal
intimacy which is consequent thereupon; and as its a favor peculiar to some,
by way of discrimination and difference from others, for it is the joy of God
dispensed only to the Godly. And I call it, 2. Satisfaction, as importing
sutableness to the subject on whom it is bestowed on all accounts, and as such
apprehended and resented by it. And, 3. I appropriate it to the Soul, as being
first and most concerned in it, and most capable of it, for till the
Resurrection the Soul alone enjoys it. Before the dissolution of the body the
Soul is only capable of the prospect and improvement of it, and therefore most
concerned and engaged about it: and after the Resurrection of the person, and
his introduction into glory, the Soul is made the most immediate recipient of
it; and the comforts and perfection of the body are resultant from the Soul's
satisfaction and delights, and truly subordinate thereunto, as both are
subordinate unto God, not to h^s joys but will and honor. And 4. I fixed it on
the Soul at rest, as the result of all its aims and motions: for it is both the
recompense and cessation of all its painful exercises and pursuits. 5. I make
the matter of this joy to be the Soul's adequate End and Object, which none but
God can be; since it is apparent that neither Heaven nor Earth have any besides
God to make and be a portion for the Soul, Psalm. 73.25. And then, 6. I lay the
formality of this joy in the possession and embraces of this End and Object,
both as adequate and desired; for as it is adequate, it speaks no want nor
deficiency in the Object; and as it is desired, so it speaks the preparation of
the Subject; and as it is embraced and possessed, so it speaks no cost and
labors lost, nor expectations frustrated. And now indeed the Soul is most
ravished, when all its motions are directed to their End, and terminated there,
with unconceivable satisfaction, when God is all in all, and the poor painful
Christian is, through tedious oppositions, difficulties and travels, safely
conducted to its most proper Portion; Choice and Joy.

2. By Course, is meant the Time of Life in reference to our stated work and
difficulties. The Metaphor is fetched from that Olympic Exercise which is
called (...); in which the Racers ran in Armor, because of sharp Assaults and
Oppositions all the way. In armis Cursorum fuere Galea, quam capite, Ocreae,
quas tibiis, Aspis sive Clypeus, quem manibus ferrent qui eo certamine
contenderent. Pet. Fab. Agonistic. lib. 2. cap. 23. p. 186. Hence we have
something in our Christian Panoply answerable hereunto; as, The Helmet of
Salvation, Ephesians. 6.17. Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace,
answering to the Ocreae; v. 15. And the Shield of Faith, v. 16. And therefore
after the Apostle had showed the Ephesians their Race and Course of Duties
which they had to run in, Ephesians. 4.5, 6. and 1.9. He acquainteth them also what
oppositions they might expect, and what Enemies they had to grapple with, and
what a Panoply or Armor they must put on and use; Ephesians. 6.10, 18. that so their
Course might be successful.

3. By finishing the Course with joy, is meant, to have it managed and
completed so, as that the Comforts, Prize and Glory of it might be theirs who
run to discharge Trust and Duty with all Activity, Prudence, Constancy and
Delight; to face and conquer Difficulties with such masculine courage and
success, as best becomes the Spirit, Hopes and Furniture of a Christian: to
make our matchless estimation of approaching Glory remarkable in all our
strokes and steps. No man is crowned that strives not lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5. Our
Motions must be persevering, swift and even, and herein answerable to the great
ends of God Christ, in calling us to our Trust and Care; and all our
warrantable ends in our voluntary undertaking to be Combatants and Racers to
hold Integrity so fast, to prize the Crown so much, to watch over Hearts so
strictly, and discipline the whole Man so exactly, as that the Gospel may not
be ashamed to own us, nor Christ ashamed of us. Our Trust nor Talents must not
be imbezeled, nor managed with slightness nor falsehood, nor any way abused by
us, lest those Comforts should be lost that are before us, as the determined
recompense of faithful Racers: For God resolves to render to every man as his
work shall be, Romans 2.6, 10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Jer. 17.10. We know the Apostle's
Care and Counsel, 1 Cor. 9.24, 27. Phil. 2.12. He knew all running would not
serve the turn; and he was apprehensive of all those Dangers, Snares and
Oppositions which called for universal Watchfulness, Resolution, Care and
Courage; and knew the Crown of Life could never fit the Sluggard's or Coward's
Temples. Nor will God prejudice the Interest of Religion, nor restrain and
mortify all those awakening Arguments, which are to be derived from this
Principle and Topic, viz. That only faithful Racers must be Crowned with Life
and Joys.

Query 2. How far must love to Life be conquered and subdued, and every thing
be disregarded, for the right finishing of our course with joy?

1. These things must be distinguished, in order to the understanding of the
Nature and Measure of this Duty and Attainment.

1. It is one thing what may be loved and valued simply and abstractedly, as
only considered in it self; and it is another thing what may be loved and
valued, as compared with something else. And,

2. It is one thing what degree of value of Love and Care may suit the
excellency and importance of the Object, and another thing what may exceed it.

3. It is one thing how I may love a thing, when consistent with, and conducing
to our best Concernment; and it is another thing how I may love what is
withdrawn from and set against it. And,

4. It is one thing to have Affections to be Snares and Hindrances, and another
thing to have them Helps and Furtherances to something better. And,

5. A moderate and subordinate love is one thing, and a supreme and coordinate
love is another. And,

6. It is one thing to love with true submission to God's commanding and
disposing Will, and another thing to love to the prejudice of God's Prerogative
and Providence; so as to murmur and quarrel with the great Jehovah for what he
does.

2. And upon these Distinctions may we ground these following Propositions and
Conclusions.

1. Life and the Comforts of it are eligible and desirable as they are
considered in themselves; and in this sense God has not forbidden the loving
of them. They come from God as emanations and expressions of his Goodness: They
are good and perfect gifts, and lovely in their kind and plaees; for had not
Life been lovely, it could have been no punishment to dye; for all punishment
is Malum Physicum propter Malum Morale; and when it is laid in a privation, the
want cannot be evil, if the thing we are deprived of be not good and lovely;
nor could the promise of long life have been a quickening Argument to Holiness
and Duty (as it is, 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. Exodus 20.12.) had we not loved it. Nor
would God have promised to us as a Mercy, what is not good and lovely. Adam in
Innocence had the love of Life implanted in him; and he did ill in that he
feared the loss of Life too little, to make him regularly careful to preserve
it. And it had been no argument of awful cogency that he should dye upon
transgression, had not the love of Life been deeply rooted and implanted in
him; for who can rationally fear the loss of what he cares not for? It is plain
that Adam's love to Life was the result of God's Creation, and therefore good;
for it was in him in his Innocence: And the Argument was framed to prevent
Transgression, as something possible, but not yet existent; and God was never
angry with him, till he through sin had forfeited his Life; and this proved his
love to Life to be every way consistent with a state of Innocence. And for all
the Comforts of Life, they are desirable in themselves, and lovely: As,
Relation, Ephesians. 5.25. Liberty, 1 Cor. 7.21. and Birth-priviledges Acts 22.28.
Credit, Prove. 22.1. Outward Supplies, Prove. 30.8 Yea, Plenty of them, Eccl.
7.11. and 10.10. And it is impossible and inhumane for any man simply to desire
and attempt his own personal Misery and Destruction; yea, it is his sin to do
it. See Acts 26.29. Neither does Grace it self mortify or correct our love to
Life and all its Comforts, as simply considered in themselves; for if it did,
it could neither be the trial nor the commendation of a gracious sober
Christian to part with Life and Comforts, since it would only be demanding from
him what he cared not for, Gen 22.1 2, 12.

2. Life and the Comforts of it have their subserviency to better things; and
thus it is more our Duty not to disregard them. Life makes us capable of
serving God, and of the enjoyment of him. Our spiritual and eternal Life
suppose; natural Life: and further, it is our state of usefulness and trial. We
cannot actually serve God any further, or our Generation longer, than we have
our Lives and Beings here. The usefulness and comforts of Relations are
reciprocal. How can I see or serve God with what I have not? They are my helps,
and trust and trials. Relations may be mutually won and ripened for eternal
Glory by each others Conversation, 1 Pet. 3.1. Credit is valuable because of
usefulness to others, and our own necessary confidences and encouragements, 1 Timothy 3.7. Places of Honor and important Trust must not be disregarded. Joseph,
Mordecai and Daniel were greatly serviceable through their great interest and
estimation in their respective Princes Courts. What useful Instruments have
holy Kings and Princes been for God upon their Thrones? Plenty and fullness are
desirable: It Is better to give than to receive, Acts 20.35. Innocence and
Independence steel the Countenance. It Is comfortable to be the poor man's
staff, and the rich man's pattern. The like I may say of Liberty, Gifts, Parts,
etc. And when God throws these things upon us, to make us useful, it would be
our misery, shame and sin to cast them from us with contempt; and as both Life
and Comforts stand in relation to Usefulness and Glory, Grace rather heightens
than abates esteem and value of them; and rather quickens and engages
thankfulness and affections for and to them, than sets the heart against them
thus considered.

3. It is the Apostasy of our state and hearts from God, that sets our lives
and comforts in their capacity of being snares to us. Had it not been for sin,
God, and our Lives and Comforts had not been reduced to such an inconsistency
as now they are; nor had our natural Lives and Comforts been our snares, had
not their end and ours been changed: they had never been so insignificant, as
to our safety and delight, had we not torn them from that their Figure, God
himself, to whom their true subordinate relation gave them their whole worth
and value. Our snares and surfeits come from our own irregular appetites, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Luke 21.34. Life and its Consolations are God's, and good, Jam.
1.17. The Lust is ours, 1 John 2.16.

4. Life and all things must be disregarded, as they are separate from God, and
set against him; as they are separated from God, so they must be neglected; and
as they are set against God, so they must be opposed. Our lives must never be a
course of lusts, Romans 13.13. Nor must their Comforts and Continuance be
entertained or indulged, as God's Opponents or Corrivals; nor be preserved,
possessed or prosecuted to the prejudice of better things, even holy works and
joy; while they and better things may keep together, the elder must serve the
younger. Our present Life and Comforts must minister to the great Concernments
of another better state; and when Religion or our Lives must go, we must
disclaim the latter to secure the former. Nothing must bound or circumvent
Religion; nor must it be subjected to the trifling ends and dotages of a
transient Life. Our Lives and Comforts are dispensed to us for usefulness, not
satisfaction. We must secure obedience and submission to God's preceptive and
disposing Will, and a true, constant, practical relation and subserviency unto
God's Glory, and our own eternal Welfare, and the full credit of Religion, and
its advancement in our selves and others: And wherein soever the love of Life
threatens or makes toward an equality with God and Life-to-come-concernments,
or makes us change our Lord, to serve our Lusts, or grow reluctant to that
great Seal and Testimony, which we owe to the full Interest and Claims of
Christianity, or makes us more remiss, sluggish and fearful in our Christian
Course of holy, painful and resolved exercises, than our Hopes and
Circumstances can admit of, therein must Life be wholly disregarded.

Query 3. Whence is it evident that this Design and Prospect will have such
powerful influences upon concerned serious Christian, as to make this
regardlesness of Life and every thing, to be a possible attainment?

1. From personal Instances. All that are gone to Heaven have reached this
Frame. Oh what a Cloud of Witnesses is afforded us? Heb. 11.2, 39. and 10.32.
The Apostle here himself stands like a Monument, with this Superscription, It Is
possible to be a Conqueror of Life and Death, 2 Timothy 4.6.8. Acts 21.13. Phil.
1.20, 23. Nor does he want his Seconds; as Barnabas; Acts 15.26. Epaphroditus;
Phil. 2.30. Daniel also, and the Three Children long before, Dan. 3.16, 18. and
6.13, 22. and those in Rev. 12.11. and many others.

2. From Scriptural Injunctions and Comminations, Luke 14.26. 1 Pet. 4.12, 16.
It is no ways probable that such weighty Accents of Command, Concernedness, and
Importunity and Caution should be laid upon Impossibilities; or that God should
urge and threaten man, and press upon him both with promises and menaces, and
be at such expense; of cost and patience, grace and bounty, and digest his Name
and Treasures into such cogent arguments, and make both Heaven and Earth, yea,
Hell and Conscience, minister to this Design of ripening and advancing him to
such a p t^h of ex^ltation above all prejudicial love of Life, and fear of
Death; if this were foreign to his own capacity, and therefore unattainable;
for this would be the way even to distract the H^rmony of God's whole Name with
such unaccountable and impossible Discords, as that account which God has
given us thereof would not admit of; nor is it consonant to that Analogy which
his Image on the New Creature expressly bears unto himself.

3. From the Advantages which the Design and Prospect of the Text afford us. We
have something nobler to attempt, than to preserve and cherish that Life and
Interest which is separate from God, and set against him; and something better
to expect and promise to our selves, than such contracted transient Comforts as
Death can strip us of; namely, the finishing of an honorable Course that is
set before us, and reaching of those matchless Consolations which are tendered
to us, and affixed to the end and termination of that costly, painful Race
which we have to run. And such things have an exact sufficiency in their kind,
as Arguments and Motives to our Hopes, and Diligence and Resolution, to make us
more than Conquerors both of, and in Life and Death, Rev. 2.10. Romans 8.18. 2 Timothy 1.8, 12. and 2.12. Acts 24.14, 16. Romans 8.32, 39.

4. From the Assistance which God is ready to afford us, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor.
1.3, 5. and 12.7, 10. John 14.18. Mat. 28.20. Jer. 1.8. Our Winter-work has
suitable furniture and provisions, Jam. 1.2, 6. We shall have Counsels,
Comforts, Quicknings, and suitable Relishes, Views and Strength to all our Work
and Exercises.

Query 4 and the Case in hand. What must we therefore do to (and how must we)
overcome the inordinate Love of Life and Fear of Death? For no man can love or
dare to dye, that loves this Life inordinately; and values it too dear to let
it go; or that prevailingly doubts, or fears, or undervalues a better Life
hereafter. Now in this instance in my Text, Bonds and Afflictions seemed to
minister to Death; and Death is very terrible to Nature, as its Dissolution,
and terrible to interested Souls in the Concernments of this Life, as ending
all the Pleasures, Profits, Honors that Sense and Fancy can be courted with;
it is terrible to those that are not satisfied of another state, because it ends
what they were sure of the existence of, and had the greatest desires of, and
pleasures in; and because it ushers them thither where their doubt will be
resolved, and that for ought they know (and they have great jealousies and
suspicions of it in sober thoughts and cool blood) to their eternal sorrow,
cost and shame. It Is terrible to those that never valued the joys, and hopes
and work of Godliness, and cannot then expect the recompenses of that Godliness
which they declined and hated. And it is terrible to those that are uncertain,
as to their spiritual state, dark in their evidences, low in their hopes, and
disturbed with melancholic or other fears about their interest in God and
Christ, and everlasting welfare of their immortal Souls. So that where all or
any of these things prevail, men dread to leave this Life, and to be
transmitted to another state by Death, be it natural or violent. And the same
Reasons, Helps and Motives that may be useful for the one, may be also useful
for the other; and therefore before the Case can be resolved, something must be
premised to prepare the way; and that is this: viz. The Argument of the Text is
a successful proper Antidote against a double evil, and it is the ground and
measure of a necessary Duty. 1. The Evils are, the inordinate love of Life, and
the fear of Bonds, Afflictions, Death. 2. The Argument imports, 1. A prospect
of something better than what we are called to mortify, feel or quit, and that
is joy resulting from a Course well finished; and a state (if I may call it so)
of mere nonexistence cannot deserve or claim the name of Joy, 1 Cor. 15.17,
29, 32. And nothing but this prospect could necessitate his sufferings, or his
disregard of Life; nor could this do it, had he not sure foundations for his
Confidence, Heb. 11.6. Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.10. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. And therefore the
Prospect mortifies the inordinate fear of Death. Now, 2. The Argument imports a
Project too; and that is this: viz. so to manage and complete the Course, as to
secure the Joy; which cannot be, if Life or any thing have an equal or
transcendent interest in us or influence upon us; and therefore the necessary
Duty is the Conquest of the Love of Life, and Fear of Death. The measure of our
necessary Conquest is fetched from its relation and subserviency to the Prize;
So far as Love of Life and Fear of Death are opposed to, and inconsistent with
our better hopes and work, so far they must be overcome. And the ground of the
Duty is in the Text; because otherwise our Course cannot be finished with joy;
it can be neither regular nor successful without the conquest and attainment of
my Text: And therefore my Answer to the Case before us, shall lie in these few
following Directions.

Direct. 2. Be thoroughly persuaded of, and heartily affected with a Life to
come, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. This is the poyse and pondus of Religion. Heb. 11.6.
This is the heart and strength of Godliness. Acts 24.14, 26. It Is this that
strips that King of Terrors, Death, of all his frightful looks and strength.
This spoils his fatal Conquest, Gripe and Sting. 2 Timothy 4.6, 8. 2 Cor. 5.1, 10.
and 1 Cor. 15.51, 58. It was this that did invigorate the confidence and
courage of that Noble Army of Martyrs, Heb. 11. throughout. This clothes the
Brow with Confidence, to face the storms, and entertain the challenges of Earth
and Hell. Romans 8.35, 39 This startles hearty Resolutions into awakened
Exercises; and forces such expressions of inward strength and fixedness, as
shall amaze the world, and shame the daring stupid Infidel into strange
Convictions of the transcendent joys and gain of godliness, and its approaching
triumphs. This makes the heart indifferent to live or dye, so that by either
the great concernment may be prosperous and successful, and need I furnish you
with arguments to persuade you to believe another state? does not the word of
God, the soul of man, the course and consequence of moral government pass into
arguments to prove this thing? would God create capacity in the soul of man to
render him proper for another state, and do this, as the result of his
remarkable love and wisdom, and make him capable of being influenced by motives
drawn from hence, and after all turn his capacity into his wrack, and abuse and
rule him by mistakes and errors, and shame those hope; and confidences in the
Soul, and strip it of those proper ends and exercises, which God himself
ordained, enjoined and started? Moreover, will not the state and element of
everlasting retributions be more significant than a probationary state and
theater? and if so, no way more proper to conquer the inordinacy in our case,
than right persuasions and resentments of another state of life. It is no
wonder that an Infidel should be inordinate in his love of life, for he that
looks for nothing when he is dead, cannot attempt divorcement from his Idols,
interest and consolations here; for now he must conclude, that a living dog is
better then a dead man; and if the smart conviction will not suffer him to
remain an Infidel (for Atheists and Infidels cannot be such, without his
permission, if not judicial stupefaction and desertion by whom they were
created) yet if he relish not the joys and exercises of another state
hereafter, he cannot but be wanton and imposed upon by his ensnaring dreams and
shadows, and parcel out his heart (till he have lost himself) amongst the
incoherent transient vanities of sense and fancy. The world and present life
are this man's all: and it is no wonder if when he has nothing else on which he
can place his heart, he fix it here; but oh when better things appear in chase
and view, when things commensurate with his capacity and duration strike his
concerned eye with close and smart appulses, and so affects his heart, shadows
must fly away, and the Sons of the Morning must suit their exercises and
attempts to the discoveries of their day, and alienate their hearts from what
will be abusive of their souls and hopes; as their discoveries will make them
then conclude.

Direct. 2. Look upon life and comforts as they are, not as they seem to be,
under their present circumstances; and make your choice and value suitable
thereunto. Your life is but a shadow which must disappear, a cloud that must be
scattered, more easily passed through than embraced, and all the glory of this
World is easily winked into blackness and distaste, and all the lower comforts
of our lives are but the crumbs we gather from the broken world. The world it
self is but an Element of Sin and Sorrow, and through that curse upon it, which
was derived by our first apostasy, it is become a stormy and disturbed Region.
There is nothing suitable to our better part therein when separate from God and
set against him. Our Souls (the noblest part of Man) are entertained with
nothing but burdens, stints and snares. A chain of Gold may pinch as hard as
one of Iron. There is nothing here that can endure those warm affections and
close embraces which our true happiness deserves; and should we thus embrace
them, our Idols arms and hearts would certainly be broken altogether. Our
lawful comforts and delights are hereby embittered and polluted, and melt away
to nothing, and bid farewell with dreadful gripes and bitter relishes, and fly
away upon the wings we give them, for indeed the great affections of our
enflamed hearts cannot but turn them all to smoke. It is their subservient
usefulness and relation to God, our present work, and future glory that make
and speak them excellent, and if you change their (...), you rob the cluster of
its best juice and blessing: and if your lives and comforts turn God's
competitors and enemies, you Spin them into snares and ruins. And were but
this the rule and measure of all our fears and love, there would be joy in
keeping and resigning them; God would be with them in their stay, and in their
stead and places when they are gone; in Psalm. 73.24, 26. Oh! how disgracefully
is this world reflected on in holy Writ? 2 Cor. 4.18. Mat. 6, 19, 1. Romans 8.18.
And when you do compare it with that above, and cast them both into an equal
balance in your considerate and serious thoughts and pauses, then think which
is noblest in its nature, most indisturbed in its possessions, most uniform in
its constitution, most enduring in its excellence, most adequate in its
proportions, and most desirable in its full dimensions, 1 Pet. 1.4. And what
advantages herein are others testimonies in the Case! Would you but measure the
good and evil of both worlds by the experiences and apprehensions of dying and
awakened persons, how vast a difference would you see betwixt the life and
comforts of them both; yea, and their sorrows too! Where have you any thing in
this world that can preponderate or equal the comforts of God's blessed Face
and Favor? especially when all clouds and frowns are gone? what is this world
more apt to do, than to deface God's Image in us, (or prevent it) darken his
Glory, obstruct his comfortable emanations and addresses to us, and to foment
our Jealousies and suspicions about his present interest in us, and his eternal
kindness to us? O what a difference is there betwixt the mantle of our mortal
life, which falls upon that dark and sluggish world where purblind man delights
to be, and those more glorious and enduring Robes of Righteousness, Salvation,
Praise and Immortality which our Redeemer has provided for us, where by our
death he calls and takes us? What therefore but our inconsiderateness can make
us love our Prisons, Chains and Rags, or the pretenses of ensnaring Cheats,
Impostures and Delusions?

Direct. 3. Look upon life and all its Comforts as a probationary state for
something else, and use them so, Prove. 9.12. Eccles. 9.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans
2.6.10. Heb. 9.27. Trifle not here, for it is your time of trial; we are all
designed to live elsewhere; and future retributions must be answerable to our
present carriage. This is our trading season, and would you be always in the
Shop or Market? Would you be always traveling homeward, and never reach your
Fathers house? 2 Cor. 5.6, 9. We must not dream of being always on the Stage;
we have our parts to act, our work to do, and must be called off ere long, that
others may succeed us; and after a few successive Acts, the Theater must be
taken down, and can we fancy shadows, representations and resemblances to be
everlasting? What! has God sent us hither to dote upon those Lives and
Comforts which are built upon the weak, uncertain Sands, and spend themselves
in triflings upon the hasty streams of short uncertain Time? Or is it not
rather that we should be acting and ripening for eternal joys and exercises?
This is our time of Discipline, Exercise and education for the Prince's Court,
to fit us for our everlasting Ministrations before the great Jehovah. Now we
are learning Principles, and laboring to understand and try what it is to love
and honor God; what to be ruled and taught, that so we might be saved by
Christ, to thrive upon and under preparatory quicknings, counsels and
consolations of the Spirit, what it is to receive, reflect, refract God's
Holiness and Image in his instituted ways and methods; and can we terminate our
Affections, Pleasures and Desires upon these preliminary elements and
prelusions to those more lofty Exercises and enjoyments that wait for us when
we have regularly finished our probationary Course? Surely our dark
discoveries, slender seize, cold affections, frequent and great
disturbances, and faint attempts to get near God, our mean proficiency, and the
true prospect of what we want, as to both our accomplishments and enjoyments,
should make us easily resolve our value, care and love into this one single aim
and enterprise; namely, to see that Comforts, Lives and Time be most
effectually managed and improved for the securing of these joys before us; for
there is nothing that we are and have below, but it is a Talent for the Market,
not the Napkin: and therefore neither Life nor Comforts should lie as dead
Goods upon our hands, nor be as Idols in our hearts. Have we but one thing
needful to secure, and are we upon our trial for it? and shall we turn our
trust and helps to snares and hindrances, by doting on them; and by fixing
and abiding, where we should be in motion? Are not we called to labor in the
Vineyard, in order to our reckoning and reward at night? and is it not to day
that we must work? Heb. 3.12, 15. John 17.4.5, Will not our Crop and Harvest be
answerable to our Seed? Gal. 6.7, 9. What wonder is it that the guilty Drone so
much desires to live, and fears to die, or that he rages, frets and trembles to
hear his Hour and the Judge is come? When men have trifled all the day, it is a
most frightful sight to see the lengthned shadow and declining Sun.
Stupefaction is no conquest of the fear of Death, or love of Life: But when the
awakened soul expects and sees the King of Terrors in the head of his whole
Army, and on his hasty March, what then can steell that countenance, whose
heart and life have been expended and embezled in trifling dotages and
mistakes; yea, and gross neglects of what the man was sent into the world to
do? He that was sent into the world to please his God, and save his Soul, and
to grapple with, and trample on the twisted strength and subtilties of Earth
and Hell, and to acorn and propagate Religion by an exact and exemplary
conversation, and so under Christ, to make all clear within and sure above,
when he has neglected all, cannot be comfortably furnished to sacrifice or
part with life for the Concernments of Eternity, with cheerfulness, and out of
choice; or to conquer the Exercises, Fears and Challenges of a dying hour. And
besides did we but carry as upon our trial, weaning our hearts from things
below, and wedding them to things above, and managing all our Duties with all
diligence and resolution; the very oppositions and difficulties of the way, and
of our work in this world, would make us weary of our entertainment here, and
full of vehement longings and desires to be gone. We should have little heart
to wish for long continuance where we can have neither welcome nor satisfaction.
Our very works and sufferings would abate our love to Life; and our
encumbrances about many things and from them, when they are apprehended as
prejudicial to the one thing needful, would be rejected by us, because
distastful to us.

Direct. 4. Keep up your ordinate fear of Death, as the Corrective of your
inordinate love to Life; and see that this be well improved, Psalm. 49.6, 14.
Why? should our hearts be where we must not stay? Had Eve but thought more upon
Death, the forbidden Fruit had never been betwixt her teeth. We fancy
Immortality in a maze of Vanity, and our imagined continuance here inflames our
hearts; and did we more consider how short a time we have to stay, and how much
work to do, how sure we are to die, and why Death came into the world, and how
suddenly, yea, and surprizingly the King of Terrors (who receives not Bribes)
may make dispatches of his sharp and hasty Arrows into our sides and hearts,
the enamouring influences of this mortal Life would more effectually be
mortified and obstructed. Why should I dote on that to day, from which I may
be gone to morrow? The fear of Death has its ordained place and use, and
calls upon us to prepare, Job 14.14. He that is sensible of his own vanity
here below, and capable of Immortality above, ought to be ready for his change
and call. If we be negligent in the Discipline of our Affections, within the
prospect of our dying day, our misery becomes our choice, and we betray our
souls to startling sorrows and surprizals, and give our hearts away for
trifles in the very face of danger. Security makes us prodigals and wantons,
and exposes us to the powerful charms of fearful fascinations. Extinguished
Lamps and empty vessels are only in the hands of slumbring Virgins; by whom
the Midnight-cry is clear forgotten. Treasures and Goods laid up for many
years, and then the heart is gone and sold to empty confidences and vain
delights, until that Cry (Thou Fool, this night thy Soul must go) correct the
Cheat, and shame the dreaming vvanton. Methinks the avvful thoughts and looks
of Death should quench those flames of Love which have no other Fuel, but a
Vapor or thin exhalation, which has no light and glory but in its own
destruction; and they should rather make us careful to secure that Treasure in
the Heavens, which remains to be possessed, when our Mortality shall be
swallowed up of Life. Our daily instances of Mortality should start such fresh
remembrances in us of our own approaching dissolution, and that amazing
alteration of our comforts and employments which will ensue thereon, as should
irresistibly prevail upon us to guard and fortify our hearts against the
inrodes and invasions of such addresses as the corrupting flatteries and
pretenses of Life and Comforts here below, are apt to make upon our hearts; for
this inordinacy of love to Life, gives Death a fatal sting to strike us with.

Direct. 5. As to the inordinate fear of Death, labor to get a perfect
understanding of its Grounds and Cure; for our mistake herein, may make the
application of the Medicine both dangerous and successless: And therefore let
us first enquire into what it is that makes us loath or afraid to die; and
then, what Antidotes are expedient for this Cure of such inordinate Fears? and
then direct your Application.

1. That which makes Death terrible to us, is either relating to, 1. What we
leave behind us; as Life, Comforts or Advantages here, for getting and
exercising Grace in order to eternal Glory, Or, 2. The state we are going to;
as to which, we either, 1. Doubt of its existence as to eternal comforts; Or,
2. Want a Title to them, and so fear the loss of them, and pains of Hell for
ever. Or. 3. A value for them. Or, 3. The passage from one state to another;
and that either, 1. As to its pains, or, 2. Its conflicts; or, 3. Its
separation of Soul and Body; and 4. A remaining in that state of separation of
Soul and Body, through a defect of Divine Power or Faithfulness to, and Mercy
for us.

2. The proper Antidotes and Expedients for the Cure of these excessive Fears,
which I shall briefly give you, are in these following Propositions.

Propos. 1. There is a state of Life and Immortality designed and prepared for
holy persons. It is prepared, Mat. 25, 34. Discovered, 2 Timothy 1.10. Purchased
by Christ, and proposed by God, Ephesians. 1.11.14. Promised, Tit. 1.2. And reserved
in Heaven for such, 1 Pet. 1.4. We have all the imaginable proofs and
demonstrations of it, that things invisible, and at a distance from us, can be
capable of. God has made us capable thereof, and has implanted in us a desire
of, and longing for it; though some, through sin, have rotted these desires at
the roots. And further, on these desires, capacity, and inclinations, God has
grounded Laws for Moral Government, and rules the world by hopes and fear,
whose vital influences are derived from this future state. And further still,
God has sent his Son to tell us of these preparations, who in the humane
nature published such reports, which God attested by frequent apparent
uncontrollable Miracles, and sealed them with his blood, and rose again as the
first fruits of them that sleep; and after taught this Doctrine, and went to
Heaven to take possession, and make necessary preparations for our conduct
thither, and title and possession there; and sent the Spirit down for the
repeated Seals and Publication of this Doctrine of a Life to come; who did
inspire Apostles to write and preach it, and urge it upon the Consciences of
men, and to prepare the heart of man for this Inheritance, to urge it as an
Argument of weight upon them, and start joys and sorrows in them as they carry
in relation hereunto: And he has declared, that he will judge the world by
Christ, in order to their legal settlement in this state.

Prop. 2. Our present state of life and comforts is no way comparable to what
is designed hereafter. It is a State and City, in respect whereof God is not
ashamed to be called our God, Heb. 11.16. with Luke 20.34.38. Oh what a change
of persons shall we meet with there! Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 15.49, 54.
Our bodies shall not be what they now are; even the wracks and loads and chains
of souls. What are they now but foul unactive lumps of Clay? they are pierced
with cold, and worn with labors, appaled with griefs and dangers, and griped
with pains, and macerated with keen and envious passions, and after all
mouldred to dust by death and rottenness; but there, neither deformity, pains,
nor death shall be their fear nor exercise. Our Souls shall quit their prisons,
clouds and chains; our apprehensions shall be clear, 1 Cor. 13.12. and
Consciences full of peace and joy. Oh what an harmony and concord shall there
be betwixt God's will and ours! what purity, order, warmth and vigor shall
there be in our affections? and what subserviency and due prostrations in our
passions? yea, what comfort and constancy shall there be in full and grateful
exercises in the whole man! No Jars and Discords shall spoil the Melody of our
Spheres; our Holiness shall need no Crutch, but reach the fullness of a perfect
stature; no broken-winded nor imperfect praises there; the pulse of perfect
Souls shall know no intermissions nor unequal motions, but keep one constant
rate of work and joy. And what a change of state, as well as persons shall we
meet with there? Phil. 1.23. A vale of tears quit for Rivers of eternal
pleasures; an element of joys succeeds our bitter Cups; our rights can never be
invaded there; nothing can stain the comforts of that world; no blots nor
wounds are there contracted nor endured; no troubles in that Israel; there are
no pauses of astonishment through surprisals of afflictions; death smites no
corners there; Providence makes no storms, there lies that Ark wherein no vile
or wicked Cham shall dwell, the glory of that place it knows no eclipse nor
cloud; no dim discoveries or flat notes shall be the exercise or entertainment
of that state. How sprightly are the Airs and descants of their Hallelujahs. No
worm on Conscience or carcass there; there Charity knows no breach; no
male-administrations in that Kingdom; nor bad constructions of God's
providence, or of the Actions of his servants there; there are no cuts from
Friends, nor gripes from Enemies; no frailties to report, nor Enemies to report
them; no falls in Israel to grate upon these holy hearts, nor fears to be their
painful exercises; there are no wrinkles on the brows of God, nor frowns upon
the face of Majesty, nor one dejected look amongst those blessed Myriads of
Saints and Angels; their Ark has neither shake nor cover, nor any startling
strokes to terrify its attendants. Souls once arrived at this harbor, are
entertained with perfection in a morning-blush and everlasting youthfulness. Oh
who can draw these Breasts of Consolation dry; These upper Springs they run
clear and freely; and all the Fountains of the great Deep shall there be broken
up to overflow the Banks of Paradise with everlasting joys and satisfaction.
With what a torrent shall these clear and pleasant Rivers run? Should I attempt
a full description of this joyful state, I might far sooner set Rhetoric upon
the wrack, and contract the Character of being one that quaintly did attempt to
play the fool, and was eloquently mad, than think to escape that censure, Job
38.2. Who is this that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Oh, it must
be Vision and Fruition, and not the Flourishes of expression that must reach
the excellent perfections of that state, 1 Cor. 2 9. See Psalm. 16.11. And now
shall we fear to leave this world and die? What! shall we be undone by being
happy? Is it the misery of man to be with God, like him, and dear and near unto
him? What is this state and theater of woes and sorrows, that we are so loath to
quit it? Methinks I see the Angels overmatcht with strange astonishment at our
reluctancies to be gone, and our averseness to desert our Dotages and Prisons.
It might in reason be expected from us, that no exercise of our patience should
be so sore and pinching as this, that we must stay from Heaven so long; and
shall we after all, raise such a false report about the Land of Promise, by our
averseness to be gone thereto, as to insinuate into the thoughts of others,
that either the trifles of this mortal Life, or the pains and terrors of our
passage to the Land of Rest, are much beyond the Recompenses and Reparations
that we shall meet with there? View then the difference, and be free to go?

Prop. 3. Death is an enemy which Christ has conquered; and God has given us
the victory through Christ, 1 Cor. 15.54, 57. Heb. 2.14.15. Oh what an
emancipation has Christ here wrought! That Christ has conquered it, it is
clear in Acts 2.24. That Prophecy is now accomplished, Hos. 13.14. with Romans
1.4. And blessed are the consequences of this Victory to us; John 6.39, 40. Why
should we fear this King of Terrors, who gives his stroke, but has no sting?
the stab is deep, but the captivity short? for we shall have our lives again,
which are hid with Christ in God till Christ appear, Col. 3.3, 4. And Soul
death is escaped; for when we are absent from the body, we shall be present
with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. Sin bound us over to eternal death by Law; and here
was the strength and sting of Death: but this Sentence is reversed through the
Law of the Spirit of Life, Romans 8.1, 4. And Death it self can neither come
from, nor end in any want of Love in God to us. And how triumphantly does the
Apostle speak when animated with this Meditation? Romans 8.32, 39. What an allay
is it amidst our pangs and fears of death, to think upon those Confidences,
Encouragements and Consolations, before, and in, and after the shakes and
conflicts, yea, and execution of a dying hour, which God allovvs, intends, and
is resolved to give us then! It Is now consistent with the dearest love to
die, and introductive of the best delights and state; and therefore we have
little cause to fear it, seeing we shall be gainers by it; it is but a Moment's
blovv, and that shall be healed again, 1 Pet. 1.3.

4. He that is true to his baptismal covenant has now the title, and shall
have the honor and advantages of this victory, if God be served and sought and
loved as our great end and happiness; Psalm. 73.25.26. if we be freely for
Christ, Joh. 6.37. faithful to him, Rev. 2.10.3.10. Heb. 5.9, and fruitful in
him, Joh. 15.1.10. 2 Pet. 1.5.10. if we live in the spirit and walk by it,
Gal. 5.25. Romans 8.9.17. and sovv to it, Gal. 6.8. and if we heartily and
prevailingly answer the claims and ends of the Gospel of the grace of God,
Tit. 2.11 15. What need we perplex our selves with fears, as if we served a
rigid or unfaithful Master? Oh let not our unvoluntary weakness and surprisals
discourage us, for God is merciful, his goodness is exceeding great, and our
High priest is sensible of our weaknesses, and true to all our interest, Heb.
7.25, 9, 24. Heb. 2.14. 18, 4.14.16.

And now having thus prepared the way by these preliminary Propositions,
what now remains for us to do, but to take these follovving Directions,
which will come something closer to the case in hand?

Direct. 1. See that you lay foundations right and deep. How can it be
imagined, much less expected that unprepared and estranged Souls from God and
Christ should face the challenges and terrors, or escape the dangers of a dying
day? what can support the confidence of that man who is dispirited by the
deserved rebuke and buffettings of an exasperated, because a guilty,
conscience? for conscience is the mouth of God, and speaks his mind (and what
speaks otherwise in point of charge or censure is rather ignorance than
conscience) and by his order and commission, and in his name and Majesty whips
the careless soul. It is impossible to still the cries of guilt and wrath. It
is far more easy for us to charm and stupifie the man than truly cure him. He
that is negligent of the main affair is like to bear the smartings of his own
voluntary vvounds; and the more voluntary our negligence appears to be to our
awakened consciences when startled by gripes and fears of death, the less cause
will there be for help and pity. All fears arising from an unconverted state,
have God to back and sharpen them, because they are truly grounded on God's
professed resolution and legal comminations, to bring those fears on them by
whom they are deserved. So that our only way to cure and quell these fears,
is to remove their Cause, by giving up our selves to God the Father, to know
him, love him, and live to him, and to delight our selves in God's Image,
Presence and Favor; in his Son Jesus Christ more than in all the treasures and
delights of lovver things; to know the Lord that bought us, and to serve him
in righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, with confidence to commit
our selves to his tendered conduct, government and protection; and entertain him
with all sutableness of apprehension, affection and conversation to all his
excellencies, offices and appearances; to answer all his kindnesses, cost and
care with all such faithful, fruitful, cheerful conversations as God and Christ
determined and designed in man's Redemption, Ephesians. 1.4. Yea, to be ruled,
assisted and refreshed by what the Spirit of Grace, and Holiness and Wisdom
has done for us, and is sent from the Father and the Son to perfect and
complete in us; to live the Life of Faith and Holiness, and endeavor to spend
our days in the delightful hopes and fore-tasts of, and ripenings for, and
hasting to (or hastening, as the word imports, (...).
2 Pet. 3.12.) your everlasting state of Joys and Glory; to make the unseen
world the exercise, poise and spring of your most vehement desires, most
vigorous pursuit, and most inviolable satisfaction: and in a word, to walk in
all due conscience of your trust and charge, to God the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, to others and your selves; in all things to think, and speak, and do as
in the sight of God, relation to him, and special interest and delight in him,
and not through ignorance, enmity and sloth, to let the Devil, Flesh or World
mortify your delight in God, your motions toward, affections to, and
resolutions for God. And hearken not to those discouraging thoughts and
jealousies of God and Christ, which your grand enemy the Prince of lies and
darkness is ready to abuse you with. Where has God told you that the
vvilling, thoughtful, painful Soul, though much distempered and imperfect,
shall be rejected by him? For when the Son protests so solemnly against
rejecting such as come, he speaks his Father's heart, Jo. 6.37, 40. And I
profess, when I most seriously consider the terms and tenor of the covenant
of Grace, I am much confirmed in this, that all grounded jealousies, suspicions
and discouragements as to our hopes of everlasting happiness, can only fix upon
our voluntary rejecting of God and Christ, and holiness and Heaven: And though
many things may humble us, and ought to do it, yet nothing can implead our
Title to the purchased possession, nor our comfortable hopes at death, when
once our wills are sixth on Christ, and well resolved for him, and prevail
upon our lives for vvalking worthy of our great Vocation. We have no
impossible conditions imposed on us; especially if we consider
Gospel-assistances, indulgence and encouragements: for when we know our
way, as God has shevved it us in Christ, and have our hearts inclined and
fixed for God, we are but to exert what strength and power we have to serve
and please our God, and proportionably to our abilities and advantages, to
vvait upon God for more, according to his instituted vvays and methods.
Improvements are but required to be proportionable to our Talents; and he that
brought ten Talents to his Lord, had more than one or two at first to make
improvement of. I do indeed believe the Law By the Law of the Nature I ^ ean
God's revealed will, as Ruler, objectively signified in the nature of things
within us and without us; concerning our Duty and Rewards, or Punishments; and
this Law is written upon, and discovered by our own capacity and constitution,
our relations to God and others, and our f^rniture and advantages from what we
are encomp^ssed and entrusted with in the whole firm of Nature.
of Nature yet in force, though now incorporated into the Law of Christ; and
that the Decalogue is yet in force to bind and rule us, and never look to see
its abrogation proved, till they that hold this abrogation, can demonstrate
that the Father lost his Right and Throne of Government by the appearance of
his Son; and that Christ acted not as his Fathers Delegate, and for his Glory,
and that Grace was not designed and directed to the reparation of declined
Religion in the world; but that God was so prodigal of his Pardon and
Indulgence, as to grow regardless of his Government: But yet that Law is one
thing, and this Covenant another thing; For the Covenant of Grace respected
those distempers and perplexities and disadvantages (and supposed them, and was
suited to them in its Tenders and Provisions) for which it did design Relief.
And now our terms of Life are not so strict as those on which God dealt with
healthful, sound and innocent Adam; for now sincere and prevalent Faith and
Love and Holiness shall reach those Consolations after Death, which once (
viz. antecedently to Christ's undertaking and completing satisfaction) they
could not do: and therefore if your insincerity and fundamental unpreparedness
for your change, be that which starts and feeds your fears, labor, to be
sincere and faithful in Covenant-making and Covenant-keeping, and you may be
sure of this, that Death will lose its sting and victory, and thereupon its
fearful looks; when Sin has lost its Throne, and when God and Christ have got
your hearts, and life-to come concernments influence and rule your purposes,
projects and pursuits. It is with relation to our manifold temptations, wants
and weaknesses, and all despondencies and discouragements consequent thereupon,
that Christ has undertaken to be our great High Priest, Physician, Advocate
and Savior. His satisfaction related to our forfeiture of all the good we had
in promise and possession; and his Intercession is with respect to our great
distance and unworthiness. His deep compassions suppose our Misery, and his
assistance and supplies imply our wants and disadvantages. We are to be taught,
because we are ignorant; and healed, because we are sick; and disciplined,
because so prone and subject to disorders; and succored and supported, because
we are tempted: and when the heart is once resigned to Christ and God by him,
Christ looks upon himself as much concerned to perfect in and for us every
thing that can concern us in life and death, and after death.

Direct. 2. Labor to understand your fears distinctly, and know their reasons,
ends and measures. We are buffetted in the dark, while we are ignorant of, and
so mistake the reasons of our fears, and know them not in their original and
end. The Devil loves and labors to disturb us by such boisterous storms and
winds as none shall know either whence they come or whither they go; he loves
to walk and speak and act in the Clouds to our astonishment and confusion, that
we may be disturbed, even when he knows we cannot be destroyed; because he sees
our hearts are gone for God. It Is here as in Polemical Divinity; a Case when it
is clearly stated and discovered, is half answered by the stating of it; for
then our Arguments are driven and directed to a point: but when words and
things are ambiguously used and rendered, there will be great contention, and
but little satisfaction. We are too often frighted with clouds and shadows at a
distance, but when by near approaches and clear inspection we understand the
matter, our fears become our shame; and therefore to come nearer to the Case
and our own Consciences, what makes us thus reluctant and afraid to die?

1. Is it the loss of what you must be divorced from by death? If so, then
think a little on what you are like to lose. What is this state which you must
leave that it has stolen your hearts away? What is the Wise man's Motto on it
but vexatious Vanity? Eccles. 1.14. Is it not a state of blindness, enmity and
active wickedness? a state of distance and distractions? Is it not a state
wherein nothing is more sure and frequent than sin and sorrows? The mind and
heart of man are sooner stupefied and corrupted, than comfortably exercised and
satisfied. The pleasures and delights of this distracted transient state are
most near of kin unto the sluggish drossie part of man his Senses and his
Fancy, and when the impetuous cravings of Sense and Fancy have got their gluts
and surfets, the Soul, that nobler and more capacious part, is furiously
invaded, sadly imposed on, and prevented and obstructed in its sublimer
exercises and enjoyments; it is degraded by a base captivity, stripped of its
choicest Ornaments and Enrichments, and made to slight and quit its best
concernments, that so the brutish part of man may rule and ruin all. The
excellency of all things here lies in their ordinate usefulness and
subserviency to better things, from which when you abstract them, you have no
right, propriety nor proportion in them for you; but by your own aversness to
be gone from them, you show your little or no love to God.

2. Is it your startling apprehension of what you must encounter and sustain in
death, that makes you fear to die? It is true, the terrors, jealousies and
pains, that commonly do attend a dying hour, together with that dissolution to
which our Natures are averse, make Death appear an Enemy in the way ready to
meet us, like Balaam's Angel, with an amazing Sword, and therefore formidable.
But yet the serious, painful and resolved Christian has many things wherewith
to scatter or correct the evil influences of all discouraging apprehensions of
this amazing exercise and change. For,

1. Those sins that have truly and regularly lost their Throne and Interest in
the heart, shall never be the ruin of the man; through Christ the domineering
and damning power of sin are left together. He that has subjugated and
mortified his vile Affections, Interests and Corruptions, and has broken off
his sins by righteousness, and has changed his Principles, end, and actions,
has that immortal seed of life and peace and joy, which will assuredly ripen
into his everlasting life, security and triumphs, 1 Cor. 15.56, 58. Your former
provocations lose their damning strength, when you have deserted them by
penitent conversion, Acts 3.19. And when he that has the Keys of Death and
Hell, has told you this (as he has, Luke 24.47.) what have you then to
exercise your jealousies and sad suspicions, but sinful and groundless
infidelity, which gives the lie to all those testimonies and assurances of the
ability and fidelity of God and Christ, who have engaged themselves by promise
to save you from those dangers which you fear; and of whose gracious Nature the
Gospel, and all those wondrous mercies that attend it have informed you?

2. This being granted, what then has the Devil to shake your confidences
with, but lies and falsehood? It Is your own fault to credit Satan when he
invalidates the truth of God, and would weaken and enervate all the assurances
which God has given you of his resolved design to save you. If he can prove
that sin may be repented of and yet unpardoned; that sin may be pardoned, and
yet the Soul undone; that God and Christ are either forgetful, impotent or
false, then be dejected; but it is your comfort, that he has no other Arguments
but what are bottomed on these great Absurdities. And

3. As to the Terrors of that hour, which may arise from Satan's furious onsets
and assaults, God will not let you walk alone; he has his Rod and Staff in
readiness for your assistance and support. Christ, our compassionate High
Priest, knows what it is to die, he knows the subtilty and fury of the Tempter
by smart experience, and his sympathy has taught him pity; and our
compassionate Head will not forget his exercised Members under their pains, and
terrors, and great temptations at that hour. Christ is not exalted above the
exercise of pity, but went to heaven for the reception and possession of that
capacity, throne and dignity at God's right hand, which he is resolved to
improve for our security and relief when we are most afflicted and in danger.
And

4. As to the pains and stroke of Death, they are but short and sudden, and
made our necessary passage to everlasting Glory. And may not much be born when
all shall be secured? What are the struglings, gasps and stretches of departing
Saints, unto those gripes of Conscience and fears of vengeance, which are the
inward, frequent exercises of Sinners when they live and when they die too? Nay
it is a great allay unto the bitterness and fears of Death, that God has such
rich and mighty cordials and consolations proper for that hour. O! what
refreshments do often times issue and arise from those discoveries of God's image
in us presence with, and favor for us, which are made by us, when we are
forced to retire within, when all things round about us fail, and lose their
interest in, and favor with us, because our flesh decays and wastes through
pains and rottenness, to which the bewitching dotages of time could make their
easiest and most successful applications! And it oft-times happens that our
fears exceed our pains, and that the King of Terrors does not gripe so hard,
nor stab so painfully as we are apt to think and look for; but when the stroke
is given indeed, and the pains are gone, how easily and quickly do the first
openings of our eternal morning even swallow up all the remembrances of our
dying sorrows? Oh, when the joys and visions of our God invade and exercise our
departed Souls, then comes the great prelusion and welcome pledge of our
eternal conquest of this last enemy; and after a short sleep of Bodies in the
dust (whilst Souls retire and go to God) the Trump will found, the Lord will
come, the World shall perish, or be refined by the flames, and the dead rise
again, and die no more.

3. Is it because you fear a change of state to your great disadvantage when
you are dead, that you are loath and dread to die? If so, then it is because
either, 1. You credit not or question the certainty and excellency of the world
to come. Or, 2. Because you do not understand and value it. Or, 3. You do
suspect your interest in and fitness for it. If it be the first, concoct those
Arguments and Intimations which God has given you, by diligent enquiries,
sober pauses, faithful meditation; reflect upon the first and second
Propositions, and those more cogent useful Treatises which are written on this
Subject, and wherewith the world abounds; and let not the bribes and flatteries
of a vain world divert you, nor the malignant influences of a wanton Fancy
corrupt and mortify the Faculties which God has given you for this end; for
here the light is ready for the prepared eye.

2. If you do not understand its excellence, and so have no value for it,
compare both states together, that so your choice and value may result from
wisdom, and be the product of true and sober judgment. Is it so good to dwell,
delight and perish in the flames of smart contention betwixt God and you, or to
have your breath and spirits expended in dreadful groans and echoes to the
Apostle's deep complaints and cries? in Rom 7.18, 21, 23, 24. Is there no
melody like heart-reproaches for practical despising and displeasing God? Psalm.
51.3, 4. Is there such harmony and advantage in the sluggish exercises and
motions of diseased souls? Is there such pleasure in dark and difficult
discoveries, which are but one remove from the thick darkness of damning
Ignorance and Blindness, as that your aversation to be sent away unto that
Element of clearer views and visions in the other world may well be fixed
there? Can you delightfully be exposed to temptations, to injurious and
unworthy thoughts of God, and dwell where God is little discerned, prized and
served? What! is an Hospital such a desirable habitation, that you are loath to
quit it? Are the distractions, pains and vanities of a forsaken world such
Charms and Loadstones to your hearts, as to set you on building Tabernacles and
fixing there? Who ever loved to be exposed to miseries, or to build his Palace
on the sands or hasty Streams? and what is this state of Life but the true
Theater and Center of all these woes and miseries? But of this, see more in
Prop. 2.
But if you look above, and pierce the Heavens, there you will meet with clear
discoveries and vehement flames of Love, and all desirable, unconceivable
vigor, liberty and satisfaction in an immortal state.

4. Is it because you do suspect your interest in, and fitness for the life to
come? If so, then know the terms of Life, and try your state thereby. Do you
not know what God is, believe what he says, accept what he tenders, and do
what he commands? Know you not who Christ is, what he has done, what he
expects, what he promises, and will do? Are you an enemy to the Graces, Truths
and motions of the Spirit, and to his directing, quickening and comforting
influences? Are ye not dead to sin, and alive to God through Christ? Is not
another Life the exercise and object of your chief desire, pursuit and
satisfaction? have you no prevalent inclinations, affections and resolutions to
renounce the World, Flesh, Devil, and to discharge all your Duties to God,
yourselves and others, with wisdom, holiness, activity and courage? And to do
all this as in the sight of God, and with delight, as in the hopes and prospect
of a better world; and to expect what God has promised, in the ways which he
commands. If these things be in you, and abound, your hearts are right,
condition safe, and title good. If you be wanting here, this is your way of
reparation and security: Do these things, and Death is yours; and when these
things are done, all your discouraging doubts and fears are answered and
dispelled, by being clearly understood. For,

1. It is one thing to be fit to die, and another thing to know it.

2. It is one thing to have your Title good, another thing to be sinless, and
so fully ripe for Heaven immediately.

3. It is one thing to have a serious, fixed heart and will for God, and
another thing to have passionate affections, which depend more upon the temper
of the Body, than the power and ripeness of the Grace of God upon the heart.

4. It is one thing what we cannot be, though we would be with strength and
readiness of will, and another thing what we have little or no will to be.

5. It is one thing to love and hate proportionably to what God and sin are and
deserve; and it is another thing to love and hate as God requires in proportion
to our strength, and with reference to our Work and Joy, And,

6. It is one thing to have Corruption dwell in us, and another thing to have
it rule.

7. It is one thing to be tempted of the Devil, and another thing to yield
thereto. And,

8. It is one thing to have ground of Hope and Joy, and another, to have the
sense thereof.

9. Joy is also considerable, as our Duty, and God's Gift.

And these 9 Distinctions well observed, rightly applied, and carefully
improved, will go exceeding far toward answering all those Doubts which
animate unwarrantable Fears of Death in those whose hearts are right; whilst
their hopes are low, their jealousies great, their Spirits faint, and so their
Lives uncomfortable, through their own ignorant and sad Mistakes.

Infer. 1. Christian Religion at the worst, is better than a course of
wickedness at the best.

Inf. 2. Men's carriages will be answerable to the truth and power of their
Faith and Hope, in reference to the comforts of the unseen world.

Inf. 3. All the dejectedness of thorow-Gracious Christians arises from their
inconsiderateness.

Inf. 4. To understand the regular measures of Fear and Love, is of
considerable concernment in our Christian Course.

Inf. 5. To look and act for joys to come, and to make them quickening arguments
to our obedience and preparations, is an essential part of our Religion, 2 John
8.

Inf. 6. Immoderate love of Life and fear of Death is sinful and of dangerous
consequence.

Inf. 7. It is of great use to understand the truth and worth of the Comforts
of a well-finished Course.

Inf. 8. Infidelity in whole or in part, as far as it reaches, cannot but
mortify those noble dispositions and necessary preparations which Christianity
calls us to; for it is impossible to be religious any further than God's
existence and rewarding excellencies and resolutions are credited, Heb. 1-1.6.

Inf. 9. The want or distance of pertinent and smart temptations is the only
reason of perseverance in the formality of Godliness amongst Professors whose
hearts and aims are not upon, and for the joys of Heaven.

Inf. 10. To have our Faith and Hope well fixed and exercised, is the best
Method and Expedient for Cheerfulness, Constancy and Courage in the whole frame
of Christian sufferings and duty. This makes exalted active Souls in Godliness,
and for it.

Inf. 11. Then what considerable friends are God and Christ to Christianity and
serious Christians, who have furnished us with hopes and arguments drawn from
the certainty and transcendent excellence of joys to come.

Inf. 12. No man has cause to quarrel with what he is called to do and suffer
for the Christian Cause, nor reason to decline Religion because of difficulties
in the way.

These Inferences should and might be enlarged upon, but that the determined
Bounds of a single Sermon must not be exceeded. Close with the Truth delivered
here, and with the Author lament, and pray for the heightning of his (too mean)
accomplishments and furniture.

What Gifts of Grace are chiefly to be exercised in order to an actual
preparation for the coming of Christ by Death and Judgment. SERMON XXXI.
Matthew. 25.10. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that
were ready, went in with him to the Marriage, and the door was shut.
WE have two large and weighty discourses of Jesus Christ to his Disciples
newly before his Death; Joh. 14, 15, 16.
the one to comfort them against his departure out of the world, the other to
prep re both them and us against his return to judge the World; of which the
present Chapter treats, and part of the precedent.

In the former Chapter we have Christ's Exhortation unto watchfulness against
his second coming; Chap. 24.42.
urged from the uncertainty of the time of his return: And this Exhortation is
continued in this 25th Chapter, in which there are these three parts. The first
is contained in the Parable of the Ten Virgins, from the first to the
fourteenth Verse. The second, in that of the several Talents given by the
Master to his Servants, to be employed and improved by them against his return,
from the fourteenth to the thirty first Verse. The third contains the
Description of the Coming of Christ to judge the world; from Verse 31, to the
end of the Chapter.

My Text lies in the first Parable. viz. That of the Ten Virgins; of which,
five were wise, and five were foolish. And whereas Christ very often opened his
mouth in Parables, none of them comes closer to the Consciences of men than
this, as I may have occasion to show hereafter.

I shall not insist in opening the whole Parable; seeing the following
Discourse will take in most thereof: I will hasten therefore to that part
thereof which I have now read unto you.

Now as for these Ten Virgins, they professed alike; and who were the wise, and
who the foolish, lay undiscovered till the Midnight-cry was heard; Behold, the
Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him; behold, he comes with Clouds, he
comes to judge the Earth; he shall judge the world in righteousness, and his
People with equity.

This was an awaking Cry to slumbring Virgins in the midst of the dark and
black night, who little dreamed that Christ was so near at hand; but wise and
foolish are startled and raised with it, and all of them betake themselves
forthwith to the trimming of their Lamps; when the foolish finding theirs
extinguished, desire the wise to communicate of their Oil unto them; they speak
like persons not well awaked: For though there is a Communion of Saints in the
exercise of their Graces mutually among themselves, yet there is no
communication of personal Graces to each other, and moreover, the just shall
live by his own, and not by another's Faith. What therefore say the Wise?
(...), Nequaquam; By no means, say they, lest there be not enough for us and
you; we have no Oil to spare; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for
your selves. Salsa derisio, non cohortatio, says Beza. The Wise answer the
Foolish wisely; yea, wittily upbraid them for their Folly; for was this a time
to get Grace, when the Bridegroom was come, and time was slipped? Is that a time
to have Oil to buy, when we should have Oil to burn? Or is this Oil to be
bought with money and price, which is most freely given in the day of Grace and
Mercy? What therefore do the foolish do? As if they foolishly understood an
Exprobration for an Exhortation, they are thinking now of buying; but while
they went to buy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready, went in with
him, and the Door was shut.

In which words you have, 1. The going of the Foolish to buy. 2. The coming of
the Bridegroom to the Marriage. 3. The preparedness of the Wise to enter with
him. 4. The shutting of the Door after them.

But not to insist upon these things distinctly, let me gather up the principal
scope of our Savior in the words; which is to show us,

Obs. That very miserable is the condition of such, especially Professors of
the Gospel, who have Grace to seek and get at the coming of Jesus Christ;
Observe.
and as happy is the state of such who are ready to enter with him into the
Bride-chamber of eternal Rest and Peace.

This is the Point that I shall insist upon; which, in the Application, will
lead me to the Question that is to be spoken to.

1. I say, Very miserable is the condition of such, i. e. of such in general,
and not only of such as profess to Christ, but of others also that profess not
to him at all, as to any show of Godliness in their lives, such as are the far
greatest part of men; yea, and commonly too, where the Gospel is preached, who
are (sure enough) to seek not only of the Oil of Grace in their Vessels, but of
Light also in their Lamps.

2. But more miserable is the state of such who are Professors of the Gospel,
and yet have Grace to seek and get at such an hour; yet so will it be, as you
see in my Text; for such are these foolish Virgins, who go to purchase Grace
when the Bridegroom comes.

3. Very miserable is their case, because the Door of the Bride-chamber is shut
against them. They profess to the Bridegroom in common with the Wise; and now
the Wise are admitted, and the Foolish excluded: For the everlasting Doors of
Glory stand open unto saving, but never unto common Grace.

4. It must needs be then, that the state of the Wise is very blessed, because
they are prepared, and their Lights are burning, and their loins girded, and
their Oil of Grace in exercise when Christ is coming to them, and therefore
they are brought to the King in raiment of Needle work; yea, with gladness and
rejoicing they are brought, and enter into the King's Palace, where the wise
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and even as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father.

But I shall not stand upon this second part of the Doctrine, to show the
happiness of the Wise prepared Virgins; the Time, and Question to be handled,
will not permit it; only something I shall speak to it in the close of this
Exercise.

1. Therefore, in opening of the other part, viz. The misery of such as profess
to Jesus Christ, who have Grace to get and seek at the coming of the
Bridegroom; let me show you that there are such as profess at an high rate, and
yet are no better than foolish Virgins; for such are these here in my Text, who
rise very high in their Professions, as excelling the ordinary rank of
Pretenders unto Christ. How so?

1. They are Virgins; and what is that? 1. They have renounced Antichristian
Idolatry, and all the false worships of the Mother of Harlots, and they will in
no wise conform to the Inventions of men, as it is said of the hundred forty
four thousand which stand with the Lamb on Mount Sion; these are they that have
not defiled themselves with women; for they are Virgins: Rev. 14.14. i.e. They
have abandoned the spiritual Fornications of the great Whore, and kept their
garments undefiled in that respect.

2. They have also renounced the pollutions of the world through the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet 2.20. (...), the Puddles or Sloughs
wherein the Swine of the world do wallow; they flee from these as the word does
signify: yea, they are not only (...), but also (...), not only such as flee
from these Puddles, but such as (at least seemingly) abhor them. For these
Virgins are too neat to defile themselves with the world's mire and dirt; they
arise (you see) and trim their Lamps; they are therefore trim Virgins, who have
not visibly defiled themselves.

3. And more especially, they are Virgins, in professing Espousals to Christ
the Bridegroom, who, as it was prefigured under the Law, marries a wife in her
Virginity, Lev, 21.13. These Virgins therefore are visibly espoused unto
Christ, and joined in the same Communion with the wise; for here is a
fellowship between the Ten; they stand at so great a distance from the world's
defilements, that they profess Communion visibly with the choicest Saints. And
indeed, the Saints in Gospel Fellowship are Virgins, and every Church of Christ
is a Virgin: Hence, says the Apostle to the Church at Corinth, 2 Cor. 11.2. I
have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin unto
Christ. And therefore the Members of the Churches are to be reputed such, Eadem
est tatio partis and totius.
seeing they are parts of the same homogeneal Body. And thus you see how these
Professors are Virgins.

2. They have their Lamps as well as the Wise.

1. In that they are persons of light and understanding, guides to the blind,
and lights to them that are in darkness, instructers of the foolish, and yet
themselves but fools.

The Word is also a Lamp to their feet, and a Light unto their paths, so far,
that they will conform their Actions to the Rule; for the Commandment is a
Lamp, and the Law is a Light, Prove. 6.23. And in these two respects (their
knowledge and external conformity) their Lamps shine as brightly as the wise
Virgins do.

3. They profess not only their expectation of Christ's coming, but make also
preparation for it, in that they go forth together with the wise to meet the
Bridegroom. And though at last they are found unready, yet they prepare so far
that they go forth to meet him, as hoping to partake in the blessing and
comfort of the Nuptial day; whereby it appears that they had tasted of the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come. And though they fell
into their midnights-sleep, so did the wise Virgins also. For it will indeed be
such a drowsy time immediately before the coming of Christ, that not one of
ten that profess unto him, will be awaked; no, nor one in five of such as do
truly love him. And at the first too, they only slumbered, and neither slept
nor waked; but by degrees they fall fast asleep; for Security has its gradual
progressions before it be midnight with the Soul. But this was not proper to
these five, but common to all the Ten.

4. They are no less awaked than the Wise with the Midnight-cry of Behold the
Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him; for says the text, Then all those
Virgins arose; so that they take the Alarm equally with the rest. Thus one may
be awaked with the Cry of the word of God, and yet be void of Grace in his
heart.

5. They likewise fall to trimming of their Lamps no less than the Wise Virgins
do; i.e. They fall to furbishing of that Profession which had contracted Scurf
and foulness in the time of their midnight-security. For now they looked upon
themselves as espoused unto Jesus Christ, and begin to deck and trim themselves
with Ornaments against the Nuptials, as conscious that preparation is most
necessary for those who desire to be found of Christ in peace at his
appearance; for there is no meeting him with Lamps untrimmed, and Lives
unguided by the Word.

6. They persevere unto the Bridegroom's coming; they were guilty of security
indeed, and so were the Wise also; but here is neither Apostasy, nor
discovered Hypocrisy thus far; viz. until the Midnight-cry. They held out to
the last, and dye at Heaven's door; and, like the Levite's Concubine, with
their hands upon the Threshold, Jud. 19.27. Thus they professed far; for such a
sort (I say) there is, that rise thus high, and yet are foolish Virgins.

2. In the next place let us consider where the defect is, and wherein the
folly of these Virgins lies. For you have heard of their Virginity in their
separation from and profession against Antichristian Idolatry and men's
Inventions, and also in their escaping the world's pollutions; and you have
seen their Virginity in their Espousals unto Christ, and visible Communion with
the Wise in the enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances; you have heard also of their
Light, their Hopes, their Awaking, their Trimming their Lamps, and how near
they came to Heaven. But here now was the one thing lacking, that all this was
the effect only of an external and ineffectual work, wherein, though there was
something internal, it was but light and transient, which never wrought a
through and powerful change of the heart; whereas the Wise had an inward and
powerful Call to Christ, insomuch that the Gospel came to them not in word
only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, whereby they were made to know
wisdom in the hidden part, and became Virgins in affection and disposition, as
well as in profession and action. Mean while the operations of the Spirit are
languid, weak and transient upon the hearts of foolish ones, as we see in the
stony ground, in which there is no through, powerful and abiding change. And
hence it is said, The foolish took their Lamps, but took no Oil with them; they
wanted the Oil of the Spirit of God, and his saving gifts in the Vessels of
their hearts. Briefly, the wise Virgins were sincere professors and followers
of Christ; the other, mere Hypocrites and foolish Builders, who laid their
foundation on the Sand. And yet I do not say, That foolish Virgins have always
saving Grace to seek at the coming of Christ; because there is Repentance and
Pardon to be had in time for Hypocrites. A foolish Professor may go forth to
meet the Bridegroom, with his Lamp only in his hand, and no Oil at all in his
heart, and yet he may meet with timely awakings by the way, and Christ may
infuse the Oil of saving Grace into his heart before the Midnight-cry, whereby
he becomes wise in the latter end, who was a fool in the beginning; for Christ
calls upon Hypocrites as well as others to repent. Mat. 23.26. Jam. 4.8.
Hypocritical Sardis is called hereunto as well as the other Virgin-Churches of
Asia: And many unsound Professors have been effectually converted, when many
others have lived and died in their hypocrisy; and perseverance in profession
unto Christ is no Argument of a good estate to a dying Virgin, except she be
found in the way of wisdom.

3. There remains one thing more to be spoken to for the clearing of the
Point; and that is, That very miserable is the state of such as these who have
Grace to get when Christ comes. For the Door is shut upon them.

In which words is declared their punishment of loss; which some have thought
to be greater than that of Sense; which I shall not dispute, but briefly
discourse of that of loss, as mentioned only in the Text; which is inevitably
followed by that of Sense.

1. All the profession of these Virgins is lost, their prayers, praises,
humblings, external reformations, communications both of their worldly
substance, and likewise of their Parts and Gifts; and so are their sufferings
and their witness-bearing to the Truth, etc. All these are excluded from God's
acceptance of them, through want of an interest in the Bridegroom; for none of
these were offered up in Christ, and the greatest and most glorious services,
without unfeigned Faith and Love, are nothing, Lev. 17.5, 6. Heb. 13.15. Col.
3.17. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

2. All opportunities and means of Grace are now lost, never to be enjoyed
more; the door of opportunity (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 2.12. and
16.9.) is for ever shut against them; they have survived all their seasons,
which now give place unto Eternity. For the Bridegroom comes first by Death;
and it is appointed unto men once to dye, and after this the Judgment; not,
after this, and further means of Grace; not, after this a Sabbath, or a Sermon,
or a time to pray and repent; but, after this the Judgment: And what then
succeeds the Judgment? the perpetual execution of it: in which respect it is
called the eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. So that the door of opportunity is now
for ever shut.

3. There is a door of Hope, and that also is shut against them, Hos. 2.14.
These Virgins had hopeful expectations of entrance with the Bridegroom; for
that was it they waited for; whereas now their hope is perished and has given
up the Ghost, for at best, it was but a fine-spun Spider's web, Job 8.14. but
never a true lively hope.

4. It follows upon this, that the door of Grace is shut, never to be opened
more. Christ stretched forth his hands to them all the day long, but now the
accepted time and day of salvation is ended, and there is no further place for
Grace and Mercy, nor hopes of seeing the King in his Beauty.

5. They have now lost their Communion with the wise Virgins, who are safe
within the door; that whereas they separated from the world, to join in
fellowship with Saints, they are now for ever separated from the Saints to take
their portion with the world, Mat. 7.23. Time was, when the Door of Christ's
house upon earth (which is the Church of God) stood open to them as well as
unto the wise, and the Key of the Kingdom of heaven gave them admission into
this lower house, upon their visible subjection to his Rule and Government, and
they had entrance equally with the wise to partake of all the privileges
thereof; and now when they think to enter into the Upper House of Eternal
Glory, the key is turned against them.

6. These Virgins now have lost their Vails, and are discovered to the wise,
who see not the Virgins their Companions brought to the King in fellowship with
themselves in Glory; and now they are discovered also to themselves and to all
the world, and known to be what they are; so that they have nothing henceforth
to cover them but everlasting shame and contempt. Time was, that they were
taken together in the same net with them who are within the door; but the
Angels have gathered the good fish into their Vessels, and cast away the bad.
Mat. 18.47, 48, 49.
That therefore now is taken from them which they seemed to have, even the
shows and shadows of that Grace they never had, by him that brings to light the
hidden things of darkness, and makes manifest the counsels of the heart. Their
Lamps were going out when they awaked at the Midnight-cry, v.8. and now they
are quite extinguished, never to shine more; the Word shall shine no longer to
them, nor their Knowledge and other Gifts to any.

7. It now remains, that they who ere while were in their midnights-sleep, are
now in their midnights darkness; even there where the light of a candle never
shined, nor the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride was ever heard: For they
are driven out of light into darkness; and an eternal night of grief and
desperate sorrow, to have their portion with Hypocrites, their Lamps to be put
out in obscure darkness. This door of separation (like to the pillar of the
cloud between the Israelites and Egyptians) yields light to the wise within,
and darkness to the fools without.

These things (which are mostly Textu^l) are enough to demonstrate the misery
of these Virgins; I need not spend further time to dilate upon the pain of
loss, nor at all upon the pain of Sense, which follows inevitably upon what
you have already heard. Let me therefore apply the Truth thus opened, and
hasten to the Question.

Use. Are these things so? What then shall we think of such, who fall as short
of the foolish Virgins, as the foolish do of the wise? And where shall the
profane and ignorant Sinner appear? O how many are there in a La^d of Light,
who are far from this Virginity fore mentioned, as being defiled with
Antichrist's and the world's pollutions? How many, who never engaged in the
Saints Communion, and who never pretended to the Bridegroom, never waited for
his Coming, never went sorth to meet him, never regarded a Lamp of Light
without them in the Word, nor of the knowledge of Christ within them, and who
are so fast asleep in sin, that no midnight-cry can awake them? Surely the door
of Grace will be shut against these when they dye, who never cared to come near
it whilst they lived. And if foolish Virgins per sh with their hands upon the
gates of Glory, what will become of them who live and dye at so vast a distance
from them? And if five of ten that go sorth to meet and marry the Bridegroom,
are yet shut out of doors, what can they expect who go out to meet him in an
hostile manner and professed opposition to him?

2. The Point admonishes all that profess unto the Bridegroom, to take heed of
resting in ought that is common to them, with the foolish Virgins. For except
your righteousness exceed theirs, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, Mat. 5.20. (...); there are two Negatives in the Original Text; as
much as to say, you shall not, you shall not enter. The Door is double locked
against them. Now you have heard of their seize, their Virginity, i.e.
their protesting against Idolatry and Superstition, and also the world's
pollutions; yea, their joining in Communion with sincere Believers, their
light, their fellowship in all the Ordinances, their expectations of the
Bride-grooms coming and preparation for it, their awaking and taking the Alarm
of his Approach, the trimming of their Lamps, and perseverance in these
seize to the end. Verily these are great things, and more than we can
find in many that profess to Christ this day: Surely our Lord Jesus did foresee
the slumbring frame of all the Virgins both wise and foolish from age to age,
especially against his coming, that he has left behind him such a Parable as
this to awaken them, which is sufficient to make one start in his
midnight-sleep, and arise and cloth himself with tremblings. You read, Heb.
6.4, 5, with 9. of enlightnings and tasting of the heavenly gift, partaking of
the Holy Ghost, tasting also of the good Word of God, and powers of the world
to come, and yet these things do not infalliby attend Salvation; but may at
last determine in Apostasy. Here are three things; Illuminations, Common Gifts
and Operations, and Tastings, 1. Of the Heavenly Gift, which is Christ. 2. Of
the Promise. 3. Of the Joys of Heaven. But (I say) these things do not
infallibly conclude Salvation, except effectual saving Grace be joined with
them; for they may be where there is no saving Grace, and they may be where
there is, or they may precede a saving work; but bare illuminations, as to the
Doctrine of Christ, and attaining the Literal knowledge of the Gospel, is no
saving work. The like may be said of common Gifts and Operations of the Holy
Ghost, as, a Gift of Prayer, of Preaching, of Utterance, of Tongues, and of
working Miracles, as in the primitive times: So for the Tastes either of the
heavenly Gift, Christ Jesus, and the glorious divine things of the Gospel, or
of the good word of God in the Promises, or of the joys of the world to come;
all these things may be found in temporaries, Mat. 7.22, 23. Supernatural gifts
are given sometimes to mere Natural men. John Baptist's Hearers rejoiced in his
light for a season; the stony ground received the word with Joy; and even
Balaam had a taste for the time, of the world to come, when he desired to dye
the death of the righteous; and these foolish Virgins lived to the last in
hopes of entering into Glory. But the immortal Soul cannot live upon light,
superficial Tastes, which yield only a transient relish; there must be a feeding
on, as well as a tasting of the heavenly gift, the good word of promise, and
the Glory of an higher world. Tasting is a thing distinct from feeding; and
therefore when the Apostle uses a similitude to illustrate what he had said of
this kind of tasting, in distinction from eating and drinking, digesting and
living upon the things thus tasted, says he, The Earth that drinks in the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it
is dressed, receives a blessing from God; but that which bears thorns and
briars, is rejected, and near to cursing, and their end is to be burned. In
which comparison he intimates, that as it is not enough that the rain does
fall upon the earth, except the earth does drink it in, without which it will
not be fruitful nor receive a blessing; even so it suffices not that these
heavenly things do fall more lightly upon the spiritual palate, except the Soul
so drinks them in, as that it lives upon them; for then (and then alone) it
receives a blessing from the Lord; whereas otherwise such persons are rejected
and nigh to cursing, and their end is to be burned.

Brethren! The Parable now in hand, and that Text to the Hebrews, are of an
awaking nature; for God knows our slumbring dispositions. You have heard then
of the Seize of these Virgins, and of those Professors mentioned by the
Apostle to the Hebrews. Heb. 6.9, to the end. And they are indeed good things;
but, says he, there are better, and such as do accompany salvation: For in the
second part of that Chapter, he speaks of the work of Faith, the labor of
love, and the patience of hope in the sight of God and the Father, 1 Thessalonians.
1.5. i.e. Such as are not spurious and adulterine, but germane and genuine, and
will endure the Test as to their sincerity, in the presence of an
heart-searching God. And by these infalible Notes we must take our measures.
Illuminations, common gifts and operations, and light transient tastes and
relishes are no evidences; we must have these better things to bear up our
hearts against the coming of the Bridegroom. It suffices ^ot to be enrolled
among Professors, and to enjoy the charitable thoughts and approbations of the
wisest Virgins under Heaven. It is singular mercy to be rightly guided in
self-esteem and valuation; for they that measure themselves by themselves, or
compare themselves among themselves, are not wise The Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.12.
would not have us to take up with the positive degree of good things; but to
take our aims by the comparative of better. These good things are more light,
ineffectual and superficial, and too often like the Seal that is impressed upon
bare Paper; whereas these better things are like the Seal's impression on the
Wax.

Yet let no trembling Soul or broken reed be affrighted at the end of these
foolish Virgins, to see the Door thus shut against them; the tender heart of
Jesus Christ aims not at our consternation, but awaking, and to prepare and
hasten us unto Glory before the Key be turned. Nor does his Apostle, in the
foresaid place, despise the day of small things, but his real scope and purpose
is, to excite Professors to look carefully to their foundations, and then to go
on unto perfection, Heb. 6.1. And blessed for ever be the Lord for the second
part of that sixth Chapter to the Hebrews; in the close whereof we may see the
afflicted heart tossed with tempests, and not comforted, yet hoping in Mercy,
and fleeing to Jesus as his Refuge, and casting the Anchor of his floating Soul
within the Vail, whither the Forerunner is entered for us, who himself was once
tossed in the Ship of the Militant Church, albeit without sin; but is now gone
ashore to heaven as our forerunner, both to look to our Anchor, which is
fastened there, and to hold all fast, and to draw our tossed Ship to shore, and
to see all safe; that where our forerunner is, there may we be also. And thus
the sweet conclusion of that Chapter does fully recompense the severity of its
beginning. Let us comfort our selves and one another with these things.

Thirdly, You have heard the miserable condition of such (especially Professors
of the Gospel and Pretenders to Christ) who have Grace to seek at his coming.
As for the hapy state of such as are ready to enter in with him into the
Bride-chamber of eternal peace and joy, I shall speak a little in the Close.

Now therefore in the remainder of this Exercise, it will be expected, as
seasonable, that it be considered, What gifts of Grace are chiefly to be in
exercise in order to an actual Preparation for the coming of Christ by Death
and Judgment? For his coming is first by Death, and then by Judgment. And I
say, an actual Preparation, because there is always a general and habitual
preparedness to meet Christ Jesus in hearts that are truly godly, but not
always a particular actual fitness: And this we see here in the five wise
Virgins, who are found in their midnight-sleep, with Lamps that have need of
trimming at the coming of Christ. Thus Hezekiah was fit to dye, as to a general
and habitual fitness, in that he could assert his sincerity before God, when
the message of death was brought him; but he was to seek of a particular actual
fitness, in that he begs for longer life with prayers and plenty of tears. The
Message of Death awaked him, and the holy man is startled, and has his Lamp to
trim; for the tidings of his death at hand, was as much in effect, as if it had
been said unto him by the Prophet, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go forth
Hezekiah to meet him. The nature of his distemper, which some by the remedy (a
lump of Figs applied to the Bile) conceive to have been the Pestilence; and
this, considered with the shortness and sharpness of the Message, and the
Prophet Isaiah's quick and abrupt departure from him, and that the King had
then no Heir to succeed him in the Throne, and also that he was now at the full
strength of Nature, being but nine and thirty years of age; and his fear also
what might become of his Kingdom, and of his former Reformation after the grand
Apostasy of his Father Ahaz, I say, these considerations made him to apprehend
that there was a rebuke of God in this present Dispensation, and therefore he
is loath to dye under a temporal frown; albeit his a vowed integrity would (at
the worst) have seen him safe at heaven. For though a Child of God cannot dye
in his debt, yet he is unwilling to depart under the sense of his temporal
displeasure, so as the good Prophet did, whom the Lion slew at his return from
Bethel to Judah, 2 Kings 13.24. When David therefore was under God's rebukes
for sin, and even almost consumed with the blow of his hand, he betakes himself
(as Hezekiah did) to prayers and tears; says he, Psalm. 39.10, 11. to the end,
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear to my Cry, hold not thy peace at my tears;
for I am a stranger with thee, and a Sojourner as all my Fathers were; O spare
me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no more. Thus you see
that the dear Children of God, who have a general and habitual fitness to meet
Jesus Christ when he is coming to them by Death and Judgment, may yet be to
seek of a particular actual preparation.

2. Before I come to the answer of the Question, let me premise this also; That
though a state of Grace is here supposed, seeing Grace cannot be exercised
where it is not; yet there may be need to have it cleared, inasmuch as the want
thereof is a great hinderance in the way of this Duty. You know that one that
fears God, and obeys the voice of his Servant Jesus Christ, may yet walk in
darkness and see no light, Isa. 50.10. and he may say with Jonah, he is cast
out of God's sight, and his soul is filled with troubles when his life draws
nigh unto the Grave; wherefore let your eye be not only on your Lamp, but also
on your Vessel, and examine your Oil, as well as mind your light. For though
you have received an Unction from the Holy One, and felt the sweet influences
of the Spirit, and have had the witness in your self, yet the Comforter, which
sometimes relieved your Soul, may (at the present) be far from you, and suspend
his testimony; for Grace inherent is not self-enlightning, but like the Moon,
which holds forth Light no longer than the Sun shines upon it; and though
the Dial has its Lines and Figures, to declare the time of the day, yet you
will be to seek, if the Sun withdraw hi^ Light: Even thus, though the Spirit of
God has drawn the Lines and Figures of his Gifts and Graces in your heart, yet
if he also do not shine upon them, you will not know what time of day it is
with your Soul. Pray therefore and strive for renewed sights of Grace, and for
anointing with fresh Oil; for the Saints do often lose their Impressions
through carelessness and inadvertency, whilst they have here and there to do,
or indulgence to some Carnality, and through the malignancy of some over
beating temper or temptation in an hour and power of Darkness: And this makes
the Soul to drive heavily, which sometimes ran as pleasantly as the Chariots of
Aminadib, but now the Wheels begin to skreek, through want of fresh anointings.

It being so, look to your Vessels and your Oil, and see how they are stored
with it and how the Spirit shines at any time upon his own Lines and Figures.
This also I premise to the answer of the Question, because the soul never
acts Grace so vigorously as when ones state is cleared.

First therefore for resolution; Maintain your Faith in frequent exercise, and
make no less conscience of acting daily Faith, than you do of daily Prayer. For
we are apt to rest in a quondam Call to Christ, and in the original work of
Faith, and not to be coming still to Christ; and that as earnestly and
studiously as if we had never come before. He that is coming unto me, says
Christ, John 6.35. 1 Pet. 2.4. The word in the Original is a Participle of the
Present Tense. And through the neglect of this daily coming the soul is often
in the dark, and seems to have lost the Promise in which it was formerly
drawn to Christ; by means whereof, it is sometimes midnight with the wisest
Virgins, as well as so at other times, by means of their security. For
instance; By Faith, Abraham, when he was called, not only unto Canaan, but unto
Christ, obeyed; for he looked more to the Promised Seed, than to the Promised
Land, else, what had his Faith been? But now in tract of time ( viz. about ten
years after) he begins to call the Promise into question, Genesis 15.2. and to
make the Steward of his house his Heir, till God renewed the Promise, to revive
thereby the actings of his sleeping Faith; Look now toward Heaven, says God,
and tell the Stars if thou be able to number them, and he said unto him, so
shall thy Seed be: Upon this, Abraham believed in the Lord, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness. Why? Did he not believe before? Yes, The
Apostle dateth his Faith from his coming out of Vr of the Caldees Heb. 11.8.
And yet here we meet with a second Date, i. e. as to an eminent reviving act of
his Faith, as if he had omitted to believe, as indeed he did, and now began
again, which was only an interruption, not an intercision.

Now thus it may be with you who believed many years ago; but the Promise and
Impression of it is perhaps almost worn out, and your Faith begins to languish;
but the Promise is still the same; and the word of the Lord endures for ever,
and that is the word of the Gospel which is preached to you; wherefore take
hold of it again and again, and of Christ therein; and not only of that
particular promise wherein Christ at first was held out unto you, but of any
other that occurreth; and in the frequent renewings of your Faith, your
drooping hearts will be revived, and long at last for the coming of him in whom
your Soul believes. You know that your Faith will determine with your Life,
and therefore improve it daily for your Death, which draws on by gradual
steps, in which you are still making forwards toward the Bridegroom's coming,
who keeps equal paces with you; so that he and you will meet together at the
point of dissolution: Your Faith cannot conquer Death: for there is no
discharge in that war between Death and Nature; only Faith will vanquish the
dread and horror of it. For Death (in which the Bridegroom first comes to us)
is, in it self, the King of Terrors; other Afflictions (as Poverty, Reproach,
Imprisonment, Debt, Exile, Sickness, etc.) are inferior fears, which possibly
may be escaped, and out of which there is oftentimes deliverance; but Death is
the Sovereign Lord and King of all of them, from whence there is no return. He
that goes down to the Grave, shall come up no more, but passes presently unto
the highest Tribunal, there to receive the eternal judgment, whether of
Absolution, or of Condemnation. And upon this account, the fear of the King of
Terrors, is the King of Fears, and a sore and painful bondage, in which many
are held all their Lifetime, till Faith in Christ release them; yea, and
afterward also, if their Faith be not the stronger. What shall I say then,
but, Awake Faith, and flee to him for refuge, who through death has destroyed
him that has the power of Death, that is the Devil; and delivered them, who
through fear of Death were all their lifetime subject unto bondage. For without
this Refuge of Faith, Christ's coming by Death, is terrible and astonishing,
which the bare habit of Faith cannot cure and conquer. Believe therefore that
you are Christ's, and believe it daily by frequent closings with him, and
resignations of your selves unto him, and then you are not so much Death's, as
Death is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Make good your interest in the Bridegroom, and
then you will rejoice at his coming; Make haste, my Beloved, says the Bride,
Cant. 8. ult. Why so? Because he is Beloved, and my Beloved. And the Spirit and
the Bride say Come, Rev. 22.17. i. e. The Spirit in the Bride, or the Spirit of
the Bride: for a Bride has a Bride-like Spirit, which longs for the coming
of the Bridegroom. But perhaps the weak Believer cannot reach to say thus; and
therefore says the Bridegroom to him, Let him that is athirst come; If thou
can not say Come, to me, I say, Come, to thee: For we must first come to
Christ, before we can say Come, to him; yea, we must have some sense of our
coming unto him, before we can heartily say, Come, to h m. And this Faith that
I have spoken of, is the principal Grace, preparing the Believer for the coming
of Christ, provided that it be maintained in frequent exercise; for hereby the
Person is justified, the Heart purified, the Conscience pacified, a sweet
Correspondence continued between Christ and the believing Soul, Death
conquered, and Heaven opened.

Secondly, This Faith does necessarily work by Love, and as they always do
cooperate, so are they commensurate, and carry a just proportion each to
other, though peradventure you may be more sensible of your Love, than of your
Faith. But now, the more you abound in both, the more you will long for the
coming of Christ, and be the more prepared for it. No marvel therefore that the
Apostle loved the appearance of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. with Acts 21.13. who had so
great a love to his person, that he was not only ready to be bound, but to dye
at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. To dye at Jerusalem, for there (he
remembered) Christ died for him. And this enflameth his love toward him, and
makes him willing to dye for him, and to be for ever with him. No marvel also,
that he was straightned between the choice of Life and Death, and that the
balance seemed to incline mostly toward departure and being with Christ. He
cries, Phil. 1 23. (...), I am constrained between two: Why so? Because he
could say, (...); The love of Christ (i. e. to serve him with all my might)
constrains me. The Original word is the same in both places.

And how came Peter to sleep so soundly and sweetly in his chains between the
Soldiers, the night before his intended death, in which he was to go to
Christ? Why, he could say, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I
love thee, John 21.17. When Christ lies in the Embraces of Faith and Love,
what follows next but Nunc dimittis? How so? Thus; The more we are purified,
the more prepared. Now as the heart is purified by Faith, so also by Love; For
herein is our Love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
Judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17. Love does
assimilate a godly Soul to Christ; and then what follows? There is no fear in
Love, 1 John 4.18. i. e. no fear of the day of Judgment; for perfect Love
casts out fear, i. e. strong Love; for so is perfect taken sometimes, 1 Cor.
14.20. In understanding be men, or perfect; i. e. strong, and not like
Children. So Heb. 5.14. So that strong Love casts out the fear of the day of
Judgment, which every degree of Love will not do; for he that fears is not
made perfect in love: he may have a true sincere love, but it is too weak to
overcome his tormenting fears about that great and terrible day of the Lord. Be
much therefore in the exercise of this Grace, keeping your self in the love of
God, and looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal Life: and
be often in the contemplation of the preventing love of God and Christ; to
which John in the foresaid place directs us for the strengthening of Faith,
Amat ille non immerito qui amatus est sine merito. Bern.
and overcoming our fears: says he, We love him, because he loved us first, 1
John 4.19. And Christ is deservedly beloved of him, who is undeservedly beloved
of Christ. And though there is a force in Anathema Maranatha, to put the Soul
upon the love of Christ, yet be taken rather with, Grace be with all them that
love him in sincerity.

Valde sunt cognatae sorores Fides and Spes, D. Par. in Heb. 6.
Thirdly, As Faith and Love are co-operary, so Faith and Love are very near of
kin; only Hope is the younger Sister, as to operation, as waiting with patience
for that good which faith lays claim to in the promise; and without this Hope
we can neither live nor dye with comfort. For the promise is many times
deferred as to accomplishment; and without hope's patience, how will you spend
the interval? God made a promise to Abraham of multiplying his Seed, but
neither he, nor yet Isaac, nor Jacob must live to see it fulfilled. But says
Stephen, When the time of the promise drew near, the people grew and multiplied
in Egypt, so that God's promises have their stated times and seasons, during
which, there is work for hope, or else the Soul would swoon away. My soul
(says David) faints for thy Salvation, but I hope in thy word, Psalm. 119.81.
i. e. thy word of Promise. Hope is a Cordial against the Soul's fainting fits.

Again; During this interspace between the promise and the accomplishment, you
may meet with many tribulations, through which you must enter into the Kingdom
of heaven, fightings without, and fears within, the watchmen may smite you, and
the keepers of the walls may take away your Vail, as if you were no Virgin, but
a Prostitute, you may meet with sad eclipses, and the hidings of God's face,
his wrath may lie hard upon you, and all his waves afflict you; nay, you may
meet sometimes with such a storm, that neither Sun nor Stars may in many days
appear; during which time, you may reel to and fro like a drunken man, and be
at your wits end; your tackling and fraught may be thrown overboard with your
own hands, you may call all the work of God in you into question, and your hull
may be laid a drift either to sink or swim. In these, and the like cases, what
will you do without casting the Anchor of your Hope within the vail, and riding
it out till Sun and Stars appear again? O let the patience of hope have its
perfect work, for you will have great need hereof, that when you have done the
will of God, you may receive the Promise. Though the wise Virgins fell asleep,
yet so far as they waited for Christ's coming, they exercised their hope; and
such can say at the Coming of Christ, Lo this is our God, we have waited for
him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be
glad and rejoice in his Salvation.

Fourthly, Keep even accounts with God, and still be perfecting that repentance
which is the work of every day, and let there be no old reckonings between God
and you; for so it may be with a true Believer, and it may be called to his
remembrance in an evil day, and lie heavy too upon his Conscience. For this (I
conceive) was Jacob's case, who had sinned greatly in his fraudulent and
surreptitious way of getting the Blessing from his Brother Esau, for which he
was not thoroughly awaked to see the evil of it, for the space of twenty years;
namely, at his return from Padan Aram, and that Esau was coming forth against
him to be revenged on him; but then his sin came fresh to his remembrance, and
he set apart a night to seek the Lord by solemn Prayer, and to wrestle with the
Angel of the Covenant. And what did he wrestle with him for? You may see by his
Answer to the Angel, I will not let thee go without a blessing, Genesis 32.26.
Why, did not his Father bless him? Yes; I have blessed him, says he to Esau;
yea, and he shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. And not only so, but when Isaac sent
him to Padan-Aram, he blessed him again, Genesis 28.1. But Jacob would not trust
to this, seeing the first and chief blessing (which was due to him by Oracle
and Promise) had an ill foundation, as to the manner of obtaining it, and in
that respect there was a flavv in the Title, which therefore now he striveth
to corroborate, before he dares to look his Brother Esau in the face; as if he
should say, My Father indeed has blessed me, but there was Error personae, he
mistook the person, and therefore the Blessing is null; and moreover, what the
meaning of this Providence is, that my Brother should come forth against me in
this hostile manner, I know not: Wherefore I humbly beg thy Blessing, and the
confirmation of that Title which has so great an error in it.

Thus God brought an old reckoning to his remembrance in an evil day, and set
it on his conscience, and put him to repent and mourn; for he wept and made
supplication to the Angel, Hos. 12.4. He came not off so easily, but was fain
to wrestle hard all night, to lose his rest, and to struggle, and sweat, and
pray, and vveep, and shed many a tear, and to go halting afterward upon his
Thigh unto his dying day.

Take heed therefore of old Reckonings undischarged; look back and consider
how it has been, and omit not a day without revievving your Actions and
Repentings; I say, as duly as the day determines: let not the Sun go down
upon any guilt contracted, that so your sins may be blotted out when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and exercise your self
to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and men; and this will
the better prepare you for the coming of Jesus Christ both by Death and
Judgment.

Fifthly, Be much in the exercise of Goodness, Mercy, and works of Liberality
toward Christ in his needy Members, according to your opportunity and power.
For though you shall be saved by your Faith, yet you shall be judged according
to your Works. And it greatly concerns us, to be laborious in that Service
upon which the judgment shall pass at Christ's appearance, Mat. 25.35, 36.
Call your self therefore to an account what you have done in this way for
Christ, as how you have fed, clothed, visited, relieved him in his Members
here on earth. And if this were more considered, such as profess to Christ,
would be more active for him in ought wherein they might be more serviceable to
him; but when we see but little activity in the exercise of this Grace, we may
well fear there is but little Oil in the Vessel; for rich anointings will make
men agile and ready for every good work, inasmuch as the fruit of the Spirit is
in all goodness, and they that hope for eternal Life when Christ shall come by
Death and Judgment, must seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, not only in
well-doing, but in continuance in it. Beware of Omissions, and among others, of
this great duty. The Judgment will reach unto all sins, In the Narrative of his
Life and Death
and to omissions in a special manner, Mat. 25.37, 38. For which, that learned
and holy Usher was humbled upon his deathbed.

The Nobleman has put a Pound into your hand, saying. Occupy till I come; yea,
he has given you many Pounds in a literal sense, with which you must trade, as
well as with the Talents of your Parts and Gifts of Grace: And I know you would
be glad to find Mercy with Onesiphorus, in the day of Christ; Remember
therefore, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7.
But, He shall have judgment without mercy, who has showed no mercy, whereas
mercy rejoices against judgment. A merciful man is so far from fearing
judgment at Christ's coming, that he rather rejoices at the thoughts of it.

Sixthly, Exercise diligence and faithfulness in your particular Calling. For
when Christ speaks of his Coming, says he, Be ye ready, for in such an hour
as ye think not, the Son of man comes. What follows? Who then is a faithful
and wise servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his household, to give them
meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes,
shall find so doing, Mat. 24.44, 45, 46. When Christ was speaking to this
Point, says Peter, Lord, speak thou this Parable to us, or even unto all?
Luke 12.41. Truly Christ spoke it unto all, though in a special manner to such
as Peter; for Christ will have an account how every one of us have managed our
particular Callings. But they that are Stewards in the House of God, which is
his Church, have a very great account to give; and it is required of them in a
special manner, that a man be found faithful; and of all Christ's servants, his
Stewards have most to answer for; that if a dispensation of the Gospel, and the
care of souls were not committed to them, he that understands the weight of
Stewardship, would dread to undertake it; but a necessity is laid upon them,
and woe unto them if they Preach not the Gospel. It is said of Calvin, that when
Nature began to decline in him, Melch. Adam in vit. Calv.
and the symptoms of a dying man appeared on him, he would be diligent at his
Studies, from which his friends dissuading him, says he, Nunquid me Dominus
inveniet otiosum? Shall my Master find me idle? Let such therefore, and all be
diligent and faithful in their respective place; and employments: And indeed
every man is a Steward more or less. You know what the Master says of the
slothful Servant, Take him and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Such slothful servants shall be under the
tribute of eternal pains, Prove. 12.24. when the good and faithful Servant shall
be made ruler over many things, and enter into the joy of his Lord, Mat. 25.23.
Would you stand before Christ at his coming? Oh dread Idleness and
unfaithfulness in your Callings, as you desire to be sound of him in peace, at
his appearance! Fill up your days with Duty, and give your time to him who gave
it to you. Paul was a great lover of Christ and his Appearance, and who more
abundant in his Labors for him? For he had the Conscience of his indefatigable
industry and fidelity in his work for his Master. Says he, I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. He
means especially his military faith and oath in fighting a good fight for
Christ. And wherefore do we hear him groaning so earnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with his house which is from Heaven? It was because he labored
ambitiously, that whether present or absent, he might be accepted of him; For,
says he, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
might receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5 2. with 9.10.

Lastly, That I might not multiply particulars, let me add what Christ has
joined together; Sobriety, Watchfulness and Prayer. Luke 21 34.36.
And therefore take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and that
Day come upon you unawares. Gird up therefore the loins of your minds, be
sober, and hope to the end for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ; for we are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in
God, and when Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall we appear in
Glory with him. Mortify therefore your earthly Members, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affections, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which
is Idolatry. You must not only deny all visible gross ungodliness, which even
the very Sons of Morality will decline and decay; but also all worldly lusts,
and their secret operations, living soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world, looking for that blessed hope and glorious appearance of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Take heed of slumbring in these secret
lusts, for ye are children of the light and of the day, and therefore take heed
that you sleep not as others do, but watch and be sober, for they that sleep,
sleep in the night, and they that are drunk, are drunk in the night; but let us
who are of the day, be sober, putting on the Breast plate of Faith and Love,
and for an Helmet, the hope of salvation, watching and praying always, that ye
may be accounted worthy to escape those things which shall befall the foolish
Virgins, and that ye may stand before the Son of man, who is coming with ten
thousand of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all; and therefore be sober,
and watch unto Prayer, seeing the end of all things is at hand; and look well
to your Lamps, which are your Watch-lights, that they burn brightly in this
World's Midnight, and pray particularly for daily supplies of Oil, and
sincerity in all your Actions and Duties both to God and man; never omitting to
beg for Death-bed-Grace that so you may live and die to the honor of your
Bridegroom. And as for this present World, use it as if you used it not, and
have no more to do with it than bare need requires: And set your Hearts and
Houses, and all your civil secular Affairs in order, having your conversations
in Heaven, whence you look for Christ the Savior. And thus walking with God in
the exercise of these gifts of Grace, when we come to dye, we shall change our
places only, but not our company. And let none of you behold Death at a
distance, nor have it seldom in your thoughts, but daily in your eye, that you
may not fear it when it comes. A Lion is not terrible to his Keeper that sees
him every day. You must frequently converse with God, Christ, Death and
Judgment. For when Christ speaks of his coming to Judgment, he so expresses
it, as if he were to come in their time to whom he spoke it, Matthew. 24 42. Mark
13.33.35, 36, 37. Luke 21.34, 35, 36. And so indeed he did; for he comes to
every man at the hour of his Dissolution. And we are his Agents or Factors in a
foreign Land, and how soon he may remind us home, and call us to an Account, we
know not. Say not therefore, My Lord delayeth his coming; lest we are thereby
rocked into a midnight sleep, and scared with a midnight-cry of, Behold the
Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him.

I shall not detain you much longer. You have heard what those Graces are,
which are chiefly to be exercised in order to an actual preparation for the
coming of Christ by Death and Judgment. I now commend them to your daily
exercise; and for your encouragement therein, shall leave a few Considerations
with you, and conclude.

First, That the Door of eternal Rest and Glory shall stand open for you at
Christ's coming to you by Death. Why?

1. Because you are ready; and they that are ready, go in with the Bridegroom.
God has made you meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in
light, Col. 1.12. and has wrought you for the self same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5. You
are a Vessel of Mercy prepared for Glory, Romans 9.23.

2. You admitted Christ into the door of your hearts, when there he stood and
knocked, Rev. 3.20.

3. You had your conversation in Heaven, whilst you lived here on earth. It was
your Father's house where you used daily to converse, the doors whereof shall
open to you at your Death.

Secondly, Consider the place into which you shall be admitted; for the wise
Virgins shall enter into the King's Palace, Psalm. 45.14, 15. into Paradise, the
third Heavens, your Father's House, a City that has foundations, whose Builder
and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. A magnificent Structure surely, that has such a
Builder and Maker; (...).
one that has built the City most artificially and curiously, and for public
show, as the original words do import. Such a City it is, yea, a Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25 34. The first hansel
of God's workmanship, Genesis 1.1. This is the place whither you shall enter.

Thirdly, You shall enter thither with the Bridegroom, even our Lord Jesus
Christ; and this is heaven enough, viz. to be where Christ is, Luke 23.42, 43.
John 14.3. and 17.24. Phil. 1.23. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Heaven is described by being
with Christ. And when Christ shall descend from heaven with a shout, to judge
the world, if all the Saints (suppose) should not descend with him, but any of
them be left behind, what an alteration would they find in heaven? whereas all
of them going with Christ, it is all one as if they were still in heaven with
him. You know Paul was caught up into the third heavens, and yet when he comes
to describe heaven, and the Saints everlasting happiness there, he calls it
being for ever with Christ: for this is a comprehensive expression. How so?

1. If the Saints shall be with Christ, then shall they be exempt from all
troubles and trials; these fall off from them like Elijah's Mantle, when he
went to heaven. There is now a glorious door of partition between these and
them, they are all excluded, viz. Sin, Sorrow, Afflictions, Reproaches,
Necessities, Persecutions, Poverty, Sickness, Pain, Death, Curse, wicked men
and Devils; you shall never be troubled with these any more.

2. If they enter in with Christ, they shall enjoy the Father in him, John
20.17. and be filled with the Holy Ghost from them both, and thereby with
unspeakable consolations, and the fullness of God, and they shall live for ever
in the immediate contemplation, and vision and fruition of one God in three
persons, and be replenished to the brim with eternal love from them and to them.

3. You shall enjoy the fellowship of an innumerable company of Angels, and
shall then know who they are, and love them entirely, and be as intimately
beloved of them, though now in your present state you cannot bear the presence
of one of them.

4. You shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven,
and enjoy communion with the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. All
this follows from your entrance into Heaven with Christ.

Fourthly, Consider that you shall enter into Heaven with Christ the
Bridegroom, and therefore to be married to him. And hence again it will follow,

1. That there will be the nearest relation possible between Christ and you;
for you shall be one conjugally for ever with him. You are one with him
mystically and matrimonially, who is one with the Father essentially.

2. You shall be invested with unutterable Glory, seeing it is a Marriage-time,
wherein the Bridegroom and Bride shall shine in the richest Attire and
Embroidery that is in all the Wardrobe of Heaven. Christ and the Saints shall
wear the very same Glory, John 17.22.

3. There shall be unconceivable Love, Joy, Delight and Complacency between the
Bridegrom and the Bride; and as the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so
shall the Lord Jesus rejoice over his Spouse. O there will be a most glorious,
delightful, loving, sweet familiarity and conjugal rejoicing between Christ
Jesus and the Saints! Marriage-joy upon earth is usually great, what then will
that be in heaven, when shall be fulfilled th^^ which Christ spoke at his last
Supper? I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine until the day that I drink it
new with you in my Father's Kingdom, Mat. 26.29. Where, by fruit of the Vine,
we understand Wine, which makes glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104 15. and
causes it to rejoice, and shadoweth out the Love of Christ, and Joys of Heaven
to us; Cant. 1.2, 4. And by New, we understand other, Mark 16.17. with Acts
2.4. in the Original. So that in this Marriage there shall be new, i. e. other
(yea, othergess) wine, viz. Love, Joy and Rejoicing, than there is in the
Lord's Supper; For Christ, who kept the best wine to the last at the Marriage
in Cana in Galilee, will surely do so at his own Marriage at the last day.

4. This Marriage is not on Earth, but in Heaven, and therefore it shall never
dissolve, as Marriages on Earth do, but continue unto Eternity. O how will the
Holy Angels rejoice and sing at this Marriage! For they that sang at the Birth
of Christ when he lay in the Manger, will sing to the purpose at his Marriage,
when he sits upon his Throne in the highest Glory.

Now the consideration of these things is greatly inducing to be very studious
in actual preparations for the coming of Christ. Be ye therefore much in the
exercise of Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance, Goodness, Mercy, and works of
Bounty, Diligence and Faithfulness in your Callings, Sobriety, Watchfulness and
Prayer, that so at last you may have an entrance ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And now, Brethren, Abide in him, that when he shall appear, you may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming; but lift up your heads
with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Hear wisdom therefore, and receive
instruction, that you may be wise in the latter end. And God himself and our
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ make you to increase in all these Preparatory
Graces, to the end that he may establish your hearts unblameable in Holiness
before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all
his Saints. And now, Grace be with all them that love him in sincerity. Amen.

FINIS.

