Casuistical Morning-Exercises.

The Fourth Volume.

By Several MINISTERS In and about LONDON, Preached in October, 1689.

JEREM. XXXV. 15. I have sent -- unto you -- my servants the Prophets, rising
up early, and sending them, saying, Return you now every Man from his evil
ways, and amend your doings. -- LONDON, Printed by James Astwood for John
Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, over against the Compter. 1690.

TO THE READER.
THese Sermons are sent out into the World upon the same Design with the
former, viz. To promote Practical Godliness. Though none (I hope) will be
offended with the Matter, yet the Circumstances require some Apology, which
serious Readers will heartily interpret. This Collection is less than the
former, the usual Time of the Exercise being contracted from a Month to a
Fortnight, and I could in Modesty crave but a Week's addition: Besides, a less
disorderly pageing is made use of, to prevent a greater, while all Errors of
this kind could not possiby be avoided, the Book being wrought off at several
Presses; and that necessitated by the Importunity of those who heard the
Sermons, they being impatient till they can read, what they heard with so great
Satisfaction. Yet such things as these may occasion an abatement of their
acceptance; but greater prejudices than these may be blown away with a Breath;
do but say [and hold,] that you will set your selves to profit, to mend your
own Faults, not to hunt for others; my Apology will appear less necessary, the
Sermons more useful, and my Recommendation of them superfluous.

I suppose some may single out some particular Case with special respect to the
Question or Preacher, and may probably be induced to Read on, till he meet with
more Profit than he desired. In a word, I shall as heartily pray, that every
Reader may get good by his Reading, as I heartily request every one that does
get good by it, to lift up a Prayer for

Your worthless Soul-servant, Samuel Annesley.
December. 4. 1689.
The Names of the MINISTERS, and the Cases they Resolved.
Dr. Annesley.
Sermon. I. HOW may we give Christ a satisfying Account why we attend upon the
Ministry of the Word? Mat. 11.19. p 1 Mr. Barker.
Sermon. II. Wherein, and wherefore will the Damnation of those that perish
under the Gospel, be more intolerable than the Damnation of Sodom, or the worst
of Heathens at the day of Judgment? Mat. 11.24. p. 33. Mr. Steel.
Sermon. III. How may the Uncharitable and dangerous Contentions that are amongst
Professors of the true Religion be allayed? Gal. 5.15. p. 45. Mr. Mayo.
Sermon. IV. From what Fear of Death are the Children of God delivered by Christ,
and by what Means does he deliver them from it? Heb. 2.15. p. 64 Mr. Vink.
Sermon. V. How is Gospel Grace the best Motive to Holiness? 2 Timothy 2.19. p. 69
Mr. Alsop.
Sermon. VI. What is the fullness of God, which every true Christian ought to pray
and strive to be filled with? Ephesians. 3.19. 200 Mr. Adams.
Sermon. VII. How are the ordinary Means of Grace more certainly successful for
Conversion, than if Persons from Heaven or Hell should tell us what is done
there? Luke 16.31. p. 214 Mr. Cole.
Sermon. VIII. How may it convincingly appear, that those who think it an easy
matter to believe, are yet destitute of saving Faith? Ephesians. 1.19, 20. p. 223 Mr.
Veal.
Sermon. IX. What is the danger of a Deathbed Repentance? Luke 23.42. p. 230
Mr. Woodcock.
Sermon. X. How does practical Godliness better rectify the Judgment, than
doubtful Disputations? Romans 14.1. p. 241 Dr. Bates.
Sermon. XI. How is Sin the most formidable Evil? Genesis 39.9. last clause. p. 249
Mr. Hamond.
Sermon. XII. How may private Christians be most helpful to promote the
Entertainment of the Gospel? Col. 4.5. p. 300 Mr. Vincent.
Sermon. XIII. How is Christ to be followed as our Example? 1 Pet. 2.21. lat.
part. p. 314 Mr. Sylvester.
Sermon. XIV. How may a lukewarm Temper be most effectually cured? Heb. 10.24,
25. p. 321 Mr. Slater.
Sermon. XV. What is the Duty of Magistrates, from the highest to the lowest,
for the suppressing of Profaneness? Romans 13.3. p. 336 Mr. Hurst.
Sermon. XVI. How may we enquire after News, not as Athenians, but as Christians,
for the better managing of our Prayers and Praises for the Church of God? Act.
17.21. p. 400 Mr. Burgess.
Sermon. XVII. Wherein may we more hopefully attempt the Conversion of Young
Persons than of any others? Eccl. 12.1. p. 410. Mr. Williams.
Sermon. XVIII. What Repentance of National Sins does God require, as ever we
expect National Mercies? Hos. 10.12. p. 427
Quest. How may we give Christ a satisfying Account, why we attend upon the
Ministry of the Word? SERMON I.
MATTHEW. XI. 9. But what went ye out for to see?
COuld I Preface this Exercise with any thing, which through Grace would force
its own Application, and lie lieger in your Consciences, to mingle with every
Sermon you shall hear; that these Sermons may influence your Lives, so that
your profiting (though you modestly vail it, yet may shine through the vail,
and) may appear unto all men, so as to commend Religion in them who are
prejudiced against it, and to encourage those who have made some entrance into
it; then you and I, when we shall meet in Glory, shall bless God for this
Exercise.

Shall's try, Christians, what may be done? Conscience do thine office, and
through Gods assistance, I Will endeavor to do mine.

John Baptist was Bodily in Prison, Spiritually in Heaven; he is not
sollicitous about himself, but his Disciples, and therefore sends them to
Christ: As a dying Father consigns his Children to a faithful Tutor, and then
dies quietly; he had instructed them while he could, and now recommends them to
Christ. When John's Disciples were gone, Christ asked the people, who used to
flock after John's Ministry while he flourisht, but now grew cold upon his long
Imprisonment; Christ asks them what end they proposed to themselves; what went
ye out into the wilderness to see, a reed shaken with the wind? q. d. You could
not look upon John to be a light, hollow, empty Preacher, to bend with every
wind and wave. But what went ye out for to see, a man clothed in soft raiment?
q. d. You could not expect any thing smooth and delicate; John was no Court
Preacher, if he had, he would not be so long in Prison, and now in daily danger
of his Life. These two Metaphors show what John was not like: my Text lies in
the question, which is not Negative, but Affirmative; they looked upon him as a
Prophet; an extraordinary person sent from God; yea, says Christ, and more
than a Prophet; that is, John spoke of Christ in another manner than the former
Prophets; they spoke of him as a great way off, John points to him as Joh. 1.29.
present: Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the World. I
know some give quite another sense of the words, which I will not so much as
mention, but presently propose what I take to be the sum of the Text.

Doctrine. We should strictly and frequently call our selves to an account,
that we may the better give an answer to Christ's question, what end we propose
to our selves in attending upon the Ministry of the Word.

'Twas but a little while since, there was a general flocking after John
Baptist, as if they would turn the City into a Wilderness, and make the
Wilderness the City. Joh. 5.35.
He was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light; but that flash is over, and now they are flocking after
Christ with like affection. Christ does as it were say to them, It Is a foolish
and ridiculous lightness to run after the best Preachers in the World, without
proposing some end unto our selves beyond the vanity and pomp of the World,
some fruit that may remain. The blessed Apostle would have those that had been
his Hearers to call themselves to an account; examine themselves 2 Cor. 13.5
; put such searching questions to their own Consciences, whether they be in the
Faith; whether the Doctrine of Faith hold them, that they do not fwerve from
it; and whether the Grace of Faith be in them, that they live by it? If not,
they cannot expect that Christ should approve of them.

I shall endeavor to make my way to the stating of the Case, through the
explaining of the Doctrine by these Propositions.

Proposition 1. John Baptists Ministry was the best in the world, when he began
to Preach; and all people that had any care of their Souls went out after him:
His Ministry differed from the ordinary Ministry of the Times: He cried not up
Humane Inventions before Divine Institutions; but with holy vehemence pressed
the necessary Doctrine of Repentance; a Repentance upon which they might expect
pardon of sin Luke 3.3.
; and 'twas convincing where 'twas not converting; those that loved their sins
better than to yield: 'Twas of Divine Authority, yet they loved their credit
better than to affirm 'twas but of Humane Authority. Mar. 11.14, 32.
In short, his main design was to bring or send persons to Christ. I Baptize
you with water Mat. 3.11, 12.
to repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose sho^s I
am not worthy to bear; he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with f^re:
Whose ^an is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his ^^^or, and g^th^r his
w^^at into his ga^ner; but will burn up the chasf with unqu nchable fire. (q.
d.) Christ will Baptize with the pouring out of his Spirit on Believers, and
with that fiery trial which shall refine the Gold from the Dross, and winnow
the Wheat from the Chaff, he will gather the Faithful into his Heavenly
Kingdom, and burn up Unbelievers with unquenchable fire.

Prop. 2. Persons of all ranks, with some kind of pains and selfdenyal,
followed John Baptist for his convincing Instruction Mat. 3.5.
: Some were savingly converted, and got that good by his Ministry which they
made good use of many a year after: It Is said of Apollos Acts 18.25, 26.
, that he knew only the baptism of John: He taught diligently the things of the
Lord, and with the help of what he got by Christian Conference, he mightily
convinced the Jews that Jesus was the Messiah; but besides few such,

1. The Pharisees they followed him, who were themselves the most applauded
Preachers among the Jews; they, whose Dictates were taken for Oracles; they
left the chair of Moses to hear this Elias.

2. The Sadducees, who denied the Resurrection, and the Immortality of the
Soul; John asks them Mat. 3.7.8.
, Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come. q. d. You Pharisees are
so conceited of your own Righteousness, that you think you are in no danger of
Hell; and you Sadducees think there is none. John presses both to Repentance,
that might evidence it self by its fruit to be sincere.

3. Persons that pretend nothing to Religion, but were so infamous for gross
wickedness, that every one who valued his Reputation, shunned being seen in
their company. Mat. 21.31, 32.
The Publicans and the Harlots got Heaven by believing.

4. Soldiers, that the Romans kept to maintain their Conquest of Judea; such
do not use to trouble themselves with Cases of Conscience. Luke 3.14.
The Soldiers also demanded of him, saying, And what shall we do? He does not
blame the employment, but regulates their behavior.

5. Courtiers, who could not bear plain dealing, yet could expect no other from
him. They could not but fear him, though they did not love him. It Is said that
Herod himself Mar. 6.20.
feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and an holy, and observed him;
and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. As if he would
bribe his Conscience by parting with some sins more quietly, to give him leave
to keep others, that he could not part with. And thus you see what a
Congregation John preached to.

Prop. 3. Those that attend upon the Ministry of the Word, they do, or should
propose unto themselves some End why they do it. Those who through Grace
propose a good end to themselves, they always obtain their end; they 2 The.
2.10.
who receive the truth in the love of it, shall be saved: But for the most,

1. Some propose to themselves no End at all; neither can they so much as speak
sense to any one that shall ask them why they come there: I cannot better
express it, than in the words of the Divine Historian, in describing of that
rout, truly so called; (though he names it a Church) Acts 19.32. (...).
the assembly was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come
together. I am loath to say this description fits too many Congregations.

2. Some propose to themselves Ends downright sinful; viz. Some to catch at
expressions, for the exercise of their frothy Wits over a glass of Wine. Isa.
28.22.
Be not mockers, lest your bands be made too strong for you to break. Some to
ensnare the Minister; we need not think it strange, for they dealt so with our
Master. Mark 12.13, 14.
They send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to catch him
in his words; and they pretend a scrupulous Conscience; they say unto him,
Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man; for thou regardest
not the person of men, but teach the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to
give that as Tribute to Caesaer, which Moses appointed for the use of the
Sanctuary? Christ does as it were answer them; If 'twere really a Case of
Conscience, they would not stick at paying both; the one because they must, the
other because they ought. Some get into the greatest crowd for the advancement
of their diving trade of picking pockets, they not at all observing, how the
Devil tricks them of their Souls for perverting the ends of the Gospel.

3. Some propose Ends frivolous and trifling (though they are sinful too); e.
g. some to see fashions; some to be taken notice of among serious Christians,
for Worldly, not Spiritual advantage.

Prop. 4. Those that propose a good End, must call themselves to a strict and
severe account, how that end is obtained or lost. A slight account is in some
respect worse than none at all; for by a shuffling account you do but as it
were bribe Gods Officer (natural Conscience) to respit you from time to time,
till Death surprizeth you with a summons to give up your account to Christ
himself.

I Will name four Metaphors which will illustrate and prove this.

1. We must give such an account as a Scholar to his Teacher, of what he
learns: Mar. 4.13.
And he said unto them, know ye not this parable, and how then will ye know all
parables? q. d. If you understand not those similitudes that most plainly show
you how you must receive the Word, if ever you get saving benefit by it, how
will you ever profit by any thing else?

2. You must give an account as a Steward to his Master; Luke 16.2.
Give an account of thy Stewardship, etc. But here is the difference between
being Stewards to our Heavenly, and to an Earthly Master; Christ and his
Servants have but one and the same interest; if we improve whatever he entrust
us with for our real profit, we do thereby give him the Glory he expects, and
he will accept of our accounts.

3. We must give an account as a Debtor to our Creditor. Mat. 18.24.
The Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a certain King which would take account
of his Debtors, and when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which
ought him ten thousand talents, etc. We are so far sinfully indebted to the
Justice of God, that unless we be discharged upon our Suretyes payment, we must
be imprisoned with Devils unto Eternity.

4. We must give an account as a Malefactor to a Judge: Mat. 12.36.
Every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account thereof in the
day of Judgment, for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. Unprofitable words cannot escape being accounted for.
Let Us fulfill all these Metaphors in calling our selves to account; and when we
have done that, we have not done all; for,

Prop. 5. The strict Account we take of our selves must be frequent. Every
Christian is Christ's Garden, that drinks Heb. 6.7.
in the rain that comes often upon it: As there must be frequent Showers on Gods
part, so there must be frequent Weeding on our part, or no Blessing to be
expected. This is not a Duty that can be dispatched at once; those that do not
often account, never account as they ought. Methinks I may allude unto the
dying words of Elisha to Joash 2 King. 13.18, 19.
, when he bid the King smite upon the ground, without prescribing how often; but
when he smote only thrice, the man of God was wroth with him, and told him, he
should have smitten oftener. What, do you reflect upon your selves only upon
some qualm of Conscience, or upon some rouzing Sermon, or upon some startling
Providence? Don't you know that your hearts are incredibly deceitful; Satan
perpetually watchful to steal away the Word, and he will do it unless you Ps.
119.11.
hide it in your heart. Your ordinary Experience tells you, that you never let
your accounts run on to any length, but they are entangled; and that your
frequent self-reflections are always blessed with growth of Grace. But I Will
come to some Inferences from the Doctrine.

Infer. 1. It is not the bare hearing of the best Preachers in the World that
will save you. Though a Minister be never so successful in the Conversion of
Sinners, unless your Souls be Converted, you had better never have heard him.
Let not any scoffing Atheist say, Then I Will never hear any of them more. Sirs,
pray believe this one word; that will not make your Damnation more tolerable.
Ezekiel. 20.32, 33.
That which comes into your mind shall not be at all; We will be as the
Heathen, as the families of the Country, to serve wood and stone. As I live
says the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm,
and with fury poured out, will I rule over you. God will not send his Word to a
people, and leave them at their liberty to continue in their infidelity, or to
return to it at their pleasure; if they will live as Heathens, their
Condemnation shall be far worse.

Infer. 2. Many persons, who lay aside other Business, spend much time, and
take much pains to hear the best Preachers, but they either not proposing, or
not pursuing a right end, renders all they do worse than nothing; and they drop
into Hell, while they seem to be knocking at Heaven door. We read of five
thousand Men, besides Women and Children; (may we not moderately reckon the
Women and Children to double the number?) Mat. 14.15. etc. and 15.32. etc.
these poor people when they came from home took Provision with them for
several days, drank Water, lay several nights upon the ground in the open
Fields, staid after their Victuals was s^ent, till they were scarce able to get
home for saintness; all this appears by having Baskets so ready to gather up
the Fragments; whereas in the Wilderness there was none to be bought or
borrowed. But alas! How few of this Ten Thousand were then savingly Converted?
We read not of any great numbers of Converts by Christ's Preaching, for Christ
but covertly and sparingly discovered himself to be the Messiah, least he
should hinder the main thing he came into the World for, viz. to dye for
sinners; for 1 Cor. 2.8.
had they known him, they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Besides,
Christ told his Disciples, Joh. 14.12.
their Preaching should be followed with the Conversion of more Souls, than
his. Pauze a little, and think, how many will tell Christ they have heard him
Preach in their streets, and they have followed him into the Wilderness; they
have there wanted their sleep in the night, and gone with a hungry belly in the
day, for which Christ fed them by Miracle; and yet Christ will profess unto
them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity Lu. 13.26, 27.
. Let me follow these Inferences with a word or two of,

Reproof. 1. Of those whose other Duties do not hold proportion with their
Hearing. Mistake me not; I had rather never speak word more while I live, than
speak a word to gratify scoffers at Religion, who scornfully twit those that
are better than themselves with their Hearing so many Sermons; but yet I dare
not sooth up those in their Hypocrisy, whose Religion lies all in Hearing of
Sermons, as if there were no other Duties to be minded; no Family Duties, no
Relative Duties, whereas only Hearing will make at best but rickety Christians.

2. They are also to be reproved, that only go to See a Sermon. What went ye
out into the Wilderness to see? What? To see Fashions? They can give a more
exact account of every fantastical Dress, than of any one savoury Truth they
heard; whereas it is said of Christ's hearers Luke 4.20.
, the Eyes of all that were in the Synagogue were fastened on him. A wandering
Eye is an infallible evidence of a wandering Heart. But I Will come closer to the
Case, in a Use of

Exhortation: With Directions to all sorts of Hearers, that they would
sorthwith set upon the practice of this great comprehensive Duty, to give
Christ a satisfying account, why they attend upon the Ministry of the Word.
Every one must give an account of himself to God. That you may do it with
Comsort, take these or such like Directions.

Dir^cti^n 1. Set your selves toward the removing of those Hindrances; which
ti^l you i^ good earnest set upon the removing of them, you can never give a
good account to your selves, much less to Christ, of any Soul-business. I Will
name but four, and with the naming of them give a word of Direction how to
attempt their removal: e. g.

1. The state of Unregeneracy is a dead weight to the Soul; it keeps it down
from lifting up it self Heavenward. One dead in sin, blesses himself that his
Conscience is not troublesome; i. e. it is neither squeamish to boggle at sin,
nor inquisitive after the danger of it. The only Remedy I shall name is this;
viz. Mind Conversion as far as it is possible for an unconverted person to mind
it. How far is that? Thou can never tell till thou have tried. Query, Whether
ever any pusht this forward to the utmost, and missed of Conversion. Not that
any thing an Unconverted person can possibly do, can merit Grace; but the
Soul's holding on in its attempt, and in some measure breaking through the
Corruptions and Temptations that way-lay it, is a token for good, that the
Spirit of Grace is hopefully at work, to bring over the Soul to Christ; the
Spirit of God saying to that Soul, what David said to his Son Solomon, 1 Chr.
22.16.
Arise and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

2. The second hinderance is love of Ease. Persons don't love to meddle with
that which they apprehend will be a troublesome business. What? To be always
upon our watch? To be always examining, why, and to what end, we so much as
hear a Sermon? This is wearisome and intolerable. For Remedy; Rouse up thy
Soul, as thou would do thy Body in a Lethargy; thou would then be jogged
and pulled, and shook; there is more need in thy Soul-Lethargy: It Is the voice
of him that deserves to be thy Beloved that calls thee; do not give an answer
directly contrary to Christ's Spouse; Cant. 5.2.
I am awake, but my heart is asleep.

3. A third hinderance is Unbelief. (As to this) I speak not now of the state
of Unbelief, but they do not believe this to be so needful as it is represented.
The truth is, if we run up sins into their causes, we shall find Unbelief to be
the most teeming Mother of most omissions, and of more than omissions: e. g.
Why do you omit such a Duty? I do not believe it to be necessary. Why do you
not reflect upon the Duties which you do not omit? I do not believe God
requires it. For cure,

Consider, you have more grounds and Motives for Faith in this matter, than you
have for any thing you practice. e. g. You Pray, (I hope you do, I would not
have my supposition fail me) it is more your Duty to reflect why you Pray, and
how you Pray, than it is merely to Pray: you may teach a Parrot to speak words
of Prayer, but it is a special exercise of Grace to Pray aright as to the manner
of it. So, you believe it is a Duty to attend upon the Word, it is more your Duty
to propose a right End, and to reflect, how that end is pursued, attained or
lost, than it is barely to hear. Pardon me, if I use a nauseous Metaphor to set
forth an odious sin: Some of you bring your Dogs with you, and they hear the
sound of words, lie still, and depart when the Sermon is ended. Upon
reflection, you will be ashamed to do no more.

4. A fourth hinderance is the satisfaction that natural Conscience takes in a
little tiny Devotion: Natural Conscience requires a little, and but a little,
a little will satisfy it, so it be but something: Doeg 1 Samuel 2.7.
was detained before the Lord. It had been better for him to have been sick
in's Bed, than to have been quieting his Conscience with such circumstantiated
devotion: For cure,

Do but review what thy natural Conscience takes satisfaction in, and thou will
be more dissatisfyed; bring but thy Conscience, with thy Duty, to the Rule, and
then examine it. To act only like Gal. 4.30.
a Slave, that desires no more than to turn his Work off hand, to do no more
than he needs must, this leads to rejection; whereas a Conscience guided by
Scripture, will put you upon doing all as a Child, that the Manner of it may
please your heavenly Father; and this will qualify you for an heavenly
Inheritance: This is the first Direction, remove hindrances.

Direct. 2. Call your selves to an Account, before, in, and after the hearing
of the Word, to what End thou came, and how the end is pursued, or dropped.

(1.) Before you hear. Solomon advises thus: Eccles. 5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of God, and be more ready to hear
than to offer the sacrifice of Fools; be more ready to receive Instruction, and
to accept of what God says, which will be thy Wisdom, than to offer Sacrifice,
and neglect Obedience, like foolish Hypocrites. And a greater than Solomon,
Luke 14.28, 31.
our Lord Jesus Christ, cautions us by a double Metaphor at his Schooldoor,
when we come to be his Disciples, viz. That spiritual Edification will be in
this like worldly building, cost more tha we imagine; and our Spiritual warfare
will be in this like the carnal, more costly than at first we conceive: 'twill
cost us more careful thoughts, more waking nights, more painful days, more
Prayers and Tears, more Self-denial and Contempt of the World, than
inconsiderate persons will believe. For your care before you hear, I shall
propose but three things.

1. Renew your Repentance of the Sins of your hearing: the more particularly,
and expressly, and heartily you do this, the better you will be able to give
account of your attendance upon the Word: This will be like the washing or
scouring of a Vessel before you fill it, that what you put into it may not be
spoiled. According to that of the Apostle James, Jam. 1.21.
Lay apart, not only restrain and keep in, but put off and throw away all
filthiness. (^) (...), sordes.
It Is a Metaphor borrowed from the filth of the Body, and thence transferred to
the Soul: Sin is a sordid thing, and we must not only lay aside all things that
defile us, but all superfluity of naughtiness: Some interpret of it those
Excrements which we are in pain till we are rid of them: q. d. Wash off all
outward filth, and purge out all inward, for without this we can never savingly
receive the Word.

2. Propose to your selves such an End for your hearing, that you will not be
ashamed of. If God should give you your Liberty, propose what End you will to
your selves, provided it be such as upon serious reflection you will not be
ashamed of. e. g. You go to hear a Sermon to see a Mistress, is not that an End
to be ashamed of? or you fetch a Walk for your Recreation, and sit down to rest
you at the end of it to hear a Sermon, and when you have rested you return, may
you not be ashamed of this? You go to a Sermon for the Language, or Notions of
it, though both these may be excellent, your End is sinful. But yet I Will close
this with this Advice, viz, Hold on to hear Sermons, though with an end to be
repented of, for while you play with the Bait, you may be caught with the Hook;
while you are in the way of Grace, you may be graciously surprised.

3. Above all, preface your hearing with Prayer: As praying is the last thing
the Minister does before he Preaches, let praying be the last thing you do
before you go out to hear: Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase. 1 Cor. 3.7.
Many times our profiting is according to our praying: But here again, I advice
you to hear, though you pray not at all, for by hearing you will be convinced that
it is your Duty to pray, you will be instructed, and encouraged in it.

(2.) In hearing. When you are engaged, pray don't gratify Satan then by a
diversion for Preparation: No, tho it be by Prayer, (any other than
Ejaculatory,) that must have been before; herein likewise take these three
Directions.

1. Set your selves before God, to hear Christ speaking to you from Heaven: The
more actually and seriously you presentiate Christ unto your selves, the more
you will give up your selves to him. I grant, we cannot preach as the Apostles
wrote, by the immediate guidance of the Holy Ghost, without all error and
mistake, (Query, whether all their popular Sermons were so infallibly guided,
it seems not,) Gal. 2.11.
yet Christ speaks through us as through a cracked Trumpet: though we betray
our own frailties, yet for the main of our Sermons, we dare say, Thas says the
Lord, which is a proof of Christ speaking 2 Cor. 13.3
in us, this will be matter of thansgivings by both your Ministers, and your
selves, when 1 These. 2.13.
you receive the Word of God, which ye heard of us; not as the word of men, but
(as it is in truth) the Word of God; then 'twill certainly work effectually.

2. Mix your hearing with Ejaculatory Prayers: Ejaculations to God, and
Soliloquies to your selves, will help to make and keep the heart tight: Jogg
your own hearts, as you do your sleeping Neighbor; call in your thoughts while
they are within call, and as far as it is possible, think of nothing but what
you are about: A Heart thus confined, is like to be most enlarged both with
Grace and Comfort.

3. Be sure to hold fast the Seope of what you hear: Not only those passages
which more particularly affect you, but that which is the main design of the
Sermon: I think this the weakest Memory may retain; and I think, this will do
most good when it is retained. In short, be be sure you retain something: Do
thus, or somewhat like it, in hearing.

(3.) After hearing. These Questions were proposed by Christ, both negatively
and affirmatively, some months, perhaps some years after they had heard John:
And Christ proposes that with some vehemence: That you may give a good answer,
I shall commend to you but two things.

1. Consideration. Chew the Cud, this is the Metaphor that is commonly made use
of. Lev. 11.3.
The Beasts that chewed the cud, were clean for food and sacrifice^; these
Creatures gather up their food into a kind of inward bag, and then they sit
down and bring it up to chew it over again, and then convey it into the stomach
for nourishment: So that Christian, whose self and service is a Sacrifice
acceptable to God, gathers up what he thinks the Best in a Sermon, and when
retired, chews it over again for his spiritual nourishment and growth in Grace.
As your considering, thinking Man, is the only wise man, so your considering
thinking Christian, is the only thriving Christian.

2. Add something to your practice, and continue [that] till it give way to
something else of greater moment. I am far from laying any stress upon any
spiritual Prudentials that I can offer, but I would humbly propose it to
thinking Christians, whether if every Lord's Day, (I do not exclude other days;
but) Query, Whether we may not expect more from Lord's-days Sermons than any
other? The Lord's Day being the time of Divine appointment, and other days of
humane convenience: The business of the Lord's Day is Devotion, on other days
we make a escape from worldly business to a Sermon, and then rush into the World
again, as if we would redeem that time for the World, that we spent with Go^: I
query therefore, If we do charge our selves upon what we hear on the
Lord's Day, to practice something more, or something more carefully than
before; and to keep to that till that give place to something else of greater
moment. Did we beg something of God more this week than the last: Did we
single out some sin for mortification more this week than the last: Did we do
something enjoined on the Lord's Day: This would be to us like the Shewbread
to Israel, which was made thus: They brought twenty four pecks of Wheat-meal,
out of which they sifted twenty four Pottles of fine flower, of which they made
twelve unleavened Cakes, every one was ten hand breadth long, and five broad,
and seven fingers high; which signified the multitude of the Faithful,
presented unto God in his Church, as upon a pure Table, continually serving
him; Lev. 24.8.9
as also the Spiritual repast which the Church of God obtains from and before
God, who feeds them with Christ the Bread of Life, especially every Sabbath
day. Were this, or some such course taken from week to week, would not this
hook into your practice all the great Duties of Religion? And so you would give
a good account of your hearing; but,

3. My third Direction is this: Do not only satisfy your selves, but carry on
your enquiry, that it may through grace satisfy Christ. My Text is a question
proposed by Christ, and to him must we give our answer. You may give a
plausible account to Ministers, but 'pray 'remember you must give an account to
Christ: You may by leading questions mislead Ministers, as persons that go to
Law do their Lawyers, and they lose their Cause by it; but when by studied
Hypocrisy, you mislead Ministers to gratify you with a mistaken judgment, you
lose your Souls by it. It Is Christ that asks the question, not to be informed
by you, for he knows what is in man, better than they themselves: Christ would
have you to be plain-hearted and ingenuous, that wherein you see cause to
complain, he may help you: When the trembling Soul after the hearing of such
Ministers as would undeceive them, is like Jeremy, for his peoples being
deceived by false Prophets; Jer. 23.^.
My heart within me is broken, because of the Prophets, all my bones shake: I
am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine has overcome, because of the
Lord, and because of the words of his Holiness. q. d. Fear and trembling takes
hold of me, I am ashamed, I am at my Wits end, the word of God calls for so
much Holiness, and I have so little. Thou inquire, Lord, what I hear for? I
dare not say that my intentions and ends are so serious as they should be; I am
afraid to own any thing that is good: Christ in a way of compassion is ready to
encourage such a Soul. Can thou but sincerely say thou come to meet Christ,
and to learn of Christ, Jesus Christ welcomes such to him, and they may answer
him with comfort. Under this head, consider

1. Christ asks thee here in this World, that thou may now be able to give
such an answer as thou may stand by at the last day, when there will be
neither Hopes nor Time to rectify it, if it be insufficient. It Is in this
something like our Pleadings in Courts of Judicature; we must put in our Plea,
and stand to it. Thou know Lord, there is through Grace something of
sincerity, but for any thing else do thou Lord answe^ for me. 'Pray 'mark this;
when once the Soul can bring the question back again to Christ; thus, Thou
ask me what I come for; Lord I come for thee to answer for me. I cannot
satisfy my own Conscience; it is ready to fly in my Face; much less can I
satisfy my Jealous Master, unless tho^ compassionately answer for me: Lord,
thou usest to answer for thine own.

May we then suppose Christ thus to enquire, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of any one, who sincerely comes to wait for me in mine Ordinances? Can
we suppose any one to be so daring, as to perk up, and say, I charge all these
to be a company of proud, conceited Hypocrites, they will needs be wiser than
their Neighbors; they spend their time in running up and down to hear Sermons.
Christ does as it were answer; Do thou make this a Crime? What he did 'twas
out of Love to me, and Obedience to me: He has chosen that good Luke 10.42.
part which shall not be taken away from him; and for you, who are so ready to
accuse others and excuse your selves for slighting, or ill managing all the
means offered for your Salvation; Mat. 22.13.
Bind him hand and foot, that he may make no resistance; take him away, that he
may neither make an escape, nor have any hopes of Mercy, and cast him into
outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

2. If you do not give Christ an answer which he will accept of, it is in vain
to expect relief from any other. If the Father be offended, Christ interposeth
himself, bears the wrath of God, and prevents it from us. Christ is the
days-man between God and us.

If the Spirit be grieved by our quenching his motions, and striving against
his striving with us to hear and obey the Lord Jesus, [provided that rise not
to THE Sin against the Holy Ghost,] which the greatest part of trembling
Christians often fear they have committed, though by the way let me tell them,
that their fear they have committed it, yields them sufficient assurance they
have not committed it, for this sin is always attended with such hardness of
Heart, that they sin without remorse. So that while the Spirit overcomes their
resistances, and prevails with them to comply with Christ; through Christ their
sins against the Spirit shall be pardoned.

But Exodus 23.20, 21.
when the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus Christ, was promised to be sent before
the Israelites in the Wilderness, to keep them in the way, and to bring them
into the place prepared for them; they are expressly charged to beware of him,
and obey his voice; provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
Transgressions, but severely punish them. Not that sins against Christ shall
never be pardoned, though repented of, but to keep us from adventuring upon
sin, as if it should easily be pardoned; whereas the Apostle tells us, Heb.
10.26.
If we sin wilfully, -- there remains no more sacrifice for sin: i. e. Those
that reject and renounce Christ's Sacrifice for sin, there is no other Sacrifice
can atone God for them. I grant, that this Text chiefly concerns the
unpardonable sin: But I pray you consider, those that do not make it the main
business of their Lives to give Christ such an account as he will accept of;
what improvement they have made of his Word; if they live and dye in that
neglect, they shall as certainly perish as they who commit the sin against the
Holy Ghost. There are but very few can commit that sin, but an incredible
number commit this, without considering the danger of it. Now Christians is
your time to make up such an account, as you must stand or fall by to Eternity.
[Oh that I had but one Minutes such conception of Eternity, as it is possible to
be had in this World! I reckon 'twould influence my whole Life]. Christ's
Sentence at last will be according to (...) account we give him here; and if
his Sentence ben't as you would have it, there will be no altering of it: Your
Repentance then will be no small part of your Torment.

Object. I cannot think that Christ will be so sharp and severe. This affrights
me more than any thing: This is the most terrible Consideration that ever I
heard: I expected relief from Christ at last, and that Christ should hear me at
my first Call; though I have neglected to hear him, so as to have any practical
regard to what he said all my Life. The thoughts of what you say would amaze
me, did I believe it: But I hope to find it otherwise.

Answ. 1. Do not flatter your selves with vain hopes, but let what I have
spoken fright you to your Duty, not from it. You may expect as much from Christ
as you can reasonably desire. Would you have Christ to be to you like a foolish
Mother to a cocker'd Child? Let the Child do what he will; do but chide him, or
threaten him, he runs to his Mother, and she will excuse all, and bear him out in
all, though it be to his future undoing of Soul and Body. Christians, never
expect it, Christ will never do so. Christ tells us before hand, that none
shall be more ready than he to help us against sin; provided we will be ruled
by him: But we shall find none will be more severe against it, if they be
impenitently rebellious. Zech. 7.1^.
As he cried and they would not hear, so they cried, and I would not hear,
says the Lord of Hosts. And,

2. How absurdly disingenuous is it, to be careless of our account, and to
expect that Christ should answer for us! Christ was more ready to answer for
his Disciples, than they could be to ask him; when through Infirmity they were
Sleeping, when they should have been Praying: But it is absurd to expect any
thing like it, when it is not Infirmity but Wilfulness, through dislike of his
Service, and hatred of Holiness: You Would verify the Pharisees slander of Christ,
that he is a friend of Publicans and Sinners; a friend to their sins, not to
their Souls. In short therefore, be Conscienciously sollicitous to give an
account to Christ, such as may be graciously acceptable; and though there is
nothing beyond this, yet there may be something over and above. Let this
therefore be my last Direction.

4. Make it your care to give a silencing account to the Devil, and all his
Agents. I grant, that neither he nor they will ever be silent, they will reproach
and revile you, they will mutter and whisper, and secretly say and do all they
can against you, and they will never want something out of which they will force
matter of reproach. You have Christ in this very Context, saying, Mat.
11.16.17, 18.
Whereunto shall I liken this Generation? It is like unto Children sitting in
the Markets, and calling unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto
you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented; for John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a
Devil: The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man
Gluttonous, and a Wine-bibber; a friend of Publicans and Sinners: But Wisdom is
justified of her Children. They do as it were say of John, the Devil enables
him to endure such hardship, and therefore they reject his Doctrine; and they
reproach Christ's person, as if his more free temper encouraged Licentiousness.
Let a Godly Man's Conversation be what it will, 'twill never please those that
hate Holiness. But yet my Brethren, 'twill strangely muzzle them, they can but
grumble out a reproach; or if they speak out, it is by clamor, to drown the
whispers of their Consciences, when they can say something like that; Ruth
2.15, 18, 19
So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: --
And she took it up, and went into the City, and -- brought forth, and gave to
her that she had reserved, after she was sufficed; and her Mother in Law said
unto her, Where have thou gleaned to day? etc. q. d. Such of Christ's
Harvest-men have been at work, and I have been gleaning after them; I have met
with that which to me has been a feast, the Word has been refreshing, and I
can show you some of the handfuls that I have gleaned; I have attended upon the
Ministry of the Word, and have picked up some Knowledge, who was before an
ignorant wretch, and never minded my Soul. I have picked up something of food
for my Soul, whereas I was pining away in mine iniquities. My Conversation will
witness where I have been gleaning, and I humbly resolve there I Will abide, in
the use of such means, while God vouchsafes them. When you thus resolve, you
must expect Satan will do his utmost to flatter or fright you out of your
purposes: But while you can approve your ends to Christ, your selves may answer
Satan in the hindrances he will throw in your way. e. g. Satan. Why art thou so
sollicitous for thy Soul, thou may be saved without all this ado, it is more
then needs. Soul. No, Satan, all I can do is too little, did not Christ
undertake for me, but I will not do the less, for Christ's doing so much. Satan.
All thou do is to no purpose, thou shall be damned at last. Soul. Should it
be so, I Will rather serve God for nothing, than thee for all thy flattering,
lying Promises: I Will do God all the service I can, for the Mercies I have
received, though I should never have more; the very work of Religion is better
than the work of Sin, even without a Reward. Satan. Spare thy self, poor Soul;
thou art not all Spirit, thou have Flesh and Blood as well as others; why will thou expose thy self to Contempt and Sufferings; no Man in his Wits will court
a general hatred. -- Soul. Peace Satan, be it known to thee, and to all thy
Imps, I had rather have your hatred than your love, all your kindness to me is
to ruin me. Satan. Be not so conceited of thine own Wisdom, look about thee in
the World; have not others Souls to save as well as thee, and they don't
proudly pretend to be wiser than their Neighbors. Soul. Be gone Satan, I Will
parley no longer; if others neglect Salvation, therefore must I? Will their
missing of Salvation relieve me, for the loss of mine? Though a Peter persuade
Christ to spare himself: Nay, when Mar. 3.21, 31.
his friends went out to lay hold of him, thinking his Zeal had crazed him:
Nay, when his Brethren had wheedled in his Mother to send to him, to abate his
work, he would not yield a minute: By the Grace of God, (though I shall come
infinitely short) I Will make Christ my Pattern, and therefore Satan say thy
worst, and do thy worst, through Christ I defy thee. Will not some such
account (in some respect I may say) to the Devil himself, more confound him?
When he shall see all his spightful insinuations work out comfortable Evidences
of present Grace; aye, of growing Grace, and future Glory. If this will not
silence him, 'twill make him roar in his Chains. When he finds himself tied up
from doing what mischief he would, he roars for vexation; while the gracious
person (Thanks to Christ) laughs at him. Psalm. 8.2.
Out of the mouths of very unlikely persons have thou ordained strength, that
thou might still the Enemy and the Avenger. q. d. God does by the Spiritual
Skill and Strength which he gives even to young, weak Converts, unfit to
grapple with an Enemy; God enables even such, to silence, confound and conquer
the Enemies of God and his People, and the Devil in the head of them, whose
Kingdom and Power is broken by this means, and those that fight under his
Banner against God and Christ. And pray observe the Title here given him, viz.
the Avenger; he being Sentenced by God to Eternal Torments, makes it his
business to revenge himself, what he can, upon God and Christ, upon his
Children and Servants. Christians, if you can through Grace make Satan himself,
against his will, help you to profit by the Word, this will raise your Souls
beyond what is ordinary, both for Grace and Comfort: Or, if God in his Wisdom
suspend such manifestations of himself; yet such exercise of Grace shall
certainly tend to the multiplying of Praises in the other World.

And now, though I have (in my pitiful manner) answered the Case, my work is
not yet done, till I have answered a Complaint upon the Case; and it is the
Complaint of those who have least cause; of those who give Christ that Answer
to his Question, which satisfies him, but yet cannot give an Answer will
satisfy themselves. Their Hearts ache from the very proposing of the Question,
and their Hearts misgive them under all that is said in Answer to it.

Complaint. We have more Cause to complain than we are able to express. Oh, the
Sermons that we have lost, of which we can give no account at all; and of those
that are not utterly lost, we have made no suitable improvement. We are
convinced that we should be as impartial now in examining, whether we have got
saving Faith by hearing of the Word: We should be as strict now, as if we were
upon our Dying Bed. (We know not whether ever we shall have a Deathbed; many
more likely to live than our selves, dye suddenly, and why not we?) Nay, rather
now; for we have not now wearisome Sickness to disable us: We have now those
helps that we cannot have then; Freedom of Ordinances in public; Capacities for
Duties in secret. We may now bring things to an issue, which is then next to
impossible. These, and a Thousand such Considerations even fright me; when I
sit down to think, my Thoughts even overwhelm me, to reflect what a sorry
account I can give of all that I have heard. These, and more doleful Complaints
are the usual entertainments of their most serious Christian Friends. To all
which I shall offer these Answers.

Answ. 1. The Word of God which they apply to their Sorrow, they ought as well
to apply to their Comfort; for those who are really grieved that they cannot
satisfy themselves, much less, as they think, Christ: They are mistaken; for
Christ is ordinarily best satisfied, with that which the gracious Soul is least
satisfied. e. g. That Prayer which he is most ashamed of, Christ most approves
of. Cant. 2.12.
The Flowers appear on the Earth, the time of the Singing of Birds is come, and
the Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. It Is Springtime in the Soul:
When the Groans of a contrite Heart sound harsh to others, they are Music in
Christ's Ears; not that Christ delights in his peoples Sorrows, but as they are
Evidences of his Graces in them, and of his Spirit's abiding with them. It is
only the gracious Soul that is grieved at Heart, that he cannot give Christ a
better account of his profiting. Ezr. 9.6, 10. chapter 10.2.
O my God I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God -- What
shall I say after this? -- There Is hope in Israel concerning this thing. The
Apostle expressly assures us, that 1 Cor. 11.31, 32.
those that judge themselves shall not be judged, with a Judgment of
Condemnation. Cheer up therefore, poor dropping Soul, and to thy comfort
consider, whether this be not the only thing wherein Christ and you Believers
be not of the same mind: Christ puts a better interpretation of his actings,
than he himself dares; many a time Christ owns that as Grace, which he condemns
for Hypocrisy; Christ forgives him that which he can never forgive himself;
Christ says, Well done good and faithful Servant, for that which he ever finds
fault with.

But the complaining Soul says, I mistake him, I speak to the rong person.
Propose comfort to those that are grieved, they cannot give Christ a satisfying
account; whereas I am not troubled enough, nor grieved enough; a serious
reflection upon such returns as mine to Christ's kindness, would certainly break
any Heart but mine: But alas, I am next to nothing affected with it.

2. I therefore further answer, Thy complaining for want of sensible
complaining, entitles thee to Comfort. Dare thou own so much as this, that
thou art troubled thou can be no more troubled at the shameful account thou
give to Christ. Thou art afraid that Word has overtaken thee: Isa. 6.9, 10.
Hear ye indeed but understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive not; make
the Heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes;
least they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with
their Heart, etc. Surely thou can not think worse of thy self than this. Let
me tell thee, the more thou think of this, the less cause thou have to apply
this to thy self; for those who God gives up to judicial hardness, never think
or speak of such things, but in scorn, and to make a mock of them, and that
thou dare not do; there is another word for thee to think of: Isa. 66.1, 2*
Thus says the Lord, The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool;
where is the place of my rest? To this Man will I look, even to him that is
poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that trembles at my Word. If God has any
place upon Earth for his Repose, it is in that Soul that stands in awe of his
Word, and with due Reverence receives it. What! Do thou complain thou art not
troubled enough? Nor contrite enough? Not humbled enough? How do many Souls
bring their Complaints to Ministers, and bring their Bills to Congregations,
for brokeness of Heart, and a deep sense of Sin, when they are so much broken
already, that their other Duties are almost justled out by it. Don't therefore
overlook that Text; Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. We
should make it our business, to live in a ferious course of Holiness toward
God, and Righteousness toward Men, in the love and practice of Peace with all;
and in the joyful sense of the love of God, and hopes of Glory, taking pleasure
in the promoting of the Graces and Comforts of others in our way to Heaven.
Christians, forget not, that the joy of the Lord is your strength Neh. 8.10.
: The serving of God with cheerfulness strengthens both Body and Mind,
whereas excess of grief damps the Spirit, and infeebles the Body, unfitting us
for the Service of either God or Man.

But the complaining Soul will still complain. Say what you will or can,
Comfort belongs not to me. Ps. 77.3, 4.
I may say with Asaph, My Soul refuses to be comforted, I remember God, and am
troubled, I complain, and my Spirit is overwhelmed; God holds mine Eyes waking:
I am so troubled that I cannot speak, q. d. I cannot but reject all the
Consolations that my Friends suggest to me: The thoughts of Gods Goodness,
Wisdom and Power, have sometimes been refreshing to me, but now they are matter
of terror to me; God is angry with me, and I cannot bear it; my trouble is so
great I cannot express it; your speaking Comfort to me, is but as the Singing of
Songs to a heavy Heart.

3. Notwithstanding all this, and a great deal more of such Complaints, yet
I Will assert, and make good my assertion: That Comfort belongs to them that
conclude against themselves that their case is hopeless; and I Will try to make
those very persons confess it. We are not to take Men's own word, that either
the Promises or Threatenings are their portion; but we must examine the grounds
of their peremptory assertion. e. g. If a wicked wretch shall confidently
boast, he does not in the least doubt, but he shall as certainly be saved as
any of those that take most care about their Salvation, though he never
troubles his thoughts about it: Do you think that in taking his Accounts, Chist
will let his Confidence pass for saving Faith, and give him Heaven for his
Presumption? surely you cannot think he will, while he has given us so plain a
Rule, how to judge of words by things, viz. By their fruits you shall know
them; Mat. 7.16. etc.
A good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: So then, as a Man shall not save
his Soul for his groundless Presumption, so neither shall he lose his Soul for
his groundless despondency. Thou complainest of thy self, not of Christ, he is
precious 1 Pet. 2.7.
in thine eye, therefore thy Faith is saving; thou fear that thou do not
cleave to Christ, yet thou had rather die than offend him; this is a Faith of
adherence, and that is saving: Thou complainest, but restlesly strivest to be
more inwardly, outwardly; universally holy; that is a good Evidence thy state
is good, though while under a Temptation, or under a Cloud, thou can not see
it to be so.

But thou still say, I am an unprofitable Hearer, and I cannot believe that
Christ will pardon what is amiss, and accept of any thing as good, of what I
can do; and therefore pray quit this way of answering my complaint, by telling
me of Comfort: If you have any thing else to offer, I Will hear it, I may expect
rather to hear of Christ in a clap of Thunder, than in a soft and still voice.

4. I Will speak to thee no more directly of Comfort, but only ask thee a
Question about the Comforts of others. What are thy thoughts about the Comforts
and Joys of the Holy Ghost? are there any such things, or are they mere
Fancies? If there be any such things, what think thou of those that partake
of them? Is the enjoyment of them desirable? Are they happy that have them?
Whether is more eligible, to spend your Life in mourning Complaints, or to
spend it in the joyful Praises of the Lord our Redeemer? Are these Questions
hard to be answered? These Questions are out of question: Oh! there are no joys
like the joys of the Holy Ghost, the best of carnal joys are incomparably below
them. Though I fear I shall never be so happy as to enjoy them, yet I cannot but
admire them that do. Do you ask which is more eligible, a life of mourning
Complaints, or a life of Joys? Ask a Man under a fit of the Stone, whether that
is more eligible than a state of health? Well, do thou speak this heartily?
Ask thy Heart again, that thou may not mistake me, or go back from thine own
answer. Are the joys of the Holy Ghost Realities? Are they unspeakably beyond
all other joys? Are they happy that enjoy them? Will thou stand to thy word?
Then they are all thine own, thou have a title to them at present, and as sure
as thy Redeemer lives, thou shall be put into the possession of them: Mark how
I prove it. Every one that has Truth of Grace, has an indefeasible Title to
Glory: 1 John 5.13.
These things which I have written unto you, that believe on the Name of the
Son of God, that ye may know that you have eternal life; 2 Cor. 1.22.
They have a Seal for Assurance, but an earnest which is a begun possession,
elsewhere called the first fruits; Romans 8.23.
but every one that prizeth the holy joys of the Holy Ghost, has Truth of
Grace: Graceless Persons make a mock of the joys of the Holy Ghost; they can
scarce forbear sneering at the mention of them; he perfers carnal Comforts
before them; Psalm. 4.6, 7,
Many say, who will show us any good? But the gracious Soul says, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy Countenance; Thou have put gladness in my heart, more
than in the time that their Corn and their Wine increased: and ver. 3.
This is the godly Man, whom the Lord has set apart for himself. Not any one
that is not a Saint himself, has any esteem for a Saint as a Saint: 1 John
3.14.
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren:
He that loves not his brother, abides in death. Now I dare appeal to your
selves, in the very midst of all your complaints; when thou fear thou shall
never have any of these joys, yet thou have a value for them above any other:
Thou preferrest thy complaints before worldly Pleasures; thou do not, thou
can not but follow Christ, though it be tremblingly: If all these be not
infallible Evidences of Grace, what are? Chide thy self, and pray thy self out
of thy complaining temper: Eccl. 9.7.
Go thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for
God now accepts thy works: And thus you have my Answer, as well to the
Complaint, as to the Case: God make it beneficial to all that shall read it.
There remains some questions depending upon the Case, that require some Answer;
I Will attempt that also.

Qu. 1. When we make choice of a Minister to be under Christ, the special Guide
of our Souls: How shall we avoid the sinful preferring of one before another?
How may we escape that partiality which is one of the great sins of the Age, to
cry up some, and decry others; to overvalue some, and to undervalue others;
Every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I
of Chrst. 1 Cor. 1.12.
I am of Paul: He had an extraordinary Call to the Apostolical Office, there is
none preaches Free Grace like him. He withstood Gal. 2.11.
^^^r to the Face, because he was to be blamed: And as for Apollos, he had need
to learn of his Hearers: Acts 18.26 24. end.
When Aquila and Priscilla heard him, they ^^ok him unto them, and expounded
unto him the way of God more perfectly. None of these things can be spoken of
Paul, and therefore I am for Paul. Another says, I am for Apollos, chapter 2.6, 10,
10.
he is a powerful Preacher, an eloquent Man, and mighty in the Scripture,
fervent in Spirit, diligent in the things of the Lord, speaking boldly in the
Synagogues, mightily convincing the Jews. I am for Appollos, Paul is nothing to
him for a Preacher, his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible,
and therefore I am for Apollos. Another says, I am for Cephas, he was the
chief Apostle, Christ gave him a special charge to feed his Sheep, and his
Lambs, Joh. 21.17.
and therefore I Will be of his Flock Another says, I am for Christ, all these
have their imperfections but Christ has none, and therefore I Will expect the
immediate teaching of Christ by his Spirit; I Am not for the teachings of Men.
And thus Christians do not only differ from one another in their esteem of
Preachers; but we shall find them differ from themselves in their esteem of the
same Persons; they magnify and vilify the same Ministers: Joh. 5.35.
John was a burning and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season, and
but for a season, to rejoice in his light: To Christ himself they said one day
Hosanna, and the next day Crucify him; and of Paul, the Galathians Gal. 4.14,
-- 16.
one while received him as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus; presently
after are as shye of him as of an Enemy, because he insists upon some Truths
they have no mind to. How may this Distemper be prevented or cured?

Answ. 1. Keep up your Esteem of Jesus Christ, as your great Shepherd, and of
all Faithful Ministers, or his under Officers: 2 Cor. 4.5.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
Servants for Jesus sake. It Is impossible to overvalue Christ, provided you do
not mistake his Work, and neglect your own; do not expect that from Christ
which he will not do; he will not teach you without the Ministry of Man, where
he vouchsafes it. Christ has the words of Eternal Life, but yet he commits to
the Ushers of his School, The Word of Reconciliation: 2 Cor. 5.20
And we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God: And it is Christ
that says expressly: Luke 10.16.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me; and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me. This does not only relate to
extraordinary Officers, such as the Apostles, for Christ as well Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
gave Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ: And therefore
conscienciously Attend upon the Ministry of Men, but expect the benefit of it
only by the Blessing of Christ; whoever plants or waters, the success is from
Christ.

2. Take heed of a narrow Spirit; confine not the Church of Christ to a Party:
No, not the best Party upon Earth. What has Christ only these few Sheep in the
Wilderness? If Christ should have no other Subjects, his would ^e a little
Flock indeed. Rev. 7.9.
Whereas Christ's sealed Ones, who are sealed for Holiness, are a great
multitude, which no Man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and People,
and Tongues, standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb, etc. Christians,
be as severe against your selves as you will, but be not so against others. Say
to thy self, If I should be less strict than I am, I should question mine own
fitness for Church Communion: But I dare not judge so of another, I do not know
his temptations: I do not know how far God might leave him to himself, 2 Chr.
32.32.
To try him, that he might know what was in his Heart, etc. Shall I from such
an action judge of his State? No, I dare not: be severe to your selves, but be
charitable unto others.

3. Take heed of over-esteeming any, least God blast his Ministry as to you,
that it be less profitable than before. You may easily observe, that when any
one is overvalued, God is robbed of the overplus of Honor that is given to any
Creature: This is a tender thing, and God will not bear it; let a well ordered
Self-love steer you right in this matter. Query, Whether Ministers or Peoples
falling into scandalous Sin, or dangerous Error, spring not from this Root?
These Cautions concern as well the sincere as others; but my last under this
Head concerns only Hypocrites, or those who have too cause to suspect
themselves to be so.

4. Take heed of being swayed by private Interest; Jude 16.
To have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage. i. e. Of flattering
persons upon some carnal account: You have the Apostle naming some of their
spiritual Diseases: 1 Timothy 6.3.4, 5.
If any man affect to teach or to hear otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, i. e. words that tend to cure the Soul of Spiritual Distempers, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, i. e. that Doctrine which promotes downright godliness; He is proud,
i. e. he is swelled up, he is great in his own esteem, though knowing nothing
solidly, but doting brainsick about questions of no use, and strifes of words,
contending about words, whereof comes envy of those that are wiser than
himself: strife, An ignorant person will not yield that another knows more than
himself; railings, What he wants in arguments, he will make up with foul
language; evil surmisings, Uncharitably suspecting what they will not speak
out; perverse disputings, Not to clear up Truth, but to shuffle in Error; of
men of corrupt minds, distempered in their heads; destitute of the Truth, have
quitted savoury Truth; supposing that gain is godliness, whatever tends to
their worldly interest, that is very well consistent with their Religion; from
such withdraw thy self, have nothing to do with them.

Qu. 2. When there is a difference in the Directions that are given by
Ministers, what shall those do who are to observe them? Prescription are
sometimes peremptory, and we are charged to do expressly thus; and when we hear
the same Duty pressed by another, he directs otherwise: 1 Cor. 14.8
If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for the
Spiritual Warfare?

Answ. 1. Those that ordinarily ask this Question, don't do it for practical
Direction, but for captious diversion; they don't speak by way of Enquiry, but
excuse; they will except against this, and the other, but they will follow none;
and therefore I Will pass by these.

2. Do but practice that wherein all the Ministers of Christ are agreed, and
you are safe: They all give the same Directions for substance; though their
Directions are different, they are not contrary. You know there is nothing more
ordinary than for two Ministers to preach upon one Text, and to handle it
different ways, and to draw from it different Inferences, and different Uses;
but while they keep to Scripture, and to the Analogy of Faith, all is
commendable and beneficial. Christ is pleased variously to distribute both
Graces and Gifts, both to Ministers and Christians, and it is to the Glory of
his Wisdom and Grace that he does so. All who are Faithful to Christ and
Souls, agree in such things as these, viz. To convince of the evil of Sin, and
of the necessity of Regeneration: there is none that is worth the name of a
Minister that can give Sin a good word; they cannot speak slightly of sin, they
cannot encourage sin, they cannot, they dare not flatter you in your sins; they
all agree to assure you, Numb. 32.23.
That your sin will find you out; that if you do not find out your Sin to
Repentance, your Sin will find you out to your Ruin: They all agree to direct
you to Christ, some do it with more skill and warmth than others, but all agree
in the thing: 1 Cor. 3.11
Other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ:
They all agree in pressing a Life of Holiness, to evidence the sincerity of
your Faith; Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord with comfort.

3. Endeavor to learn the holy Skill, and the holy Zeal of making your
Advantage of the different Talents of Christ's faithful Ministers: Hear none
but whom you may groundedly take to be Ministers of Christ: And then esteem
such for their Masters sake; whoever brings me a Message from Christ shall be
welcome; Isa. 52.7.
How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet (though sweaty, dusty, dirty,)
of him that brings good tidings of the dissolution of the Babylonian
Captivity, -- that publishes Salvation by Jesus Christ; how much more amiable
must these be? 1 Cor. 12, 7, 11, 21.
The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, --
dividing to every man severally as he will. -- No one shall have all, lest he
should be proud; none shall want all, lest he should be discouraged.

4. Strive to approve your selves to be of a healing Temper: You will hereby
get more profit to your selves, and be more useful unto others: Mat. 5.9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God.
Those that long and labor for Peace, they are like God and Christ, and shall
be owned as such: It is a Duty for every one to sit down under a particular
Pastor, for the enjoyment of all Ordinances; but as still holding Communion
with the truly Catholic Church. Though you can hold local Communion but with
one Congregation at once, yet you may hold mental Communion with the whole
Church of Christ at the same time: Do any thing but sin, to comply with others
for their spiritual Edification; and be not too hasty in accounting any thing
sinful, wherein the sincere Servants of Christ may have Sentiments different
from yours; rather suspend your own practice, than censure others. I would
commend it to you, to love the Truth and Peace, to love Truth more than Peace;
but yet to consider several Truths of lesser moment, may be waved for Peace
sake. e. g. I may part with several things of my own right for Peace sake. Genesis
13.8.9.
Abraham the Uncle, lets his Nephew Lot make that choice which belonged to
himself, lest their Infidel Neighbors should scorn both for their Contentions.
The Blessed Apostle will not insist upon 1 Cor. 9.12.
his due maintenance, lest he should hinder the spreading of the Gospel: This
Rule is therefore to be observed, that when two different Commands at the same
time call for our Obedience, we must consider which of them is of greatest
moment, not so much in it self, as to that season; for so a Command about the
immediate Worship of God, must give place to a command that concerns but Man's
bodily relief, Mat. 9.13.
I will have mercy rather than sacrifice: Several good works must be omitted,
when the doing of them will do more hurt than good. I Will close this with that
of the Apostle: 1 Cor. 9.19. -- 22.
Though I be free from all men, not obliged to any one more than another, yet
have I made my self servant unto all: I have complied with the persuasions and
inclinations of others in things Indifferent, that I might gain the more, that
I might win them to Christ for their Salvation; To the Jews I became as a Jew,
that I might gain the Jews, i. e. To the unbelieving Jews I conformed to some
of their Ceremonies, that I might persuade them to embrace Christianity; To
them that are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are
under the Law. i. e. To those believing Jews and Gentiles, who yet think it is
necessary to observe the Law of Moses, I comply also with them in some
Ceremonies which were not yet unlawful: To them that are without the Law, as
without Law. i. e. To those Gentiles that do not look upon themselves as bound
to observe the Law of Moses, among them I use my Christian Liberey for the
non-observing of days, and meats, etc. (being not without Law to God, but
under the Law to Christ;) i. e. I walk by the Rule of the Moral Law, and
subjecting my self to all the Commands of Christ in the Gospel: To the ^^ak
became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: i. e. I condescended to the weak,
in teaching them according to their Capacity to learn; I am made all things, to
all men, that I might by all means save some. i. e. I accommodate my self to
all persons, for the promoting of the Gospel.

Quest. 3. How shall weak Christians, that have but low Parts, little Grace,
few helps, and many hindrances, follow these or such like Directions?

Answ. 1. Know this to your Comfort, that though you are such, yet while you
are low in your own esteem, and diligent in the use of what means and helps you
have, you stand fair to be as thriveing Christians, as rich in Grace and
Comfort, as those you apprehended far exceed you. It Is the low valleys that are
most fruitful: 1 Cor. 27.28.
God has chosen the foolish things of the world: God picks up those that seem
to others to be the Refuse of the World, to confound the wise. As Christ chose
the poor Fishermen, to convince the most knowing part of the World. God has
chosen the weak things of the world; such Persons as seem most incapable of
understanding the Mysteries of the Gospel, to confound the things that are
mighty, to put to silence those that are far above them: And base things of the
world, and things which are despised, God has chosen: Yea, and things that are
not, to bring to naught things that are. God by those who are as contemptible
as if they had no Being to be taken notice of, manifests the emptiness of those
that seem most excellent. Pray consider, when the whole World was drowned, and
when Sodom and the neighbor Cities were burned, there was not one Servant
saved: But now under the Gospel Tit. 2.10.
they are in a special manner charged, (and honored by the charge,) To adorn
the Doctrine of God in all things; and they stand upon even ground as to
Spiritual Privileges, with any rank of men in the World: There is Col. 3.11.
neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all: It Is neither the Grecians being
the most learned part of the World, nor the Jews being the only National Church
in the World; it is neither the observing the Ceremonial Law; it is not the
Barbarian that wants Accomplishments, nor the Scythians, who are of all
Barbarians most barbarous; it is not bond, i. e. those who are in the worst of
humane slavery; nor free, i. e. those who were never in bondage to any, but
Christ is all, and in all. i. e. He infinitely supplies all outward defects,
he is infinitely better to them than all outward Privileges; so that you have
comparatively nothing else to do but to clear up your Union with Jesus Christ.

2. Practice what you know, tho it be never so little, improve what helps you
have, tho they be never so few, (...) your Graces will grow more than you are
aware of: Mar. 4.26.27.
So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and
should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up he
knows not how. Those that receive the good Seed of the Word into good honest
hearts, (or the Word has made 'em so,) it has an insensible efficacy, which
produces a gradual increase of Grace, even beyond observation: But you
complain that you see no such thing: in some respect I may say, The less you
take notice of your own Graces, the better; provided you do not belly the Spirit
of God in overlooking, and denying what he has wrought. Things necessary to
Salvation are but few, and plain, easy to be (through Grace) sufficiently
understood and practiced; tho there is not any thing so inconsiderable, but may
exercise the greatest Parts and Learning attainable in this life; yet there is
not any thing necessary to be known, but Jesus Christ, who is our Prophet to
teach us, will both give Instruction, and Capacity to receive it, to all his
willing Disciples; and Christ will require an Account for no more Talents than
he gives.

3. Endeavor to make a true Observation, how those things which are in their
own nature Hindrances to the Soul, are graciously and powerfully governed by
God for our Souls profiting by them; that as the Apostle, I would ye should
understand Phil. 1.12.
brethren, that the things which happened to me, have fallen out rather to the
furtherance of the Gospel. When Paul was first taken off from preaching, and
cast into Prison, who would not at first hearing be ready to cry, Oh! many a
poor Soul will rue this day, this is the blackest Cloud that ever darkened our
Gospel day. The Apostle does as it were tell 'em, They are greatly mistaken, at
present, the same of his Sufferings rung through Court, City and Country; and
persons were so far from forsaking the Truth through discouragement, that they
boldly own the Gospel: And now was he more at leisure to write those Epistles
which would benefit the Church in future Ages. But to bring this down to
ordinary Christians: You know that groundless fears, and trembling mis-givings
of heart are the ordinary diseases of a scrupulous Conscience; these now
dispirit us, and hinder us from that cheerful behavior that might render
Religion more amiable, and so hinder the spreading of it. And besides this,
Satan, that subtle Angler for Souls, strikes in with our Spiritual Diseases,
and plyes the Soul with next to overwhelming temptations; and he never fails of
success through want of skill, or through want of industry: But blessed be God
for overruling all this. God by but upholding the Soul under (not delivering
the Soul from) its fears, keeps it humble, and makes it more useful throughout
the whole course of its Regeneration: and as for the advantage that Satan
takes, God is pleased to give the poor trembling Soul those experiences, that
it is our sin not to take notice of them. e. g. That Christian that is in his
own eyes the poorest, weakest, filliest Sheep in Christ's Fold, shall out-wit
Satan in all his Stratagems, and overpower him in all his Assaults, though he
knows not how he does it: Thus, the poor Soul when he is hard beset, retreats
to Christ, and though he dare not call his carriage an acting Faith upon
Christ, Christ will own it as such, and reward it as such. For how is it that
such a poor Soul has held out so many years under its own fears and Satan's
Temptations, but that Christ upheld both it, and its Faith? Here Is Faith not
discerned, yet victorious.

4. Endeavor thankfully and impartially to take notice of the Advantages of
your Condition: Do not so much look at what you apprehend more desirable in
another Condition, as to know and consider the circumstances of your own
Condition. Another condition is better for them, God sees your condition to be
better for you; it is the station wherein God sets you: 1 Cor. 7.24.
Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God: your
station in the World is not so high as others, and your distractions in the
World are not so great as others: God has not set you in his Church so high as
others, God does not require so much of you as he does of others: But alas! you
have not the Graces that others have; neither have you the temptations nor
desertions that others have. Those who have the largest measure, and the
highest degrees of Grace, have always exercises suitable to their Receipts;
they have sometimes the sorest Trials, sometimes the greatest Corruptions; and
if not that, yet you will find it is such as Job, and Asaph and Heman, that make
most doleful complaints of the hidings of God's Face; 1 Cor. 7.21.
therefore take the Apostle's counsel, Art thou called, being a Servant, care
not for it. q. d. Be not troubled at it, as if thy mean condition in the Word,
rendered thee less acceptable unto God; poor Lazarus is in rich Abraham's Bosom:
James 2.5.
Hearken, my beloved brethren: q. d. This is a matter worthy your special
notice; Has not God chosen, q. d. dare ye deny it? the poor of this world, i.
e. In the things of this World, or in the esteem of this World; rich in Faith,
i. e. they have abundance of the Grace of Faith, and of the Privileges of
Faith; they have no Inheritance on Earth, but they have at present a Title to,
and they shall soon have the Possession of the heavenly Kingdom.

The Case I am to discourse of this Morning, is this: Quest. Wherein, and
wherefore, the Damnation of those that perish under the Gospel, will be more
Intolerable, than the Damnation of Sodom, or the worst of the Heathens, at the
day of Judgment? SERMON II.
MATTHEW. XI. 24. But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the Land of
Sodom in the day of Judgment, than for thee.
WE read in the foregoing Chapter, our Savior giving Commission to his Twelve
Disciples, whom he called Apostles. Where we have their Commission asserted,
Instructions about it, and Encouragements to the Discharge of it.

But by his Commission given to them, he did not thereby excuse himself. By his
sending them forth to preach and work Miracles, he did not forbear and indulge
himself: Others labors did not excuse his own. For we read in the first Verse
of this Chapter, When he had made an end of commanding his Disciples, he
departed thence to teach and preach in their Cities. And some of the Cities are
these mentioned in this Chapter; Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, three
Cities in Galilee. And he begins his speech to them in a way of Exprobration.
Then began he to upbraid the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done,
v. 20. Whence we may note, That this was not his first time of his coming to
these Cities; he had been with them before both teaching and working Miracles,
else how could he now upbraid them. And also, that these were not the only
Cities where he had thus been present, but here the Text says were wrought
(...), most of his mighty works.

And he begins with Corazin and Bethsaida, and puts them both together, either
because they were near one another, about two miles distant: Or, because they
both had equal Privileges of his presence with them, and so equally under
guilt.

And in his upbraiding them, 1. We may consider, what he upbraids them for,
that they repented not; notwithstanding the mighty works they had seen done
before their Eyes, and the heavenly Doctrine they had heard preached in their
Ears. 2. Who he upbraids them by, it is Tire and Zid^n, the Tyrians and
Zidonians; who were Phoenicians inhabiting Syria, none of the Jewish Nation,
out of the Pale of the Church, brought up in the Ignorance of God, and true
Religion, yet if the works done in these Cities had been done among them, they
would have repented, and repented in dust and ashes, when these Cities repented
not at all: Whereupon our Savior denounces a Woe against them, Woe to thee
Corazin, etc. 3. He upbraids them by name and not in general, with other
impenitent Sinners; for Particulars affect more than Generals.

Next he proceeds to Capernaum; and because it may be this City was under
greater guilt than the two former, or any other in Galilee, therefore Christ
names it by it self, and does not only name it but notify it. 1. As being
lifted up to Heaven; not in outward Grandeur, Pomp or Power, but by signal
Favors and Privileges from Christ's Presence, his Preaching, and mighty Works
done in it.

2. As a City to be cast down to Hell. Thou shall be cast down to Hell: (...).
Or hurled down by force and violence, as the Greek word imports: And to Hell,
or as low as Hell. A great fall indeed. What so high as Heaven? and what so low
as Hell? Though by Hell some understand a temporal destruction; some fatal
Calamity, that should carry it to the grave of Oblivion, and bury it in ashes
out of sight: which was executed upon it by the Assyrians, Caldaans, and then
by the Romans. But seeing Christ speaks in the Text of the day of Judgment, I
suppose he rather speaks of the Aeternal Hell and Damnation it should be hurled
then into.

3. He notifies it by the form of his Speech, directed to it in a way of
indignation. And Thou Capernaum: As if he held up his hand, shook his head, and
contracted his brow against it. Ah! Capernaum, Capernaum, of all Cities thou
art likely to have the severest doom.

4. And again by comparing it with Sodom, and representing it as worse than
Sodom. If the mighty works done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained unto this day. Sodom would have repented, or had so many righteous
persons in it whereby not to be destroyed with Fire and Brimstone.

Now as all these three Cities were in Galilee, so they belonged to the Tribes
of Zabulon, and Naphtali; which are foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, as such as
would first fall into the dimness and darkness of Affliction in the Assyrian
Captivities; and as such as should f^rst have the Gospel Light shining amongst
them in Christ's public Ministry, Isai. 9.1, 2. The people that walked in
darkness, have seen a great light. And therefore are first upbraided, and
rebuked by our Savior, because they repented not.

But I pass from the Context to the Text, wherein we have our Savior looking
to the day of Judgment, and the rewards of Sinners to be then distributed. But
I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the day of
Judgment, than for thee.

Which words he speaks to Capernaum, and are a Prediction of its doom in the
day of Judgment. And we might take up several Notes from them.

There shall be a day of Judgment. Whether men will believe it or Felix
trembled, though an Heathen, when Paul discoursed of it. It is one of the
Articles of the Creed, and one of the Principles of the Christian Religion,
Heb. 6.2. called Eternal judgment. But I shall not insist on this.

In the day of Judgment some Sinners shall fare worse than others.
Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, shall be cast into hotter flames: And those that are
cast into utter darkness; yet for some is reserved the blackness of darkness.
When our Savior tells us of some that are made two times more the Children of
Hell than others, Matthew. 23.15. and of some that shall be beaten with few
stripes, and others with many stripes, Luke 12.47, 48. it shows there are
degrees of punishment in the state of Damnation. Some have questioned whether
there will be degrees of Glory to the Saints in Heaven; but none but believe
there will be degrees of Torment in Hell; some more, some less tolerable. But
neither this shall I insist upon.

In the day of Judgment there will be a distribution of Sinners punishments Why
else shall it be more tolerable for some sinners than others?

As Grace and Mercy will distribute the Rewards to the Saints; so Justice,
Punishment to the Wicked. So that nothing will be added above what is due, and
nothing abated of what is due; not one stripe inflicted, nor one diminish't of
what Justice shall determine. By him actions are weighed, says Hannah in her
Song, 1 Samuel 2.3. Bad actions as well as good; and the sinfulness of them known
to a grain; and the heavier Sin shall have the heavier Judgment. Neither this
do I insist upon.

Christ's saying is sufficient ground for our believing. But I say unto etc. He
adds no more by way of proof; his saying it is enough. How often do we find in
the Gospel these words, Verily I say unto you; and sometimes, Verily, verily, I
say unto you; or Amen, Amen; and is himself called the Amen. We owe this
deference to him, as to believe him upon his naked Word. If an ipse dixit
passed for a proof in Pythagoras's School, much more should it in Christ's.
Neither will I insist on this.

In the day of Judgment it will be more tolerable for Sodom than Capernaum. And
this will lead me to discourse of these two Cities literally, and from thence
to speak of the Case proposed more at large, and generally.

These two Cities may be considered under a threefold distinction:

1. Nominal: The one is called Sodom; in the Hebrew Sedom, or Sedomah;
sometimes we read of the Land of Sodom, or the Sodomites; and then it
comprehends Gomorrah, which is often mentioned with it: as Isai. 1.9. Matthew.
10.15, etc. And Admah, and Zeboim, and Bela also, may be meant by the Land of
Sodom, and the Cities of the Plain, Genesis 19.25. And the other City is called
Capernaum, which signifies in Hebrew, A Field of Consolation, or a pleasant
Field: As Sodom has its Name from a word that denotes Secrecy, or Coetus
Consultantium, Genesis 49.6. But I shall not Criticize upon Names.

2. Local: Sodom was on the East of Canaan, in the Plain of Jordan, which Lot
chose at his parting from Abraham; and he is said to journey to the East, Genesis
13.11. and was a pleasant and fruitful Plain, and as the Garden of the Lord,
till it was destroyed from Heaven, v. 10. But Capernaum was on the North, or
North-west of the Land of Judah.

3. Moral: Both were sinful Cities, but their sins of a distinct kind. The sins
of Sodom were sins against the Law more directly, and against the Light of
Nature, and of the highest scandal; but Capernaum's sins were more against the
New Light of the Gospel breaking forth upon them from Christ's Ministry, and
the mighty Works whereby his Doctrine was confirmed among them.

Now Christ considering both these Cities, and the sin of both, gives the
decision in the Text, That it will be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom,
than Capernaum, in the day of Judgment.

And may not this seem strange and amazing? Sodom was a City that was wicked to
a Prodigy, and to a Proverb. It Is said, Genesis 13.13. That the men of Sodom were
sinners and wicked before the Lord exceedingly. And impudency in sin is called
a declaring their sin like Sodom, Isai. 3.9. And they are to me like Sodom,
says God, speaking of the sin of the Jews, Jer. 23.14. And wicked Rulers are
called Rulers of Sodom, Isai. 1.10. Whereupon Lot is said to vex his righteous
Soul with their unlawful Deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. And there is a sin, not fit to be
mentioned, called by the name of Sodomy; so denominated from the place. Yet
notwithstanding all this, it will be more tolerable for Sodom than Capernaum in
the day of Judgment: Capernaum was lifted up to Heaven by many favors and
privileges, which were not vouchsafed to Sodom; had means of knowing the
Savior of the World, and the way of Salvation above what Sodom had; had Christ
himself, the Son of God present, preaching, and doing many wonderful Works in
it, which Sodom never had. Many things are recorded in the Evangelists about
this Capernaum, and its Privileges above most Cities. It Is said, that Christ
dwelt here, Matthew. 4.13. Here he healed the Centurion's servant by a word from
his mouth, Matthew. 8. Here he healed Peter's Wife's Mother, and many that were
sick, and possessed of Devils, ibid. And here he healed the Paralytick man let
down through the Tiles of the House, Mark. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. And here he cast out
the unclean Spirit by a rebuke from his mouth, Mark 1.24. Here he wrought the
Miracle of the Tribute-money taken out of the mouth of a Fish, Matthew. 17. Here
he entered the Synagogue, and taught once and again, that they were astonished
at his Doctrine. And here he preached that divine and mysterious Sermon about
the Bread of life which came down from Heaven, and eating the Flesh, and
drinking the Blood of the Son of Man, John 6.59. And this City was so famous
for Christ's Miracles, that when he came to Nazareth, they expected him to do
the works there which he had done in Capernaum, Luke 4.23. Now when after all
this, Capernaum did not receive him nor his Doctrine, but murmured at both,
John 6.41. and turned not to God by true repentance: this was the Sin of that
City, which will make it more tolerable for Sodom in the day of Judgment, than
for it.

But that I might bring my discourse home and closer to our selves, and to the
case proposed, we shall consider these two Cities as Types and Examples of two
sorts of Sinners, for so it may be supposed our Savior intended them. Sodom,
as a Type of the Heathen, and all that wickedness found among them, who have
not heard of Christ and Salvation by him; and Capernaum a Type of those Sinners
who live under the Gospel, and have had Christ preached to them, and present
among them by his Word and Ordinances. And so I come to the last Note, which
will fully answer to the Case proposed.

That the worst of the Heathen, who never had Christ preached to them, and
Salvation offered by him, shall fare better in the day of Judgment, than those
that continue impenitent under the Gospel. A tremendous Doctrine.

Sodom is here instanced in by our Savior, as being the most notorious Sinners
among all the Heathens, worse than Tire and Sidon before mentioned, or any
Heathen City, and yet shall fare better than Capernaum, though none of Sodom's
sins be charged by our Savior upon it. But they repented not under the means
of Grace and Salvation: Because they repented not, says the Text: this was
their sin.

Q. But what is this Impenitency under the Gospel?

A. 1. It is not all hardness of Heart, that is Impenitency: many good
Christians may still find something of it; but it is when men harden their own
hearts, Heb. 3.8. which are two different things.

2. It is not any particular act of Sin that may be called Impenitency, but a
trade and course of Sin.

3. It implies a wilful rejecting the Offers of Grace and Salvation by Christ,
in those that live under the Gospel.

4. It implies a slighting and contempt of the threatenings denounced against
Sin, and Sinners.

5. It implies a resolved purpose to persist in Sin, though Man knows it to be
Sin: when the Sinner's mind is not changed, nor he comes to himself, and to
grow wise after all his folly, as the Greek word for Repentance does import:
this is Impenitency.

This I premise to clear my way to the following discourse: As also by
answering the following Objection.

Obj. But Capernaum's case is not ours. Capernaum saw Christ in the Flesh,
which we never did; they heard Doctrine preached from his own mouth, which we
never did; they saw his Miracles wrought before their eyes, which we never saw.
Had we had their advantages and privileges, we would not have done as they
did, nor been impenitent as they were.

Ans. This Evasion is much like that of the Scribes and Pharisees mentioned
Matthew. 23.30. Had we been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. When they at the same time
were filled with that malice against Christ, which issued in the shedding of
his precious blood. But I answer:

1. Though we have not Christ with us in his fleshly Presence, yet we have his
Doctrine still with us, and preached to us. And it was not his fleshly Presence
that brought any Sinners to repentance, but his Doctrine.

2. Though we see not Christ's Miracles wrought before our eyes, yet we h^^e
them recorded by the four Evangelists, and by such as were either
eyewitnesses, or wrote by an infallible Spirit, or rather both. And if we
believe the Gospel, we believe what is there recorded: and Faith is the
evidence of things not seen; and will make their impression upon the Heart, as
if seen with the Eye.

3. Of those many thousands both of Jews and Gentiles that were brought to
repentance by the Gospel in the Primitive times, not one of an hundred or of a
thousand did either see Christ in the Flesh, heard him Preach, or saw him work
any Miracle.

4. Of those many thousands that did see him and his Works, and hear him preach
when he was upon Earth, not one of an hundred were brought to repentance
thereby, vid. John 12.37. And are any sure in these days, had they then lived,
they should not have been of that number? Considering that men have now the
same blindness and hardness upon their minds and hearts which they had then;
and the same love to their sins, and prejudices against Holiness as was then.
And therefore Impenitency now will expose a man to as severe punishment, and
present him as guilty before God at the day of Judgment as it will Capernaum.
And does not our Savior denounce the same severities against them that
received not his Disciples preaching, as his own. Matthew. 10.14, 15. Whosoever
shall not receive you, (having offered peace to them;) depart, and shake off
the dust of your feet against them. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah than that City. And this holds
true in every Age, and in the present Age; in every City, and in this City; in
every Nation, and in our own Nation.

Thus having made my way clear, I now proceed: And show, That Impenitency under
the Gospel will expose men to the most intolerable Judgment in the day of
Christ.

1. I shall prove that it will do so. 2. Why it will do so. 3. Wherein will
this greater Intolerableness consist.
1. That it will do so, I need not prove it by any other Argument, than what we
have in the Text. I say unto you, says our Savior. And again, v. 22. I say
unto you, it shall be more tolerable, etc. And he adds his Amen and Verily to
it, Matthew. 10.15. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Zidon in the day of Judgment, etc. If we believe not that Christ has said
this, we are Infidels to the Gospel. If we think he has said false, we are
guilty of Blasphemy. Is it not he that says, Heaven and Earth shall pass away,
but my Words shall not pass away, that says this? Is it not he who is styled
the Amen, the true and faithful witness, that has said this? Is it not he who
came down from Heaven, out of the bosom of God, and spoke nothing but what he
had seen and heard from his Father, that says this? And therefore it may seem
some reflection upon Christ's Veracity, and my Auditor's Infidelity and
incredulity to bring any other proof.

2. Next, Why will it be so at the day of Judgment?

R. Because Impenitency under the Gospel has more of sin in it, than any sin
of the Heathen. And this is the general Reason.

And where there is most Sin, there will be the severest Judgment. I suppose
none of you think, as some Philosophers of old, that all sins are equal: And
inequality of sin requires in justice inequality in punishment: That saying of
Christ to Pilate shows that there are degrees of sin: He that delivered me to
thee has the greater sin, John 19.11. And so we may conclude there will be
degrees of punishment.

And these degrees of sin must needs be known to God, who is a God of
Knowledge; and being known to him, his Justice requires of him Punishment in a
proportion; though not in this life, yet at the day of the Revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. When all men shall be put into the Scale, as Daniel
told Belshazzar, and Judgment past upon them according to what weight they
bear. And their Actions also considered and weighed in all their Circumstances;
what Grace and Holiness may be found in the actions of some, and what Sin in
the actions of others?

So that many sins that may pass for no sins now, may be found sinful then; and
such as pass for small sins, and of little scandal before men now, may be found
highly sinful in that day.

There are many sins that have more Scandal than Impenitency under the Gospel,
and yet not so much guilt: As we use to say in Divinity, that some sins are
majoris reatus, but minoris scandali; so it is here. The sins of Sodom had more
Scandal, but the sins of Capernaum greater Guilt.

Q. But wherein lies the sinfulness of Impenitency under the Gospel above other
sin?

Ans. 1. Such will be left without Excuse above all others. If the Heathen are
said to be without excuse, not living and worshipping God according to the
dictates of natural Light; and the notices of God suggested by the works of
Creation, Romans 1.20. If the Jews will have their Mouth stopped, having the
written Law of God, and the Knowledge of God's Will therein, and yet
transgressing this Law: as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.19. much more will those
who live impenitently under the Gospel be without excuse, and have their mouths
stopped in the day of Judgment. Had I not come and spoken to them, says
Christ, they had had no sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin, John
15.22. The Gospel strips sinners of every Cloak, and so exposes them more
naked to the severe Justice of God; John 3.19.
For this is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light: And so are without excuse.

1. Such cannot plead, as the Heathen may, that they were ignorant of a
Savior, and how to be saved by him from their sin.

2. Neither can they plead, that Salvation by him was revealed so darkly, that
they could not have any distinct knowledge of it, as the Jew may plead.

3. Neither can they plead that this Revelation was never confirmed from
Heaven, so that they might certainly believe it to be from Heaven, and not the
invention of Men. The Confirmation of it is now made evident.

4. Neither can they plead, that they knew not that Unbelief and Impenitency
were damnable sins, and would expose men to the judgment and wrath of God.

5. Neither can they plead Ignorance of God's punitive Justice: The Sufferings
of Christ for sin to satisfy offended Justice, do clearly evidence this to all
that know any thing of the Gospel: And this more fully, than any Judgments God
has inflicted upon sinners in this world, even Sodom it self.

6. Neither can they plead Ignorance of a future state; of the Immortality of
the Soul, the Resurrection of the Body, and Judgment to come, and Heaven and
Hell. Though the Heathen had but dark notions, the wisest of them about these
things; yet now Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel; and a
future state is more clearly revealed than before either to Jew or Gentile.

7. Neither can they plead ignorance of God's pardoning Mercy, and his
readiness to pardon upon repentance, whereby sinners may be hardened in their
sin, as being without all hope. There is forgiveness with thee that thou may
be feared, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 130.3. And knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance, says the Apostle, Romans 2.4. 2 Cor. 5.19.
And God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them; His pardoning Mercy is now clearly revealed, which is the
great Motive to Repentance.

Obj. But then to be ignorant, will be a Man's advantage, and will furnish him
with an excuse.

Ans. 1. That Ignorance which is invincible, will excuse, but not slothful and
affected Ignorance. If a King has published and proclaimed his Law, a Man's
Ignorance will not excuse him from the penalty: And to shut out the Light is as
sinful, as to sin against it. When the light shines in darkness, it will be no
excuse, if the darkness comprehend it not.

2. Impenitency under the Gospel is a resisting the loudest Calls of God to
Repentance.

The Heathen were called to Repentance by the Light of natural Conscience, and
the Works of Creation and Providence. The Jews were called by the Law God gave
them, and the Prophets God sent among them; but now* under the Gospel, the Call
is louder than before. When the Gospel was entering the World in John Baptist's
Ministry, it entered thus; Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew.
3.2.

And under Christ's own Ministry the Call was louder; The time is fulfilled,
and the Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.15.

And under the Apostle's Ministry the Call went into all the World. Acts 17.30.
The times of their ignorance God winked at, now he calls all men everywhere to
repent. And still the great Work of the Ministry is that which our Savior
speaks of his, and the end of his coming; Not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. And what the Apostle Paul speaks of his Ministry in
Asia, Teaching Repentance toward God, and Faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ,
Acts 20.21. this is the great Work of the Ministry now. And higher Motives are
laid before sinners to repent, under the Gospel, than ever before.

3. There is the highest Contempt of God in it: He called by his Prophets to
repentance before, but now he has called by his own Son. If a King sends his
own Son to command Rebels to lay down their Arms, and accept of terms of Mercy,
and they still refuse, it is greater Contempt than if he had sent his Servants.
As the King in the Parable said, Surely they will reverence my Son, Matthew.
21.37.
though they misused and killed his Servants.

There has been Contempt of God by sinners in every Age, as the Psalmist
complains, Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore do the wicked contemn God? But this Contempt
rises to an higher degree under the Gospel, since Christ came into the world.

1. An higher Contempt of God's Authority.

To transgress the Law of God delivered by Angels upon the Mount to Moses, and
by Moses to the People, was a Contempt of God's Authority, and received a just
recompense of reward, Heb. 2.2.

How greater Contempt is it to disobey the Gospel which was preached by the
Lord himself, as the Apostle there argues? To refuse him that spoke from
Heaven, is greater Contempt of God's Authority, than to refuse him that spoke
from Earth, Heb. 12.25.

Rejecting the Gospel, Christ calls it a despising both him and his Father,
Luke 10.16. And the Law was delivered in the hand of Christ to men, when he
came into the world; so that now disobedience to it is an higher Contempt both
of the Law and Lawgiver, than before. If I had not come and spoke, says
Christ, they had no sin, John 15.22. The Authority of the Speaker makes the
Contempt the greater.

2. An higher Contempt of God's Goodness.

For the Goodness of God is now revealed in the Gospel more fully and clearly
than before: Every impenitent sinner under the Gospel puts a Contempt upon the
highest revelation of God's Goodness. And that Goodness that should lead him to
Repentance, is now rejected and despised. And nothing does aggravate Sin more
than when committed against special Love, Grace, Kindness and Goodness. To turn
Grace into Wantonness, is great abuse; but to put it under Contempt is
abominable. Man can better bear to have his Power, or Authority, or Wisdom
contemned, than his Goodness. Ingratitude is justly reputed among the worst of
Vices; and the Contempt of Goodness is the highest act of ingratitude: And the
higher the Goodness is that is Contemned, the higher still is the Ingratitude,
and the more provoking.

3. An higher Contempt of God's Threatenings.

God's Threatenings under the Law were, for the most part, of Temporal Evils;
but now, under the Gospel, the Threats rise higher, and are more dreadful: It
is the damnation of Hell, everlasting Fire, utter darkness, where there is
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: Everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power, etc. And great Men cannot
well bear to have their Anger slighted, and their Threats despised, or derided.

But though the Lion roar, and God's Threats are denounced, and his Wrath
revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of Men more than ever before;
yet the impenitent Sinner trembles not, but goes on in his sin, and says he
shall have Peace; and so casts Contempt upon the severest Threatenings of God.

4. This Impenitency is a disappointing God in his End. It is a frustrating of
his great design, which is to recover lost Man to himself by Jesus Christ. And
Man is not recovered and brought back to God but by true repentance. And it is
his great End in sending his Gospel to a People, to bring them to Repentance.
And this End of God is now made void when sinners repent not: Men are sometimes
grieved, and sometimes angried when they are disappointed in their End; so is
God said to be: He complains often of this in the Scriptures, when he is
disappointed in the End of his Corrections; he complains, Jer. 2.30. In vain
have I smitten your Children, they received no Correction: And in the End of
his showing favor, Isai. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up Children, and
they have rebelled against me. And complains of his Vineyard disappointing the
End of his care and cost about it; When I looked for Grapes, it brought forth
wild Grapes, Isai. 5.4.

Our Savior is said to rejoice when Sinners were brought to repentance; he now
enjoyed the End of his Coming, Luke 10.21. But then, at another time, he
grieved, because of the hardness of men's hearts, Mark 3.5. And there is still
joy in Heaven when sinners repent: And Christ's faithful Ministers rejoice also
when sinners repent; for they now attain their End which they com^ upon, and
will give up their account with joy concerning such, as they will do with grief
concerning others: Whereupon the Apostle, as a Co-worker with God, Heb. 13.17.
beseeches the Corinthians, that they receive not the grace of God in vain, 2
Cor. 6.1. That neither God nor himself may be disappointed in the end of their
work, being Co-workers. And Grace is bestowed in vain when it brings not
Sinners to repentance; and when men accept not of the reconciliation mentioned
in the foregoing Chapter, which Grace has provided for them. It was a sad
complaint of the Prophet, when he says, I have labored in vain, Isai. 49.4.
Much more for an Apostle, and a Minister of the New Testament, thus to complain.

And much more for Christ to complain thus, as sometimes he did. And most of
all for God himself to complain, as he does in the case of Sinners impenitency.
So that Impenitency under the Gospel must needs be very sinful.

5. This Impenitency has much folly in it, as well as sin. For men to run
themselves into the destruction which they might avoid, and refuse the offers
of God's mercy and grace in the Gospel, is not this folly? He is called a fool
that has a price in his hand, and has not an heart to use it, Prove. 17.16.
And the Virgins in the Parable, that lost their Season of entering in with the
Bridegroom, are styled foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. And are not Sinners that
continue in their sin and impenitency under the Gospel, thus foolish? For they
have set before them the fairest price, and the richest seasons. The Prodigal
in the Parable, when he came home to his Father, is said to come to himself:
Luke 1^.
So when a Sinner repents, and comes home to God, he now comes to himself, as
if his former life was folly and madness.

6. Impenitency under the Gospel shows greater Wilfulness in sin. As it argues
great folly in the Mind, so perverseness in the Will. And the more there is of
the Will in sin, the more sinful it is: As the Schoolmen say; Bonitas and
malitia moralis sunt potissimum in voluntate. Paul could say it was not he that
sinned, when he did sin, because his Will was against it, Romans 7.20. The Evil
that I would not, that I do. And this God chiefly looks at in Actions both good
and evil. There seems to be more wilfulness in Impenitency under the Gospel,
than ever before. The more Light and Knowledge men sin against, the more Will
there is in sin. And the fairer offers are made to men of Heaven and Salvation,
the more wilful is the refusal. And this is the case of Sinners under the
Gospel. They do not repent, and they will not repent; they do not hear, and
they will not hear; they do not leave their sin, and they will not leave it.

7. Lastly, Impenitency under the Gospel is attended with the greatest
resistance of the Spirit: Greater than in former time. There is more of the
Spirit goes along with the Gospel-ministration, than with any before it. And
there cannot be a disobedience to the Gospel, without resisting that Spirit
that goes along with it: Upon some the Spirit prevails, and brings them to
repentance; and in others he is resisted. And some resist to that degree, that
they are said to offer despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. And the sin
that is accounted unpardonable, is committed against the Holy Ghost; and it is
Thought cannot be committed, but under the Gospel; whereby Sinners are brought
by a sinful, to a judicial Impenitency, Heb. 6.6. So that by this time you may
see the great sinfulness of Impenitency under the Gospel, beyond what was, or
could be in Sodom, whereby men's damnation will be more intolerable.

Now I come to the last Particular, to show wherein the greater intolerableness
will consist.

1. Such will suffer greater Torments from their own Consciences. The worm of
Conscience will gnaw them with greater pain. The reflections of it upon the
sinner will be with greater force and fury. By how much Men have sinned against
greater Light and Mercy, by so much the remembrance of this will be the more
afflictive: It was some aggravation of Dives his Torments in Hell, the
remembrance of former good things enjoyed; Much more will the remembrance of a
day of Salvation lost, and of the refusal or neglect of Gospel Grace and mercy
be afflictive to sinners in a state of Damnation.

The Light they have sinned against will be Hellfire in their Consciences for
ever; and the clearer light, the hotter fire: And the higher they have been
lifted up by the opportunities of Grace toward Heaven, the lower they will
fall under the weight of Guilt, and the rebukes of Conscience.

2. They will suffer more than others from the Devil, and his Angels: For that
they are the Executioners of God's wrath upon the wicked in this world, is out
of question; and so some think they will be in the world to come, but only as
under God's Commission: which they ground upon that Text, Agree with thine
Adversary quickly, lest he deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the
Tormentours, etc. by whom they understand Evil Spirits, Matthew. 18.34.

3. Christ himself will appear in greatest severity against such: He is said to
be revealed in flames of fire against such that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. By both which expressions are meant impenitent Sinners
under the Gospel. His first Coming was in a flame of Love to save Men; but when
Men are impenitent, and reject his Salvation, he will come next in flames of
Wrath to take Vengeance: And in the first place against these; To the Jew
before the Gentile, Romans 2.9. and to the impenitent Christian before both.

4. Witnesses will rise up against these more than any other sinners. The
Heathen will come in against them, as our Savior speaks; The men of Niniveh
shall rise up against this generation and condemn it. The Queen of the South
shall rise up and condemn it, Matthew. 12.41. The Heathen, who have gone further
by the Light of Nature, than many who have lived under the Light of the Gospel,
will come in as Witnesses against them.

The Jew may come in as a witness also, who under the darker Light of the Law,
has out-stripped many that were under a Gospel ministration.

The good Angels may come in as Witnesses; who having been present in the
Church Assemblies, have heard the Calls there given to Sinners to repent.

The bad Angels may come in and plead against them, that they never refused the
Calls of the Gospel to believe and repent; for they never had any.

Ministers may come in as Witnesses, who spent their pains and strength upon
them to invite and call them to Repentance, but they would not hear.

Many of their Neighbors and Fellow Christians may witness against them, who
did believe and repent under the same means, whenas these did not. All which
will contribute to make their Damnation the more intolerable.

The APPLICATION.
Use 1. We may hence learn what to judge of the Heathen, who have not heard of
Christ. I shall not dispute whether any of them may be saved or not; yet this I
can say, that their Damnation will be more tolerable than of many others. Those
that sinned without the Law, shall have more favorable Judgment than those
that sinned under the Law; and those that detained only natural Truth in
unrighteousness, as the Heathen, Rom, 1.18.
shall fare better than those that so detained Truth supernatural.

And among the Heathen, Diogenes may fare better than Dionysius, Cato than
Cataline, Vespasian than Dioclesian. The last Judgment will be exactly
righteous.

Use 2. Hence it appears, that what is in it self a great Favor and Privilege
to a People, may be the occasion of the greatest Evil. As the Gospel is in it
self, yet will be an occasion to many of a Damnation that will be most
inexcusable, and most intolerable. Christ was first preached to the Jews, which
was their privilege; but they rejecting him, it brought sorer Calamities upon
their Nation than ever before; And wrath came upon them to the utmost: And that
Christ that is a Cornerstone to his Church, they first stumbled at, and then
it fell upon them, and did grind them to powder. And how it will fare with them
in the day of Judgment, he tells them, John 12.48. The words that I have
spoken, the same shall judge you at the last day. And what Judgment will be
more severe than theirs, who have refused and rejected words that came
immediately from the mouth of the Son of God? Words so full of Grace and Mercy,
Truth and Faithfulness, Wisdom and Understanding; so that never any Man spoke
as this Man. As the men of Bethshemesh rejoiced and offered Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving at the Coming of the Ark to them, but it proved an occasion of the
destruction of many Thousands of them, 1 Samuel 6.19.

Use 3. We may hence take notice, how ineffectual the best outward Means are of
themselves to bring a people to repentance. Could any City have greater means
for it than Capernaum? Here Christ wrought Miracles that did amaze them, and
preached Doctrine that did astonish them, but not bring them to repentance. The
Gospel does sometimes make some impressions upon the Minds of people, that may
still continue impenitent in their sin.

Some, when they have heard a Sermon, will applaud it, but not repent. Whether
it be from a Conforming or Nonconforming Minister, yet by neither are brought
to repentance.

John Baptist preached Repentance, and Christ came and preached, Repent; and
yet the Jews, for the greatest part, repented not by the one, or the other.
Some are for Gospel-preaching, some for preaching the Law, and yet hold fast
their sins under both. Such is the stupidity that is fallen upon Man, and such
deceitfulness in his Heart, and is so fast bound by the Chains of his Sin.

Obj. But God can bring Man to Repentance if he will.

Ans. God has a twofold Power, Potestas absoluta, and ordinata; A Power that
he exerts immediately, or in the use of means. God can by his absolute Power
preserve Man's life without eating or drinking, but he maintains it ordinarily
in the use of means, which Man is obliged to use; and if he reject them, will
be guilty of his own death. God affords Sinners means to bring them to
repentance; and if they reject them, God is not obliged to work by his
immediate Power. Hereupon God is said to be willing, that all should be saved,
and come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. by his calling them, and affording means to
repentance.

Q. But why does God make these means effectual to some, not to others, by
giving special Grace?

A. When he that makes this Question can resolve me why Christ wrought his
mighty Works in Corazin and Bethsaida, and not in Tire and Sidon, when he
foresaw that Tire and Sidon would thereupon repent in dust and ashes, and
Corazin and Bethsaida would not repent; I shall then answer him in his Enquiry:
Secret things belong to God, but t^ings revealed to us, and our Children. Let
Sinners use the means, and wait there for God's special Grace.

And can Sodom justly complain that Christ came not to do his mighty Works in
it, and brought not the Light of the Gospel to it, when she offered such
Violence to the common dictates of the Light and Law of Nature?

Use 4. See hence what little Reason men have to boast of their Knowledge, or
Gospel-priviledges, when these may turn to their sorer Condemnation. He that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes,
Luke 12.47.

And so Christ speaks to the Pharisees, who boasted themselves to be the
Pechachim, the seeing men, whose eyes were opened; Because you say, we see,
therefore your sin remains, John 9.41.

And thus the Jews boasted over the Gentiles; That they knew God's will, were
instructed out of the Law, and were instructers of the foolish, and teachers of
babes, Romans 2.18, 19, 20. and boasted themselves to be the Circumcision; but
yet they not keeping the Law, the Uncircumcision should judge and condemn them,
v. 27. We have many among us who boast of a little Knowledge they have more
than others, and have learned to talk and dispute of Religion, and despise
others as foolish, ignorant, blind and babes; when all this may make their
Judgment the more intolerable. Some of the Jews have a Tradition, that the holy
Fire of the Altar was hid in an hole of a Rock all the time of the Captivity;
and when at their return they looked for it, it was turned into a Jelly, which
they took and laid upon the Altar, and there was kindled into a Fire again by
the beams of the Sun. When the Light that is in the Mind kindles a Flame of
Love in the Heart, and thence are presented holy Sacrifices to God; this is
Light sanctified, and sanctifying the Soul: but when it rests in the Mind, and
is resisted in the Heart and Practice of Men, it will, whether Men will or no,
shine into their Consciences first or last, to their greater Terror and
Condemnation.

And therefore let Men take heed of Sin against Light and Knowledge: Against
the Light of Nature; the Light of Education; the Light of good Example;
especially the Light of the Gospel: For such Sins make the greatest noise in
the Conscience; do most harden Men's hearts; make Men self-condemned, and will
most expose Men at the day of Judgment.

Use 5. And so I come to the next Use: which is, To awaken us of this City, and
this Nation, who have had Gospel-favours and Privileges above most people
under Heaven. May we not say of London as Christ of Capernaum? O London! who
have been lift up to Heaven! And if any from hence shall perish, and be cast
down to Hell, how great will their fall be! It would be better perishing out of
Tire and Sidon, and Sodom, than out of London. Tolluntur in altum, ut Casu
graviore ruant; as the Poet speaks of Men that fall from high places. What
though God has by a wonderful Hand opened us a door of Liberty? What though we
have such plenty of excellent Preaching? and what though we are such constant
Hearers of these Lectures Morning by Morning? yet if any of us still continue
Impenitent, it will but increase our Doom at Doomsday.

Obj. But we hope that that day will never come; and all this Talk of it is but
to fright people a little into good manners; A device of Princes to keep People
under Government, or of Priests to make Markets of their Consciences.

Ans. 1. It Is true, few live as if they believed it. But can any Man say that
he is sure it will never come? I think no Man dare say that. Therefore it is
our best wisdom to prepare for that day which may come, though we should not be
sure it will come. A wise Man will provide against an Evil that may possibly
come, though he is not sure it will come; especially, considering the dreadful
consequence of being surprised.

2. And it is true that this day is delayed; but it is because God waits for
Sinners repentance; and would have Men saved, and enter in before the door be
shut. 2 Pet. 3.9.

3. Do any of us not believe it, when the Devils themselves believe and
tremble? When they said to our Savior, Art thou come to torment us before our
time? It showed they believed a day of Judgment. But I spoke of this before.

Q. But what will preserve us then from Damnation, seeing such a Judgment-day
must certainly come?

Ans. That which would have preserved Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, will
preserve us, and that is true repentance; which you may know what it is by the
description I have given before of its contrary, which is Impenitency. Let us
all in good earnest turn to God and repent. Let us repent of our Pride, and
immodest Dresses in Apparel, and reform; Let our Women take down their high
towering Dresses, and our Men shorten their monstrous Perukes. Let us repent of
our Strife and Contention, and the Persecutions that have been amongst us. Let
us repent of the great neglect of Family Duties, and our spending so much time
at Taverns and Coffee-houses. Let others repent of their Frauds in Commerce and
Trading; and others of their Oaths and Blasphemies; and others of their
Extortion and Oppression; others of their base temporizing in Religion. Let
Children repent of Disobedience to Parents, and Parents of their neglect of the
Instruction and Education of their Children; so Masters and Servants of the
neglect of the Duties of their mutual Relation. Let us rerent of our careless
Hearing, and our unprofitable Hearing; of our loose Observation of the Sabbath,
and unworthy Receiving the Lord's Supper, and bring forth fruits meet for
Repentance. Let London remember what befell Sodom for not repenting, and take
heed of Sodom's Sins, which are said to be Pride, Ezekiel. 16.49. 2 Pet. 2.6. Jude
7.
Idleness, and Fullness of Bread: and Fornication, and going after strange
Flesh: and now have suffered the Vengeance of Eternal fire. That this City may
not be called Sodom's Sister, as Jerusalem was for being so like her in her
Sin, Ezekiel. 16.48. and her Fruit not like the Apples of Sodom, fair without, and
within nothing but Ashes. But I have better hope concerning this City; and
that, as God has wonderfully saved it, so he will do still; and that its case
is not as Sodom's, not to have in it ten righteous persons when Abraham
interceded for the sparing of it.

And though this City was once laid in Ashes, yet not as Sodom, which was never
built again; and is now a bituminous Lake, called Asphaltites, and the Waters
of it are deadly, and the Fumes out of it mortal, and the Ground and Trees
about it barren; which Pliny, Solinus, Diodorus Siculus, and other Heathen
Writers have taken notice of. But London stands up out of its Ruins, to the
terror of those that designed it to oblivion and perpetual desolation, and is
more populous than ever; and the joyful. Sound of the Gospel, and the Voice of
the Turtle, are yet heard in her Streets, and not the Voice of Owls and Satyrs,
as is foretold of Babylon. And is spiritually called Sodom, Rev. 11.8. And was
Typed by the City Jericho, which would expose the Man to a fatal Curse that
should attempt to re-build it.

Use Last. From all that has been said, we may lastly conclude, That Sinners
that are impenitent have little reason to flatter themselves, because of their
present impunity. Let them consider how it will fare with them in the day of
Judgment. Christ refers to that in the Text. And those who have Eyes to see
afar off, will look so far as that day: So did Paul, 2 Cor. 5.11. Wherefore we
strive, whether present or absent, to be accepted; for we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. And hereupon he counted it a small thing to
be judged of Men, or at Man's day, looking to the Judgment to come, and that
great Day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 4.5, 6. The fallen Angels are said to be bound in
Chains of Darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the great Day; and so are
impenitent Sinners reserved to that day; when, notwithstanding their present
Impunity, they shall then fall under Judgment more intolerable than that of
Sodom. As a Malefactor that is kept in the Gaol under Bolts and Fetters till
the Assize, has little reason to rejoice in his present freedom from the
Sentence of the Judge. And this is the case of Sinners, Because Sentence is not
speedily executed, their hearts are fully set to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. And so
I make the Conclusion of this Discourse with that which Solomon makes the
Conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his Commandments, etc. For
God will bring every work to Judgment, and every secret thing, whether Good or
Evil.

Quest. How the uncharitable and dangerous Contentions that are among
Professors of the true Religion, may be allayed? SERMON III.
GALAT. V. 15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not
consumed one of another.
MY Business from this Scripture is to enquire into the Cause, the Danger, and
the Cure of uncharitable Contentions in the Church of God.

The Holy Apostle Paul having some few Years before planted a Church in
Galatia, a region in the upper parts of the lesser Asia, there soon crept in a
sort of false Teachers; who contended, that the Mosaical Ceremonies, in
particular, that Circumcision was still to be observed, even by the believing
Gentiles; and that the Christians were not justified before God by Faith, but
by the Works of the Law. Which two Errors, when he had fully confuted in the
former part of this Epistle, he Applies in this Chapter and in the Next. 1. By
way of Exhortation, to stand fast in this their Christian Liberty, ver. 1.
which he backs with diverse Arguments. 2. By way of Direction, to use the same
aright, not for an occasion to the Flesh, ver. 13. the Works whereof he
afterward reckons up at large; but rather, that they should by Love serve one
another, and abound in all Holiness and Goodness, which he inlargeth upon in
the rest of this Chapter and in the Next.

This Text in hand lies within the Verge of this latter Use; where the Apostle
using their own Weapon, the Law, whereof they cracked so much, against
themselves; he roundly tells them, that the whole Law, to wit, the second
Table, which also has an inviolable connection with the first, is fulfilled in
loving their Neighbor as themselves; and so, though they were free from the
Law of Ceremonies, yet not from the Law of Love; and though the Moral Law had
now no power to justify the Sinner, nor to condemn the Believer, yet still it
has the force of a Rule, to guide them in that grand Duty, as much as ever
before.

These Words then come in as a Motive, to press the Galathians to exercise that
Charity, which he had affirmed before to be the sum and scope of the whole
Law, and it is drawn from the Danger of the contrary temper. Plain Commands of
God should be sufficient to sway us to our Duty; but generally we have need of
the most powerful Motives; especially, when the violent streams of Rage, Lust,
or Revenge do oppose it; as in the Case before us, But if ye bite and devour
one anothir, take heed that ye be not c^^^^med one of another.

In which Words you may see, 1. The Sin specified, whereof they were supposed
to be guilty: But if ye bite -- that is, reproach and defame one another; some
violently maintaining these Jewish Ceremonies, and others passionately opposing
them: -- and devour one another; that is, tear and oppress each other, by all
the mischievous Hostilities ye can; for religious Feuds are always sharpest. 2.
Here is the Danger forewarned, in Case they proceeded therein; take heed that
ye be not consumed one of another; that is, you will certainly destroy one
another. The Division of the Members must issue in the Dissolution of the Body.
The Decay of your Love will weaken your Faith, both parties will rue it, ye
will be in danger of total ruin, Body and Soul, here and hereafter.

Now if we consider these words only in Hypothesi, or in Relation to these
Persons in the Text, they teach us, 1. That there were Contentions in the
Church of Galatia: So that Unity is no infallible Mark of a true Church. Unity
may be out of the Church of Christ, and Dissension may be within it.

2. That many People were Violent in them: For the Apostle would scarce have
expressed himself in such terms of biting and devouring, unless there had been
some outrageous Carriage among them toward one another.

3. That these Contentions were very dangerous to them all: They threatened no
less than the overthrow of both the contending Parties, the consumption of them
all.

But considering the words of the Text in Thesi, or Absolutely, which we may
safely do, seeing the same Causes do still produce, or at least dispose unto
the same Effects, we may collect this Conclusion.

That Uncharitable Contentions do prepare for utter Destruction. And here I
shall, 1. Clear and open the Terms. 2. Amplify and confirm the Truth: And, 3.
Apply and bring home the Influence of this Point unto our selves.

I. To understand the Subject of this Proposition, to wit, Uncharitable
Contentions, we must distinguish

1. Of the Matter of Contentions; and they are either of a Civil, or of a
Spiritual Nature. 1. Of a Civil Nature, which concern Men in their Lives,
Liberties, Names, or Estates: And these are either Private or Public. 1.
Private Contentions, which are about Meum and Tuum; and these are troublesome
to those which are in the right, and damnable to those that are in the wrong,
and oftentimes ruinous unto both; and therefore are by all good means to be
prevented, or else by all fair and just means to be managed; and all fit
opportunities are to be watched, not so much to obtain a full Victory, as a
quiet Conclusion; lest the Remedy prove, as it does frequently, worse than the
Disease. 2. Public Contentions, which are usually about the Succession, Power
or Prerogative of Princes, and the Liberties or Properties of Subjects. And
here, seeing Right and ^^stice can be but with one of the contending Parties,
both ought to find it out, and to acquiesce therein; and to beware, lest
private Ends preponderate the Public Good, that Princes be not fond of
unlimited Power, nor Subjects fond of unlimited Liberty.

2. Some Contentions are of a Spiritual Nature, concerning Religion, and matter
of Conscience: And these are either about things that are Essential and
Fundamental therein, that is, about such Truths as are plainly revealed, and
necessary to Salvation; for these indeed we must contend earnestly, but yet
charitably, with the softest words, and hardest Arguments we can; even for
these things we must not bite and devour one another: Such were some of the
Points in debate among the Galathians. Or else they are about things that are
Controversal in Religion, that is, that are not Essential or Fundamental, or
that are not plainly appointed of God; as matters of Order, Ceremony, and such
other circumstances: About which, in these latter Ages of the Church, there
have been in diverse places the greatest Contentions. Now as it is very culpable
to be Circumstantial in Fundamentals, so it is very ridiculous to be
Fundamental in Circumstantials.

2. We must Distinguish of the Manner of these Contentions. They are either 1.
Charitable, when there is Love in the Heart, when there is Kindness in the
Tongue and Pen, when there is a civil and sweet Behavior in the Carriage of
the Parties that differ; and these may be called rather Dissentions than
Contentions; rather differing from one another Conceptions, than contrary to
one another Persons. Or else they are 2. Uncharitable, when rancour is in the
Heart, reviling in the Tongue or Pen, rage, at least all manner of rudeness and
disobligation in the Carriage; when men speak and write so, as if they would
bite and devour one another: And of these the Conclusion is to be understood,
that they prepare for utter Destraction; and this now is the First thing to be
opened.

2. What Destruction those do prepare for, which is the Predicate of the
Proposition: And the Destruction they threaten, is, 1. Mutual or Total: All
that the one opposite Party aims at, is to disgrace, to run down and to ruin
the other; but take heed that ye be not consumed (...), each by other, or that
ye perish not one under another. Satan, the old Apollyon, who blows the bellows
of Contention, designs and endeavors the ruin of both; neither of you will
have cause to boast in the end. 2. The Destruction that these lead unto is
Final, eternal Destruction, so the Word in the Text does frequently signify:
The Wrath of God kindled hereby may inflict it, and the Infidelity and
Skepticism that results from them may procure it: So says a Great Divine
Luther in loc.
abroad, that ye perish not utterly; so says, a Great Divine Bp. Hall par. in
loc.
at home, Take heed lest ye be the Authors of each others endless Confusion:
And so much for the Explication.

II. The Amplifying and Confirming of this Point shall be done under these
following Propositions.

1. That there ever were, are, and will be Differences amongst God's own People
in the matters of Religion.

2. That these Differences may, and should be managed with Charity.

3. That these Contentions are Uncharitable, when men bite and devour one
another.

4. That such Contentions do prepare for Destruction.

Propos. 1. There ever were, are, and will be Differences among God's own
People in the matters of Religion: Even amongst the Jews, who had such punctual
Rules prescribed before them, yet the School of Hillel went one way, and the
School of Shammai went another, and their Contentions sometimes were sprinkled
with the Blood one of another. And no sooner was the Gospel planted, but the
Professors of it fell at variance about matters of Religion: Plain in the
Controversies about Circumcision, for the quieting whereof that famous Council
met at Jerusalem, Act. 15. The like Differences arose in the Church at Rome
about Meats and Days, the strong Christians despising the weak, and the weak
censuring the strong, Romans 14. The like Dissension in the Church of Corinth,
about eating Meats offered to Idols, 1 Cor. 8. and about the exercise of
spiritual Gifts, 1 Cor. 14. In the Church of Galatia, you may perceive by this
Text, to what height their Differences did rise, that they were in danger to
devour one another. At Philipi, Colosse and Thessalonica, matters were much at
the same pass: Scarce any single Church in the New Testament was clear of
Difference in matters of Religion: And this whilst the Blood of Our Savior was
warm, and diverse of the Apostles were yet alive. Shortly after, what dreadful
Combustions were kindled in the Church by Novatus, then by Donatus; to say
nothing of other Heretics, who not holding the Head, cannot reasonably be
reckoned in the Body Mystical of Christ, his Church. The Story is sadly
remarkable of Chrysostom and Epiphanius, two Bishops that contended so bitterly
with one another, that Epiphanius in his fury wished that Chrysostom might never
dye a Bishop, and Chrysostom in his Passion wished that Epiphanius might never
go home-alive; and the History tells us, that it fell out to them both
accordingly. So that no considering man will admire, or be offended at a
Disease, which has been incident to the true Church of Christ in all ages past.

Let not the present Church of Rome too much boast of her Unity, for the Case
has been no better there: For, as there has been more Schisms among them,
than in any other Church whatsoever, so there have been Collected out of the
very Writings of their Eminent Doctors, some Hundreds of Differences among
themselves in Points of Religion; and they are Strangers in the World that are
ignorant of the Quarrels between the Thomists and the Scotists, between the
Dominicans and the Jesuits; and many can still remember the fewds between the
Jansenists and Molinists, all of them within that Communion.

And it is not only among Christians, that these Differences in Religious
matters are to be found; but the like Dissension is to be met with among Turks
and Infidels: The Persian Kingdom and diverse Others following Haly, and the
Grand Seignior and his Dominions following Osman, the two great Sect-masters in
that sorry Religion; insomuch as the Persian Turks do execrate the other in
their daily Prayers, saying, Cursed be Ebubeker, Omar and Osman, and God be
favorable to Haly, and be well pleased with him. Yea, it is no better among
the very Heathens, even the most learned of them, to wit, the Philosophers; of
whom One of their Own says, Tunc inter Philosophos conveniet, quando inter
Horologia: Well therefore does Athanasius answer them, when they objected
Diversity of Opinions to the Christians in the Primitive times, that even they
did some of them worship one God, and some of them another, and could neither
agree about the Object, nor the Manner of their Devotions.

By all which it is evident, that as there have been different Opinions and
Practices among all sorts of Religions in the World, so the Church of God has
been subject to the same Malady.

And as it was from the beginning, so it is now, and so will it be, 'till the
World have an end, until the Church of God be presented to Jesus Christ,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: And the Causes hereof are evident.

1. Our general Imperfection in this Life: As the best men are imperperfect in
their Holiness, so are they in their Knowledge, there will be Defects in our
Understanding, as well as in our Will: Some are Babes in Knowledge, others are
strong Men; some have need of Milk, being unskilful in the Word of
righteousness; others are of fuller Age, and have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. Foolish men are ready to burden
the Scriptures in Vulgar Tongues with the Differences that are found in
Religion; but therein they blaspheme the Holy Ghost, for the Word of God is a
clear Light; the Cause of Mistakes is the weakness and blindness of our
Eyesight, whereby we cannot all with equal clearness see into the meaning of
it, by reason of this our Imperfection: So that it is scarce possible to
prevent all Diversity of Opinions in Religion, unless every pious Man had a
Promise of Infallibility annexed to his Piety.

2. Men's Education contributes much hereunto: It is manifest how strong an
Influence this has upon all Peoples Understandings: The Principles which then
they imbibe, be they right or wrong, they generally live and dye with: Few will
be at the pains to examine them, and few have a mind to alter them. So that it
is much to be doubted, that if it had been the fate of many of our professed
Christians; to have been born and bred under the Turk or M^gu^, they had both
quietly and resolutely proceeded in their Religion. And proportionably to be
bred under Parents, Masters, or Tutors of a different Opinion or Practice in
the true Religion, must needs greatly bias such Persons toward the same; and
every one not having the very same Education, there follows a kind of necessity
of some difference in Religion.

3. Men's Capacities are different: Some have a greater sagacity to penetrate
into things than others; some have a clearer Judgment to weigh and determine of
things than others; some have more solid Learning by far than others, and these
doubtless will attain to an higher Form and Class than others can. Others have
neither such natural Abilities, nor Time to read and think of matters, so as to
improve and advance their minds to the pitch of others. And there are not a
few, who as they are duller in Apprehension, so they are commonly hotter in
Affection and Resolution. And it is scarce possible to reduce these Persons,
that are so unequal in their Capacity, to an Identity of Opinion: And then out
of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth will be apt to speak, and so there will
follow some Difference in the matters of Religion.

4. Men's natural Tempers are different; some more airy and Mercurial, some more
stiff and Melancholy; and those Complexions do strongly and insensibly incline
People to those Sentiments that are most suitable and proper to such
Temperaments; which being diverse, yea, almost contrary, must of necessity when
they are applied to matters of Religion, breed variety of Apprehensions. And
the same Holy Spirit which inspired the sacred Penmen of the Scriptures, and
yet therein adapts himself, as is manifest, to their Natural Genius, cannot be
expected in his Ordinary Illuminations to thwart and stifle the natural temper
of all Mankind; neither are those Notions which do grow upon men's Natural
Constitution, easily any other way altered. And,

5. Men's Interests are different; the best of Men have something of the Old
Adam in them: And though the sincere Christian must and will strive against any
such Temptation, yet according to the strength of unmortified Corruption Men
will be prone to be for this Opinion, Practice or Party, and against that
Opinion, Practice or Party that falls in or out with their Worldly Interest.
Not that any good Man does wittingly calculate his Profession for his baser
ends, but yet they may secretly bias him, especially in more minute and
dubious matters belonging to Religion. It is a great Question, what Way or
Party many Men would choose, if their present Profession were quite stripped of
all carnal and worldly Advantages and Considerations, and that they were left
to square out their Religion only with the Bible.

Now from these and many other Causes it sadly follows, (for the consequence is
a matter to be bewailed) there will be Differences among the People of God in
Points of Religion; especially in minuter matters, which are but darkly
described, and more darkly apprehended by the Sons of Men. In short, that there
is no more hope of perfect. Unity on Earth, than there is of perfect Holiness:
It Is to be endeavored, but not fully attained 'till we arrive in Heaven: Then
we shall come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of
God, when we are grown perfect men, according to the measure of the s^^ture of
the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11.

Propos. 2. These Differences may and should be managed with Charity* Not but
that Unity should by all good men be first endeavored; and to that end, they
should all impartially seek for Truth, on which side soever it lies; and this
every humble diligent man shall find. The Spirit of God, which is promised unto
his Church, and which every true Believer shall have for asking, will guide all
such into all necessary saving Truth; and all other Unity save in the Truth, is
but Conspiracy: Accursed is that Charity, says Luther, which is preserved by
the Shipwreck of Faith or Truth, to which all things must give place, both
Charity, yea on Apostle, yea an Angel from Heaven. If the one must be dispensed
withal, it is Peace and not Truth. Better to have Truth without public Peace,
than Peace without saving Truth: So Dr. Gauden. We must not sail for the
Commodity of Peace beyond the Line of Truth; we must break the Peace in Truths
quarrel, so another Learned man. But this is to be understood of necessary and
essential Truths, in which Case, that Man little consults the Will and Honor
of God, who will expose the Truth to obtain (as says Nazianzen) the repute of
an easy mildness: Speciosum quidem nomen est pacis, and pulchra opinio
Vnitatis, sed quis dubitat eam solam Ecclesiae pacem esse, qua Christi est,
says Hilary. But when as, after all such endeavors have been used, as are
within the reach of a Man's Parts and Calling, ^^ill Differences do remain in
smaller matters, these ought to be managed with all Charity; that is, with true
Love, a Love of Honor and respect to those that are above us; a Love of
Condescension and forbearance to those that are below us; and a Love of hearty
Good Will and Kindness to those that are equal to us; for Aquinas well says,
that that Concord which is the Effect of Charity, is the union of Affections
not of Opinions: There may be the same Love in the Heart, where there are not
the same Notions in the Head; and this will keep the strong Christian from
despising the weak, and this will keep the weak Christian from censuring and
judging the strong. They may be of the same Heart, who are not every way of the
same Mind; or else there could scarce be real Affection between any two Persons
in the World: Pax non est consensio ingeniorum, sed conjunctio animorum;
sentire in omnibus tecum, nunc quidem non possum, sed amare debeo; as Naeranus
well said. This is that more excellent way, which the Apostle does so divinely
describe and advance, 1 Cor. 13. throughout a whole Chapter.

But yet this Method is Hard, and very rare, and that chiefly by reason of our
Pride: Most men thinking too well of themselves, and consequently of their
Opinion and Practice; and thereupon vilifying all others that differ from them.
Every man would be a Lawgiver, a God to another, would prescribe to them and
quarrel with them for their Dissent; insomuch as the Wise man affirms, Prove.
13.10. that Only by Pride comes contention. If we had but that lowliness of
mind, whereby to esteem others better than our selves, then nothing would be
done through strife or vainglory, which the Holy Ghost does earnestly require,
Philip. 2.3. But we are as apt to be fond of our own Notions, as of our own
Children; and as rarely to value others, as if we were the only People, and
Wisdom must dye with us, and all others must strike sail unto us: And from this
root springs Passion and distemper of spirit; and then perit Judicium, cum res
transit in Affectum; when men's Passions are once kindled, then Wrath and
Revenge manage the Controversy, and one Christian is ready to bite and devour
another.

But certainly it should not be thus: Religious Differences should be managed
religiously; that is, piously and charitably: This may be, it is possible, for
it is prescribed and pressed, Romans 14.13. Let us not therefore judge one
another any more -- And why do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou set
at naught thy brother? and ver. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things
that make for peace. And this should be; for Charity is a Grace of an universal
extent, we owe it to all, to the weak, to the ignorant, to the peevish, to the
proud, to the good and to the bad, Romans 13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love
one another. And it is of that necessary Connection with other saving Graces,
that we can neither have Faith nor Hope, unless we have Charity; yea, the
greatest of these is Charity, 1 Cor. 13.13. And herein the true Church of
Christ has ever excelled: The Fathers of old in their dealing wit the
Donatists would account them their Brethren, when they could not prevail with
them for a Reciprocation. And it is a Golden saying of Bernard; Adhaerebo
vobis, etiamsi nolitis, adhaerebo vobis etsi nolim ipse: cum turbatis, ero
pacificus; dabo locum ^rae, ne diabolo them: I Will cleave to you against your
Will; I will cleave to you even against my own Will; when ye are moved, I will
be quiet; I Will give place to anger, that I may not give place to the Devil.

And there is great Reason for such a Temper; for every Difference in Religion
creates not a different Religion: While Men do hold the Head, they must needs
be of the Body. Where the same substantial Doctrine is avowed, accidental
variety is very tolerable, especially where the Peace of God's Church is not
infringed. It was worthy Bishop Reynolds's Conclusion, Where the same straight
road to Heaven is kept, a small difference of paths hinders not Travelers from
coming to the same Inn at night: So neither should they bitterly contest about
the next way, who steadily own the same Guide, the same Rule, the same End;
only every one has not so clear an Eye, nor such opportunity to know the more
obscure Points pertaining to the Christian Religion, which others have:
Therefore in these things Luther's Motto is best, In quo aliquid Christi video,
illum diligo; where there is any thing of Christ, there I love: And this Love
will cover, not one or two, but a multitude of sins and infirmities.

Propos. 3. These Dissentions are Uncharitable, when Persons bite and devour
one another. The spring of all this Poison is in the Heart, for out of the
abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks and the Hand acts. There Is a Defect
of real and fervent Love, and an Excess of Selfishness within; Self-opinion,
Self-will, and Self-interest: And this Arrogance breeds Insolence, and all the
biting and devouring mentioned in this place. Now if these two Expressions do
bear a distinct signification, then

1. Men do Bite one another by keen and venomous Words. When Men do whet their
Tongues like a Sword, and bend their bows to shoot their Arrows, even bitter
words, Psalm. 64.3. The Tongue (unbridled) is a fire, a world of Iniquity, it
sets on fire the course of Nature, and it is set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3.6.
What flames of Strife have the Tongues and Pens of Men kindled and continued in
the World!

Sometimes by Censuring their Brethren, they are time-servers, proud, covetous,
superstitious; or they are conceited, peevish, factious: Especially if any one
be really scandalous, by imputing it presently to all his Party, as if they
were all such, which is the most Unjust and Uncharitable Inference imaginable;
for what Party of Men is there on Earth, wherein there are none that are
foolish, false and wicked? In short, there is no Vice more common and
mischievous, not only among different Parties, but with all sorts of People,
than in their ordinary Conversation to let fly their censorious Arrows against
others; insomuch as it is very rare to speak of any one behind their back,
without some reflection upon them, which is not only a biting, but a
backbiting one another, and so the more base and mischievous.

Sometimes Men Bite one another by plain Slandering one another, charging them
with Crimes which they abhor; thus One Party reckons all their Opposites to be
presently Enemies to the King and to the Church, who on the Other side are as
ready to count them Enemies to God and to his People, monopolizing Godliness to
One Party, and Loyalty to Another: Nay, each is ready to appropriate all
Religion and good Conscience to themselves, and to unsanctifie and vilify all
of the contrary mind. A common course of Hypocrites, first to degrade a godly
Man into ungodliness, that so they may have room to hate him. Though the same
Law, and the same Lawgiver forbids us to bear false witness against our
Neighbor, that forbids the Worshipping of a graven Image.

And sometimes men Bite by downright Railing, if not Cursing those that differ
from them, devising and affixing the most disgraceful Names and Titles,
concluding them all to be Knaves or Fools that are of a contrary mind, both
Praying and Drinking to their Confusion. Thus Men sharpen their Tongues like a
Serpent; Adders Poison is under their lips, Psalm. 140.3. Their throat is an
open sepulcher, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: But the wrath of
man works not the Righteousness of God. A bad cause is never made better, but
a good cause is always made worse by such methods. Adeo invisa est mihi
discordia (says Erasmus) ut veritas etiam seditiosa displiceat: As God's Truth
needs not Man's lie, so neither does it need his rancour to uphold or promote it.

2. Men Devour one another by Actual Endeavors to injure and hurt one another,
when their inward rage breaks out into overt Actions, and Practices tending to
ruin their Brethren: And this is done sometimes, 1. By fraud, which signifies
all the cunning devices, which Malice can suggest, whereby to undermine their
credit, estate and comfort. Such there were of old, and yet Professors of a
true Religion; of whom the Psalmist, Psalm. 10.9, 10. He lies in wait to catch
the poor: He does catch the poor, when he draws him into his Net: He
croucheth and humbles himself, that the poor may fall by his strong ones. It
is endless to particularize all the arts and sleights of uncharitable men each
against other; but the end is to devour the Estates, Lives, Names and Posterity
of others. And is this to love your Neighbor as your selves? or to do as you
would be done to? nothing less. 2. Sometimes this is done by Force: When either
party can get any humane Law on their side, down without mercy go all their
Opposites; yea, sometimes without it, and beyond it; yea, oftentimes you shall
see them most zealous for compliance with one or two Laws, which fit their
humor, who live in the continual breach of twenty others. All Ages have
groaned under this disease; what work did not only the Arians and
Circumcellians make of old, when they got power into their hands, but in latter
ages nothing has been more common, than the employing the secular arm to the
utmost by those that could obtain it, to promote their purposes. But where is
that Dove-like innocence and harmlesness this while? Columbae non sunt, (says
Augustine,) accipitres sunt, milvi sunt, non laniat columba: And he, though he
was zealous in writing against the Errors of the Donatists, yet professed that he
had rather be slain by them, than occasion their persecution unto Death.

Propos. 4. These uncharitable Contentions do prepare for utter Destruction. So
says, 1. The Scripture. So 2. All History and Experience. 3. Undeny- Reason
confirms it.

1. For Scripture; see Hos. 10.2. Their heart is divided, now shall they be
found faulty. There may be different Notions in the head, yea, there may be
different practices, one may eat Flesh, and another only Herbs, and yet the
Church may flourish. It was a good Motto of a great Scholar, Opinionum
varietas, and Opinantium unitas non sunt (...). But when the Distemper lodges
at the Heart, when that is wounded, when that is divided, the Man dies: And this
is not only meant of man's heart divided and distracted from God, but of Men's
hearts divided from one another, which it should seem was the Case of Israel at
that time under the reign of Hoshea. And what follows? Now shall they be found
faulty, or, as the word will bear, and others render it, They shall be made
desolate. This will prepare them for certain and speedy desolation; now shall
they be made desolate. Agreeable to which is our own Saviors words, Matthew.
12.25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought into desolation; and
every City or House divided against it self, shall not stand. Where you see, 1.
One great Cause of the ruin of a Kingdom, City or Family, which is being
divided against it self. If the Head and Members be set one against another,
nay, if there be only an inveterate jealousy between them, it is often fatal;
but when the Hearts of a People in a Kingdom, City, or Family, are in a burning
Fever one against another, and no art or means can qualify them; a dissolution
of the Body, a desolation of that People is at hand; for so it follows, every
such Kingdom is brought into desolation. Where 2. You see the greatness of that
ruin that follows, (...), it shall be made desert and desolate; which implies
and contains all the miseries that do concur to make a Kingdom a desert. It
will not only be shaken, endangered, weakened and decayed; but if some speedy
and effectual remedy be not applied, it is ruined utterly. 3. See the Certainty
thereof; for, as our Savior speaks positively in the beginning of the Verse,
it is brought into desolation, so in the latter end of the verse as
peremptorily, it shall not stand. The undoubted seeds of ruin are in it;
nothing but an Eradication of them by real amendment can prevent it. And lest
any place, Angle or Isle in the World should think to escape, see, 4. The
universality of this Axiom: Every Kingdom, every City, and every House, though
the Kingdom be never so well peopled, never so well furnished, never so well
fortified; though the City be never so well built, never so well chartered,
never so well traded; though the House be never so well situate, never so well
guarded, never so well adorned; yet if the Inhabitants be divided against
themselves, they will come to desolation. But the Text in hand is sufficient to
affirm this position, Take heed that ye be not consumed one of another; which
Caution questionless implies manifest danger, and the danger is no less than
mutual consumption, or utter perishing, as you heard before: Hic enim est
dimicationis exitus, as Grotius; the end of these Contentions, if they be not
repented and extinguished, is Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Ruin.

2. Histories and Experience do attest the same. For Contentions in general, it
is evident, that the Divisions which were among the Trojans, made way for their
overthrow by the Greeks: the like animosities among the Greeks, brought them
under the slavery of Philip: The Fewds that were among the Assyrians, brought
in the Persians; and the like among the Persians, subjected them to the
Macedonians: and the Contentions among Alexanders Successors rendered them up
to be swallowed by the Romans one after another; yea, the Roman Empire it self,
near the time when the Western and the Eastern branches of it were hottest in
Contention about the Supremacy of their Bishops, and about Images, behold the
Goths and Vandalls destroyed the one, and the Saracens and Turks ruined the
other. The scandalous discords among the Jews, exposed Jerusalem at length to
that dreadful desolation by Titus Vespatian: And for this Island, it has been
still accounted like some great Animal, that can only be ruined by it is own
strength: The Contentions of the Britans, made the Romans Conquerours; Et cum
singuli pugnant, omnes victi. Afterward the Saxons came in upon the Divisions
of the Natives; and the Contentions of the Saxons, prepared the way for the
Normans. And for Religious differences, it is known how Julian the Apostate
cherished those between the Catholics and the Donatists, saying, That no
savage Beasts were so cruel against one another, as the Christians; so that he
expected thereby to ruin them all. It is notorious what famous and numerous
Churches were once in Africa, but by the Contentions of the Manichees, then of
the Donatists, they are now extinguished. The Contentions among the Protestants
in King Edward the Sixth's Reign, ended in the Persecution by Queen Mary: and
if ever the Romans ruin us again, it will be procured by our Contentions among
our selves. It is but reasonable to leave those Children in the dark, who will
be still fighting about the Candle; and it will be just with God to force them
to agree in Red, that are still bickering about Black and White. The one party
may think to extirpate the other, but both are like to rue it; and they that
have been accomplices in guilt, must look to be companions in the punishment. By
all which you may see whither these uncharitable Contentions do usually tend,
and where they are like to end: And,

3. There is too much Reason for it. 1. Ex part Rei. These Dissentions have a
natural tendency to promote our destruction; nothing can more properly bring it
to effect. For,

1. They weaken that Confidence that is necessary for the preservation of a
People. Jealousy is the great bane of Families, Churches and Nations, but a
mutual confidence establishes them. How can those that bite and devour one
another, confide in one another? And if the Parts be thus ill-affected, how
crazy must the whole Body be? When we can see little or nothing amiss in a
Person, or in an Action, and yet do suspect that there is something concealed,
even this creates a distrust, and weakens the welfare of the whole; much more
when suspicions are boiled up into actual dissension, it must needs expose such
a Church and Nation to the utmost peril. For then men presently put the worst
construction upon each other, and upon all their words and actions. You know
every thing has two handles; we should take every thing by the charitable
handle, and if it be capable of a fair and friendly sense, so we should receive
it; for so we desire in all Cases to be understood: we would not be always
interpreted in the worst sense, and why then should we deal so with others?
Charity thinks no evil. It Is true, it behooves Men in Office and Trust to be
watchful, and to stand much upon their guard, for the prevention of public
dangers; but with private persons to put ill interpretations upon one another
words or carriage, argues ill Nature and baseness of Spirit; and this humor
greatly weakens that confidence which is necessary to the happiness of any
people.

2. They destroy that Love which is the Cement of all Societies. As they
proceed from a defect of Love, so they quite ruin the remainders of it. Now
this love unites, and so strengthens: but when men's Hearts are once divided
from each other, what care I what becomes of them I hate? That made that
Scythian Scilurus when he was on his Deathbed, to cause a bundle of Javelins
to be brought and laid before his eighty Sons, who being commanded to break the
whole bundle, could not possibly do it; but when they were untied, they easily
broke them one after another: teaching them thereby to cleave to one another,
and that their Division would be their Destruction. Hereupon it is worth our
notice, that the Apostle when he musters up the works of the Flesh in this
Chapter, verse. 20. Nine kinds of them are contrary to this Love, to wit,
Hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders: And when the Fruits of the Spirit are reckoned, verse. 22. behold how
many of them are akin to this Love which I am speaking of. The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness: As
if the carnal man were composed only of Flame, and the spiritual man made up of
Benignity: But such unkind Contentions, like rust or canker, do consume this
love; and so each part looking only to it self, there is none that take care of
the whole; and so, as by Concord small things increase, so by Discord great
things wast to nothing.

3. They prepare for the most desperate Actions. For when there is a dislike
settled within, and that men's spirits are exasperated by provoking words and
actions, there wants nothing but opportunity to produce the most violent
effects. The Text seems to give warning hereof, by saying, Take heed that ye be
not consumed one of another; as if he should say, Whomsoever you thus bite and
provoke, may possibly be tempted to revenge it, and so you will fall foul upon
one another: your common Enemies may well think and say, Let them alone, they will
tear one another in pieces, etc. Behold the sparks of Civil War, and what else
but ruin can follow such premises? We undertake hereby to be our own
Executioners, and spare our Enemies the pains of destroying us. From whence
come wars and fightings among you, come they not from hence, even of your
lusts, that war in your members? And hereupon that following advice is given;
Speak not evil one of another, brethren: He that speaks evil of his brother,
and judges his brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law, Jam.
4.1.11. And it has been observed, that Religious Fewds (the more is the pity)
are generally the most fierce and violent; whether because the best things
being corrupted, prove the worst; or that mistaken Conscience, and misguided
Zeal do hurry men to the greatest excesses; and that people think that they can
never be too earnest and vigorous in their actings for God; John 16.2. The time
comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. How
dangerous must those Bigotts and those Zealots be to one another, that believe
they serve God best, when they hate and mischief one another worst? No
persecution from without can be so fatal to the Church of God, as the
strugglings in her Womb: As no storms or tempests do rend and tear the Earth so
much, as the convulsions that are within it. And as their Uncharitable
Contentions do thus Ex part Rei, procure,

So 2. They do Ex part Dei, deserve Destruction; and therefore they do plainly
prepare for it. 1. They do provoke the Wrath of God. God is Love, he is the God
of Peace, and then these must evidently offend and cross his Blessed Nature.
The more patient, quiet and mild men are, the liker are they to God, and the
more uncharitable and implacable, the liker to the Devil, the Accuser of the
Brethren. When our dear Savior, who came on purpose to reconcile God and Man,
and men to men; The Anthem which was sung by Angels, was, Glory to God in the
highest, on Earth peace, and good will unto men. These Contentions do ring
these Bells backward, and chase away that peace and good will back to Heaven
again. When Joseph was so kind to his guilty Brethren, as to be reconciled to
them, he sent them back again with this charge, Genes. 45.24. See that ye fall
not out by the way; q. d. See, I am reconciled to you all, quarrel not among
your selves; a most kind and equal advice! In like manner our Blessed Savior,
when he had obtained Remission for us, commanded all his Disciples to have salt
in themselves, and to have peace one with aaother; he renews no Commandment,
but that of loving one another: And the Holy Ghost in the Apostles does still
inculcate this Lesson above all others, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, to be like minded, to have the same Love, to do nothing through
strife or vainglory, to avoid the provoking one another. Now how inexcusable
does this leave all fiery and contentious spirits? And how justly may they be
handled without any Mercy, that handle their brethren without any Charity? And
certainly, as the Lord commands a blessing upon Brethren that dwell together in
unity, Psalm. 133. so it is a manifest token of his wrath, when a spirit of
dissension is sent upon People; when Manasseh is set against Ephraim, and
Ephraim against Manass^h, and they together against Judah, then it follows, for
all this, his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still:
Isa. 9.21. And look as the Husbandman deals with his way-ward Cattle, when they
cannot agree in the Field, he pounds them up, and makes them quiet in the Fold;
so may our Just and Holy God make all those that cannot unite in the Church, to
agree at the Stake. As Meletius and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, who fell into
such debate when they were in Prison for the same Cause, that they refused to
hold communion together, till they both at length agreed in Red. And so two
other learned men were at such discord in the Mines, whither they were
condemned for Christianity, that they made up a Wall between their Works, to
keep them asunder, till at last they met at the fatal Pile.

2. They consume the Power and Life of Godliness. God's grace never thrives in
an unquiet Spirit. The Jews say that Jehovah lives in Salem, which signifies
Peace; but he cannot live in Babel, which signifies Confusion. That Zeal, that
Time, those Studies which should be employed in the increasing of saving
Knowledge, Faith, Hope and Holiness, they are all consumed in these
uncharitable Contentions. Instead of making our own Calling and Election sure,
we are busy to reprobrate our Brethren, and to render their Calling
ineffectual: Instead of considering one another to provoke to Love and good
Works, these engage us to consider all the defects and faults of others, and to
provoke them to Anger, and to every evil Work. This is fasting for strife and
debate; these imbitter our Prayers, and hinder our access to God, when we
cannot lift up unto him holy hands without wrath, nor without doubting; yea,
they will tempt us to restrain Prayer before God, or to do, as Mr. Latimer tells
of some, that would not say the Lord's-Prayer at all, lest they should be
thereby obliged to forgive others; and therefore in the stead thereof went to
our Ladies Psalter. How can such approach the Holy Table, that will make no
agreement with their Adversaries? that will not forgive, that desire not to be
forgiven? In short, where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every
evil work. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated -- And the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace of them that make peace, Jam. 3.16, 17, 18.

It will be Objected here, That it is our Duty, where we have Right and Truth
on our side, to contend earnestly. So they were exhorted, Jude 3. to contend
earnestly for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints. To be cool or
lukewarm, is to betray and sell the Truth; and this Neutrality becomes no man
in the Cause of Truth.

To this I Answer, 1. We must consider the Nature and Consequence of Truth;
that is, that it be a great or necessary Truth: For though no Truth must be
denied, yet many Truths may be forborne. If every Man should be obliged to vent
and propagate at all times every thing which he holds to be true, no place or
conversation would be quiet. It was a Truth that a Believer might eat all
things, yet the Apostle did not think it necessary to urge or insist upon it,
nor that it would quit the cost of a doubtful disputation, Romans 14.12.

2. In asserting any Truth a Man may be earnest, and yet charitable: he may
think well of his Opposites, and yet think ill of their Opinions; he may oppose
an error with a spirit of meekness, with soft words and hard arguments: An
excellent direction there is for this; 2 Timothy 2.23, 24, 25. But foolish and
unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes: And the Servant
of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient:
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. This is far from
aggravating men's mistakes, spinning out odious consequences from them,
concluding that all of another persuasion do militate against their own
Consciences, that worldly interest or vain Humor swayes them, that they are
ignorant Sotts, or superstitious Time-servers, (and the like;) these kind of
strivings are not for any Servant of the Lord. When Michael had the worst of
all adversaries to dispute with, he durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude 9. And if a little railing
might not be mixed in a Dispute with the Devil himself, how dare any man use it
against any one of the same Nature, Nation, and Religion with himself? Most
piously therefore was it resolved by diverse eminent German Divines, who met at
Marpurg, to discuss the point of the Real Presence, that though they could not
accord therein, yet that they would preserve the bond of Charity inviolable
among them.

Yea, but you Object, That our Opposites are violent; and if we be gentle, we
shall but encourage them: Shall they be hot in the wrong, and we lukewarm in
the right? How can we handle charitably, such uncharitable persons?

Unto this I Answer: We may be resolute, and yet charitable, for one Grace
never crosses another: As the greatest Courage is still accompanied with the
greatest generousness to an Adversary, so the warmest zeal, if true, is
attended with the purest Charity; otherwise it is but Rage and Brutishness
which is very foreign to the Christian temper. Where true Grace is impressed
on the Soul, there graciousness and kindness will be expressed to all men. When
all is said and done, all true Christians are sworn Brethren, and must love and
bear with one another. Proh dolor! (S. Cyprian) quid facit in cord
Christianorum luporum feritas and canum rabies?

2. Bitterness can never cure violence: As the wrath of Man works not the
Righteousness of God, so neither does it work the Reformution of men: One sin
can never work a right cure upon another. We see this in our selves, severity
and violence cures no body; and this should be men's design in all Arguments,
Disputes and Reproofs, namely, to recover and cure those that are out of the
way; but durum super durum non facit murum: Hence the expression of that
peaceable Bishop Hall, I am, and profess to be, as the terms stand, on neither,
and yet on both parts; for the peace of both, for the humor of neither: how
should mortar cement, if it lie not between both stones? The Kingdom of God
stands not in meats, in colors, in noises, in gestures; God stands not on such
trifles, and why should we? etc. The Wisest of men determines this: Prove.
30.33. The wringing of the nose brings forth blood; so the forcing of wrath
brings forth strife.

O but God's Glory (you will say) is at the stake! therefore it is not only lawful
to be zealous, but necessary.

But, 1. Be sure it be so, that the Honor of God be really concerned in these
your Contentions: It is a dangerous thing to engage God's Glory in our sinful
affections or expressions. You know how dear it cost Moses that Servant of the
Lord, when in great heat against his erring Brethren, he brake out unadvisedly
with his lips, saying, Numb. 20.10. Hear now, ye Rebels, must we fetch you
water out of this Rock? Though otherwise he was the meekest man upon Earth, and
was at that time sufficiently provoked, yet Almighty God would not bear to hear
this language from him, and shut him out of the promised land for it. God
knows, we are more apt to press God's Glory into the service of our Passions
and Interests, than to engage our selves, and all our abilities, or to deny our
humors, for the promoting thereof.

2. Be it known to you, that though your Ends be very sincere, yet God's Glory
has no need of your Intemperance. As his Truth has no need of our Lie, so his
Honor needs not the rotten pillars of men's passions: Job 13.7, 8. Will ye
speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? Will ye accept His
Person? Will ye contend for God? He requires it not, he needs it not. The
excellency of the end will not legitimate the vitiousness of the means; nay, by
breaking his Law in these uncharitable Contentions you dishonor him. God's
Truth and Honor have almost suffered as much by weak and passionate Advocates,
as by open Adversaries.

3. If you be indeed so concerned for God's Glory, and for his Truth, then you
will use all other means to reduce men into the way of Truth. His Glory must be
promoted by his own means; you will not only rebuke them, but you will pray for
them; you will speak as zealously for them to God in Heaven, as you speak against
them upon Earth. If they hunger, you will feed them; if they be disparaged or
distressed, you will assist them; and thus by heaping coals of fire upon their
heads, you will melt them into Repentance; you are not ignorant that the
blustering Winds make the Traveller gird his Cloak closer to him, when the warm
Sun forces him to lay it aside: And men generally will strengthen themselves in
their Opinions, when they are only pelted with wrath and rancour, who may
recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, when they are instructed with
meekness.

III. For Application. 1. Then it follows, That Union is the true means of our
Preservation. Unity of Judgment, this I say again should be endeavored, not
only in weighty Points, but in all matters of Doctrine and Practice: And if men
would labor to divest themselves of Prejudice and Interest, this might in a
great measure be obtained. Truth is but One; and if all did truly seek Truth,
they would surely find it: The integrity of the upright shall guide them, and,
the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way; Prove. 11.3.5. But a
violent Prejudice for or against any Opinion or Practice, is a notorious
hinderance in finding out the Truth; it shuts the windows that light cannot
^nter: Whosoever therefore would find out the plain Truth, must strip himself of
all such pre-occupation, as will not suffer him to make an impartial search
into the Mind of God about it; and having found it, must render himself
prisoner unto it. So also must all worldly Interests be laid at the feet of
Truth, and whether the Doctrine or Practice in question be in repute or under
disgrace, whether it will gain or lose my best Friends, whether it will prefer
or undo me, are not Considerations worthy of him that has learned to deny
himself, and to value the World to come above the Word that now is: I say
again, if men did but sincerely seek, they should certainly find, according to
Christ's Promise, Matthew. 7.7. and so Unity in Judgment, would be attained more
than it is, which doubtless would be a sovereign Preservative from Destruction.

But there is another Unity, which is in Affection, and that is Charity, which
is of no less Excellency and Use to our preservation. There may be many, who
may call for Unity, not for Truths sake, but for their own. As Musculus
observes upon the Soldiers, that would not divide our Saviors seamless Coat;
but it was not out of any respect to Him, but hoping every one, that it would
fall to his Lot: So many cry out for Unity, says he, not out of Love to the
Truth or Unity, but in expectation that the stream shall run in their own
Channel. But now Charity, as it would be in all material things on Truths side,
so in things more disputable it can bear some contradiction: and so concludes,
In the Substance of Christianity, he that is not with us, is against us; in
things Indifferent, he that is not against us, is for us: And to promote this
among our selves, I mean, the Contending Protestants in these Nations,

Let us consider, 1. How many things we agree in. And if men would begin at
this end, and not still at the wrong end, to wit, the few and small things
wherein we differ, we could not for very shame be so implacable to one another.
We agree in the acknowledgment of the Being and Providence of God against
Atheists and Epicures; In the Doctrine of the Trinity, against Mahometans; we
agree about the Person, Natures, and Offices of our Redeemer, against all
Heretics both Old and New: In short, we agree in the same Creeds, in all the
Articles of the Christian Doctrine; yea, we agree in the Substance of the same
Wors^^^, and in the same Sacraments, against both Papists, Socinians and
Quakers: We have one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. And then in Civils, we agree
in our hearty Approbation of our Monarchy, and in a dutiful Allegian^^ to our
King, and in refusing the Supremacy of any other at home or abroad. And how
many Particulars of the greatest weight are contained under these Heads,
wherein all we Protestants are agreed? And if Unity in the Truth be any ground
for Love and Charity, it is incomprehensible, that they who agree in all these
things, should be more inveterate against one another, than against such as
differ not toto Caelo, but toto tartaro from them both! But it is observed,
that the nearer some men are to a conjunction, some difference remaining, the
greater is their hatred; thus a Jew hates a Christian, more than he does a
Pagan; and a Papist hates a Protestant, worse than he does a Jew; and a nominal
Protestant hates a Puritan more than he does a Papist, (as Dr. Featley notes):
The Contention of Brethren are like the Bars of a Castle: Prove. 18.19. A most
unreasonable, though a very common thing!

2. Consider the Imperfections of our humane Nature. Our Understandings were
sore wounded by the Fall of Adam, and they are but imperfectly and unequally
recovered by all the means which the Gospel affords. Why should we condemn
every one that is not endowed with our Abilities, or advanced to our Capacity?
Do we fall out with one that is purblind, because he cannot see so far, nor so
quick as we? we should rather pity him, and praise God who has been kinder to
us. They that are most intelligent, know but in part. And if any man think that
he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.
That was therefore a good Answer which Melancthon made to those who objected to
the Protestants their Divisions; says he, The judicious agree in fundamentals;
but as in a great Army, the skill or strength of all the Captains and of all
the Soldiers is not equal, but they all agree in their wills and honest designs
to serve their Prince; so all good men have not the like knowledge, but all
agree in their sincere love to goodness.

3. Consider, that you who are so violent, do differ from others, just as far
as they differ from you. Do you think that one kind of Government in the Church
is best? they do as verily think so of another: do you hold such and such
Ceremonies in Religion to be unlawful? they are as confident of the lawfulness
of them. Do you conclude, that all Private men's Opinions in such matters ought
to be swallowed up, and to acquiesce in the public Determination? they verily
believe that the Church should leave them, as the Apostles did, in their first
Indifference. Now when such, as do not otherwise forfeit their Veracity, come
and profess that they cannot for their Hearts think otherwise than they do; you
cannot yield to them* they cannot comply with you, what remedy then is so
proper, so Christian, as Charity to each other? relying upon that Promise,
Philip. 3.15. If in any thing ye be oth^^wise minded, God shall reveal even
this unto you.

4. Consider, that there have been greater Differences than Ours among those
that were the true Members of Christ's Church: Witness Act. 15.1. Certain men
which came down from Judea taught the brethren, Except ye be circumcised after
the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. A material Point, and urged you see
with great confidence; and yet God forbid we should blot these out of the roll
of true Christians. How resolute were some Great Divines in the Church pro and
con in the Case of Rebaptizing those that were lapsed in the Primitive times!
And what Heart can be so hard, as to deny the Lutherans and Calvinists a place
in the Church of Christ, who yet differ in greater matters than ours? Wherefore
seeing their Differences were greater than ours, we should not aggravate them
against one another, nor by our violence render them intolerable.

5. Consider your own personal moral Failings. Has not each of us some right
Eye? are we perfectly good? are not we all Men of like Passions? What if our
Judge shall say, And why beholdest thou the more that is in thy brothers eye,
but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? thou Hypocrite, etc.
Matthew. 7.3. Alas, if we were truly conscious of our own Neglects of many
Duties, whereof we have been convinced, toward our God, our Neighbor and our
selves; and of the many Transgressions and Faults which we frequently commit,
we should much abate our Rigor toward others, and turn our Indignation
against our selves. How sad a business would it be, if any of those who have
censured and damned their Opposites for some dubious matters, should prove
Slaves to their own Lusts, and be found at last to be wretched Hypocrites in
the main things of Religion.

Use 2. If Uncharitable Contentions do prepare for utter Destruction, Then Woe
be to the Instruments and Bellows of our Contentions: If the Evil of them be so
great, if the Danger from them be so dreadful, then most wicked and wretched
are the promoters of them. Woe to the World because of offenses, for it must
needs be that offenses come; but Woe to that Man by whom the offense comes,
Matthew. 18.7. If those that set an House or Town on Fire, be justly reckoned and
treated as Enemies to humane Society, certainly they who inflame the Souls of
Christians against one another, to the ruin of a Church and Nation, deserve
the worst Character, and the worst Punishment. But as Ahasuerus once said to
Esther, c. 7. v. 5. Who is he? and where is he that dare presume in his heart
to do so? And as she answered, The Adversary and Enemy is this wicked Haman; so
I may answer,

1. Our common Adversary and Enemy in this matter is Satan. Our Contentions do
plainly smell of fire and brimstone. Legions of Devils, though we cannot see
them, are employed herein: He is the Old Accuser of the Brethren, both to God
and to one another; that wicked Spirit is the truest Salamander, that lives in
the fire of Contention. Divisions are the Devil's Music, but that which makes
the Devil laugh should make us weep. How often have there been Essays and
Endeavors to reconcile our unhappy Differences, and this cunning and malicious
Enemy has defeated them all? I have somewhere read of a Treaty between a
former King of England, and another of France, which was held and concluded in
an old Chapel, while their several Armies stood ready expecting the issue: The
Kings agreed, and coming out of the Chapel, a Snake or Viper crept out of the
old Wall, which they seeing, drew their Swords to defend themselves; which
being discerned by their Servants who attended at the door, they drew likewise,
and the Armies seeing this did the like, and slaughtered one another a long
time before they understood the mistake. And just so has it often fared with
God's Church abroad and at home. Wise and good Men have been ready for a
Reconciliation, and in effect agreed, when that Old Serpent the Devil, being
ready to burst with Malice at it, has spoiled so good an enterprise, and
renewed the flames of Discord again.

2. Jesuits and other Emissaries from Rome: These have been Satan's Instruments
to set the World in Flames. It was Campanella's old Advice to the Spaniard,
that they should by all means keep up Union among themselves, and keep open the
breaches among the Protestants. The like by Adam Contzen, another Jesuit, in
his Politics. These doubtless did blow the Coals in our Civil Wars, and
insinuated themselves into each Party: And it is strange, that though this
their Principle and Practice be undeniable, neither side will discern or yield
any such Boutefeu's to be among them. What else could maintain that deadly rage
and violent Prejudice so long among Englishmen and Protestants, whose Temper
and Religion is of it self so sweet and gentle, but such Instruments as these,
who aggravate Differences, and exasperate men's spirits, and endeavor to
persuade People, that it is better to yield to a Foreign Religion than to one
another? and to this end their Doctrines and Ceremonies are represented with
the fairest and falsest Colors, our first Reformers abroad and at home slily
censured, and our domestic Differences rendered irreconcilable.

3. Atheistical and Debauched Persons: These hate all sound Religion in
whomsoever, and are ripe for any Profession which will gratify their Lusts,
and so are as ready to be Mahumetans as Romans; who for all their Professions
of Loyalty, would hate their Governors at the Heart, if the Laws were strictly
executed against their Vices. These cry out, Let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us; and so must needs abhor any such
Settlement, as would conduce to the flourishing o^ ^eal Piety. Besides, their
Practices provoke God to fasten his Judgments upon us, whereof our Contentions
are not the least. And also these having an inveterate Antipathy to all sober
and religious Persons of what Character soever, do equally hate such of every
Party, and on the other side adhere unto and animate the looser sort, whose
Religion consists in Humor, Noise, or Show; and wherever they live are pouring
Oil into our Flames.

4. Ignorant and Proud People, whereof the number is too great in every Party:
Such as have neither read the Scriptures with Judgment, nor other
Ecclesiastical Histories, nor considered the Constitution of the Churches of
God in other parts of the World, but only pore upon what is next to their
Senses; and these commonly are most conceited and unmovable, abounding only in
their own sense, and condemning all others with the greatest contempt. Of such
good old Mr. Greenham is to be understood, when being asked by the Lord
Treasurer Cecil, where the blame of that great rent lay between the Bishops of
those times and Others: The fault, said he, is on both sides, and on neither
side; for the godly-wise on both sides bear with each other, and concur in the
main; but there be some selfish, peevish spirits on both sides, and these make
the quarrel. And how few are there, that are no way biased by their worldly
Interest? which is a strong and irrefragable Argument, and where it rules, will
make men content to behold a whole Nation on fire, so that they may warm
themselves thereby. How rare a thing is a public Spirit, or a Man that,
looking upon the distracted condition of a Church and Nation without the false
Spectacles of Prejudice and private Interest, can drop a Christian Tear, or
impartially offer any Balm to cure their Wounds? From such as these
beforementioned, proceed our Uncharitable Contentions: And woe be to them,
unless they repent, that is, amend.

Use 3. If these prepare for Destruction, Then We in this sinful Nation are in
the ready way to misery. For,

1. Our Differences and Contentions are notorious. Divisions in the Church,
Divisions in the Nation; Cities divided, yea Houses divided: Names of
Distinction imposed, and no Pacificatory Endeavors, nor Inviting Providence
have yet cemented us. Our Enemies smile at it, and our well-wishers mourn.

2. We are Uncharitable in these Contentions, we bite and devour one another,
we censure, we slander, we rail, we damn, and we are ready to mischieve one
another, by force, by fraud; the Press sweats, the Pulpit rings with Invectives
and with Reproaches. O Lord, how long shall I cry and thou will not hear! even
cry out to thee of violence, and thou will not save! why do thou show me
iniquity and grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are
that raise up strife and contention, etc. Habac. 1.2, 3. The Law of Kindness is
banished out of men's Mouths, the Law of Love too much out of men's Hearts: Yea,
some Preach Christ of envy, strife, and contention, supposing to add affliction
to others bands, (as it was Philip. 1.17.) We may take up Optatu's complaint of
old, Nullus vestrum est, qui non convitia nostra suis tractatibus misceat:
Lectiones Dominicas incipitis, and tractatus vestros ad nostras injurias
explicatis. Profertis Evangelium, and facitis absenti fratri convitium.
Auditorum animis infigitis odia, inimicitias suadendo, docendo suadetis. This
has been Englished too often in Pulpits, I am loath to do it. In all
concourses, instead of kindness, freedom and love, either uncivil clashings, or
a fearful reservedness: The worst Interpretations made of one another actions,
words, looks, and behavior. Certainly the Enemy has done this, his cloven
Foot is evident in these effects; but this is matter of fact, and undeniable.

3. Too many of those that should quench these flames, exasperate them. If St.
Paul were here, he would ask again, as 1 Cor. 6.5. Is it so, that there is not
a wise man among you? I speak it to your shame. If St. James were among us, he
would ask as Jam. 3.13. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you?
let him show out of a good Conversation his works with meekness of wisdom; and
conclude, But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not,
and lie not against the truth. Magistrates and Ministers should be Healers, but
there have been some of these, and that of each Party, that have increased
these flames. How industriously have our wounds been kept open? and some have
not been ashamed to set themselves against all Coalition and Union. Where are
our healing Shepherds? Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there?
why then is not the health of the daughter of my People recovered? The
Pythagorians had a Custom, that when two fell at Contention, their Leaders
would appoint them a meeting before Sunset, and cause them to embrace one
another. But we have many to push us on, and few to moderate us in our
Contentions. We tear one another in pieces; and if any interpose, he is
stigmatized for a Neuter, or else meets with the Parter's portion, to wit,
blows on both sides; he finds Livie's Observation but too true, that Media via
neque amicos parit nec inimicos tollit. Hear Holy Augustine in the like Case to
Hierome and Ruffinus, who were in Contention. Woe is me that I cannot find you
nearer together! how am I moved, how do I grieve, what fear am I in! I would
fall down at your feet, I would weep and beg each for himself, each for the
other, yea for others sakes, especially the weak, that look upon you to their
great hazard, Combating as it were upon a Theater. But where has this Holy Man
left his healing spirit? I am sure this would become those in each Function,
and turn to their honor and comfort both here and hereafter.

4. Our Common Enemy is ready to devour us. The Holy Ghost observes, that when
Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, for we be brethren, that the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in
the land, Genesis 13.7, 8. that if the Relation of Brethren would not sway his
Kinsman, yet the reproach and the danger that might fall upon them both from
the Canaanite and the Perizzite might check any further breach between them. We
have the Canaanites both within the Land and without, that are ready to make
one morsel of us, and who after we have condemned one another for Superstition
and Schism, will truss us all up for Heresy, without the infinite Mercy of
God. Now even Antipathies are laid aside in common dangers, as it is probable
that all the Creatures, though of contrary dispositions, agreed in the Ark: And
yet we cannot, in this our common peril, agree with our own Contrymen.
Luther tells of two Goats, that meeting upon a narrow Plank over a deep River,
whereby they could neither turn back nor pass by; the one of them lies down,
that the other going over him, they might both escape the danger. If mere
Nature can teach these poor Creatures to yield so far to one another, to
prevent the Ruin of both; furely Reason, and especialy God's Grace being
superadded, should teach each different Party, in common dangers, to strive
which should submit to other, in what possibly they can, to preserve the whole.
It is evident, that we all have a watchful and an unmerciful Enemy, who as they
have long abetted our Divisions, so they build their greatest hopes upon the
continuance of them; and although they may carry fairer to one side than to
another, yet even such must only expect to be used by them as Ulysses was by
Polyphemus, to be devoured last. What unaccountable folly then is it for us,
with Archimedes, to be taken up with drawing unnecessary lines and figures,
while in the mean time, the City is taken, and the Romans come, and take away
both our place and Nation.

Use 4. Let us all then be entreated, conjured, and persuaded to forbear biting
and devouring one another. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, be ye like minded, having the same love, be of one accord, of one
mind. Let nothing be done through strife and vainglory, Philip. 2.1, 2, 3.
Leave off this brutish Behavior toward one another. To which end Consider,
1. The Greatness and baseness of the Sin. 2. The Certainty and sadness of the
Danger that attends it. 3. The best Method to Cure the Sin and prevent the
Danger.

For the first, the Greatness and baseness of the Sin.

1. You break the great Command of God's Law, which is Love. For next to the
Love of God, is the Love of our Neighbor; and they are so conjoined, that the
one cannot exist without the other: For he that loves not his brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. When
therefore you think you are zealous for God, by this kind of managery you are
breaking his Laws. Yea, you break the Royal Law, which Commands you to Love
your Neighbor as your selves, Jam. 2.8. and no other Devotion, Preciseness or
Charity will answer for this Defect; as it follws ver. 10. Whosoever shall keep
the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, (referring to this very fault) he
is guilty of all.

2. You trample upon the great Precept of the Gospel, which is Love. 1 John
3.23. And this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment. See here,
Commandment in the beginning of the Verse, and Commandment again in the end of
it; and then it is joined, and goes hand in hand with Faith in Jesus Christ; so
that you may as safely be without the one as without the other. And again 1 John 4.21. And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God love
his brother also. Now what Love can there be in the Heart, when there is
nothing but reproach, contempt and rage, in the Tongue, in the Pen, and in the
Carriage? It is certain, That out of the abundance of the Heart, the Tongue
speaks; and the Lungs must needs be corrupt within, when such purulent matter
is expectorated. Say not, that your Love to the Truth, or to the Public Good,
must regulate your behavior to particular Persons: For neither the Truth nor
the Public good do need your uncharitable words or behavior. Our Blessed
Savior had great Truths to declare, and great Errors to oppose, yet He did not
strive, nor cry, neither did any man hear his Voice in the streets, Mat. 12.19.
And as Lactantius argued with the Heathens, Vel Ethnici Christianos sapientes
judicant, vel stultos; tamen non vel sapientes imitantur, vel stultis parcunt.
So either your Opposites are either wise or foolish: If wise, you should comply
with them, respect and reverence them; if foolish, you should forbear and pity
them: But whatsoever they are, you ought entirely to love them.

3. These Contentions do bring great dishonor to Jesus Christ. He is the
Prince of Peace, the true King of Salem; the great Promoter of Peace, and the
great pattern of it. When he came into the World, Peace was sung, when he
departed out of the World, Peace was bequeathed. Now this quarrelsome temper in
his Servants does grievously reflect upon him. For he says, John 17.20, 21.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them that shall believe on me through
their word; that they all may be one -- That the world may believe that thou
have sent me. As if he had said, Their dissentions and quarrels will tempt men
to think that I came not from thee, who art the Mirror of Wisdom and Love. He
employed all his Sacred Breath, to pluck men out of the power of the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, to promote Faith, Repentance, and Holiness, and to guide
our feet into the way of peace. And accordingly the Apostles tell us, That the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost. Let not us therefore dishonor our Redeemer, let us not
calculate a new Gospel, let us not lay too great a stress on small matters, let
us not provoke men to think, that our great Master came to tithe mint, anyse
and cummin, who came about far other work, and taught us far greater matters.
It is recorded of Alexander Severus an Heathen Emperor, that seeing two
Christians contending, he forbad them to assume the name of Christians upon
them, for that by their quarrelling they disgraced their Master. How many now
by this Rule would be interdicted that worthy Name?

4. These Uncharitable Contentions do grieve the Holy Spirit of God. He
descended like a Dove, and cannot brook the gall of bitterness. When therefore
the Apostle had dehorted the Ephesians, c. 4.30. from grieving the Holy Spirit
of God, he adds in the next verse, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice, and be ye
kind one to another, tenderhearted, etc. This sweet Dove will never lodge in a
Vultures nest. You heard the fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc.
And whatsoever pretenses any may make to the Spirit, if they do not verify
them by a meek, loving, and charitable behavior to others, they abuse the Holy
Spirit, and deceive others. For as nothing is more grateful to this good
Spirit, than Love and Peace, so nothing more distasteful than Wrath and
Contention.

5. These Contentions do stir up much Corruption, both in the Aggressour and
the Defendant. There is a great deal of folly in the wisest and best of men,
and this either lurks in the habit, or is produced into Act, more or less, as
there is greater or lesser temptation. Sin dwells in our Natures, as the mud in
the bottom of a glass of water; when it is shaken, it appears and stains the
whole glass. There is a world of pride, anger; envy and revenge in men's hearts,
and these Contentions draw them forth, strengthen them, and make them rampant.
Prove. 26.21. As Coals to burning Coals, and wood to fire, so is a contentious
man to kindle strife. So that the Wise Man concludes, That he loves
transgression, that loves strife, Prove. 19.19. And hereupon some have made
observations upon the deaths of Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Hooper, that they
suffered with more torture than others, and that because of their Contentions
together before.

6. They do greatly hinder the Conversion of the Ungodly, and the progress in
Holiness of the Godly. Whereas the great work of God's Ministers should be to
instruct the ignorant, to convince and reform the profane, to build up God's
Children in their Faith and Holiness; this should be their study in private,
this their business in public: Now the ignorant and ungodly are left quiet in
their sins, the Sober and Pious are little improved in their Christian course,
and men's Talents of Time, Parts and Pains, are laid out in dry and unprofitable
Controversies. And then private persons, who should employ their converse
together to their mutual edification, they are perpetually irritating one
another by these fruitless Contentions.. I have heard of a Monster born in
Scotland, in the Reign of James the Fourth, with two Heads and one Body, which
two heads would be still arguing and knocking each other in eager disputes,
(too fit an Emblem of this disputing Age!) But we that have but one Blessed
Head, yet the members are always contending among themselves. Instead of
exhorting, we are censuring; instead of reproving, we are reproaching; instead
of provoking to Love and good works, we provoke one another to wrath and
discontent. And then for the devout use of Prayer, doubtless these wrathful
Contentions must needs greatly disturb it. For if Husband and Wife should
maintain a constant amity, that their Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. a
continual contesting with our Brethren must greatly clog and damp them.
Whereupon Cyprian, citing those words of our Savior, When two agree on Earth
to ask, etc. has this Observation, Plus impetrari potest paucorum concordi
prece, quam discordi oratione multorum. A few in concord shall obtain more than
many in discord.

7. These Contentions in Religion tempt men to be Atheists. When they read and
hear such unmercifull rage in Christians one against another, and that they who
profess agreement in nineteen things, are ready to anathemize one another about
the twentieth; what a stumbling block must it needs be unto weak and unresolved
persons, and tempt them to throw aside all Religion? So Optatus observed of old
in the like Case, Vos dicitis, Licet; nos dicimus, Non licet: Inter licet
vestrum, and non licet nostrum, not ant animae populorum. I say this tempts
men, but it is only a temptation: For who that has a present Journey to go for
his Life, will sullenly forbear to set forward, because all his Friends in the
Town are not agreed what a Clock it is at his setting out? Every Man is bound
upon peril of everlasting damnation to win Christ, and be found in him, to work
out his own Salvation, and to set about it without delay: Now what a weak thing
is it for any man to refuse or neglect this necessary work, because some men
are not agreed about a Gesture or a Ceremony? Such fools shall dye in their
sin, but their blood shall be required at their hands, who have been a scandal
to them.

8. These biting and devouring Contentions are Uncivil, Inhumane and barbarous.
It has been always reckoned for good Breeding, not to be confident and
peremptory in asserting any thing, whereof any in the Company modestly doubts:
And on the other side, if any cannot comply with the Sentiments of another, to
enter his dissent with all possible respect, and without any reflection or
provocation. We account it barbarous rudeness in discoursing, yea, or in
discussing any point, to signify in civil company the least provoking gesture,
much more to fall into a rage or to express revenge: And yet if you hear the
Harangues, and read the printed discourses of some Gentlemen, you would
conclude that they have but a small pittance either of good humor or of
ingenious Education. Man is a rational Creature, and is not born with Teeth,
nor formed with Sting or with Horns, neither is he teachable or ductile by such
boisterous methods. When Love indites the reproof, when that accompanies the
argument, it penetrates and prevails: Dilige and dic quod vis. But there not
only were, Psalm. 52.2. but yet there are tongues that devise mischief, like a
sharp Razour, working deceitfully. Ver. 4. Thou love all devouring words, O
thou deceitful Tongue! I should somewhat suspect their Divinity whose Ethics
are no better. Thus you see the manifold Sinfulness and base Vileness of this
sin, truly, but imperfectly described. And now,

2. Consider the Certainty, and Sadness of the Danger. You were assured of the
Certainty of Ruin from these Contentions in the fourth Proposition, that it is
in vain to expect safety, to be exempted from the calamity threatened. Do but
weigh this very Scripture, and that determination of our Savior, Matthew. 12.
and you will conclude, That nothing but a miraculous interposition of God's
Power and Mercy can prevent it. As when a Disease is in its nature and degree
mortal, the Physician advises the Man to settle his Conscience and Estate, for
his danger is imminent; so when we see that Charity broken, which is the Girdle
that binds a Nation together; when we see the black and blew spots of Rancour
and Revenge on the faces and looks, and in the words and carriage of so many,
it sufficiently proclaims our danger; that if we escape more sudden and violent
destruction, yet we are sure of a Consumption. Take heed ye be not consumed one
of other. And though you may be dead in your own Persons, before this
denunciation take effect, yet you will, so far as guilty herein, intail ruin
upon the Generation to come. And if you would but consider, that you must be
sick, and dye your selves, at which time in all likelihood, you will have
different apprehensions of these controversies; when Conscience shows you the
History of your sinful Life, and discovers an Holy God, before whom you must
immediately appear, and the strict account which you must presently give, and
the Ocean of Eternity which is just before you, then you will see that these other
points were but of small moment in comparison, and not worth that heat and
vigor you spent upon them. And as the Danger signified by this word Consumed,
is sure, so it is very sad and great. For

1. It includes the Ruin of our outward Comforts. We know not when we are
well. To have Houses, Plenty, Liberty, Peace and Quiet, are to be reputed for
very great mercies; but these fewds and quarrels tend to dispossess you of
them. Our sad Experience shows us how our Body politic languisheth by reason
of the uncharitable Contentions of the Members thereof. What Decay of Trade,
what breaking of Tradesmen, what sinking of the Rents of Land, and what a
general Consumption invades us. The Judgments of God are already as a mouth to
us, well if they break not forth as a Lion upon us, as was once threatened and
fulfilled upon Ephraim, Hos. 12.14. We are rendered by our Contentions
suspicious of one another Integrity, doubtful of one another Ability, and
some have proceeded to that height of Animosity, as to forbear all dealing and
commerce with those of an opposite Party. Whither must this tend, where must
this end but in Desolation? If the blood do not circulate, the whole body will
suffer for it; and if but a part be miserable, the whole cannot be happy. And
if all your present Adversaries were ruined and gone, yet consider, that the
Benjamites were all save six hundred destroyed, and that for maintaining a bad
Cause, and the Men of Israel had sworn in their fury that none of them would
give his Daughter to Wife to any of them, yet when their hot blood was cooled,
they lamented, and said, There is one Tribe cut off from Israel this day; and
then they used all their wits and policy to restore that Tribe again. We shall
be worse than Jews, if we have not such like Resentments.

2. It threatens the Ruin of our Religion, the only true and safe Religion on
Earth; which should be dearer to every man than his Life. Upon the occasion of
such Distempers in his time, Greg. Nazianzen cried out, I fear Antichrist will
come upon us: And they drew from him that pathetical expression, whereby he
wished that he might with Jonah be thrown into the Sea, if thereby the tempests
then in the Church might be calmed. Our common Enemies are Powerful, Cunning
and Malicious, and they gape for our destruction. This Island is the great
shelter and bulwark of the Protestant Religion, what madness then seizes us,
to destroy our selves? Who has bewitched us? Every wise woman builds her
house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her own hands, Prove. 14.1. Would
to God that we had but the honest policy of Aristides and Themistocles; who
though they were often jarring, yet being employed abroad together about their
Countries affairs, made an agreement to leave their quarrels upon the
Mountains, which they were then traveling over, till the common business was
dispatched which they wen^ about, and then agreed afterward to examine them.
Let us be so wise and charitable, as to let fall our contests against one
another, till our common Profession be out of imminent danger, and then we may
with more leisure and safety adjust our differences. How shall we bite our
Nails, yea, our very Tongues for indignation, if we shall first exasperate, and
then weaken one another to that degree, that the cruel Enemies of both shall
have made an easy conquest of us! It is no new thing for Truth (like Christ,
John 5.13.) to slip away in the throng of men's Contentions.

3. This Destruction inferrs the Ruin of our Posterity. They are embarked with
us in the same Vessel, and are in a fair likelihood to be sunk with us. And
this must greatly affect any considering person: That your sinfulness should
not only provoke God to deliver his Ark into his Enemies hands, and deprive you
of the Gospel, but also that your Children and Posterity, who have been
faultless herein, should be left to live in Egyptian darkness: Inherit your
Estates, and the Curse that is entailed upon them. We have been contending
about the Shadow of Religion, and they must fu^^er for the Substance of it.

The Providence of God has several times most expressly called us to Unity, to
Charity, and to Concord. In the Year 1660. our general Union in Civils, and our
general Flexibleness to a mutual agreement in Religious matters, was a plain
direction of Providence to us to bury our debate and strife, and to put up the
Temporal and Spiritual Sword together. But we have been biting and devouring
one another ever since, now almost thirty years. When it pleased God to contend
from Heaven with us by the Plague, and Fire, and to permit men to contend with
us by War, it was a sufficient Item to us to make our Peace with God, and to
be at peace among our selves: but we have been biting and devouring one another
for all that. In the Year 1678, when there appeared deep and strong designs and
endeavors to subvert Religion, and to bury both Parties in the same grave:
Divine Providence did thereby articulately call to us to lay our quarrels to
sleep, and cordially to join our Prayers and Endeavors in our places to rescue
our common Faith from so great a danger; but yet we have been since that time,
biting and devouring one another, as sharply as ever before. And now once more
we have a fair Call, and each Party has professed a serious Inclination to
unite together against our common Adversaries. God forbid that our Prejudices,
Humors or Interests should still hinder so great a Blessing!

I come now, in the Third and Last place, to direct the best Method to cure
this great Evil, and to prevent this great Danger. And

1. Lament your own and others sin in this particular. All sound Amendment
begins in godly sorrow. We are glowing hot in wrath and strife, Tears are
necessary to quench this Flame; mourn for others fierceness and for your own.
For the Divisions of Reuben; let there be great searchings of heart. When we
are once truly humbled and penitent before God, our Brethren will have better
quarter from us. Consider, how often you have added fuel to this fire, how you
have exasperated this burning Fever, and how little you have done to assuage
and mitigate it. How easily you have been prejudiced, how easily provoked, how
hardly pacified. If you should have met with such treatment from your Heavenly
Father, as your Brethren have had from you, you had been devoured and consumed
long ago.. Do not think that needless Divisions in Christ's Church, is so light
a fault, that reproaches and revilings are venial sins; when Our Savior has
assured us, Matthew. 18.6. That it were better for him that shall offend one of
his little ones that believe in him, to have a Millstone hanged about his Neck,
and be drowned in the depth of the Sea. And how wittily soever it be expressed,
yet he that shall say to his Brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
Hellfire, Mat. 5.22. Whatever uncharitable Reflection therefore you have been
guilty of, repent of it speedily; and also mourn for the miscarriages of
others. When we are a little melted for our own and others faults, then we are
fit for the healing mercy of God. And the Lord turned the Captivity of Job,
when he prayed for his Friends, Job 42.10.

2. Learn Christian Wisdom. Thereby you will be able to weigh and consider
things, and to look at them on every side. What mischief has Zeal without
Wisdom done in the Church of God! A wise man will observe the weight and
consequence of the things he undertakes to oppose and defend; and then he will
consider what are the most proper means to convince, and to reduce his mistaken
Adversary. He that has knowledge, and a man of understanding is of an
excellent (that is, a sedate, calm, and cool) Spirit, Prove. 17.27. A wise Man
distinguishes between tolerable mistakes and intolerable, and proportions his
zeal and the expressions thereof accordingly: Whereas a fools lips enter into
contention, Prove. 18.6. He is hurried by his folly into all the terms, moods
and figures of Provocation. And therefore the Apostle James calls for such
wisdom upon this account, Jam. 3.13. Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you? Let him come with his meekness of wisdom. As the deepest
Rivers run most calmly, so the wisest minds are ever most peaceable. A wise Man
will consider that it will be in the Church, as it is in an House; some
Children do work, and others make work; some are for the School, some for the
Field, some for the Cradle, and yet all Children; and thus God has tempered
the Body, that there may be a various love among the Members, in the strong to
the weak a love of Care, in the weak to the strong a love of Reverence. Again,
a wise Man can govern his passions, and not cast Firebrarnds, Arrows, and
Death, and then say, Am I not in sport? Prove. 26.19. No, he will make
Controversies as few, and then as short as he can, and manage Sacred matters
with a solid gravity. And therefore get wisdom, and with all your getting get
understanding: And to that end, add to earnest Prayer, reading in God's Book
especially; and as far as your Calling and Capacity will permit, in the
Histories of the Church; and withal Observe and Digest those things which you
have seen, or heard, or read; so will you be able perhaps to make peace among
others, how ever to keep the peace your selves.

3. Endeavor for a Catholic Spirit, that is, a due and tender respect to all
the parts and members of the Christian Church. For of that whole Mystical Body,
every true Christian is a Member. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into
one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit: -- Now ye are the Body of Christ, and
Members in particular, 1 Corinthians. 12.13.27. Hereby we shall not suddenly
un-Church others, at home or abroad, for some imperfections or corruptions; for
he is but meanly read in the Records of the Church, that has not observed
manifold defects, deformities, and corruptions in all the Christian Societies
which have been in the World; and on the other side, that some holy Persons in
all Ages, have in some thing or other dissented from the Common Opinions; and
that many weak and peevish people have and ever will exercise the Patience and
Charity of the rest. On the contrary, a poor narrow spirit in many, has not
been the least cause of our Contentions; whereby they have confined the Grace,
Presence, and Goodness of God to some few Persons or Societies, that have been
more strict and devout than others. No godly People but they, none godly
Ministers but theirs. And the Papists are notoriously culpable in this point,
while they would impropriate all Christianity to themselves; not valuing any
person, how Learned and Holy soever, who will not be of their Communion. But a
true Catholic, though he be fully persuaded in his own Mind of his Principles
and Practices, yet he can wish well unto, and think well of, and cordially
embrace all that are sound in the Fundamentals of Religion, though in diverse
things they do err and go astray.

4. Be clothed with Humility. For whatsoever Pleas and Pretenses are hung out,
it is Pride within which has an hand in the beginning and maintaining of our
quarrels. Prove. 22.10. Cast out the Scorner, and Contention shall go out: Yea,
strife and reproach shall cease. Hereby we are wise in our own eyes, we look
not on others things, but only on our own. This makes the Superior look upon
the Inferior that differs from him with great contempt; and this prompts him
that is on the lower ground to all the envious Reflections and constructions
imaginable of him that is got above him. Says the one, Shall I give way or
yield a jot to Men so ordinary for their Parts, and so obnoxious for their
Circumstances? I that neither need them nor value them? -- Says the other,
These men are all either blinded with preferment, or hunting after it; their
Parts are either utterly abused or quite blasted: Thus the Ball of Contention
is tossed from one to another by the hands of Pride and Scorn. Whereas Humility
makes a Man think meanly of himself, moderately of his own Notions and
Apprehensions, highly of those that deserve it, and respectfully of all. It was
this which taught excellent Bishop Ridley, when he was in Prison thus to accost
honest Bishop Hooper; However in some by-matters and circumstances of Religion,
your wisdom and my simplicity, I grant, has a little jarr'd -- yet now, etc.
More comfort to them, if they had been on these terms in the time of their
Liberty and Prosperity. Humility is a great step to Unity, Ephesians. 4.2. I
beseech you, that ye walk with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love: Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. Pray behold how these Graces are here linked together,
lowliness, meekness, unity and peace. The humble man will not endure that his
Reputation shall outweigh the Peace of the Church; and therefore is more
willing that Truth should be victorious than Himself. He Will go two miles for
one to meet his Adversary in an honest way of Accommodation, and when he cannot
make his Judgment to bend, yet his Heart shall stoop to you with all sincerity.
This Virtue made Aristippus come to Eschines, when they were at fewd, with this
greeting, Eschines, Shall we be friends? And this dictated his answer, Yes,
Sir, with all my heart: But remember, says Aristippus, That I being elder than
you, do make the first motion; Yea, said the other, and therefore I conclude
you to be the worthier man, for I began the strife, and you began the peace.
Let us all then be clothed with Humility, assume not in regard of your
Learning, Wit or Parts; consider you are but Sharers in our Common Benefactor;
neither let your Riches or Dignities make you to speak or write otherwise than
you would do without them; and this will go a great way to prevent our biting
and devouring one another.

5. Apply your selves to the Practice of Real Piety. By this I mean, that we
should employ our chief care to procure and increase a lively Faith, to
exercise daily Repentance, to strengthen our Hope, to inflame our Love to God,
and to our Neighbor, to grow in Humility, Zeal, Patience, and Self-denial: To
be diligent in Watchfulness over our Thoughts, Words and Ways, in
Mortification of our sinful Passions and Affections, in the Examination of our
Spiritual Estate, in Meditation, in secret and fervent Prayer, and in universal
and steady Obedience. In these things do run the vital spirits of Religion: And
whosoever is seriously employed in these, will have but little time, and less mind
for unnecessary Contentions. These will keep that heat about the Heart, which
evaporating, degenerates into airy and fiery exhalations, and leaves the Soul
as cold as Ice to any holy desires. It is a good thing that the heart be
established with grace, not with meats, which have not profited them that have
been occupied therein, Hebr. 13.9. It is manifest what a sad decay of these
has followed our multiplied quarrels; and how hard it is to be fervent in
Spirit, and withal to be fiery in Controversies. He that walks with God, and
whose Conversation is in Heaven, will be quickly weary of windy disputes with
men, and will be apt to conclude with one of the Ancients, Lassus sum, dum and
cum sermon, atque invidia, and cum hostibus, and cum nostris pugno. Which has
occasioned diverse great Divines the more earnestly to long for Heaven, that
they might be out of the noise of endless and perverse disputations. The
serious Practice of Godliness has the Promise of Divine Direction in all
material points. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant. Psalm. 25.14. If any man will do his Will, he shall know
of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, John 7.17. And likewise, he that lives
in the Spirit, and walks in the Spirit, dares not bite or devour his Neighbor.
Let not us, says the Apostle, that so walk, be desirous of vainglory,
provoking one another, envying one another, Gal. 5.25* 26.

6. Follow after Charity. Knowedge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. This is
the healing Grace, and if this be not applied to our bleeding wounds, they will
never be cured. This suffers long, and is kind. Charity envieth not, Charity
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. [Pray read on, and mark all these
passages:] Charity does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is
not easily provoked, thinks no evil: Rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices
in the Truth. Bears all things, (tolerable) believes all things, (credible)
hops all things, (possible) indureth all things, and (as it follows,)
indureth after all things; 1 Corinthians. 13. That whole Chapter most fit to be
read, and often studied by all that love peace. Charitas dicit aliorum bona
certa, meliora; certa mala, minora; bona dubia, certa; dubia mala, nulla. An
excellent Conclusion of Charity! That it reckons the good parts, qualities, or
actions that are certainly in others, to be rather better than they are indeed;
and the ills, to be less than they are indeed; the doubtful good things in
them, to be certain; and the doubtful evil to be none. And how far would this
Temper and Practice go to the promoting of Unity and Concord! And how directly
contrary do most of them proceed, that make the greatest noise in our
irreligious quarrels! Not only putting the most invidious fence upon one
another words and actions, but also the most uncharitable judgment upon their
persons, upon their Spiritual and Eternal Estate.

We must know that as Faith unites us to the Head, so Love unites us to all the
Members; and as we can have no Faith nor Hope without Charity, so as any Man
increases in Faith, so he is enlarged in his Charity. The more true Piety any
man has, doubtless the more Charity still that man has. We that did hate one
another, (says J^stin Martyr of the Christians) do now live most friendly and
familiarly together, and pray for our Enemies. If we must err one way, (as who
is infallible?) it is safer for you to err by too much mildness, than by
overmuch rigor; for Almighty God, though he be Wise and Just, yet he is most
emphatically called, Love. 1 John 4.8. Beloved, let us love one another, for
Love is of God: and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God. He
that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love. And for you to reply, That
you do heartily love those that are every way Orthodox, that is, that agree
with you in Opinion, is nothing thank-worthy; do not even the Publicans the
same? That may be nothing but Self-love; but your Religion injoyns you to love
your Enemies; and it is but a sorry expression of this Love to bite and devour
one another for unnecessary matters. It were better (as One says) that Caesar
should break all Pollio's curious Glasses, than they should break the bond of
Charity; or that the breach of them should be the occasion of so much
inhumanity of Brethren one against another. Let Charity therefore guide the
Magistrate in making and executing Civil Laws; let Charity accompany Christ's
Ministers in their Studies, Pulpits, and Behavior to their People. Let Charity
be maintained by all the Laity toward one another: Then shall we have that
Unity, Peace and Concor^^, which we solemnly pray for; this Dove will bring
back the Olive Branch into the Ark of the Church.

7. Avoid Extremes. Do not labor to screw up one another to the utmost. It is
observed, that every Peace, that is concluded upon rigorous or disadvantageous
terms, endures but a while; the aggrieved party will take the first opportunity
of relief, as an over-rented Tenant to throw up his Lease. Conscience must be
wary, but it would be easy in matters of Religion; and therefore should be
directed, but may not, indeed cannot be forced contrary to it is Sentiments.
When a late French King had earnestly solicited a great Statesman that was
retiring from the Court, to leave with him some of his most Politic
Observations, and to that end had locked him up in his Closset, only with Pen,
Ink, and Paper: It is said, that he only took several sheets of Paper, and
wrote in the top of the sheet Modus: in the middle Modus, and in the bottom
again Modu^: advertising his Master thereby, that the sum of all Prudence in
Government was to observe a Mean in his Administrations.

Indeed if one Party have all the Truth on their side, it is most fit, the
others should yield themselves to be their Prisoners: But if that be not
evident, as it is scarce probable, it is most equal that each do move toward
the other, as far as they can, or else they will never come together. If the
things in question be any way necessary, God forbid that ye should refuse them;
if they be not, God forbid that ye should urge them. It was King James his
^ence to Cardinal Peron -- Quare existimat ejus Majestas nullam ad incundam
concordiam breviorem viam sore, quam si diligenter separentur necessaria a non
necessariis; and ut de necessariis conveniat, omnis opera insumatur: in non
necessariis, libertati Christiana locus detur: That is, The next way to
Concord, is to distinguish between things that are necessary, and to endeavor
a full Agreement in those; and things that are not necessary, and to allow a
Christian Liberty in these. Not that in dissuading you from extremes, I would
commend Lukewarmness or halting in the course that men have chosen; but that
they so govern their Resolution by Wisdom and Charity, that they may not
unnecessarily provoke, grieve or exasperate others, who perhaps have as sound
hearts if not as clear heads as themselves. It was a Great and a Wise Man's
Motto, Mediocria firma; and a true Proverb among the Vulgar, Too-too will break
in two.

8. Mind every one his own business. The Apostle gives this Rule, 1 These. 4.11.
That ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, as we have commanded
you. It is not a thing Arbitrary but Commanded: And that upon good Reason; for
when men want employment, or have Employments too mean for their spirits, or
having good Callings do neglect them, they are fit Instruments to stir up
Contention; these permit their Tongues to walk through the Earth, and will
exercise themselves in things too high for them; these collect and disperse all
the invidious Narrations they can meet with, and make no Conscience of wounding
every man's Reputation that is on the other side: By all which they greatly
contribute to the heightning and exasperating the Differences that are among
us; and in short, they are the seventh sort of People that are abomination to
the Lord, namely, such as sow Discord among brethren, Prove. 6.19. If therefore
men would mind first and chiefly the business of their own Souls, and exercise
themselves in this, to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God,
and toward men; if they would keep their own Vineyards, weed up those tares
which spring up in their own Hearts, and stir up the Graces of God's Holy
Spirit in them; and then travel in birth with earnest endeavors for the
Conversion and Salvation of their own poor Children and Servants; and then be
diligent in their temporal Callings, they would have neither list nor leisure
to wander about from house to house, from Alehouse to Tavern, from Tavern to
Coffee-house, as they do; and are not only idle but busybodies, speaking
things they ought not, like those Women which are reproved, 1 Timothy 5.13.

Every Man has his particular Post and Province to attend; and, I grant,
besides his Domestic Concerns, he is bound in Conscience to promote the good
of the Town, Parish, City and Nation whereunto he belongs; and in consequence
thereto wisely and resolutely to asse^ and preserve all the Privileges
belonging to any of them, and conscionably to discharge the respective Duties
incumbent upon him; but this intitles no private Person to be correcting their
Governors, instructing their ^^nisters, turning the World upside down,
disquieting themselves and others, and leaving bad impressions upon those they
converse withal; whereas our great business should be to have the Salt of
Grace and Truth in our selves, and to have and further peace with one another.

9. Observe that good Old Rule, Of doing to others as you would be done to. You
would have others to bear with you, and why will not you bear with others? you
would have the best sense put upon your words, actions and carriages, and why
will not you put the best sense on their words, actions and carriages? you
would not be imposed on, censured, reproached, back-bitten, slandered; no more
should you impose upon others, or censure them, or reproach, or back-bite, or
slander them. I may say to you as Chrysostom, on that Mat. 7.12. Let thy own
Will here be thy Law. Let not this Rule which was reverenced by Heathens, be
trampled on by Christians. It Is true, Error cannot reasonably expect the same
regard from Truth, as the Truth may from Error; yet erroneous Persons, whose
errors are not mortal, should no more be devoured by the servants of Truth,
than those who have right on their side, by those that are in the wrong. Those
who have not otherwise forfeited the repute of sobriety, piety and honesty,
save only that they cannot be of your mind; let them still be so esteemed and
treated, as you your selves desire to be esteemed and treated, if any contrary
Party should ever have Wind and Sun with them. Remember how this melted
Sesostris a Pagan into Compassion, when he observed one of his Royal Captives
who helped to draw his Charlot, looking wistly on the Wheel, how the part now
lowest was presently uppermost; so that he, considering the mutability of these
sublunary things, released him from that bondage. And however, forget not what
the Holy Ghost says, Jam. 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that
shows no mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment.

10. My last Advice is, to Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: This every one may
do, and this every one ought to do. Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy walls, and
prosperity within thy palaces. There are few greater Reasons for our solemn
Fasting and Prayer than this: If some Plague, or War, or Drought come upon us,
we reckon it is high time to Fast and Pray: But alas! those are in themselves
but Miseries, but our Contentions are so our Miseries, that they are our sins
also: Those will but destroy some of our People, but Uncharitable Contentions
will consume us all. But whatever Others do herein, let it be every sincere
Christian's care to lay holy violence to Heaven upon this Account. You have
done all that is in your Power to restore Love and Peace, and it is in vain;
try th^^ what God can do, Abi in cellam, and dic miserere Deus. He can make Men
to be of one mind in a House, City and Nation: He can bow the Hearts of a whole
Nation, even as the Heart of one man, and that in a moment of time; He can
bring the Wolf, and the Lion, and the Lamb to feed together, so that they shall
not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain, Isa. 65, 25. And O that the
Prayer of our most Blessed Savior, Joh. 17.21. may yet prevail with God to
pour down a spirit of Love and Peace into us all!

In the mean time, let all those that are passive, that are upright, humble,
and quiet, comfort themselves with Salvian's saying, Insectantur nos, and in
nobis Deum. Christ is a fellow-sufferer with all that suffer as Christians; and
their design is against God himself, that devour his servants. And then pergant
nostrae patientiae praecones (...), beatos nos hoc modo facient, dum vellent
miseros. They that speak and write all manner of evil of you, so it be falfely,
while they endeavor to render you miserable, do thereby make you happy. True
Virtue and Piety shines most in the fire, and therefore in Patience possess
your Souls, if you can possess nothing else.

And for Others, if after all Warnings and Endeavors, their Hearts be still
filled with Rancour, and bent upon mischief, we must leave them to St.
Augustine's Sentence, Quos Deus vult perdere, prius dementat. There is a God
who tells his Servants wanderings, and puts their tears in his bottle, and who
will execute judgment upon all that have spoken or done hardly toward them; and
though they may support themselves with their present impunity and prosperity,
yet the Lord of that servant; that began to smite his fellow servants, will
come in a day he looked not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of,
and shall cut him asunder, Matthew. 24.50. And though they may think it a long
time to that day, they will find there is a longer space after it. They that
choose the Fire, sha^^ have their fill of it: For to them that are contentious
there remains indignation and wrath, and Fire that is everlasting.

But I despair not of so much Remorse in such as have without Prejudice and
with Consideration read these Pages, but that they will awake and shake off the
Enchantment which has possessed them; and discerning their Sin and our common
Danger, they will embrace all their faithful Brethren, and become sincere
lovers of Truth and Peace; which effect the God of Love and Peace work in us
all by his Holy Spirit, for the sake of the Prince of Peace, Jesus Christ our
Redeemer. Amen. Amen.

Quest. From what Fear of Death are the Children of God delivered by Christ,
and by what Means does He deliver them from it? SERMON IV.
HEB. II. 15. And deliver them who through fear of Death were all their life
time subject unto bondage.
IN this, and in the foregoing Verse, you have some Account of the design and
end of our Lord Jesus Christ in his Incarnation and Passion. There were diverse
weighty Reasons why he assumed our Nature, and therein subjected himself to
Death, and two of them are told us in this Context.

1. That he might destroy the Devil.

2. That he might deliver the Elect People of God.

1. That he might destroy the Devil, who is described to be one that had the
power of Death; not the supreme, but a subordinate Power of Death; a Power of
Death as God's Executioner to inflict it, and affright men with it; to make it
terrible and formidable to them, by heightning their guilty Fears, and
representing to them its dreadful consequents. In these, and in diverse other
respects, that might be mentioned, the Devil is said to have the Power of
Death. Him (as it follows) has Christ destroyed: That is, disarmed and
disabled. Christ has not destroyed him as to his being and substance, but as
to his Power and Authority over the Children and chosen of God: And this Christ
did by his own Death; Through, or by death he destroyed him that had the power
of Death, viz. The Devil. It was upon the Cross that be spoiled Principalities
and Powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.

2. To come to what I intend, another End and reason of Christ's Incarnation
and Passion, was, that he might deliver the Elect People of God: These he calls
the Children, in the foregoing Verse; not the Children of Men, as some expound
it, but the Children of God: Such Children as the Father had given the Son, so
they are said to be Ver. 13. Behold (says Christ) I and the Children which thou
have given me; such as were predestined to the adoption of Children, as it is
phras'd, Ephesians. 1.5. These the Text also describes, and tells us in what
Condition they were by Nature; Through fear of Death they were all their
lifetime subject to bondage. By all their Life time you must understand all
that time which they lived before they were delivered. This is the Condition of
the Elect of God, as they come into the World, they are not only subject unto
Death, but unto the Fear of Death, and unto bondage by reason thereof. The word
((...)) which is rendered subject, signifies they were held fast, and manacled,
as Birds that are taken in a snare, or as Malefactors that are going to their
Execution. The word ((...)) which is rendered bondage, signifies a state of
servitude or slavery, such as men dislike but cannot avoid: One calls it a
poenal disquietment or perplexity of mind, that arises from a sense of misery,
that a man would fain be rid of and cannot; it is a Yoke whereby his Neck is
galled, but he cannot put it off; and if he should be released from it by any
undue ways or means, it would be to his farther detriment and danger in the
end. Now from this Fear of Death the Children are said to be delivered by
Christ. There are many evils from which he redeems and delivers them; he
delivers them from the bondage of sin and Satan, from the rigor and Curse of
the Law, from everlasting Punishment and Wrath to come, and he delivers them
also from the Fear of Death: This is implied, if it be not expressed in the
Text; for upon the mentioning of their deliverance he gives this description of
the Persons that are delivered, that they w^^e such as were afraid of Death,
and liable to continual bondage by reason thereof. Hence all Expositors, both
ancient and modern, do rationally infer, That the Fear of Death is one of
those evils from whence we are delivered by Jesus Christ.

The Text thus briefly opened, administers a fair occasion of resolving this
Case or Question. From what Fear of Death are the Children of God delivered by
Jesus Christ, and by what means does he deliver them from it?

I shall break this Question in two; and enquire,

1. From what Fear of Death the Children of God are delivered from by Jesus
Christ? And then,

2. By what Means or Methods he does deliver them from it?

1. From what Fear of Death are the Children of God delivered by Jesus Christ?
That I may resolve this Question aright, I must distinguish of the Fear of
Death.

1. There is a natural Fear of Death: This is common to all Men as Men, and
it is more or less in them according to their different Constitutions, and other
accidental Occurrences. This is nothing else but Natures aversation to it is own
dissolution, and in it is self it is a sinless infirmity, such as sickness,
weariness, or the like. To be loath or afraid to dye, is humane and inseparable
from the nature of man; this fear of Death is found with the best of men.
Nature (as one says) has a share in them as well as in others, and will work
as Nature, or like it self. The Apostle Paul tells us how good godly men are
unwilling to be unclothed, and to put off the body. 2 Cor. 5.4.
Our blessed Savior (who was a true though not a mere Man) without the least
impeachment of the Holiness and Perfection of his humane Nature, expressed at
some times an aversion to death: John 12.27. Mark 14.35.
This therefore is not the fear of Death of which the Text speaks, and from
which the Children of God are delivered by Jesus Christ.

2. There is a slavish Fear of Death, which has Torment in it, or which
torments the Souls of men, which fills their hearts with terrors and
distractions, which discomposeth their minds, and unfits them for the duties of
their general or particular callings, and totally disables them from
prosecuting the things that belong to their Peace and Welfare. This is that
fear of Death of which the Text speaks, and from which the Children are
delivered, such as genders unto bondage, and is servile or slavish; a fear of
Death as poenal, and drawing after it everlasting punishment: This fear of
Death takes hold of carnal men; they are not so much afraid of Death, as of
that which the Scripture calls the second Death; Revel. 2.11. and 20.6. Heb.
9.26.
it is that which follows after death, that makes it so formidable to them;
after Death (as that Text speaks) comes Judgment, when they must receive
according to the things which they have done in the Body. When they dye, they
must launch out into an endless Ocean, and go the way (as Job says) from whence
they shall never return: Job 16.22.
And if Death overtakes them in their unregenerate state and condition, then it
will be an entrance or inlet into outer darkness, where there is weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth. These and suchlike are the considerations that
make Death so dreadful to the Children of Men, that give it the denomination
of the King of Terrors, and of terrible things the most terrible; they are not
(as one said) afraid to dye, but they are afraid to be damned. Hence it is,
that though Death be terrible to all men, yet it is most terrible to those
whose Consciences are awakened, and whose understandings are enlightened; who
have been instructed in the Knowledge of God, and of a future State of
Retribution. Death (as one observes) is not half so terrible to a Heathen, as
it is to an ungodly Christian; Heathen men are in the dark, and see but little
of that which is the true terror of Death: But enlightened Christians, who have
been acquainted with the Scripture, who know that the Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; Romans 1.18. 1
Cor. 6.9. Psalm. 9.17. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, that the wicked
shall be turned into Hell, and all Nations and people that forget God; that
Jesus Christ shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel,
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: That the greatest part (by far) of the
wages of sin, which is eternal damnation, shall be paid in another World. These
are they that are surrounded with the slavish fears of Death.

It Is true, that many wicked Persons who live under the Gospel, are under none
of these terrors; but then it is because they look on Death at a great distance
from them, and the remoteness of any Object, though in it is self never so
terrible, takes away the fear of it.

Or else it is because they are over-busied and taken up about the things of
the World, as the lust of the flesh, or of the eyes, or the pride of life; and
if any thoughts of Death, and of the World to come arise in their minds, they
are presently smothered and stifled by worldly objects and diversions. Cain was
a while afraid of Death, he thought every one that met him would slay him, but
by and by he gets into the Land of Nod, and there he falls a building of
Cities, and does so immerse or drown himself in the affairs of the World, that
by little and little the slavish fear he had of Death, did wear out of his mind.

Or else it is because of their Atheism or Infidelity, there is a great deal of
this amongst professed Christians. All wicked men (as the Apostle Paul says)
are (...), Ephesians. 2.12.
without God in the World, or as it may be rendered, they are Atheists in the
World: They are all practical Atheists, and too many are Atheists in Opinion
likewise; they say in their Hearts, though they don't speak it out with their
Tongues, that there is no God; Psalm. 14.1.
they have not a thorough belief of a Deity, or of a future State of Rewards
and Punishments.

Or else it is, in the last place, because of their great Security. Multitudes
of professed Christians are fast asleep in their sins; they give up themselves
sinfully, and many of them are given up of God judicially, to a spirit of
slumber and of deep sleep: And when this is the case with men, no wonder they
are without any dread of Death, or Hell, or any thing else. You know when a Man
is in a deep sleep, he fears no danger whatsoever.

These and suchlike are the reasons, why many carnal persons do spend their
days in mirth and sensuality, without any actual fear of Death, or of it is
dreadful consequents: But then it must be remembered, that these very persons
are subject or liable thereunto; and if God awaken their Consciences, and rouse
them out of their security, Job 24.17. Psalm. 55.4, 5.
then they are (as it is in Job) in the terrors of the shadow of death; horror
overwhelmes them, (as it is in that Psalm) and the terrors of death fall upon
them: Like Foelix, they fall a trembling, and like Belshazzar their knees are
ready to smite one against another.

It Is time now, that I should come to the second branch of the Question, which
is,

By what Means and Methods are the Children of God delivered by Christ from the
fear of Death?

To this I shall return an Answer: First, By showing you what Christ has
already done; and then, Secondly, What he continues still to do in order to
this end.

1. I shall show you, what Christ has already done to deliver or free the
Children of God from the fear of Death: He himself in his own Person has
suffered or tasted death for them. This is every where declared in the New
Testament, and it is hinted to us in the Text. Christ by death, that is, by his
own death, has delivered the Children from the fear of death. The death of
Christ has made Death to look with another face than formerly it had: As the
Wood that Moses cast into the waters of Marah did alter their property, so the
Death of Christ has altered the property of Death, and taken away the
bitterness and formidableness thereof; hence it is that the death of Believers
in Scripture is called a Sleep: It is said of Stephen when he dyed, (though it
was by a violent death) That he fell asleep: Acts 7.60.
And the Apostle Paul says, 1 These. 4.14. That as Jesus dyed and rose again,
even so them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. It is well observed
by some, that the Apostle does seem purposely to vary the Phrase, he says, that
Jesus dyed, and that the Saints sleep in Him; and the reason is, because that
he sustained Death with all its terrors, that so it might become a calm and
quiet sleep unto the Saints. The Death of Christ must needs sweeten the
fore-thoughts of death to the Children and Chosen of God, because that he died
in their stead; he did not only dye in their Nature, but in their Room; not
only for rheir good, but also in their stead. You know how it was with the
Sacrifices of old, they were put to death in the room of the Sacrificers: So it
was with Christ, the truth of those Sacrifices, he was put to death in the room
of Sinners, and they died in him as their Representative. Now this serves to
free them from an enthralling fear of Death; why should they fear that, which
Christ has undergone in their place and room.

There are two things more to be considered under this Head.

(1.) Christ by his Death has taken away the true Reason of the fear of Death,
that is, the Curse and Condemnation of the Law of God. The Apostle Paul says,
That the sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and the strength of sin is the Law: Death has it is wounding power from sin,
and sin has it is condemning power from the Law; it is the Law that discovers
the nature of sin, that enhanceth the guilt of sin, that denounces
condemnation against him that commits it; and it is this condemnation of the Law
that torments the Sinner with the fear of death. Now Christ having in our stead
subjected himself to death, and so undergone the penalty of the Law, he has
taken away the Curse and condemning power thereof. He has, says the Apostle
Paul, redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being himself made a Curse for us.
Gal. 3.13.
There is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.
The death of Christ has satisfied every demand of the broken Law: The Law of
God has nothing now to lay to the charge of God's Elect, it owns the Blood of
Christ to be a sufficient compensation for their violations of it; there are no
petty satisfactions to be made by themselves, since Christ has made complete
satisfaction for them, and in their behalf. The Law now is ready to acquit the
Believer, it says, Thou may live for all me, and live eternally; I require
not thy death as being satisfied with the Death of Christ: When thou dyest a
natural death, it is rather to comply with the appointment of God, and in order
to the raising up hereafter, a better and more curious Fabric of thy Body,
than to satisfy any demand of mine.

(2.) Christ by his Death has deprived the Devil of the power of death; and by
this means also he has delivered the Children from a servile fear of Death.
The Devil (as I said before) has a power to terrify the Consciences of men,
with the apprehension of death, and the dreadful consequents thereof; you see
into what bondage he brings men upon this account, many times he brings the
Children themselves into the suburbs of Hell, and lays them under dreadful
terrors and horrors; the pains of Hell, says one of them, gat hold of me, I
found trouble and sorrow; Psalm. 116.3. 2 Samuel 22.6.
and again at another time, the sorrows of death compassed me about: Now this
power of Satan is taken away by the Death of Christ. The Blood of Christ has
canceled, or at least contracted and lessened his Commission: So that when he
assaults a Believer in this kind, he is easily resisted; the Devil gives ground
if the Believer stands his ground; he cannot prevail against a Child of God,
unless God give him a special Commission, or unless he yields to his
Temptation; being justified by Faith in the Death of Christ, we have that peace
which all the Devils in Hell are not able to disturb; the weapons of his power,
and warfare in this way, are wrested out of his hands by the Death of Christ.
Thus you see what Christ has already done.

2. Let me proceed to show you what he continues still to do, in order to the
freeing and delivering the Children of God from the fear of death, and the
bondage that ensues thereon.

(1.) He works and increases those Graces of his Spirit in them which are
destructive hereof, and opposite hereunto: you will say, which are they?

1. There is the Grace of Faith: This is the Grace that conquers the World,
that conquers the Devil, and that conquers also the slavish fear of Death. This
excellent Grace of Faith has such an excellent hand in the conquering of all
these, that it is called the conquest and victory it is self; This is the
victory, (says the Apostle John,) 1 John 5.4. even your Faith: Our Savior
tells Peter, Luke 22.31, 32. That Satan had desired to have him, that he might
sift him as Wheat. And with what did he sift and shake him? Why, it was with
the fear of Death; he was afraid they would deal with him, as they did with his
Master: It was his slavish fear of Death that made him deny Christ, and to do
it once and again; but anon he recovered himself, and got above this fear, he
was re^dy by and by boldly to confess Christ, and that in the face of Death and
danger. How came this about? Why it was by means of Faith: Christ had prayed
for him that his Faith should not fail; it may be said of those that are
fearful of death, that they are of little Faith.

2. A second Grace is Love: An ardent love of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, will banish all slavish fear of death out of the Soul, 1 John 4.18.
There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear. Of what fear does
he speak? The next words tell you, he speaks of slavish tormenting fear, of
that fear which has torment: By perfect love, he means a greater measure and
degree of love. I said but now of fearful Christians, that they have but
little Faith, I may add also, that they have but little Love, for perfect or
great love expells all tormenting and servile fear.

3. A third Grace is Hope: The very nature of Hope is quite contrary to fear.
Where there is a Hope of eternal life, there can be no prevailing fear of
Death. It Is said of the righteous, Prove. 14.32.
that they have Hope in their death, and those that have Hope in their death,
they are not afraid to dye. Then Hope does more especially free us from an
inordinate fear of Death, when it grows up to that which the Scripture calls
The full assurance of Faith: Heb. 6.11.
this is a gracious Gift which the Father bestows upon many of his Children;
they know that they are in him, that they are pass ^^ from death to life; 1
John 2.5.3.14. 2 Cor. 5.1.
that when the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, they shall have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Ay, this
is that which steels and fortifies them against the fear and terror of Death.
This leads me to consider of a second way or means whereby Christ delivers the
Children from a slavish fear of death.

(2.) He delivers them from it by convincing and parswading them that they
shall not be Losers, but Gainers, yea, great gainers thereby. It was this
persuasion that made the Apostle Paul to desire death, rather than to dread it;
I desire (says he) to depart, or to be dissolved, which is far better, Philip.
1.23. And again, v. 21. he says, For me to dye is gain. It were easy here to
expatiate, and show the advantage, the exceeding great advantage that Believers
have by Death: It is commonly said to consist in these two things, in a freedom
from all Evil, in the fruition of all Good.

1. It consists in a freedom from all Evil, which is sub-divided into the evil
of Sorrow, and the evil of Sin. Believers are freed by Death from the evil of
Sorrow. It Is one blessed Notion of the life to come, that God will wipe off all
tears from his peoples eyes, and remove all sorrow, and causes of Sorrow from
their Hearts. Believers also are freed by Death from the evil of sin, which is
indeed the greatest evil, the evil of evils, all the evils of sorrow are but
the effects and fruits of the evil of sin. By Death they are delivered from all
actual sins, not only from Fleshly but Spiritual filthiness: Now they are
delivered ordinarily from inordinate actions, but then also from inordinate
affections; they shall never any more be troubled with Pride, Passion,
Discontent, Unbelief, or the like. By Death also they are discharged from
Original sin, and all remainders thereof; when the Body dies, Believers are rid
of that body of death which dwells in them, and is always present with them;
they no more complain of themselves as wretched creatures upon the account
thereof.

2. It consists in the fruition of all Good. Believers when they dye they enjoy
God Himself, who is the chiefest Good; He is bonum in quae omnia bona; all
other things that are good and desirable are comprised in him, as the
Sunbeams are in the Sun: the Saints enjoyment of God in this life, is a Heaven
upon Earth, but our enjoyment of God after death will be the Heaven of Heavens.
David says in one Place, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? There are Saints and Angels and Archangels in
Heaven, (says Musculus,) with whom David and such as he will have to do; but
what are these to God? Believers will not barely enjoy God after death, but they
will enjoy him fully. In this life they enjoy a little of God; and oh how sweet
and refreshing it is! But in the life to come they shall have as much enjoyment
of God as their hearts can wish, or hold: Now they enjoy God in the use of
means, in Prayer, in hearing the Word, and in receiving the Lords Supper; but
hereafter they shall have not only a full, but an immediate fruition of God:
Now they see the Face of God in the Glass of his Word and Ordinances, and (...)
what a lovely sight is it! But then they shall see God face to face, and what
tongue can mention, or heart imagine the loveliness of that sight?

If it were not too great a digression, I could readily demonstrate the gain
and advantage of Death from other Topics. Believers in the other life, shall
possess and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, which does more transcend the
Kingdoms of this World, and all the glory of them, than the light of the Sun
does excel the light of a Candle; they shall be most gloriously perfected both
in their Souls, and in their Bodies; their vile bodies at the Resurrection,
shall be changed and fashioned like unto the glorious body of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Phil. 3.21.
Their gain and happiness will be greatly augmented in the other life, by the
work and employment that they shall do, and by the Society and Company that
they shall have; they shall associate with an innumerable company of Angels,
and with just men made perfect; with many of their dearest Relations and
Friends, whom whilst alive they dearly loved, and whose death and departure
hence they greatly lamented. Let me close this with one Text, it is in 1 John
3.2. There the Apostle tells, us wherein the gain and glory of the godly
consists after death, he sums it up in two things, They shall be like
Christ, and they shall see him as he is. Ay, that is the happiness of the
Children when they dye, it lies in Conformity to Christ, and in the Vision, the
beatifical Vision of him.

3. Christ delivers Believers from the slavish fear of Death, by giving them
some real Foretastes of Heaven, and of Eternal Life: It is usual with God to
give his People some Cluster of the Grapes of Canaan here in the Wilderness; to
give them some drops and sips of that new Wine, which they shall drink full
draughts of in the Kingdom of their Father; he gives them to taste not only of
the good Word of God, and of the heavenly gift, but of the powers of the world
to come; and this sets them a longing to have their fill thereof: Even as the
Gauls when they had tasted the Wines of Italy, they were not satisfied to have
those Wines brought to them, but they would go and possess the Land where they
grew. This foretaste of Heaven is that which the Scripture calls The earnest of
our Inheritance; Ephesians. 1.14.
it is both a pledge and a small part of that Happiness which the Saints shall
hereafter inherit: Romans 8.23.
We (says the Apostle) that have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our
selves, do groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body: By Redemption he means the Resurrection of the Body at
the last day, which the Scripture calls a Resurrection unto Life. The Apostle
knew there could be no Redemption of the Body without the dissolution thereof;
therefore in waiting for the one, he must needs also wait for the other. The
Apostle and the Believers with him did groan for this; they were so far from
groaning under the fears of Death, that they rather groaned to be partakers of
that which follows after Death, nay, In this they groaned earnestly, 2 Cor. 5.2.
as he elsewhere speaks: Now whence was this, but from their having the
first fruits of the Spirit, which are all one with the foretastes of Heaven and
everlasting Happiness, of which I have been speaking. Those that whilst they
live have these tastes of future Blessedness, they are not afraid of Death, the
door by which they enter into the full enjoyment of them.

Having thus resolved this Question in both its Branches, give me leave to make
some short Application of what I have said, and I Will conclude.

I would Exhort you that are the Children of God; (and Oh that all that read
these Lines were of the number of such) I would earnestly beseech and exhort
you to prize and improve this great Privilege, to wit, a deliverance from the
slavish Fear of Death.

1. Be persuaded to Prize it; it is a Privilege that was purchased for you at
a dear rate, even with the precious Blood of Christ. Oh what a blessed
Privilege is this, not only to be delivered from the second Death, but also
from the servile and enthralling fear of the first Death! This is the benefit
and blessing that the Apostle Paul seems to be so much affected with: Thanks be
to God (says he) who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ:
What Victory does he mean? The foregoing words tell us, 1 Cor. 15.5^.
that he means a Victory over Death, with all its fearful concomitants and
consequents. Death is become a Friend, and not an Enemy; it is without any Sting
or Curse attending of it: Oh! this is owing to Jesus Christ, he is the great
Deliverer; he has so ordered the matter, that though we must dye, yet we shall
not be in bondage all our days, through a slavish Fear of Death.

2. Be persuaded to Improve this Privilege; put in for a part and share
therein. See to it, that you be Partakers of this benefit of Christ's Death, to
live without any tormenting fear of your own. You Will say, how shall we help it?
can we contribute any thing toward our Deliverance from the Fear of Death? I
answer, You may: And therefore as I have shown you what Christ has done, and
does to deliver you; so now give me leave to show you farther what you must do
toward your own Deliverance. I Will give you some short hints of things, which
you may enlarge upon at your leisure in your own thoughts.

1. You must be earnest with God that he would apply to you this benefit of his
Sons Death, by his blessed Spirit. Oh! beg of God, and that with all
importunity, that the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus may set you free from a
tormenting Fear of Death: This has been done for others, and who can tell but
it may be done for you likewise; Ezekiel. 36.37.
only remember that God will be inquired of by you, to do this for you.

2. You must give all diligence to the attaining of a greater measure of Faith,
Love, and Hope; yea, to the attaining of a full Assurance of Hope; it is by
means hereof (as you heard before) that the Children are delivered in part from
the Fear of Death. It Is Grace, and the Assurance of Grace that is the Anchor of
the Soul, that keeps it safe from the fear of Shipwreck.

3. You must resist the Devil, and withstand his Temptations, not only to other
sins, but to the sin of Despondency in particular: You must not give place to
Satan, nor give way to enthralling Fear, when he tempts you thereunto.
Remember, (as I told you before) it is the Law of the Combat betwixt the Devil
and you, that if you fight, he shall fly; if you stand your ground, he must
give ground.

4. You must have frequent Meditation of Death, and of the gain that is to be
gotten thereby; the frequent thoughts hereof will familiarize Death to you, and
if once Death and you be familiar together, you will not be so much afraid of it.

5. You must have frequent Contemplation also of the Resurrection. You find
that Job had conquered the Fear of Death, and if you read the 9th. Chapter of
Job, and Ver. 26, 27. you will see that his thoughts of the Resurrection were
very helpful to him herein. He is a Conqueror over the Fear of Death, that
considers with the Apostle Paul, that the Grave shall lose its Victory. 1 Cor.
15.56.
It was the saying of a worthy Minister of our Nation, That nothing lifted him
over the Fear of Death, like the belief and Meditation of the Resurrection to
Eternal Life.

6. You must take heed of living or allowing your selves in any known Sin; if
it be as your right eye, you must pull it out. The guilt of one known sin will
put a sting into Death, and make it very terrible to you, especially in your
near approaches unto it.

7. You must look to it, that your whole Conversation be ordered arigh^* and
that it be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. When all is done, an upright and
holy Life is one of the best Defenses against the dread of Death. We are told
in two several Chapters of the Proverbs, that Righteousness delivers from
Death: Prove. 10.2.11.14.
Whatever other Interpretations those words will admit of, I am sure this is a
true one, That it delivers from a slavish Fear of Death. Hear how David speaks,
he bids you Mark the perfect man, and behold the righteous or upright, Psalm.
37.37.
for the the end of that man is peace. The Apostle Paul was above the Fear of
Death, he seemed rather to desire than dread it, (as I said before) and well it
might be thus with him, seeing he lived in all good Conscience; and had this
Testimony from his Conscience, That in simplicity and godly sincerity, Acts
23.1. 2 Cor. 1.12.
and not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God, he had his Conversation
in the World.

Quest. How is Gospel Grace the best Motive to Holiness? SERMON V.
2 TIMOTHY II. 19. And let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
Iniquity.
1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.2.
THis Epistle was wrote by St. Paul to his Son Timothy (whom he had begot in the
Faith,) as his fatherly Blessing a little before his death; for he was at the
writing of it in bonds, Chapter 1. verse. 8. and he had finished his course. Chapter 4.
v. 7. This very Paul whom God had so miraculously delivered at Damascus, 2 Cor.
11.32. Acts 16.26.
and at Philippi, and where not? -- for whosoever reads the Catalogue of his
sufferings, 1 Cor. 11.26. may wonder how so many evils could befall any one
man; but as they did abound, deliverance did proportionably abound: yet now
when God had no further work for him to do, he calls his Servant home to
receive his wages; and being so near the end of his Race, Phil. 3.14.
Paul stretches out his hand, for the prize of his high calling in Christ Jesus.

And if we cannot but allow the Children of God to grow in Grace, and in
Knowledge; 2 Pet. 3.18.
and that the Lights of God's setting up in his Church, are brightest a little
before they are extinguished by death: Timothy, and all Believers, had reason
to mind especially the words of this dying Man: This Epistle being his last
Will and Testament, in which every Member of Christ's Church has a Legacy left
unto him' more precious (if understood and improved) than Gold that perish.

In the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle requires, that those things he
had taught, Verse. 2.
might be continued still to be taught, and to be practiced. He knew that there
was no getting into Heaven per saltum; that there was no coming to Glory, but
by taking the degrees (at least, arriving at the truth) of Grace; and therefore
here as elsewhere in all his Epistles, so many Exhortations and Dehortations
are to be found, so many Precepts about what we are to do, and Cautions about
what we are to avoid. The Philosopher treating of Happiness, observes, Arist.
Rhet.
(...). The Way is narrow, and the Danger is great, and they are the best
Friends to us that bid us beware, and are jealous lest we should mistake.

But withal the Apostle here meets with a great Obstacle, a Stone or Rock of
Offense, which he endeavors to remove out of our way.

Hymenaeus and Philetus, two considerable persons, and probably highly
accounted of in the Church (for we find no such difficulty arose at the turning
away of Phygellus and Hermogenes, of whom mention is made, Chap. 1. verse. 15.)
Apostatized from the Truth; and whether they were by their Office, Teachers, or
no, is not certain; but that their breath was infectious, and that their words
did eat as a canker, is testified verse. 17.

That their error was in a fundamental Article, (denying the Resurrection) is
very obvious; for as the Apostle says, If there be no Resurrection, then is our
preaching vain, and our believing vain; 1 Cor. 15.13.14.
yet such a darkness, or perverseness rather, has the Fall, and our corruption
betrayed us to, that without God cause his Light to shine into us, there is
nothing so senceless, irrational, or unscriptural, which we shall not embrace
for truth.

Hence these wretches did not perish alone, but overthrew the Faith of some,
(verse. 18.) (...), or temporary Believers, who assented to the Truths of the
Gospel, and were reckoned amongst the Faithful; nay, and they shrewdly shak'd
the Faith of others. When men in a Field-battle, see such fall who stood next
them, or were before them, their hearts are apt to misgive them, least the next
Bullet should take them off also.

Especially true Believers, knowing so much of the deceitfulness of their own
hearts, as to make them humble all their days, and being so charitable toward
others, and apt to believe any better than themselves: Their concern also being
so great for their Souls, Hinc lacrymae, they cry, we shall one day fall.

To such the Apostle accommodates these words: Nevertheless, as if he had said,
Granting all that any fearful and weak (but true) Believers amongst you can
Object, that so many fall away, and such as seemed so resolute, have
Apostatized, Mat. 7.24.25.
Yet the Foundation of God stands sure: Tho they who built upon the Sand,
with their statelyest and highest confidence, fell; yet every building upon the
Rock should hold out all winds and weathers.

To prove which, the Apostle offers a double security.

1. From the Election and foreknowledge of God. The Lord knows them that are
his: Verba sensus and intellectus ponunt affectum and effectum, is a known
Rule, to understand Scripture by. God does not only know his People, as he does
all other men, and all other Creatures in the World; but he has a special eye
upon every one of them, and a special care for them as well as Love unto them;
and this is as it were the Privy Seal which every Child of God may take for his
security.

2. They have also a broad Seal, their Sanctification; which comparatively at
least, is evident, for it is as a light set on a Candlestick, and is visible,
more or less unto all; at least they may have the Testimony of a good
Conscience, ^ Cor. 1.12.
which is as a thousand Witnesses.

Some have thought that these words may relate to an ancient custom of putting
words and sentences upon such stones as were laid for Foundations in buildings,
in which something of the Builder, or Author, or at least something thought
worthy by him to be perpetuated, Romans 11.33.
was inserted; and what more worthy than that which I have now mentioned of the
depth of the Riches of the Wisdom, and Knowledge of God? which may be allowed
to be on the top of this foundation-stone, and round about the Stone, that
which follows; Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from
Iniquity.

Which words I shall at present be confined to; they may be understood as a
seasonable Caution, least any that heard of the Continuance and Assurance of
Gods Care and Love should be puffed up: for as the Apostle would not have the
defection of others to cause any to despond; so he would by no means have
others security upon any pretensions whatsoever, to cause them to presume; but
as a wise Physician, having prescribed so great a Cordial against their
fainting at the sight of others falling, ^. Cor 3.9.
by telling them, that they who were of God's Building, should stand; he gives
them direction how to use this Cordial, least, if unwarily taken, it might
strengthen their distemper: in which Direction we may take notice,

1. Upon whom this Injunction is laid, viz. Every one that names the Name of
Christ.

2. The Injunction it is self, viz. To depart from Iniquity; which last words,
to depart from Iniquity, I shall suppose to be so far understood, as that I
need not to stay in the Explication of them. All Sin is an unequal and unjust
thing; against our Duty which we owe to God or Man, it is (...). But the manner
of the Apostles expression is equivalent to a Negative Form, which is most
comprehensive; and therefore Eight of the Ten Commandments at least are
Negative, but they do all include the contrary positive. As the forbidding us
to have any other God, commands us to take Jehovah for our God, and to Love and
Obey him accordingly. And thus the departing from Iniquity includes not only
the leaving of all Sin, but the following after, and practicing of Holiness in
all Duties that are required, in every Relation and Condition: So that there is
no Duty to God or Man, but he that names the Name of Christ is required to
practice it; nor no Sin against God or Man, against the first or second Table;
but he is enjoined to forsake it; which will farther appear when we have
considered,

1. What is meant by naming the Name of Christ, or who is understood by the
Apostle to name this Name of Christ.

2. That such an one as thus names the Name of Christ, is especially concerned
and obliged to depart from Iniquity.

As to the first, What is meant by naming the Name of Christ? What is meant by
naming the name of Christ.
it is evident, that it cannot be understood of a bare speaking of the word
Christ, sounding the letters of which it is made, which Pagans and Mahometans
may do, and the wicked Jews often did; but by naming the Name of Christ, is
understood, a making some special use of it, or of him that is signified by it:
We must therefore consider,

That wheresoever there is any thing of Divine Revelation, there man's Fall and
Misery is manifested: for tho by natural Light it could be perceived that all
was not well with Man; hence the many complaints, that Nature dealt very hardly
with Man, the noblest visible Creature, that had rule and command over the rest
of the Creation, yet that he was so short-lived, so full of misery and trouble,
Job 5.7.
which seemed as natural to him, as for sparks to fly upward: This was for a
lamentation amongst the very Heathen: But (...), whence all this mischief came
they knew not. In Scripture only we find the Cause of our disease, and the
Remedy against it; and here, Vbi invenitur venenum, juxta latus ejus nascitur
Antidotus. Where we may discover the Malady, we may seek for and discover the
Remedy.

In the Word of God we have Means prescribed, Institutions appointed, which
being used, and observed, will help and recover us.

In the former Economy and Dispensation, they were veiled under Shadows and
Types. The wages of Sin being Death, Genesis 2.17. Romans 6.23.
every Transgressor of the Law forfeits his Life, and his sin cannot be
expiated but by Blood, it might justly have been his own blood, and no others:
But the Lawgiver being graciously pleased to accept of Animam vicariam,
another blood or life, such as he should appoint; he did for a while accept of
the sacrificing of Beasts in the stead of the Sinners, till the fullness of time
was come, in which he sent his Son (this Christ whom the Text mentions) to make
full satisfaction to his offended Justice, and by his Death to expiate for all
the sins of them that by Faith apply themselves unto him. Hence it is said, he
was made sin for us, and that he was bruised for our Iniquities, 2 Cor. 5.21.
Isa. 53.5.
and that the chastisement of our peace was upon him.

But as under the Law the Transgressor was to lay his hand upon the Beast to be
sacrificed, thereby acknowledging that he was the Creature that had deserved to
dye, and desiring that the death of the Beast to be sacrificed might be
accepted in his stead; Lev. 3.2.4.4.
so under the Gospel we must apply to Christ with a due sense of our sins, and
our deserving of death for them, and be accordingly affected with them.

Yet more, when all the outward Ceremonies were performed, the sacrificed Beast
accepted and slain, tho the Law according to the letter was satisfied, and a
legal Expiation did ensue, and a legal Atonement was made; yet if the Person
that brought the Sacrifice did not mortify his sin, as well as the Priest kill
the Sacrifice, his Conscience inwardly remained defiled, and God still provoked
and incensed: Nay, if the Sinner had done one without the other, killed his
Beast, and spared his sin alive, God looked upon it as a double Iniquity, for
so indeed it was; to acknowledge he had offended God, and to pretend that he
desired to be reconciled unto him, and yet to go on in provoking of him. Hence
God did forbid and reject their Sacrifices, tho of his own appointment; Psalm.
50.9.
I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy fold: Nay, he
declares that in such a case, he that kills an Ox, Isa. 66.3.
is as if he slew a Man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs
neck; he that offers an Oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that
burns incense, as if he blessed an Idol; and elsewhere, Bring no more vain
oblations, Isa. 1.3.
incense is an abomination unto me.

Now that all Sacrifices were Types of Christ, through whom only they had their
virtue and efficacy, is confessed by all Christians: Thus Christ was a Lamb
slain from the foundation of the World: Rev. 13.8.
And the Christian when affected with his sin, and desirous to be reconciled to
God, whom by his sin he has provoked, lays the hand of his Faith upon Christ,
and humbly beggs that Christ's Death for him may be accepted instead of his
own, which he had deserved. But now (to give a further illustration of my Text
and Subject) if he pleads (tho for Christ's sake) for pardon of sin, and yet
retains a love and liking to his sin; if he desires never so earnestly that he
may not dye for sin, and yet is willing that his sin may live, these are vain
Oblations, vain Prayers, but most real and dreadful provocations. There is a
(...), a Beast within us, which we must kill, I mean every corruption, or no
Sacrifice (no, not of the Lamb of God himself,) will be accepted for us; Habes
in te, quod occidas. Every Man has some sin or other within him (nay, a whole
body of sin,) which he must slay, by at least a sincere continued endeavor, or
all Legal and Gospel sacrifices too in the World will not avail him: we must
mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13.
or we cannot live.

And now we may easily understand who they are that name the Name of Christ.
And to what purpose? For our Savior is he who is so called (the same with
Messiah) from his being anointed by God to those Offices of King, Priest and
Prophet to his Church.

All Christians name the name of Christ.
Now those that apply themselves unto him for Life and Salvation, are
necessitated to name his Name: And so they do,

1. In their Profession.
(1.) In their Profession. Hence we are called Christians, and we own the Name,
and rejoice and glory in it, as a name divinely imposed on the Disciples of the
Blessed Jesus, by God himself, for so (...) does import; and in our Baptism we
agree to be listed amongst his Soldiers, Acts 11.26.
and to fight under his Banner; nay, we name Christ's Name, and it is our
ambition to be called by it.

1. Owning him as our Father: 1 Pet. 1.23.
By whose Spirit we are born again through his Word; and as Jacob would have his
Name named on the Children of Joseph, Genesis 48.16.
thereby owning and respecting of them as if they were his own Children; so
does Christ look upon all Believers as his Children, and condescends to have
his Name named on them; nay, he names them his Children, when he says, Here am
I, Hebr. 2.13. Isa. 8.18.
and the Children which thou have given me.

2. Looking upon Christ as our Husband; 2 Cor. 11.2.
to whom this Apostle tells us that we are espoused: It is as ancient as the
Prophet Isaiah's time, to have the Wife called by the name of her Husband, Isa.
4.1.
which is the meaning of their desire, Let us be called by thy name, i. e. that
being married they might change their names for that of their Husbands; and
this was the custom amongst many of the Romans, (as still amongst us,) Vbi tu
Caius ibi ego Caia.

And thus all that look upon Christ as their Father, and hope for the
Inheritance he has so dearly bought for them, or whosoever beholds him as
their Husband, and esteem his Love, and long for the enjoying of him, are
concerned in this Obligation, to depart from Iniquity. As also,

(2.) In their Petition naming Christ. 2. In their Petition.
In every Prayer to be sure they name the Name of Christ, in that they ask all
in his Name, that is, in his strength, and for his sake: So indeed runs the
Promise, John 14.13, 14.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, and in the next verse; If ye shall ask any
thing in my name, I will do it; especially after our Saviors Ascension, when
he had paid the price for his People, and for all the Pardons and Graces,
Strength or Comfort they should want, he bids them expressly to mention his
Name; relying on his Merit for the obtaining of them: He told them a little
before his going to suffer for them, John 16.24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing
in my Name; tho doubtless they had prayed according as they were commanded, (
Luke 11.2.) the Lords Prayer, day by day, and implicitly at least desired all
those mercies through a Mediator: They knew that the High Priest was to appear
with the Names of God's Israel, and to offer up Incense for them; yet clearly
and explicitly Christ's own Apostles did not enjoy this great privilege. And
doubtless some new advantages have accrewed to the Disciples of Christ (since
that Prayer was recommended, or commanded) by his Death and Resurrection: Now
the explicit naming of Christ is a very great encouragement in Prayer, whether
in those, or any other words.

More particularly, Pardon and Acceptance, Justification and Peace with God,
must especially be desired in the Name of Christ, and for his sake only, for he
was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
and by being a Curse for us, has redeemed us from the Curse; he was as
accursed in our stead, and did bear what the Curse did threaten to
transgressors; which being done, and God's Justice and the Law satisfied, it
follows, that in him God is well-pleased: Mat. 3.17.17.5.
which words are not only mentioned by the other Evangelists, but repeated
again in that extraordinary voice at his Transfiguration, and are the more
remarkable, in that it is not said, That Christ was God's beloved Son, with
whom God was pleased, (tho that was a truth from all Eternity,) but that God is
pleased in him; that is, that God is well-pleased with all that are by Faith
united to him, and are as it were ingrafted in him. Hence we are said to be
justified freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: Romans 3.24.
So that all who are liable to condemnation, have no other Remedy, no hope, or
help; but in Christ Jesus; Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 6.11.
and there is no other Name by which they can be saved, but by the name of
Christ, for we are justified by Faith in his Name.

Justification (properly speaking) is not the making of any righteous or holy,
(tho none are justified, who are not also sanctified) but it is the accepting
of any person (who duly comes in the Name of Christ,) as righteous and holy,
for so he is in God's sight, Christ's Righteousness being imputed unto him; and
for Christ's sake he becomes one of those blessed ones unto whom the Lord does
not impute sin, Psalm. 32.2.
as the Psalmist expresses it in those very words.

En Graecis bonis Latina fecere non bona. Ter.
Whatsoever the import of the Latin word, from whence our English word
Justification may seem to be, the words (...), and (...), used by the Apostle,
are Juridical words, and relate to a Court of Judicature, where when the
accused Party upon sufficient ground is acquitted, he is said to be justified;
and Justification or Absolution is the proper Antitheton to Condemnation, as by
the whole of St. Paul to the Romans, chapter 8.33. may appear.

Now we must suppose that the convinced Sinner sets himself as in God's sight,
and having seriously considered what the Law threatens, dreading that Curse and
Wrath to come; hearing his Conscience pleading guilty to the Accusations of the
Law against him, he seems to hear the Judge asking of him what he has to say
for himself, why the sentence of death should not pass upon him; here it is
that he names Christ, and remembers in Prayer unto God, what the Blessed Jesus
did and suffered unto the utmost for him, he became sin for him; he could not
be a Sinner, but he was dealt withal as if he had been one, because he was in
the Sinners stead: Now the convinced Sinner urges God's Promise and Covenant
with Christ, that He should see of the travel of his Soul, etc. Thus the Name
of Christ is the Souls strong Tower, Isa 53.11. Prove. 18.10. Isa. 44.24.
he runs unto it and is safe, and in Christ (who is also the Lord Jehovah)
he has righteousness and strength. Again,

Is the penitent Sinner so oppressed, that words fail him, only sighs and
groans (which in his case are never wanting) are frequent with him, the Name of
Christ upholds him; for he knows (as God said of Aaron) that he can speak well,
Exodus 4.14. Heb. 7.25.
and he ever lives to make intercession for him.

I do not wonder that our being thus made whole only through the Name of Christ
should be by so many gainsayed and ridiculed; Romans 10.3. 2 Cor. 5.21.
for it is hard to bring our Thoughts into subjection unto the Kingdom of God
and Jesus Christ: and when I read it so often called the Righteousness of God
in Scripture, (as surely he alone could find out the Ransom, etc.) I know it
must be something beyond the ordinary apprehension of Man; for no man knows the
things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11.
and Nil diurnum nox capit.

May this suffice concerning the Subject of my Text, viz. He that names the
Name of Christ. We must now speak of the Injunction that is laid upon him, or
the Direction given unto him, Let every such an One depart from Iniquity: In
which we shall have cause to enquire how it consists with the naming of Christ,
(especially for our Justification,) as I have explained it; and these four
Particulars I shall offer to your consideration.

1. That departing from Iniquity (or Holiness) is no Cause of our
Justification, properly taken; notwithstanding,

2. Holiness has an Influence upon our Salvation; and also,

3. Holiness is indispensibly necessary to all justified Persons.

4. Nay more, Free Justification, or Justification by God's Free Grace in Jesus
Christ, is the best, and most forcible Incentive unto Holiness. Departing from
Iniquity is no cause of Justification.


Mercy is only from something in God.


1. For all God's Works of Mercy arise from something in God himself, who is
the fountain of Mercy, or of living waters; and Judgments are said to be his
strange Work, because he never proceeds to them but when he is necessitated to
vindicate the Glory of his injured Attributes; that is, Jer. 17.13.
the cause of all God's severities is out of himself, and only to be found in
the provocations of his Creatures. The Cause of all his Mercies are his own
Bowels and Compassions, and wholly in and from himself: O Israel, Hos. 13.9.
thy destruction is from thy self, but in me is thy help: Nay, when God says
unto the Soul, Live, Ezekiel. 16.6.
he sees it in its Blood; and it remains in its Blood, until he says unto it,
Live: for in the Apostles Phrase, Romans 4.5, 6.
he justifies the ungodly and the sinners; that is, God does for Christ's sake
discharge and acquit Sinners who flee unto him, and desire Pardon and
Acceptance through the Blood of his Son, The Lamb of God that thus takes away the
sin of the World.

And yet thus the Judge of all the Earth does right too, when he makes Christ
to become Righteousness unto the believing and penitent Sinners; for by the
same Reason and Justice that they fell in one Adam, they may be made alive in
another, and where is the Disputer? Romans 5.19.


2. There is no commutative Justice betwixt God and his Creature: 2. Reason.
There is no commutative Justice between God and his Creature.
We can give no Equivalent for the least mercy, the least crumb, the least drop
(to be sure) as coming from God. The giver puts a suitable price upon the Gift;
as the Giver is in excellency, so is the Gift in esteem; what a Prince or a
King gives, is much magnified, tho many times otherwise a trifle; but here is
Eternal Life, and a Crown immortal given by the great King of Heaven and Earth,
to such as know themselves to be but dust and ashes, and to be sure they cry,
Grace, Zech. 4.7.
Grace unto it.

God gets nothing by all our holiest Performances, devoutest Prayers, Job. 22.2.
and most spiritual Duties: Our righeousness cannot profit him. Can a Man be
profitable unto God? that is, he cannot by any ways be profitable unto his
Maker: no, it is for our sakes that God has given us his Commandments and
Institutions, that we might by them mend the frame and temper of our hearts,
and be fitted for to enjoy him to all Eternity; in the mean while to stay our
longing after him, he affords us to see him thus, tho as in a glass darkly.

But if God could be promerited (as they speak) and obliged, it must be by some
things that are our own; and Secondly, It must be by such things as are not due
upon any other account whatsoever: 1 Cor. 4.7
Now what have thou which thou have not received? Thy Faculties and Powers, thy
Grace and Goodness, a Heart and Will to do good, every Enlargement of Prayer,
and Exercise of Faith, or any other Grace, is his; it is he that works in us to
will and to do accord-to his own good pleasure; Phil. 2.13. Luke 17.9.
and if thanks be not due to a Servant when he does what he is bidden, (as our
Savior expresses,) what can be due to a Creature from his Creator, who gives
him Food and Raiment, Life and Breath, and all things? Where is there any
proportion betwixt these, and any returns we can make? In all Trading or
Exchanging, there it is (...), a quid for quo, which cannot be given to God by
us.

(2.) Departing from Iniquity has an Influence upon our Salvation, tho it be
not a Cause of our Salvation: Departing from Iniquity has its influence upon
(tho no cause of) our salvation.
And tho it cannot be admitted as a foregoing condition of our Justification,
for the Reasons above given; yet it must be acknowledged to be a condition in
the Heirs of Salvation, for without holiness no Man shall see God: And rightly
understood, Holiness is such a thing with which we shall be saved, Heb. 12.14.
and to be sure without which we shall not be saved. The Heathens made the way
to the Temple of Honor through the Temple of Virtue: And amongst Christians,
Grace is the way to Glory; that is, walking in the way of God's Commandments,
brings us to the place where God is, which way is as necessary to be walked in
by all those that will go to God at last, as a path that leads to a Town or
place must be gone in, by all that will come thither.

It Is true, good Works do not go before Justification, but follow after; for
being sanctified also when we are justified, we are created unto good works in
Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 2.10.
Till we have a Being we cannot act, and till the Root be made good, the Fruit
cannot be good. Amongst the Moralists it may still be a Rule, Bona agendo,
sumus boni; By doing good we become good; but this must not be so strictly
urged in Divinity, where the Fountain must be cleansed before the Stream can
run pure: indeed after Conversion and Regeneration, nothing increases the
habits of Grace more than the actings of Grace; and in this, natural and
infused Habits do agree; they are both strengthened by acting of them.
Whatsoever Grace you would have strong and lively in the Soul; let it be
conscienciously and frequently exercised, and it will become so: This has many
a probatum est amongst the Children of God.

The consideration of these things do give us a true account, why in Scripture
we shall find good Works and Holiness so much magnified on the one hand, and
yet sometimes on the other hand so debased: Not to make proof of the former,
(the extolling good works, which deservedly is every where in Scripture:) Yet
withal we shall find them very diminutively spoken of in Scripture; as where
it is said, That Our righteousnesses are as filthy Rags; and also where the
Apostle says, Isa. 64.6.
That he accounts his blamelesness and righteousness which is in the Law, but
loss, nay dung.

That is to say, when good Works are considered with any relation to
Justification, or when they are compared with the Righteousness of Christ, we
cannot think or speak too meanly of them: But when Holiness is considered as a
Fruit of the Spirit, always accompanying Justification, and a requisite
preparative for Glory, and an Ornament to our Profession; in the mean while we
cannot too much extol it, nor be too zealous and earnest in the acquiring and
practicing of it; especially considering that

(3.) Holiness is indispensibly necessary unto all justified Persons. Holiness
is indispensably cessary to justified Ones.
Departing from Iniquity is the Duty of all that name the Name of Christ.

As it was necessary that Christ should take upon him our Flesh; so it is as
necessary that we should receive from him his Spirit; he must become Flesh of
our flesh, and Bone of our bone, that he might pay our debt in the same nature
which contracted it; so we must partake of his Spirit, that we may be
capacitated to receive the Fruit of his Redemption, and be one with him.

Nay all Promises, the very Covenant of Grace its self is thus to be
understood, viz. That the Beneficiaries, or they that receive benefit by them,
should be holy, otherwise they might not, without presumption, hope for any
good from them: And tho we do not meet with this always expressed; yet it is
always to be understood, Jer. 22.24.
God expressly declaring, that tho Coniah a wicked Person, was as a Signet upon
his right hand, yet he would pluck him thence.

And when God engages to continue his Favor unto any, he engages to continue
them in a fit disposition to receive his Favor. Thus to the Posterity of
David, Psalm. 89.32.
which in a Type were the Representatives of the spiritual Seed that should be
raised to our Elder Brother-Christ Jesus, whom David typified, it was promised
that they should endure for ever; but then in case of forsaking of God's Law,
he would visit their Transgressions with a Rod, Verse. 29.
or he would use such means (tho irksome for him to do, and grievous for them
to bear,) as might bring them back unto himself by Repentance. Nay were the
Promise of God never so plain and full in any case unto any Person, yet there
is always a Subintelligitur of such a demeanor as may be fit to receive the
mercy promised, as we may see in the case of Eli and his Family, which God does
acknowledge that he had promised the Priesthood to; and yet upon the
provocations of Eli and his Sons, 1 Samuel 2.30.
God says, Be it far from me, that I should perform it: Neither is God
unrighteous, or his Veracity to be excepted against, for so long as we have to
do with so Hol^ a God, all Covenants are to be understood so, as may agree with
his Holiness, and not otherwise.

Thou say, But they are but vain words, that thou have such Mercies promised
unto thee, and treasured up for thee, whereas unless thou be sanctified and
born again, thou can not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, John 3.3.
or so much as see the Kingdom of God, or be benefited by any promise that God
has made: As it is storyed of one who was very debauched and wicked, and taking
up a Bible, which by his Religion he had not been acquainted with, (being a
Papist) he confessed that whatsoever Book that was, it made against him: So
unless thou do sincerely labor after holiness, there is never a word in all
the Book of God that speaks any comfort unto thee, none of the Fruit that grows
upon the Tree of Life can be tasted by thee.

This might be more evinced, if we fix our mind on these following Reasons.

1. Reason. From the Nature of God.
1. The first may be taken from the Nature of God, I mean the Essential Holiness
of this Nature, by which he cannot have communion with any one that is unholy,
no more than Light can have fellowship with Darkness; but he indispensibly
hates and opposes all wickedness, and has declared his Enmity against it. As
fire cannot but devour stubble, Isa. 5.24.
so God's Holiness will not suffer him to spare any whom he finds sin and guilt
upon: hence so many threatenings and denunciations of Judgments against it,
which do not linger, whatsoever the Sinner may think; neither can the Gospel
change God's Nature, or make him less to abhor sin. It is indeed a Declaration
of the way and means which God has ordained to exalt his Grace and Mercy to
the Sinner by, but it is in saving of him from his sin, and not with it. Nay,

2. Reason. From the requisites in the Gospel its self.
2. All the Privileges of the Gospel do include, or presuppose departing from
Iniquity. An unholy Person, whilst such, Ipsa salus non potest salvare;
Salvation its self cannot preserve. How did the Jews search every hole and
corner of their houses to find out leaven, and how earnestly did they cast it
away, or else the Paschal Lamb would not have availed them, and the destroying
Angel would not have passed from them: 1 Cor. 10.6.
And these things are our Examples, and tell us, that unless we industriously
search out and cast away the leaven of sin and wickedness, the very Death of
Christ, the Lamb of God, will profit us nothing. It Is as the first Principle of
the Christian Religion, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God; which the Apostle took for granted the Corinthians could not but know.
Verse. 10.
And what a Bead-roll is there of such as he declares shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God! No less than ten abominations are there mentioned to exclude
from Heaven, and some of them valued in common account but as Peccadillo's. Men
are apt to say of any sin, Is it not a little one, and my Soul shall live? But
as the Apostle there cautions, Be not deceived; deceits of this nature are
frequent, but very dangerous. And this is the Gospel to which we appeal, when
we are scared and frighted by the Law: But in all the Gospel there is nothing
that can take away, or lessen our Obligation to God's Commandments; but what
does every way straighten and strengthen it: Now we are bound with a double
Cord, which is harder to be broken, and it shows that sin under the Gospel has
acquired greater strength when it snaps it asunder.

Let us take a view of the Privileges of those that are saved by the Gospel,
and see how they are obliged to Holiness by them. Ephesians. 1.4.


1. Election is the first, and if we are chosen in Christ Jesus, the Apostle
tells us, that We are chosen in him, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him; 2 Pet. 1.10.
and if we should make our Calling and Election sure, it must be with fear and
trembling. The Book of Life is with God in Heaven; thou can not see thy Name
there, but it is transcribed for thy comfort in thy Heart when thou art
sanctified, and the more thou proceedest in Holiness, the more legible it will
be unto thee.

2. Our Vocation is unto Holiness. Does God call any of his to come from the
World and Sin unto him? As Christ called Saul, and His Sheep do hear his voice,
they are called to be Saints, Romans 1.7.
they are called to be made holy, and to be sanctified; whatsoever they were
before, when once they come to Christ, 1 Cor. 6.11.
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified: Christ comes by Water and Blood, and
not by Water or Blood only; and Christ is made of God unto us not only
Righteousness, but Sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.30.


3. Our Regeneration or being Born again, which the Gospel insists so much
upon, is in being made like unto God, 2 Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the Divine Nature, enabled to love what he loves, and to hate
what he hates, and to be conformed unto him in all things: So that God and
regenerate Ones have but one Will: Thus they are said to be created again unto
good works.

4. And what is Glory which we seek for, and endeavor after, Romans 2.7.
but only Holiness in perfection? Grace is Glory in the Bud, Glory is Grace in
the Flower; hence they are put together, and we are said to be called to Glory
and Virtue. Wheresoever true Grace is, 2 Pet. 1.3.
there will be Glory; and in whomsoever Glory is, there has been Grace. God
has put these two together, and let no Man put them asunder: As Laban's two
Daughters were disposed of; the Elder, tho less lovely, must be first accepted
by Jacob; Genesis 29.26.
so God deals with his two, Grace and Glory: Grace is the elder, and tho not so
desirable, every one would covet Glory: yet this is the Law of the Land, the
Younger must not be given before the Elder, you must woo for, and obtain Grace,
before you can be admitted to the enjoyment of Glory.

Nay, we are only so far Christians as we are like Christ in Principle and
Practice, as we partake of the Spirit which he had, and lead such a Life as he
did. Christian is not an empty name, and being called so, makes us not to be
so. Every one is not a Scholar, or an Artist in any faculty, who is called so:
Besides, Christianity is a practical Science, and thou have no more of it than
thou do practice. (Oh how little have most men!) The Heathen painted their
Deified Heroes with this sentence proceeding from them, Si feceritis sicut nos,
eritis sicut nos. We may imagine we hear our Savior telling us from Heaven: If
ye do as I did, ye shall be as I am.

And certainly, tho Heaven and the Glory of it be freely promised, and it is no
contradiction to say, that it is fully purchased, and sufficiently paid for,
Ephesians. 1.14.
being the Apostle calls it a purchased possession; yet there must be a
meetness and suitableness to it, in every one that shall be admitted to the
fruition of it: We must be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in Light. Col. 1.12.
What should an unholy heart do in Heaven? Heaven would not be Heaven unto it;
that is, it could not be a place of Bliss, and Joy unspeakable unto such. There
are no carnal delights, not so much as the here lawful (because necessary)
ones, of eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage: there is no Gold
and Silver to fill the Bags of the covetous Earthworms; no Dalilah's for the
Wantons; no Company to debauch and carouze with: If a Sermon or a Lord's day be
so tedious, when will it be gone? How unhappy would an unchanged, unsanctified
Soul think its self to hear perpetual Hallelujah's and Praises, to be confined
amongst the Souls of just men, and Holy Angels! God certainly will not cast his
Jewels before such Swine. Heb. 12.23, 14.


Besides, the Gospel does by no means take away the ground of that
Discrimination which will be at the last between the Sheep and Goats, between
them that shall stand on the right hand, and on the left, of the Judge of the
quick and dead. In the final Sentence there must be a Truth in what shall be
said to the Blessed; I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, Mat. 25.35. verse. 42.
as well as the final Condemnation of the Cursed, I was an hungered, and ye gave
me no meat, etc.

But I need not multiply Reasons, to prove that every one must depart from
Iniquity, even such as hope to be saved. For,

3. Reason. Taken from our very Natures. Psalm. 148.
3. It is writ in our very Natures, did we but understand them. Every Man that
receives a reasonable Soul, is by his receiving of it obliged to give God a
reasonable service: as all Creatures are called upon to glorify and praise
God; and they do it in their kind, by affording unto Man (who is their Priest,
and only can offer for them) cause of thanksgiving and admiration.

But Man owes most for himself, as having received most. There is no Man comes
into the World, but he has some of his Lord's Money entrusted with him, under
an Obligation and Charge to Occupy it until he come; and he has undertaken to
do so: Luke 19.13.
This is the (...), or the inessentiate Promise which every one is understood
to make at his Creation, viz. To perform all reasonable service, (and it is
such, whatsoever God commands) and to be subject to his Maker in all things.

And when this Promise or Oath is broken, Man cannot but be uneasy, his
Conscience accuses, condemns, torments him; so that it is indeed (...). A
wicked Man is in more trouble and pain in the pursuit of his lust, and
wickedness, than a good Man meets with in all the severest exercise of holiness.

The Soul that is renewed and born again, is so far from being disengaged from
Holiness, that its engagement is doubled, for he is redeemed, That he might
serve God in Holiness and Righteousness: Luke 1.74, 75.
God has chosen him for his Champion, to fight against The World, the Flesh,
and the Devil; and should such a one desert or yield, it were Cowardice or
Treachery: God expects greater matters from such, that being formed for
himself, he should show forth his praise. Isa. 43.21.


To be sure, no Act of Grace, no Gospel-priviledge or Advantage, present or to
come, can take away, or lessen our Obligation to become holy; for this being
the Law of our Creation, whilst we are God's Creatures, so made, so endued;
that is, whilst we have our beings, and we are at all: we carry our bonds about
with us, which we may not break without sinning against the Law of our
Creation, which it is impossible that any thing or matter in the Gospel (which
comes after it) should disanull.

But if Holiness be so absolutely necessary to Life and Happiness;

The Apostles propounded that Question unto our Savior upon the Observation
our Savior had made (the rich Young man having departed from him) of the very
great difficulty in the Salvation of a Rich man. It Is observable, that the
Disciples do not say, What rich man can then be saved? Mat. 19.25.
But being conscious that every Condition had its temptations, as a rich man
had his, so they had theirs, they therefore propound the question more
generally. To which, so far as my Subject leads me, I answer,

1. By Concession, that certainly there will be but few saved. very little One,
a little diminutive Flock. Luke 12.37.
Of the many that came out of Egypt how few entered Canaan! And if the Apostles
were so solicitous, when it was told them, that one of them (tho but one of the
twelve) was the Son of Perdition, how careful should we be, when our Savior
tells us, That straight is the way that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it. Mat. 7.14.
Who that thinks seriously on this, will not make the Apostles solicitous
Question, Is it I?

2. God does undertake for Holiness too, to enable all that in sense of their
inability come unto him in the Name of Christ: Nay, God knows them that are
his, and draws them unto Christ, who has received gifts for the rebellious,
Psalm. 68.18.
(good news for the humbled, penitent Sinner!) that the Lord God might dwell
amongst them: Nay, Christ has all fullness, Col. 1.19.
which it pleased the Father should be in Him. And God has promised to take
away the stony heart, and to give them a heart of Flesh: Ezekiel. 11.19.
As for others that perish in their Blood and Sin, God is righteous, for who of
them does what he could do, and ought to do? and God may do with his own (all
Grace is his) as he please.

3. A sincere Endeavor to depart from Iniquity, and to keep the Commandments
of God, shall be accepted at thy hand for Christ's sake. In the first Covenant
(according to the tenor of it) the Person was accepted only for the Works sake;
but in the Covenant of Grace, the Works are accepted for the Persons sake: if
thou have made thy Peace with God through Jesus Christ, and art beloved in him,
God will accept thee according to what thou have, 2 Cor. 8.12.
and not reject thee for what thou have not.

But be not mistaken, as if some sorry wishes, and faint endeavors after
Holiness were sufficient. Do men pursue so coldly and faintly things which they
value? especially if it be for their lives? therefore they shall be your
Judges: But having exceeded in the foregoing Particulars, (like those Children
that come first have usually the biggest portion) I must hasten to the fourth
and last, Particular.
and be brief in it. viz.

Free Pardon the best Motive to become holy.
(4.) This Grace of the Gospel, to wit, our Justification through the Name and
Merit of Jesus Christ, is the strongest Motive toward our departing from
Iniquity.

Though departing from Iniquity is in its self very good and necessary, yet the
Motive for such our departing does very much vary it. Our Savior taxes the
Scribes and Pharisees, that they did all their works to be seen of men, Mat.
23.5.
which was as a Fly in the Box of their precious Ointments; any good Action
ought to consist (ex integris causis) of good Causes in every respect. If the
Principle out of which it flows, or End to which it tends be not good, the
whole work is marred, it cannot be a good work. Our business at present, is to
enquire about the End which we propound in our Obedience, in which,

Meriting, or retaliating, may not move us.
(1.) If it be to Expiate for by past offenses, or to merit undeserved Favors,
it must needs be abominable in the sight of God, being the highest act of Pride
or Presumption that can be imagined. Let our works be what they will, Isa. 64.6.
(though the Best are as filthy Rags,) if they be offered unto God by way of
Barter or Exchange; they become most abominable: As if God stood in need of
something that we have, or that we were so sufficient as to be able to benefit
God too.

(2.) To depart from Iniquity, or to labor in Holiness, But Thankfulness to
God, excites us.
in order to express our Thankfulness unto God, for his mercies in Jesus
Christ, is most grateful and most forcible.

1. It must be most Acceptable unto God, being it speaks the Soul truly
affected with, and sensible of God's Free Grace and Mercy. It does not come to
God with any Purpose to deserve at God's hands, Psalm. 103.1, 2.
but with a What shall I render? With many blessings of God for his pardoning
of his Iniquity, and healing his diseases.

2. Thankfulness (as low as sin has sunk Man) is yet left, as visibly engraven
on the Nature of Man: Hence the Heathen could account Unthankfulness as the
sum of all vices; Isa. 1.3.
and Scripture makes the unkthankfull Man worse than a Beast. Now if
Thankfulness remain and be cogent, what can oblige more than the Mercies of God
in Christ? If we serve them that give us Food and Raiment, what Service is too
much for Him that gives us all things? Nay, that gives us Christ, and with him
all things. Oh! there is a vast difference in having Christ, (the Peace and
Love of God through Him,) in having Christ, his Spirit to enable us to improve
what we have from God; and not having Christ with our present Enjoyments.
Methinks when we see our Children or Servants run or go where we would have
them, do any thing to please or gratify us; we cannot but blush to think how
little we do, and how awkward it is what we do for God.

Who is it that considers the Love of God in Jesus Christ, and can forbear
crying out with the Psalmist, Truly Lord, I am thy servant, I am thy servant?
Psalm. 116.16.
(Away with all formal Pops:) It is ingeminated, because of our Obligation to
God's service, from our Redemption, as well as from our Creation: And if thou
do say so, as thou do in effect in every Prayer, let not God find thee
with a Lie in thy mouth.

God's and Christ's Love constrains us.
3. Love unto God for all his glorious Excellencies, especially for his Mercy in
Christ Jesus, is the best Principle of Holiness, and our departing from
Iniquity.

Prove. 23.26.
God requires his Children to give him their Heart: And indeed, in all the Acts
of Religion and Devotion, what the Heart does not do, is looked upon by God as
not done at all: Nay, it were well for the Hypocrite, that all his outside
Services and formal Professions had never been. 2 These. 3.5.
This made St. Paul to pray for the Thessalonians, That the Lord would direct
their Hearts into the Love of God.

Cant. 8.7.
Now Love is as a Fire which many waters cannot quench: Difficulties will be
overcome, and Obedience will be permanent where true Love to God is. And this
Love in the Soul to God is begun by, and flows from God's Love first unto the
Soul, 1 John 4.19.
(as Fire kindles Fire;) he loved us first; and had it not been a very great
Flame, it could never have thawed and warmed our frozen Hearts. We do but
(...), Love when we are beloved; but when we are made sensible of Christ's Love,
the freeness, efficacy and usefulness of it, (I know not what to say first or
last concerning it, 2 Cor. 5.14.
) it passes Knowledge, then we are constrained; that is, as effectually, tho
inwardly, forced, as any strong man can by his strength force us to do any
outward act.

He that acts according to any of Gods Commandments, out of hope to merit by
them, may act out of Love indeed, but it must be then self-love, to obtain, as
he vainly thinks, by his Obedience, Eternal Happiness. Our Love of God should
exceed Self-love, as far as God himself exceeds us, which is infinitely. Our
Love of God is a Virtue, and the Foundation of all the rest: Our Love of our
selves (thus taken) is a sin, and a Mother-sin, the Cause of all the rest of
our sins.

To hear a penitent and believing Sinner exulting in his Praises unto God,
professing his deep sense of his Mercies, considering what Returns he shall
make unto God, Psalm. 51.12.
(for the Spirit of God is a free and ingenuous Spirit,) it were the
pleasantest and desirablest Music on this side of the heavenly Quire. Thou
may set about it thy self, and make this Melody in thy own Heart: Ephesians. 5.19.
Ruminate on what God has done for thee, and what he daily does: What thou
owe for the Mercies of every Day, and Night, and Moment; and what suitable
sense thou ought to have of them; and to thy poor power, thy little all,
what Returns thou ought to make for them. But when thou set thy self as
in the sight of God, to consider what thou should return to thy God for his
Mercy in Christ Jesus; thou will find that thy self, thy Service, thy All, is
too little; but you must cry out with Mr. Herbert, Alas! my God, I know not
what.

APPLICATION.
I cannot wholly omit Application, Applicat.
though I have in a great measure prevented my self: Take what remains in these
few Uses.

(1.) This Justifies God: For no Doctrine, Instruct. This justifies God.
no Dispensation of his did ever countenance Sin. Nay, nothing does show so
plainly Gods hatred of Sin, as the Gospel does. If we take a walk in the
Garden, where our Savior sweat those drops of Blood; Luke 22.44. Matthew. 27.46.
or be within hearing of that lamentable Cry, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? If we ask, Why does the Son of God thus cry out, what makes him
thus sweat? The Gospel informs us, that it was our Sin that pressed this Blood
out of him, and forced this bitter Cry from him: Luke 23.31.
And if this be done in the green tree, what shall be done to the dry?

It discovers vain Pretensions.
(2.) This discovers the groundless Pretensions, and vain Confidence of most
men; who live in Sin, and yet hope (or would seem to hope) to live with God.
Oh! Know ye not your own selves? Read the whole Testament over; either that is
not the Gospel, or you cannot receive comfort from it: Not one good word is
there in it, to any in whom sin reigns; unless those Threatenings of Hell and
Destruction may be called good, (Oh that they might prove so!) to awaken you to
a due sense of your Condition, and be as a Schoolmaster to lead, or drive you
to Christ; to take him for your Lord as well as for your Savior; if he be not
both, 2 Pet. 1.11. Chapter 2.20.
he is neither unto you. You cannot be saved by your Book, could you read it,
and understand it never so well, unless you practice it also. Christ must be in
you, Coloss. 1.27. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16:
(his Spirit entertained in your Heart,) or there is no Hope of Glory for you:
All good Hope is through Grace. Thou flatterest thy self that God is thy
Father, and so thou call him in thy Prayers; but if thou be not like him,
2 Pet. 2.4.
if thou partakest not of His divine Nature, thou take his Name in vain, and
he will not hold thee guiltless, (for thy Prayers will be turned into sin unto
thee: Psalm. 109.12.
) And yet Pray thou must, or thou runnest into a greater Iniquity; by
neglecting to acknowledge thy dependence upon God, thou will at least border
upon Atheism. Oh what a miserable Dilemma does thy wickedness betray thee unto!

If thou had a design to dishonor God, thou could not more effectually
execute it, than by saying, That thou art his Servant or Child, and by sin to
disparage him thy Father, or Lord and Master: As he must needs provoke any
great and noble Person, who in the Livery of his Servant, or Garb of his Child,
acts filthiness and abominations.

And as for laying hold on Christ, and shrouding of thy self amongst his
Retinue, calling him thy Husband, or professing him to be thy Head, what a
Monster (pardon the expression, I tremble to mention it,) would make him? As
if he were a Dagon, whose head was like a Man, but his lower parts like
stinking Fish. The truth is, the pretensions of such unto Salvation, would make
Scripture a Lie, and Christ the Minister of unrighteousness, Gal. 2.17. ult.
which God forbid.

Do thou think it will serve thy turn well enough, if thou can but with
Stephen say at last, Acts 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit? Unless thy Spirit be sanctified, and sins washed
away in his Blood, thou will now soon hear him say unto thee, Depart thou
Cursed into everlasting fire.

Men, Brethren, and Fathers, hear our Apology: If we be taxed, because we
maintain free Grace, and Free Justification, that we make a way for free
sinning, and free living, and doing what we please, and yet geting thus into
Heaven at last, and that we may be assured of it in the mean while; we justly
abomnate such Inferences, and think they can least of all be inferred from such
premises. May we all agree to stand up for God, and to oppose sin to our
outmost, which is the last, and only Use that remains, and the best, and
suitablest to the Text that can be made.

It is foretold concerning the times of the Gospel, Exhortation. To Depart from
Iniquity. Hos. 3.5.
That in the latter days they should fear the Lord and his goodness: Oh that
these words might be now fulfilled! That men would fear to abuse the Goodness
of God, which is designed to lead them to Repentance. Romans 2.4.
The richest and sweetest Wines (they say) make the sharpest Vinegar: I am sure
sweetest Promises, when neglected or abused, issue in the severest Torments; Woe
to thee Chorazin, woe to thee Bethsaida; why is so sad a woe denounced, (beyond
that on Ty^e and Sidon)? Mat. 11.21.23.
And Capernaum too is threatened with a more terrible destruction than that of
Sodom and Gomorrah, because those miserable ones perished without having had
the Means of Salvation declared in the Gospel amongst them; these refused to
come to be saved, though invited by Christ himself. The hotter the Sunbeams
are, the more they harden the Clay that will not be softened by it.

If you keep your Sins now, you do despite unto the Spirit of Grace that in the
Gospel, Heb. 10.29.
invites, persuades, and offers to enable you to forsake them: You trample
under foot the precious Blood of the Son of God, which should wash you from all
your Impurities; you count it as a common thing, and let it be spilt in vain,
as water on the ground. One brings in Satan upbraiding our Savior with the
fewness of his Followers, and true Disciples; he (Satan) did never any good for
Man, he is Man's Enemy on all accounts; and yet upon the offer of any foolish
Toy, Profit or Pleasure, he is obeyed, and men yield themselves up to his
service, tho so hard and tyrannical a Master. Our Blessed Lord became Man,
lived meanly, dyed miserably, that he might gain Obedience to such just
Precepts and Commandments that are for our good, and yet has so very few that
will serve and obey him: Jerem. 2.12. Romans 14.9. 1 Cor. 15.27. Ephesians. 1.22. Psalm.
66.7.
Be astonished, O ye Heavens; Therefore Christ dyed, and rose, and revived,
that he might be Lord of the living and of the dead: All things are put under
his feet, and by his Power he rules over all, whether they will or no: But
Christ died and fuffered, that he might obtain a willing People, Psalm. 110.3.
such as out of choice and love would obey him.

And do any of you pretend to be bought with a Price, even with the precious
Blood of the Son of God? 1 Cor. 6.20.7.23.
then you ought to glorify him with those Bodies and Spirits which are his.

It Is now Sacrilege indeed to rob God, and he will bring thee into Judgment,
and indite thee (ay, and condemn thee too, without serious and timely
Repentance,) for it. And, Oh how hot is that Hell which is especially prepared
for Hypocrites and Unbelievers!

Thy Obligation is as strict, (and as you heard) stricter too under the Gospel,
than it was to any under the Law, and yet the Transgressors of the Law deserved
then to perish without mercy, Heb. 10.28.
and how shall we escape?

One difference there is indeed betwixt the Law and the Gospel: The Law
required the full tale of Brick, but afforded no Straw: It required Obedience,
but the Law (as such) afforded no means to perform it. The Means how thou
may be enabled to do the Will of God, and to depart from Iniquity, is
manifested in the Gospel; here thou art shown a fullness in Christ, Colos. 1.19.
out of which thou may have Grace for Grace.

Thou art invited to come, thou art assured to be welcome; bring never so many
empty Vessels, thou may fill them freely; it is in vain to say, Thou can
not, Isa. 55.1.
but thou will not be holy. Did any now, in a sense of their weakness and
inability, beg Strength and Power from him to do his Will, and walk in his
Commandments, there would be Joy in Heaven for such a Petition, Luke 15.7, 10.
so readily would it be heard and granted.

You have heard, that every one that calls himself a Christian, does it
therefore, because he pretends to be married to Jesus Christ; but in good
earnest (to use the words of Rebecka's Friends,) Will thou go with this Man?
Will thou go with Christ, and be a Follower of him? Say, and do it, Genesis 24.58.
and God speed thee well: I cannot wish thee more Joy than thou will find.

And Oh what Advantages would this bring, would Christians be what they
profess, and would seem to be! were the Precepts of Christ obeyed, and his Life
copyed out by them, this would mend the World indeed. Pagans and Mahometans,
Papists and Jews would not be able to stand out against the power of Godliness,
when it once appear in the lives of Men: Not only Ministers may Convert, 1.
Pet. 3.1.
but even Women too; thus the Husband (the Apostle tells us,) may be gained to
Christ by his Wife; thus a Servant (that does his Service as to the Lord,) may
convert his Master.

Oh! up and be doing, your labor shall not be in vain: No, 1 Cor. 15.58.
but great shall be your Reward in Heaven: When you shall be taken up to shine
as the Stars in the Firmament for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3.


Matthew. 25.11.
But if you shall neglect or refuse, my Soul shall mourn in secret for you, as
knowing that the crying, Lord, Lord, will not avail you, nor any confident
Profession of Christ's Name, stand you in any stead. -- When the Deluge came,
how many perishing Wretches ran to the Ark, and laid hold on it, cried
earnestly for to be admitted into it, but in vain! Fac quod dicis, and fides
est.
You know whom the Ark represented, even this Christ, in whom alone is
Salvation: Oh get into him, by a true and living Faith, and that to day,
whilst it is called to day, 2 Pet. 2.1.
least swift destruction come upon you. 2 Cor. 5.11.
May we all so know and consider the terrors of the Lord, that we may be
persuaded.

Quest. What is that fullness of God every true Christian ought to pray, and
strive to be filled with? SERMON VI.
Ephesians. III. 19. And to know the Love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that
you might be filled with all the Fullness of God.

(...).


THESE words are a considerable part of that excellent Prayer put up to God by
the Apostle, for his beloved Ephesians: from verse. 16. to the end. And indeed
Prayer was his tried Engine by which he always could bring down supplies of
Grace, from the God of all Grace, for his own, and the Souls of others: In this
Branch of it, you will easily observe, he prays for Grace the End, and Grace
the Mean to reach that End.

1. He Prays for Grace the End. That ye might be filled with all the fullness of
God. This being the utmost of the Souls Perfection, ought to be the height of
its Ambition: beyond this we cannot reach, and therefore in the attainment of
this we must rest.

2. He Prays for Grace the Mean to compass that End, viz. To know the Love of
Christ which passes knowledge. As we grow up into a greater Measure of the
knowledge of the Love of Christ to us, we shall enjoy more of the fullness of
God in us.

But here we meet, in each of these parts of the Text, with an (...) or a
seeming contradiction in the Terms. To know the Love of Christ, which passes
knowledge? What is that, but to know what is unknowable? And to be filled with
all the fullness of God? What is that, but to comprehend, what is
incomprehensible? The narrow vessel of our Heart can no more contain the
boundless, and bottomless Ocean of the Divine fullness, than our weak
intellectual Eye can drink in the glorious Light of that knowledge.

And yet there are many such expressions in the Holy Scripture: Thus Moses,
Hebr. 11.27. saw him that was invisible. (...). He saw him by the Eye of Faith,
in the glass of a Revelation, whom he could not see by the Eye of Reason, in
the glass of Creation: And thus we are instructed in the Gospel, how to
approach that God who is unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16. To approach that God by
Jesus Christ, according to the Terms of the New Covenant, to whom considered
absolutely, in himself we could never approach.

Let us therefore first clear and remove the obscurity of the Phrases, that we
may more comfortably handle the Divine matter contained in them; Always taking
along with us this useful caution, That we run not away with a swelling
metaphor, and from thence form in our minds rude, undigested Notions of
Spiritual things; nor fancy we see Miracles, when we should content our selves
with Marvels.

(1.)
The former of these seeming repugnances, is, To know the Love of Christ which
passes knowledge? If this love of Christ passes knowledge; why do we pray,
why should we strive to know it? If it be our duty to pray that we may know it,
how is it supposed to pass knowledge? Must we endeavor to reach that which is
above all heights? To fathom that which is an Abyss and has no bottom? Or to
take the Dimensions of that, which is unmeasurable?

To remove this difficulty, there have been many expedients found out. 1. I.
Some carry the sense thus; To know the Love of Christ, which passes, or
surpasses the knowledge of all other things: There is an excellency, an
usefulness in the knowledge, of Christ's Love, which is not to be found in the
knowledgc of any thing else. A man may know to his own pride, to the Admiration
of others, he may have the knowledge of all Tongues, and Languages; may
understand all Arts and Sciences, may dive deep into the secrets of Nature; may
be profound in Worldly Policies, may have the Theory of all Religions true and
false, and yet when he comes to cast up his Accounts, shall find himself, never
the better, never the holier, indeed never the wiser, never the nearer
satisfaction till he can reach this blessed knowledge of the Love of Christ.

Only the excellency of the knowledge of the Love of Christ, consists herein.

1. It must be a knowledge of Christ's Love by way of Appropriation, to know
with the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. That he loved me, and gave himself for me.

2. By way of efficacious Operation; Rev. 1.5. That he loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood.

3. By way of Reflection; that his Love has kindled a mutual Love in our Souls
to him, 1 John 4.19. We love him because he first loved us.

4. By way of practical Subjection; when his Love subdues our Hearts to
himself, and constrains us to new obedience, 2 Cor. 5.14, The Love of Christ
constrains us; it restrains us from sinning against him, and engages us to obey
him: To know, that we may know, and make knowledge the end of it self is
nothing but vain curiosity: To know that we may be known, is nothing but
vainglorious arrogance. To know that we may make others know, is indeed an
edifying charity; but to know that we may be transformed into the image and
likeness of what we know of the Love of Christ, this is the true, the
excellent, the transcendent way of knowledge; And this was that knowledge of
Christ, and of his Love, which the Apostle set such a price upon, 1 Cor. 2.2.
when he determined not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified:
That he might there see the Love of Christ streaming out of his heart, at his
wounds in his blood; and there see Divine Justice satisfied, the Law fulfilled,
and thence feel his Conscience purified, and pacified, and his Soul engaged,
and quickened to walk in all new obedience; This is that (...). The
transcendent knowledge of Christ, in comparison of which all other things were
loss, and dross, and dung; That he might know Christ, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to
his Death, Phil. 3.8, 10. And this is one way of clearing the difficulty, and
reconciling the seeming contradiction.

2. Others have recourse to a Hyperbaton: and would clear the Thing by
transposing the words: And they order the words thus, (...). To know the
surpassing Love of the knowledge of Christ; and then the sense will be this, I
pray that you may know that surpassing, that incomparable Love of God, which
appeared in giving you the knowledge of Christ. And it must be for ever
acknowledged, that this was a mavelous instance of the Love of God, that he
was pleased to Communicate to the World the knowledge of a Redeemer; but yet it
seems rather to impoverish the sense, than to give us the full import of the
expression.

3. There is no need to fly to Critical Niceties, nor to call in Rhethorick,
and its figures to our Relief. The words will be consistent, and freed from all
appearance of self-contradiction if we attend to these following Positions.

1. That which cannot be known by a mere humane understanding, may yet be
understood by the Spirit of Christ, which searches all things, even the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. And the Spirit of God is given for this end, to
shed abroad the Love of God, (and so the Love of Christ) in our Hearts, Romans
5.5.

2. That which cannot be fully known of the Love of Christ in this present
state, where our understandings are very much clouded, and our faith weak through
the remainders of inward Corruption, yet shall be more gloriously known when we
come to see God in Christ, face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we know but in part,
but then we shall know as we are also known.

3. Although there be much of the Love of Christ which passes all our present
knowledge, yet there is enough of that Love that may be known: enough to feed
our knowledge, that it starve not, in this life, and yet to whet the edge of
the Souls appetite to know more in the life to come; enough to guide us, and
conduct us through our pilgrimage, and abundance more reserved for our portion.
The Love of Christ has Depths in it wherein the daring Soul may drown, and yet
those shallows wherein the humble Soul may safely wade, and comfortably bathe
it self, without danger of being swallowed up: And we have some parallel
expressions in Scripture, which may well illustrate this of the Text, Phil.
4.7. The peace of God passes all understanding: (...), it exceeds all
conception, and yet there is that in the Peace of God, which may be conceived
and expressed too; even something of that inward satisfaction which arises from
a well grounded hope that our peace is made with God, and that peace copied out
upon, and exemplified in a pure and quiet Conscience: so in the verse following
my Text, we read that God is able to do exceeding abundantly ((...)) above that
we can ask and think: and yet we may conceive something of what God will do for
us, and cloth those conceptions with suitable expressions, and make our humble
Addresses to him for what he has promised to give to us, and do for us in such
a way as shall be acceptable to God through the Interest of our Advocate with the
Father Jesus Christ. In a word, As Moses could not see Gods face and live,
Exodus 33.20. And yet Moses could not live except he saw Gods face: so is there
a measure, a degree of the knowledge of the Love of Christ, which we cannot
reach if we would die for it; and yet there is such a measure, such a Degree of
the knowledge of that Love of Christ, which we must reach, or we die for it: And
hence I will briefly touch upon two Propositions.

I. Prop. There is something in the Love of Christ, which in this present state
surpasses all perfect knowledge of it: Something of which we may say as one
said of a Learned Book: If that which I understand be so admirable, what is
that which I do not understand?
Take any one mystery of the Gospel, and when we have pursued it as far as our
faculties are able to trace it, we must be forced to make a stand, and as Paul
upon the shore of the Ocean of Gods unsearchable, untraceable Counsels, Romans
11.33. to cry out, O the Depth! or as Job chap. 26.14. Lo, these are parts of
his ways, and how little a portion is heard of him!

There are two things that are unmeasurable; The evil of sin, and the Love of a
Savior: And the Love of a Savior must be therefore unmeasurable to the
sinner, because the evil of sin is unmeasurable. He that knows not the
exceeding greatness of his debt, can never fully know the exceeding greatness
of his Love that became a surety for it: He that cannot measure the greatness
of the Curse he lay under, can never measure the Love of his Deliverer: And he
that never could fully estimate the misery of his bondage, can never fully
value or conceive aright of the Love of his Redeemer.

(1.) The evil of his is unmeasurable: It is so whether we consider the Object
against whom sin is committed, or the Punishment which sin has deserved, or
the Agonies which the Redeemer suffered to Atone it.

1. If we consider sin as committed against an infinite God, so sin is infinite
objectively, and therefore unmeasurable: the malignity of sin is unconceivable,
it strikes at the Authority, the Glory, the very Being of the chiefest Good:
Every sin would in its tendency dethrone the most High.

(2.) If we consider the demerit of sin, it is that which passes all
understanding, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? We cannot take
the just, and Adequate measure of that wrath which is due to sin, by all the
Plagues, and Judgments by which God ever bore witness against the evil of sin:
The fire of Sodom and Gomorra, was dreadful fire, but yet it was quenched, a
little time extinguished it; but that fire of wrath which burns upon, but never
burns up sinners is inextinguishable fire, Mark 9.44. (...). The fire is
inextinguishable: It is everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25.46. The Deluge that
drowned the old World argued great Displeasure against sinners, yet neither was
that a just measure of Gods wrath that is due to sin: for the waters of the
Deluge were soon dried up; but so will not the Floods of Divine Vengeance
poured out upon sinners to the uttermost: for the breath (that is, the anger)
of the Lord as a stream of fire, and brimstone kindles, and feeds the matter of
those flames. The Plagues of Egypt were exceeding great demonstrations of
Divine anger against sin, yet they were determinate for number and duration,
and so could not give us a just measure of the demerits of sin.

3. If we consider the sufferings of Christ, they will prove that the evil of
sin is unmeasurable; they were such as could not be expressed; and therefore
the Ancient Christians used, in their Prayers, to beg of Christ that he would
deliver them, (...). by thy unknown torments, Lord deliver us! And hence we may
infer, that the Love of Christ must needs be unmeasurable, because he delivered
us from unmeasurable wrath, by unconceivable torments.

(2.) The Love of Christ to sinners is unmeasurable, for these Reasons.

1. Reas. We have no scale in nature, in which we can weigh; no line in created
things by which we can measure it.

1. If we examine the love of Relations, we find them all limited and bounded,
and they ought to be so: The love of a Father to a child is an intense love;
the love of a Father to an undutiful child, a rebellious child, may stretch the
line somewhat farther, yet this will fall vastly short of the Love of Christ to
sinners. The highest instance of this love that I remember was that of David to
his rebellious Son Absalom, expressed 2 Samuel 18.33. O Absalom my son! my son!
would God I had died for thee, O Absalom my Son! my Son! Here is Paternal love
strained up to the highest pitch imaginable; That a King should desire to die
for a Rebellious Subject; that a Father should be willing to die for the most
disingenuous and rebellious of Sons: This was great; but yet we find this love
extended but to a natural death; he would have been unwilling to have died a
Cursed death, to have been made a Curse for him; to have been made sin for him:
And yet the torrent of this impetuous love soon dried up; it was founded in
passion rather than judgment, and perhaps in cool blood, he would have been
unwilling to have died that such a wretch might live: I question much whether
David durst deliberately, advisedly, and premeditately, have laid down his life
to save that of a vicious debauched Son; yet such was the Love of Christ, who
laid down his life for sinners, the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. And laid
it down voluntarily, when none could take it away, John 10.18. and not only
died against the persuasions of his friends to save his life, Mark 8.32. but
against that bitter malice of his Enemies, which always sparkled, and at last
flamed out in the most cruel, bloody, implacable fury that ever was in the
World; nay, against the just displeasure of God as a Judge, all which he had a
clear prospect into, and yet gave this great pregnant proof of his
unconquerable Love, that he not only poured out his Soul in tears, Luke 19.41.
his Soul in prayers, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them: but his Soul in sacrifice
too, unto the death, Isa. 53.12.

But if the love of a Father to his Son will not measure this Love of Christ,
perhaps the love of a Mother to her Son may: And this is indeed naturally the
more soft and passionate Sex; and of this love the case is put, Isa. 49.15. Can
a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the
Son of her Womb? The case is put exceeding strong. A Child, a sucking Child,
that hangs upon the breast and is always crying for pity, in its natural
dialect; the Son of the Womb, that is more than the Child of the breast; she can
hardly forget that at any rate, which she brought forth at such a dear rate:
yet the circumstances may be such, that this tender Mother may forsake, and
forget, nay kill, and destroy too, this innocent Child; such exigences they
have been in, that Nature has proved unnatural; or Nature in one instance has
overcome Nature in another: A Mothers hunger, has caused her to forget her pity
to the Child of her Womb, Lam. 4.10. The hands of the pitiful Women have sodden
their own children: to forsake, to forget, to kill, to cook, and at last to
eat, is certainly the greatest stemming of the current, and stream of natural
affection that we can conceive of: but Christ's Love will not suffer him to
forget, to forsake; he has oftens forgotten himself, to remember them; he has
forgotten his own food, that he might provide for their Souls, John 4.34. he
has forgotten his own approaching death, that he might provide for their life,
1 Cor. 11.23. The same night in which he was betrayed he took bread, etc.

And yet perhaps the love of the Husband to his Wife, may come up to this
example of Love, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved his
Church, and gave himself for it: Here Is an argument indeed to enforce that
conjugal Love; and here is a president for conjugal Love to look upon: but that
[As] is not a note of equality, but of some general similitude: for the Husband
gives himself to his Wife, but will not, is not bound to die for his Wife: he
cannot be persuaded to have her sins charged upon his Soul: How short are all
the Loves, the Affections of Relations to give us a pattern and example of the
Love of Christ!

But possibly we may find a love in Nature more strong than any of these: And
that, if any where, must be amongst some of those great instances of Love which
have been amongst friends: It is indeed said, 1 Samuel 18.1, 3. That Jonathan
loved David as his own Soul; and in Deuteronomy. 13.6. The friend is said to be as a
Man's own Soul. But yet when we come to examine these expressions, they fade
away, and signify nothing but the life; where is the friend that will make his
Soul an offering for sin? Isa. 53.10. However this is the highest flight that
ever humane love took, to lay down life for a friend; but Christ has put this
quite out of countenance, John 15.13. Greater love has no man than that he lay
down his life for his friend; but a far greater Love than this had Christ, that
he laid down his life for enemies. Christ laid down a better life, for them
that were worse. And this is proposed to our consideration, as that which has
outdone all the love in the World, Romans 5.7, 8. Scarcely for a righteous Man
will one die: No, I think its out of question that none will; for who would be
so friendly to him, that walks by the rules of strict justice; that will do no
wrong, yet shows no mercy? but peradventure for a good Man some would even dare
to die: If there be an instance found in the World of any that has laid down
his life for another, it must be for a good Man; one that is a public blessing
to the age wherein he lives, some one may throw away his private life, which is
not very useful, for so generous a Person, that is a Common good to his
Country; but if such an instance be found, which is but a peradventure; we have
that which will shut it out of all consideration, and eclipse that which
otherwise might have had some luster, verse. 8. God commends his love to us that
when we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

2. If the love of relations will not afford us a just Measure for the Love of
Christ; let us see if there be any thing else in the whole scale of Nature that
may furnish us with a line commensurate to it: And we can no sooner think of
making the Inquiry, but we propose to our selves, the height of Heaven, the
breadth of the Earth, Prove. 25.3. The Heaven for height, and the Earth for
breadth: but we must despair of finding any thing that may measure, or
circumscribe this love, since the Apostle has assured us, Ephesians. 3.8. that the
riches of Christ are unsearchable, (...), such as we must expect no footsteps
of in the whole Creation. The Apostle might Preach it, but could not fully
reach it. The treasures of Gold, and Silver, which wise providence has hid so
deep in the bowels of the Earth, yet the vein may be pursued so far, till its
worn out; but this treasure of Love in the Heart of Christ, is so deep, and is
so rich that we can neither find out nor exhaust the fullness of it: when God
would give us some shadow of his Love, he represents it by the height of the
Heavens; not that his Love reaches no higher, but because there is nothing in
created Nature higher to represent it by, Psalm. 103.11. As the Heaven is high
above the Earth, so great is his Mercy toward them that fear him. The Love of
God is only to be measured by it self, that is by himself, for God is Love, 1
John 4.8. No Creature, no Saint, no Angel, can fadom the Love of Gods heart,
Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you.

And we must say the same of Christ's Love; there is one Dimension more in the
Love of Christ, than in the Creation, Ephesians. 3.18. That you may be able to
comprehend, with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, etc. (...).

We are taught to distinguish between the measure of a Man and the measure of
God: All bodies have but three dimensions, Rev. 21.17. He measured the City
with a Reed, twelve thousand furlongs; the length, the breadth, the height were
equal, according to the measure of a Man; but in the measuring Spiritual,
Heavenly things, such as are the Love of God, and of Christ, there is one
dimension more: So we have it in that sublime discourse of Zophar, Job 11.7, 8,
9. Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out the Almighty to
perfection? It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper then Hell, what
can thou know? The measure thereof is longer then the Earth, and broader then
the Sea. And thus we are taught modesty, and not to limit God, and his purposes
of Love by our narrow conceptions, Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your
thoughts, for as the Heavens are higher then the Earth, so are my thoughts then
your thoughts, says the Lord.

And 1. for the Breadth of the Love of Christ; It reaches Jews, and Gentiles,
it extends to all ranks of Men, high and low, rich and poor: it reaches all the
cases of Men's Souls; the Tempted, Deserted, the Backslider, and Persecutor; it
reaches the bruised Reed, the smoking Flax; it extends to the pardon of all
sins truly repented of: so that we may say that his promises, which are the
vehicles of Truth and Love, are exceeding broad, as well as his Precepts, which
are the indications of his Authority, and Power: The Love of Christ is wider
than Man's will, Romans 10.21. All the day long I have stretched out my hands unto
a disobedient and gainsaying people: Its wider than Man's power, for John 6.44.
No Man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. And yet
verse. 37. All that the Father has given me shall come unto me. It is wider than
all our wants, and necessities; there is more bread in his house, than there are
hungry Souls to eat; more mansions in Heaven than there are Souls to fill; its
wider than our capacities, and we may sooner enter into our Masters joy, Matthew.
25. than that joy can enter into us, 1 Cor. 2.9. It cannot enter into the heart
of Man what things God has prepared for them that love him.

2. The length of the Love of Christ: An extent of Grace, and Love that reaches
Souls at the greatest distance: It reached Paul, when he was in the heat, and
height of his desperate fury; mad, and desperately mad, with an inveterate
enmity against Christ: It reached Mary Magdalen, when she was possessed with seven
Devils; it reached the Gentiles when they were far off from God, estranged from
the light, and life of God by their Abominable Idolatries, Ephesians. 2.13. Ye who
sometimes were a far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ: It reached the
Prodigal when he was far off, Luke 15.20. And as it finds and reaches Souls at
the greatest distance of sin, and enmity, so it reaches a length, which we
cannot with consistence of thought conceive of, Hebr. 7.25. Able to save to the
utmost, (...). To the uttermost length of Gods Promise, and the believers Faith
and Hope; to the uttermost extent of Gods Purposes, and our Prayers; to the
uttermost duration of this Life, and the next, through all time, beyond all
time, to eternity.

3. The depth of the Love of Christ: And here unless we could sound the depth
of our Misery, we can never fadom the depth of Christ's Love; unless we could
know the power of Gods Anger, Psalm. 90.11. we can never reach the power of
Christ's Love: The Torments of Hell are unknown Torments, and those Torments
which Christ endured in his Soul, to deliver us from thence, were unknown
Torments: The Love of Christ does not only reach the depth of our Misery, by
reason of Sin, but those depths of Sorrow into which sometimes even holy Souls
are plunged by Desertion: The Psalmist cried unto God out of the Depth; Divine
Love heard him and reached him there, Psalm. 130.1. Jonah cried unto God out of
the belly of Hell: Divine Love heard him there and delivered him thence, Jonah
2.2. Heman was plunged in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps; yet Love
reached him in that sad, and dismal condition, Psalm. 88.6.

4. The height of the Love of Christ: All the measure of the height of Christ's
Love we can take, is to say its unmeasurable; It is high, we cannot attain unto
it, Psalm. 139.6. his Love reaches the Soul on Earth, and never leaves it, till
it has conducted it to Heaven; he Loves Grace into the Soul, and Loves the Soul
into Glory; what that Glory is, Go and see! The taste of it, is to be had here,
the feast is reserved for hereafter; wrath to come, and life to come are
unconceivable, and therefore unexpressible; we can neither order our Speech by
reason of our inward darkness, nor of that ineffable Light, thoughts fail us,
words fail us; we are lost in the thoughts of future blessedness, as well as in
those of our former misery! What therefore we cannot perfectly understand, let
us silently, and reverently Admire, and Adore! What a prodigious height did Man
fall from, when he fell from his God? What a desperate Abyss of misery did he
fall into when he fell into sin? And therefore what a stupendous height is
that which Love shall raise him to in Glory? All we can do, is to put no bounds
to our Love to Christ: The true measure of our Love to Christ, should be to
Love him without measure; and the true degree of our Love to a Redeemer is to
Love him in the highest Degree; But alas! Where is our Love to Christ? How
weakly do we express our Love to him, who has given us the fullest, clearest
demonstrations of his to us, beyond all expressions! His was stronger then
death, ours ready to die; the water-floods coulds not quench his, a few drops
extinguish ours; he shed blood for us with more freedom, than we a few tears
over him, and his bleeding, almost dying interest in the World; he loved
sinners better than we can love Saints; he died for us with more flame of zeal,
than we can live to, and for him: Let us be ashamed that we can find a love so
vehement for our perishing comforts, nay for our killing corruptions, and yet
have so indifferent affections for a Savior! How shall we be able to Love our
enemies for his sake, when we can neither Love him with an intense Love for his
sake, nor our own? Let us mourn therefore bitterly that the Love of Christ
should be unconceivable, and invisible, and that our Love to him should be so
too, upon such different accounts; his for the greatness of it, ours for its
smallness.

II. Prop. There is a sufficiency of the Love of Christ to us that may be known.
The Love of Christ to sinners may be considered either in the cause, or as in
the effects; in the Spring and Fountain, or in the streams that flow from
thence into Souls: Love as it was in the heart of Christ is unmeasurable; the
Spring, the original cause and reason of it, was his own unaccountable Love,
and can only be measured by the Love of the Father to his Son, which is equally
unmeasurable, John 15.9. As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you: But
Christ's Love in the effects, that it has been pleased to produce in, and upon
our Souls, may be understood, and in some good measure apprehended: If we
cannot fix our eyes immediately upon the body of the Sun in its meridian glory,
yet we may comfortably refresh our selves with its beams, and feel the healing
warmth of the Sun of righteousness arising and shining upon our Souls; If we
cannot measure Christ's Love when it dealt with God, in making his Soul an
offering for sin; nor what that Love was wherewith he loved us, and gave
himself for us, Gal. 2.20. yet we may know that Love wherewith he loved us, and
washed us from our sins, Rev. 1.5. The Love of Satisfaction passes knowledge,
the Love of Sanctification may be known: As that poor Man, John 9.15. though he
could not give a Philosophical account to the Scribes and Pharisees, how Clay
and Spittle should contribute to the opening his Eyes, yet could say, This one
thing, I know, that whereas I was born blind I now see. So may a renewed Soul
say, Though I know not from what unmeasurable Fountain this Grace and Mercy did
proceed; though I am ignorant of the manner of its working, yet this one thing I
can say, Whereas I was a lover of sin, I now hate it; and whereas I have been a
despiser of Christ, I now prize, and love him as the chiefest of Ten thousand.
I can say, That that vanity, that corruption which sometime had a mighty power
over me, is now subdued and conquered. More particularly,

1. Although we cannot perfectly know the Love of Christ, yet may we know so much
of it, as may raise our desires to know more: As he that meets with a Vein of
precious Metal, though it be small, yet it gives him hopes of meeting with more,
and those hopes encourage his labors to dig deeper and search further; so that
little we can attain of the knowledge of Christ's Love in our wayfaring state,
makes the Soul labor and strive, and hope and pray, that it may come to fuller
knowledge of that love in its own Country.

As that sight which Moses had of God, encouraged him to pray, Exodus 33.18. I
beseech thee show me thy glory: So that view we have of Christ in a glass
darkly, serves to engage our endeavors, and sharpen our desires to see him
face to face in glory. As we gain upon the knowledge of Christ, so we grow, and
as it were encroach upon him still; if God will condescend, and come down to
visit the Soul, the Soul will make an argument from thence, that he would take
it up to himself: A taste of Christ's Love, whets the Spiritual appetite after a
feast, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire ye the sincere milk of the Word,
that ye may grow thereby. If so be you have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

2. However our knowledge of Christ's Love is imperfect, yet we may know so much
as may shame us that we have loved him no better; we know the Love of Christ
carried him out to suffer most dreadful things upon our account, and may hence
reflect upon our selves with great shame, that our love has been so weak as not
to carry us out to suffer for his Name; he endured the cross, we are terrified
at the sight of it: The argument is very strong, 1 John 3.16. Thus if Christ
laid down his life for us, we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren: But
how weakly does it work upon us? How little a matter can this love constrain us
to lay down for their sakes? And its a most concluding argument, Col. 3.13.
that we should forbear and forgive one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any, as Christ forgave us; but alas! how little does this instance of
the Love of Christ prevail upon us? That Love which prevailed with him to
forgive us Talents, will not, does not prevail with us to forgive our brethren
a few Pence, Matthew. 18.27, 28. The Love of Christ was a conquering, a
triumphant Love, it bore down whatever stood in its way: It grapled with the
displeasure of God, with the malice of Devils, the fury of unreasonable Men,
and with the unkindness of his Friends, it broke through all Discouragements,
and trampled upon all Oppositions, the waters could not quench it, the floods
could not drown it, Cant. 8.7. So much we know, and may blush, that our Love to
Christ is so easily quenched, discouraged, and disheartened.

3. Although our knowledge of Christ be imperfect, yet so much we may know as
may serve to guide and encourage our obedience to him: All our knowledge of
Christ is vain, all our love to him is a pretense, if we know him not that we
may love him, and love him not that we may keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.4.
He that says I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him; for as that is not reputed with God to be any obedience,
which is not performed by a principle of love, so neither is that accepted as
any love, that is not productive of obedience: The Authority of Christ over us
is the reason of our obedience, but the Love of Christ in us is the true
principle of that obedience, John 14.21. He that has my Commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me: Christ will not acknowledge any Man to
love him that does not serve him: And as the Love of Christ was an universal
Love, it extended to all our Spiritual necessities; so must our Love to Christ,
be as universal, and have a sincere respect to all his Commandments: And upon
lower terms than these, Christ will not own our love to be any thing, John
15.14. Ye are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you.

4. Although we cannot perfectly understand the Love of Christ, in this our
present state, yet may we know so much of his Love as shall be of more true use
and worth than all we know besides; we may know something of God, and know it
to our terror and confusion: There may be such rays of Divine knowledge let
into a guilty Soul, as may make it wish it could shut them out again: And hence
it is, that sinners say, Job 21.14. Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. The most ungrateful, unwelcom thing to an impenitent
sinner in the World, is to see God, and to be convinced that God sees him: That
Gods omniscience looks into his rotten heart; and the sinner must needs sit
very uneasy under this knowledge of God, till he can see God reconciled to him
in Christ, and have the light of that knowledge comfortably shinning into his
heart in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.

There is no knowledge to be compared with the knowledge of God; no knowledge
of God comparable to the knowledge of God as reconciled in Christ; no knowledge
of Christ to be compared with the knowledge of his Love, nor any knowledge of
his Love to be compared with that knowledge of it, which subdues our hearts to
his obedience, transforms our Souls into his likeness, and raises up the Soul
to aspire after his enjoyment. Thus it is that we joy in God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement, Romans 5.11.

All other knowledge may swell the head, sooner than better the heart or reform
the life: A Man may go silently down to Hell by hypocrisy; he may go
triumphantly thither by open profaneness, and he may go Learnedly down to Hell
with great pomp and ostentation, whatever he knows, if he knows not the Love
of Christ, ruling in him, and giving Laws to him, and conforming him both to
the Death, and Resurrection of his Savior.

And let this suffice to have spoken of the second Proposition: That though the
Love of Christ in its highest elevation passes all perfect knowledge, in our
present dark imperfect state, yet there is enough of the Love of Christ that may
be known, to engage our desires and endeavors to know more, to shame us that
we know so little of what may be known; to engage our hearts to him, and make
us confess that whatever else we know without this, is not worth the knowing.

Come we now to the second part of the Text, viz. the Apostles Prayer, for
Grace the End: That ye might be filled with all the fullness of God, wherein we
meet with a second (...), or something that implies a contradiction in
appearance.

The Apostle prays that the Ephesians might, and certainly we ought to add our
Prayers to his, that we may; and to second our Prayers with endeavors, that
God would fill us with all his fullness: And yet we are here aground again, To
be filled with Gods fullness? With all his fullness, seems rather the object of
our Despair, than of our Prayer; it is that which startles Faith, discourages
Hope, which supersedes Prayer and Endeavor; for how can our finite grasp his
Infinite? Our narrow vessel comprehend the Sea of his Divine perfections? We
can no more comprehend the incomprehensible of God, than we can apprehend the
unapprehensible Love of Christ: Our hearts must needs be narrow, because our
minds are so; we can see but little, we can love no more than we can see: what
the Eye cannot behold, the Hand cannot hold.

For the solution of this, I shall only observe at the present, That as there
is, (...), that which may be known of God, Romans 1.19. and the (...), that which
cannot be known of God; in which respect we are like the Athenians, and erect
our Altar (...), to the unknown God, Acts 17.23. so there is (...), that which
may be comprehended of God, and (...), that which cannot be comprehended, in
which respects we are all scepticks, and must confess, (...), I cannot
comprehend it.

For the clearing therefore of this difficulty, perhaps we may have some relief
from the Original; (...), which we may render thus, That ye may be filled unto
all that fullness of God. There is a measure of Grace unto which the Divine
Wisdom has appointed Believers; unto that measure, that degree of fullness we
ought to aspire, and to pray that God would fill us with it; which seems to be
the purport of that other Prayer of this Apostle for the Thessalonians, 2 These.
1.11. We pray always for you, that God would fulfill all the good pleasure of
his goodness; (...). God is the Fountain, his Saints are Vessels: These Vessels
are of several capacities; God according to his good pleasure has gaged these
Vessels; now it is our duty to pray and strive, to strive and pray, that God
from the inexhaustible Fountain of his goodness would fill these Vessels with
Grace up to the brim; and that according to that capacity which God has
graciously bestowed he would graciously fill up that capacity. For if you
should pour the whole Ocean upon a Vessel, yet it receives only according to
its own Dimensions: And this is the Interpretation of Theophylact, who when he
had recited, and rejected, some other interpretations, fixes on this, (...), I
conceive (says he) this to be the best interpretation, (...). That ye may be
perfect in every Divine perfection, knowing all Spiritual things as far as it is
possible. Seeing then there is a fullness of God which we cannot comprehend,
cannot receive; and yet there is something of the fullness of God which we may
receive, it will be seasonable to propound that Question which has been
recommended to our Consideration.

Question, What is that fullness of God which every true Christian ought to
pray, and strive to be filled with?

This Inquiry will oblige us to speak something by way of Supposition, and then
something further by way of direct Solution.

1. That which is necessary to be spoken by way of Supposition, will fall under
these two Heads; That there is a fullness in God, and of God, which we cannot be
filled with; And that there is a fullness of God with which we may, and
therefore ought to pray and strive to be filled with.

1. Supposition, It is presupposed to this Inquiry, That there is a fullness in
God, with which we cannot be filled, and therefore ought not to pray, ought not
to strive to be filled with it.

It was the destructive suggestion and temptation of Satan, to persuade our
first Parents to be ambitious of being like to God, Genesis 3.5. Ye shall be as
Gods: And the Tempter never showed himself to be more a Devil, than when he
prosecuted this Design; nor did Man ever fall more below himself, than when he
was blown up to an Ambition to be above himself: It is the perfection, the
glory, the happiness of the Rational creature to be like unto God, in his
communicable Attributes: It is the destruction, the ruin of the Rational
creatures to aspire after a likeness to God in his incommunicable ones; And
it is a sinful ambition too to aspire after a likeness to God even in his
communicable Attributes, and perfections in that way, wherein they are in God;
so that it may be our destruction to aspire after a conformity to God, and it
may be our perfection to aspire after a conformity to him.

For first, God is essentially full of all Divine excellencies, he is so by
nature, by essence; what we are, we are by Grace: It Is not much we have, and
that little is Grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God, I am that I am:
Holiness is not our essence, there was a time when we were not holy; we were
born without it, and may die without it; but if we die as empty of Grace as we
were born, it had been good for us never to have been born.

Secondly, The holiness of God is a Self-holiness; God is not only full,
Chrysostom, upon that, John 1.16. And of his fullness, we all have received, and
grace for grace, informs us, that Christ is (...), the very Self-fountain.
Believers must confess with David, Psalm. 71.8. That all our Springs are in him.
Again, that Christ is (...), the very Self-root: We must freely and thankfully
own, that in him is our fruit found, Hosea 14.8. Again, that Christ is (...),
the very Self-life, John 5.26. He has Life in himself: That we have, we
acknowledge it to be from him, as our Principle, Spring, Root, with whom is the
fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9. And that the life which we live in the Flesh, we
live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. In a word, all our Obedience is
rooted in the habits of Grace wrought in the Soul, and those habits are all
rooted in Christ, who, as Chrysostom goes on, (...), contains in himself the
treasures of all good things: and not only so, but (...), he overflows, and
ever flows with Streams of Grace to all the Saints; not only being full, but
filling others; not only rich, but enriching others; a living Jesus, and giving
Life to others. And thus by Faith engraffed into Christ, we partake of the root
and of the fatness of the Olive Tree, Romans 11.17.

Thirdly, The fullness of holiness of Grace, of all perfections that are in God,
are unlimited, boundless, and infinite: God is a Sea Mortal shall put on
Mortality; but finite shall never put on Infiniteness; Corruptible shall put on
Incorruption; but our measured Natures shall never put on Immensity.

Fourthly, And hence the fullness of God is inexhaustible. As all the the Father
of lights, Jam. 1.17. by which some think is meant the Father of Spirits, who,
as so many Lamps are lighted up from the Sun; or else the Father of all Grace,
Comfort, Peace, each of which may be termed Light. Now when all the Saints in
Earth, all the Angels in Heaven have filled up their Vessels from this
Fountain, yet he is still the same infinitely blessed all-full God.

Fifthly, And the forementioned Father thinks that the similitude of God: For,
if you take but one drop from the Ocean, there is that drop less in the Ocean,
than there had been, if it had not been taken thence; and therefore we add this
last Head: That the fullness of Goodness, Grace, Holiness, and all other Divine
Perfections that are in him are not only inexhaustible, but undiminishable: For
after all the derivations of Grace from the God of Grace, he remains full, and
not only so, but as he expresses it, (...), Not at all lessened by those
communications: Nor need we puzzle our selves with this matter, for our
Derivations from God are not essential, but influential; the Soul partakes not
of the Divine Nature, materially, but by way of efficiency. Believers are
(...), Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Not by substance, but
resemblance; for we must hold this as a fixed Principle, that the Divine Nature,
essentially considered, is not discerptible, nor divisible, and therefore not
communicable.

This therefore is the first thing we must suppose, and take as granted, That
there is a Fullness in God, viz. his essential self-fulness, which is infinite,
inexhaustible, undiminishable, and therefore incommunicable.

2. A second thing we must suppose, is, That there is a fullness of God with
which we may, and therefore ought to pray and labor that we may be filled: We
cannot reach the original fullness, but we may a borrowed derivative fullness;
though we cannot attain the fullness of the Fountain, we may receive a fullness of
the Vessel from that Fountain; and if we cannot partake any thing of Gods
Essence, we may partake of his Influence; we cannot be filled with the formal
holiness of God, for that holiness is God; yet may we derive holiness from him
as an efficient cause, who works all things according to the counsel of his
Will, Ephesians. 1.11. The Wisdom of God, there is Principium dirigens; the Will of
God, there is Principium imperans; and he works according to these, there is the
Principium exequens. His Will commands, his Wisdom guides, his Power executes
the Decrees and Purposes of his wise Counsel, and holy Will.

Having thus cleared the way, we proceed to the direct Solution of the
Question, What is that fullness of God, which every true Christian ought to
pray, and strive to be filled with?

For seeing we have supposed that there is a fullness of God, which we cannot be
filled with; we must lay aside all ambitions, and vain aspirings after that
fullness; and seeing we have supposed, that there is a fullness of God wherewith
we may be filled, and the very Prayer of the Apostle supposes it: We therefore
are to take up this holy and humble ambition to be filled with it.

Now this Question can be no sooner proposed, but our thoughts will suggest to
us these two things. First, What is the matter of that Fullness, and what is the
measure of that Fullness; with what of God, and with how much of God ought we to
pray and strive, that we may be filled? And therefore of necessity we must
divide the Question into these two Branches.

First Branch of the Question. What is the matter of that Fullness of God which
we are to pray, and strive to be filled with?

When we speak of Filling, we conceive immediately that under that Metaphor
there must be comprised these three things: A Fountain from whence that Fullness
is communicated: A Recipient, a Vessel, a Cistern into which that Fullness is
derived: And then of something Analogous to the matter, which from that
Fountain is communicated, and by that Vessel received. Now in the Case before
us; This Fountain must needs be God, the Author of every good and perfect Gift,
Jam. 1.17. Souls are the Vessel into which the Fullness is received; but what we
are to conceive and understand by the matter (or the quasi materia) with which
these Vessels from that Fountain are filled, is the Subject of our present
Enquiry.

And to this branch of the main Inquiry I shall answer, First, more generally.
Secondly, more particularly.

(1.) To speak generally: That which we are to pray, and strive to be filled
with, is the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with Wine wherein is
excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit; where first the Apostle dehorts
against Intemperance; we may have too much of the best outward things: It Is
easy to run into excess in these matters: The Psalmist assures us, Psalm.
104.15. That Wine makes glad the heart of man. And the Prophet, Hos. 4.11.
assures us too, that Wine takes away the Heart. It Is no more but this; the Use
is good, the Abuse is sinful; and the danger is, lest from the lawfulness of
the Use we slide insensibly into the Abuse. Be not therefore filled with wine,
wherein is excess; but then he exhorts too, But be ye filled with the Spirit:
No fear of excess, or Intemperance in this case; when God fills the Souls of
his People with his Spirit, he fills them with all the Spiritual good things
that their hearts can fill their Prayers with: Compare but these two places:
Matthew. 7.11. How much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good
things to them that ask him? Luke 11.13. How much more shall your Heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? The comparing of these two
Scriptures evidently proves, that in praying for the Holy Spirit, we pray
virtually for all good things; and that when God is graciously pleased to
communicate his Spirit, he communicates all good things; when the Father gives
his Son, he gives all things: So the Apostle has taught us to believe, and
argue, Romans 8, 32. He that spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us All;
how shall he not with him freely give us all things? And we have equal reason
to believe, that he that spared his Spirit, and gave him to us, will in him,
and with him freely give us all things: But these all things are to be taken in
suo genere: The Gift of Christ comprehends all things that are to be done for
us; the gift of the Spirit includes all things to be wrought in us: Christ is
all things for Justification, the Spirit is all things for Sanctification and
Consolation. I shall touch at present upon some few things.

1. Do you find an emptiness of Grace, and do you long to have your Souls
replenisht with it? You go to the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. That he would
give you more Faith, more Love, more Patience, more Self-denial, more
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. you do well; but the compendious way is, to pray that
God would fulfill that Promise, and so fill your Souls with his Spirit; Zech.
12.10. I will pour out upon the House of David, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication. First the Spirit of Grace, that we may
pray; and then the Spirit of Prayer, that we may be filled with more Grace: Can
we be content with a few drops, when God has promised to pour out his Spirit?
John 7.38. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water; this spoke he of the Spirit. Can we satifie our selves, that we have so
much Grace as just keeps us alive, when if we would pray and strive for the
Spirit, we might be more lively and vigorous Christians? Can we be content with
a Taste, when God has provided a Feast? Some of the Ancients, who were anointed
with material Oil, were anointed with the Cruise, others with the Horn: O let
us not be satified that we have a few drops from the Cruise, when God is ready
to pour out his Grace more abundantly! John 10.10.

2. Would you answer the glorious Title of a Child of God with a more glorious
and suitable Spirit, that you may pray as Children, walk as dear Children? come
to God, not as Slaves, but as Children; and walk before God, not under the
resemblance of the Spirit of Bondage, but with an ingenuous Liberty, and
Freedom, as becomes the Heirs of Salvation: Pray for the Spirit of God; that he
may be a Spirit of Adoption to you, as well as of Regeneration; pray in the
Spirit for the Spirit, that you may have the frame of a Child, filled with Zeal
for the Fathers Name and Interest: It Is the Spirit of Adoption that teaches us
to cry Abba Father, Romans 8.15. It Is the Spirit of God that gives us an inward
freedom and liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Wh^^e the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
Liberty. This Spirit will not give you a liberty unto sin, but from it; nor
from God, but with him: This Spirit will not break the Bonds of the
Commandment, but tie up your hearts to it, and give you liberty and
cheerfulness in it.

We read that the Son makes us free, John 8.36 If the Son shall make you free,
then are you free indeed: We read also that the Spirit makes us free too, but
in different respects: The Son makes us free from the Curse of the Law, from
the guilt of Sin, from the Wrath of God; but the Spirit makes us free too, from
the reigning power of sin, from the bondage that is in the Conscience: The
Authority of God has made his Precepts necessary; what is necessary in the
precept, the Spirit makes voluntary in the principle; God charges the
Conscience with Duty, and the Spirit enlarges the heart to obedience, Psalm.
119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandment, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

3. Pray for the Spirit, that he would perform his whole Office to you, that
you may not partake only of the work of the Spirit in some one or some few of
his operations, but in all that are common to Believers. And especially that he
that has been an anointing Spirit to you, would be a sealing Spirit to you
also; that he that has sealed you, may be a witnessing Spirit to his own work;
and that he would be the earnest of your inheritance, a pledge of what God has
further promised and purposed for you, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. Now he which
stablisheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed you, is God. Who has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit into our hearts.

(2.) To speak a little more particularly; what the Apostle prays for his
Ephesians in more general Terms, he prays for the Colossians more particularly,
Col. 1.9, 10. We do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that you might be
filled with the knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom, and Spiritual
Understanding, that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. And when I
have opened the particulars of this Scripture, I shall not need to seek
elsewhere for an answer to this Inquiry, What is the matter of the fullness of
God, which we ought to pray and strive to be filled with?

I. Let us pray and strive, and strive and pray again, adding endeavors that
we may be filled with the knowledge of Gods will. And we have need to make this
an essential part of our prayer; for first, We may happily do the will of God
Materially, when we do it not Formally; not under that formal and precise
consideration, that what we do is the will of God, and that we do it under that
consideration because it is the will of God. A Man may perhaps stumble upon
some practices that are commanded by the Moral Law, and yet in all this not do
Gods will but his own; that which in all our obedience we are to eye, and
regard, is the Authority, the will of God; we cannot be said to observe a
Commandment, unless we observe Gods Authority in that Commandment; nor to keep
Gods Statutes, unless we keep God in our eye as the great Legislator and
Statute maker: A blind obedience even to God is no more acceptable, than a
blind obedience to Men is justifiable. Secondly, We ought to pray that we may
be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, that there may be more employment
for the powers and faculties of the Soul, which in every heart wherein the
grace of God radically is, are in the general inclined to do the will of God:
There are some well disposed Christians, of strong affections and good
inclinations to do Gods will, who are but slenderly furnished with knowledge
what that will of God is, which he would have them do: And thus those warm
propensions of Spirit, either lie like dead stocks upon their hands, or else
they laid out the zeal of their Souls upon that which is not the will of God;
and when they have spent their vigor and strength of Soul upon it, they come
to God for a reward, who asks them, who required this at your hand? And thus
even holy David's zeal was mislaid upon this account, that God had not spoken a
word, nor revealed his will in the Case, 2 Samuel 7.7. Thirdly, Its our great
concern that we may know the will of God, and be filled with that knowledge;
that the knowledge of Gods will may be an operative principle of obedience;
thus David prays, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, O God: We are to pray
that God would teach us to know, and then teach us to do his will: knowledge
without obedience is lame, obedience without knowledge is blind; and we must
never hope for acceptance if we offer the blind and the lame to God, Luke
12.47. That Servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: As
therefore all our practice must be guided by knowledge, so must all our
knowledge be referred to practice. Fourthly, and lastly, We ought to pray that
we may be filled with the knowledge of God's will; that this knowledge being
rooted and grounded in our Souls, it may render that obedience easy and
delightful, which is so necessary to its acceptance: when Satan had entered
Judas his heart, he would not stick at any of the Devils commands; and when he
had filled the heart of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.3. how ready were they to
lie unto God? If our hearts were more filled with the knowledge of Gods will,
that this Divine Law were written there, duty would be our delight, obedience
our meat and drink; nor would there be room left for those corruptions which
hang upon us like dead weight, always incumbring us in our obedience.

filled with all wisdom in the doing of the will of God; we want knowledge
much, we want wisdom more; we need more light into the will of God, and more
judgment how to perform it. For first, It Is one great instance of wisdom, to
know the seasons of duty, and what every day calls for: As the providence of
God disposes us under various circumstances, so it calls for the exercise of
various duties; one circumstance calls for mourning another for rejoicing; and
yet neither ought our mourning to exclude a humble rejoicing in God; nor our
rejoicing shut out a holy mourning: The Men of Issachar are recorded as famous
on this account, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. That they had understanding of the time, to
know what Israel ought to do. And herein we are oftentimes at a great loss,
like those children, Matthew. 11.17. that complained of their fellows, they had
piped unto them, and yet not been answered with dancing; that they had mourned
to them, but they had not lamented. Holy Wisdom would teach us to accommodate
the present frame of our hearts to Gods present dispensations: Providence does
not teach us new duties, but how to single out those that God has made our
duties. Secondly, We need wisdom that we be not deluded with shadows instead of
substances, that we take not appearances for realities; for want of which, O
how often are we cheated out of our interests, our real concerns, our integrity
of heart, and peace of Conscience! We account him a weak and foolish Man who is
imposed upon, by Copper for Gold; that would warm his hands by painted fire, or
hope to satisfy his craving appetite with painted food; yet such are we, who
spend our money for that which is not bread, and our labor for that which
profits us not, Isa. 55.2. who set our affections on those things that are not,
Prove. 23.5. Thirdly, Another point of wisdom which we need to be instructed in,
is the worth of Time, and what a weight of eternity depends on these short and
flitting moments; but we weak and silly ones count a day for no more than it
stands for in the Calender; an hour no more than so much time measured by the
hourglass; when one hour to repent in, a moment to make our Calling and
Election sure in, may come to be more worth than all the World can be to us.
Fourthly, Wisdom would teach us the due order and method of all things, what
first, what last ought to be our study, and our concern; wisdom would teach us
to seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. And then
if there be time to spare, to bestow some small portion of it, for those other
things which God in his bounty will not deny, and in his wisdom knows in what
measure to bestow. Fifthly, Wisdom would teach us the true worth and value of
all things; to labor, pray, and strive for them proportionable to their true
intrinsic dignities; to think that Heaven cannot be too dear, whatever we pay
for it; nor Hell cheap how easily soever we come by it; wisdom would instruct
us, that we cannot lay out too much of our time, strength, contrivance upon
Eternals, nor too little upon these perishing Temporals; that Earth deserves
very little of our Hand, less of our Head, and nothing at all of our Heart;
little of our pains, less of our plotting, and least of all of our love and
affections.

III. Lets pray and strive, strive in the due and diligent use of filled with a
spiritual understanding: A carnal heart will carnalize the most spiritual
Mercies, and a carnal mind will debase the most spiritual Truths; the Manna was
designed to feed the Souls as well as the Bodies of the Jews; but they ate the
spiritual meat, and drank the spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.23.
with very carnal Heads and Hearts; so that they needed the Spirit of God to
instruct them in the right use of it, Nehem. 9.10. Thou gave thy good Spirit
to instruct them, and with-heldest not the Manna from their mouth. They might
then have eaten their own condemnation as well as we under the Gospel, by that
Symbol; John 3.3. Christ had delivered a great and necessary Truth, except a
Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of Heaven; but Nicodemus though a
great Rabbi, turns it into a gross and carnal interpretation: How can a Man be
born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his Mothers womb and be
born again? And at the same pass were his rude and carnal hearers, John 6.51. I
am the living bread (says Christ) that came down from Heaven; if any Man eat of
this bread he shall live for ever, and the bread that I will give is my flesh
that I will give for the life of the world; but his Capernatical hearers
conceive of nothing but a literal, and oral Manducation of his natural flesh,
verse. 52. The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this Man
give us his flesh to eat? And yet Christ had said enough to obviate that gross
mistake, verse. 35. I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst.

One Man hears the great Duties of the Gospel pressed upon his Conscience, and
either sitting down despondeth at the (...), or else undertakes them in his own
strength, and the power of his free will, not considering that there is
Covenant grace to answer Covenant duties, and Covenant pardon for those
imperfections that attend them. Another perhaps hears the curse thundered out
against, Every one that continues not in all things written in the Law to do
them, Gal. 3.10. he hears that the primitive end of the Law was to justify a
righteous person that had perfectly observed it, and he falls upon the
observation of that Law, as the condition of the Covenant of works, hoping to
drudge out a righteousness thereby, that shall present him blameless before
God; not knowing, that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes, Romans 10.4. Let us therefore pray for a spiritual
understanding, that we may know every Truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21.
that every line, every letter of the Old and New Testament has its center in a
Redeemer.

we may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing: knowing that all our
services, all our sacrifices are nothing unless our God smell a sweet savor in
them: nor can we fill the sails of our Souls with a more noble and generous
ambition, than to be accepted of God. This was the height of the Apostles
ambition, 2 Cor. 5.9. We labor that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of him: which was the glorious frame of our blessed Saviors heart,
John 8.29. That he always did the things that pleased his Father: Its a common
delusion of Professors, that if they can get the work of their hands, not to
regard whether ever it comes upon Gods heart or no: But what are our Prayers if
God receives them not? Our Praises if God accepts them not? Our Obedience if
God regards it not? Now that we may reach this great end, we must walk worthy
of the Lord; (...). There ought to be a suitableness between the frame of our
hearts, and the tenor of our conversations to this God whom we serve: If there
be not that exact and punctual walking up to what God in strict justice may
expect, yet there must be that accuracy and circumspection which God in mercy
will accept; we must be holy as the Lord our God is holy; Spiritual, because we
walk before him that is a Spirit: sincere, as being always under his omniscient
Eye; acting our faith upon him that is faithful and true; casting our care and
burden upon him that has undertaken to care for us; and in all things proving
what is the will of God, and then approving that will, and practicing what we
have thus approved.

That we may be fruitful in every good work. That there may be Grace in the
root, Grace in the fruit, Grace in the habit strengthened, Grace in the exercise
multiplied. Let Us pray that our Faith may not be a dead Faith, for want of the
Grace of obedience; that our obedience be not a dead obedience, for want of a
living Faith, and a lively, active Love; that our Fruit may be of the right
kind, new obedience from a new heart; that it may be right for its proportion;
for herein is our Father glorified, that we bring forth much fruit, John 15.8.
that it be rightly directed; that we may bring forth fruit to God, and not to
our selves: And to all our Prayers we must add this, that we may increase in
the knowledge of God: That knowing God better, we may love him better; and
loving him more, we may serve and glorify him more, and be riper every day for
the enjoyment of him.

And thus much in answer to the first Branch of the Question: I proceed to the
Second.

Second Branch of the Question. What is the measure of that fullness of God,
with which every true Christian ought to pray, and strive that he may be filled?

There is Plenitudo fontis, and Plenitudo Vasis; the Fullness of the Fountain,
and the Fullness of the Vessel. There is again Plenitudo Solis, and Stellae; the
fullness of Light in the Sun, and the fullness of Light in a Star. Again, there
is Plenitudo Capitis, and Membri, the Fullness of the Head, and the fullness of a
Member: A Fountain is full; a Vessel may be full, but with different measures:
Jesus Christ, as Head of the Church, has the Fullness of the Spirit without
measure, John 3.34. A gracious Soul may be also full, but it is with the
residue of the Spirit, which Christ can spare for the use of those that are
his, Mal. 2.15.

God is full of all Grace, with the fullness of the Fountain; he is full with
his own fullness, but not filled from another. A Believer may be full too, but
he is filled from the fullness of God. Thus John the Baptist is said to be
filled with the Holy Ghost, Luke 1.15. And so Elizabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost, v. 4. So was Zechariah, v. 67. And thus were the Disciples all
filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.4. All these were full, but their fullness
was borrowed; they were filled: It was of Christ's fullness, that they received
grace for grace, John 1.16. They were filled, but they could not fill others
from thelr fullness; they had Grace, but none to spare: And every Believer must
answer his Brother that would borrow of him, as the wise Virgins did, Matthew.
25.9. Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you. There is an
All Sufficiency of Grace in Christ; its well if Believers have a sufficiency
according to Christ's promise to the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.19. My grace is
sufficient for thee: And having premised this little, I shall give the direct
Answer to the Question in these following particulars.

(1.) Every gracious Soul ought to pray, and strive to be filled with such a
measure of the fullness of God, and of his Grace, as the Holy Spirit, who is the
proper Judge of that measure shall see fit to communicate to us.

The Holy Spirit has these parts in this matter. 1. He is the immediate Worker
of Grace. 2. He is the Distributer of all Grace. 3. He is the Arbitrator of
that Quota, and proportion of Grace, which every Believer has need of, 1 Cor.
12.11. All these works one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every one
severally as he will; where you may observe the several parts that the Spirit
of God has in this matter. 1. He works this Grace (...), it is by his Energy,
or powerful working that there is root or fruit, habit in us, or Act of Grace
proceeding from us. 2. He divides, and distributes to every one severally,
(...), he is the great Steward of the Household of Christ, and dispenses the
measure of Grace to Individuals. 3. This measure is distributed by his absolute
power; it is according to his will, (...), as he pleases; for the Grace being
his own, he may do with, and dispose of his own Grace according to his own
will: And though he will be faithful in the discharge of his trust, yet will he
be sought unto to do it for us. Thus when there was a promise, Ezekiel. 36.25.
that God would sprinkle clean water upon his people, and cleanse them from all
their filthiness, and from all their Idols: And v. 26. That he would give them
a new heart, and a new Spirit, and take away the Heart of stone, and give them
a Heart of Flesh, and put his Spirit within them v. 27. etc. Yet still, v. 37.
I will yet for all this be enquired of, by the house of Israel to do it for
them.

(2.) Every gracious Soul ought to pray for such a measure of Grace as may fit
his Capacity; none are so full, but they may receive more: We have so little of
Grace, because we ask no more, Jam. 4.2. Ye have not, because ye ask not: We
are but poor in our selves, we might be enriched from Christ; and if we were
more poor in Spirit, we should be more enriched with Grace from him, John
16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full: We should not
satisfy our selves with the present measure of Grace received: but pray, and
strive, that we may have grace given according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.7.

(3.) We ought to pray and strive that our narrow Vessels may be widned, our
Capacities enlarged that we may be more capable of Grace. The Vessels of Divine
Grace are of different sizes; as one Star differs from another in glory, so one
Saint differs from another in Grace. And as the Spirit enlarges the Heart, he
will enlarge his own hand, Psalm. 18.10. I am the Lord even thy God, open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. Our blessed Savior may say to us, as the
Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.12. Ye are not straightened in me, but ye are
straightened in your own Bowels: Our hearts are narrow toward Spiritual and
Heavenly things, because they are so enlarged toward earthly and visible
things; when the heart is enlarged as Hell, and death that cannot be satisfied,
Hab. 2.5. For these perishing things, no wonder if there be little room for the
Graces of the Spirit. This is therefore our great concern to pray, that God
would enlarge our desires, that he may satisfy and fill them.

(4.) We ought to pray and strive, That all the Powers and Faculties of the
whole man may be filled according to their measures. There is much room in our
Souls that is not furnished; much waste ground there that is not cultivated and
improved to its utmost: We might have more light in the Understanding, more
tractableness in the Will, more heat in our Love, and a sharper edge set upon
our Zeal: And we have warrant to pray for this measure of the fullness of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Now the God of peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole Spirit, Soul and Body may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

(5.) Every gracious Soul ought to pray and strive for such a measure of Grace,
that he may be qualified for any Duty and Service that God shall call him to,
and engage him in. The Hebrew word, which we render Consecration, or separation
to an Office, is Filling the hand, Exodus 29.9. Consecrate ye Aaron and his
Sons, in the Hebrew, Fill the hand of Aaron and his Sons: Where God employs the
hand, he will fill the hand; we have ground to believe that he will send us
about no Errand, but he will bear our Charges; wherever he gives a
Commission, he will bestow a competent qualification; when we go about his
Work, we may expect his presence and assistance in the Work: And Moses seems to
stand upon these terms with God, Exodus 33.15. If thy presence go not with me,
carry us not up hence: As therefore there is great variety of Duties in our
Christian Calling, we may in Faith expect, and from that believing expectation
pray, that we may be furnished with a suitable variety of Grace for the
discharge of them.

(6.) Every true Christian ought to pray and strive for such a measure of
Grace, as may enable him to bear patiently, cheerfully and creditably, those
afflictions and sufferings, which either God's good pleasure shall lay upon us,
or for his Names sake we may draw upon our selves: We ought to pray, that
either he will lay no more upon us than our present strength can bear; or if he
increases our trials, he will increase our Faith. There Is no danger of excess
in our Prayers, when we confine them to the limits of his gracious promises.
Now here we have encouragement from his Word, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the
temptation make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

(7.) Every true Christian ought to pray and strive for such a measure of
Grace, as may bring the Soul to a settlement and stability, that he be not soon
shaken by the cross and adverse evils that he shall meet with in this Life.

And the Apostle Peter has gone before us in this Prayer, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God
of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after
that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
you. And herein especially let us keep an eye upon these particulars.

1. Pray that God would so stablish you in the truth, that ye may not be blown
away with every wind of Doctrine. A sorry trivial Error many times oversets and
puzzles a weak Understanding: Now it is our great Interest to pray, and strive
that we may reach such a clear, distinct, coherent Light into the Doctrine of
the Gospel, that every small piece of Sophistry may not perplex and stagger our
Belief of it: So the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.14. would have Believers be no more
Children tossed to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

2. Pray also that God would so stablish you in the truth of the promises, that
your Faith may not be shaken with every wind of Providence: We are apt to have
our hearts tossed by contrary Dispensations. So upon a rumor, Isa. 7.2. The
heart of Asa was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood
are moved with the wind. It argues great weakness of Faith that we cannot
maintain an equality of mind under various Providence, the only remedy of
which evil is to pray that God would increase and strengthen our Faith; that we
may be so firmly built upon the unmovable rock, that we may not be afraid of
evil tidings, having our hearts fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. And
this was the glory of Job's Faith, Job 13.15. That though God should slay him,
yet would he trust in him.

3. Let us pray, and strive that God would so settle and stablish us in Love to
himself, that no blast of Afflictions from his hand may cool the fire of Divine
Love in our hearts: We want exceedingly the Faith, that God carries on a design
of Love under all his various and seemingly contrary dealings with us; he can
love and correct; why then cannot we love a correcting God? Whether he wounds
or heals, his love is the same, and why not ours? Can we not love God upon the
security of Faith, that he will do us good, as well as upon the experience that
he has done us good?

4. Pray we and strive that God would so settle and stablish us in our inward
peace, that no wind of temptation may overthrow it: It Is a slender and ill-made
peace which every assault of the Tempter dissolves. The Psalmist stood upon a
firmer bottom; when the terrifying Onsets from without made him fly more
confidently to his God, Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will put my trust
in thee. And we have Gods own promise to answer our Faith, Isa. 26.3. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in
thee.

And thus I have returned some Answer to the second Branch of the Question,
What is the measure of the fullness of God with which every true Christian ought
to pray, and strive to be filled?

There will still remain an enquiry, How we may reach to such a measure of the
Divine fullness as has been described? To which though the limits of this
discourse will not allow a full and just Answer, yet the importance of the
Question will oblige me to point at some few things, upon which your own
Meditations may find matter of enlargement.

1. And first it is necessary that we be convinced that we are very far short
of that fullness of God, which is attainable even in this life: Many might have
had more grace, if they had not been under the delusion that they had grace
enough already: The dream of Perfection attained, has prejudiced the perfection
which is attainable: As Tully observes, Multi ad sapientiam pervenissent, nisi
eo jam se pervenisse putassent: Many Men had arrived at a high degree of
Wisdom, had they not fondly conceited that they had already reached the top of
it: The Apostle's frame was most excellent and imitable, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after
it, that I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. He
considered more what was before, than what he had left behind; that is, he more
looked forward to what he had not yet attained, than backward to what he had.

2. Let us pray that we may know more of the Love of Christ to us, as the
proper mean to be filled more with the fullness of God in us: This is the
expedient of the Text; and what greater encouragement can there be, to love,
serve, obey and glorify our God, than that he has so freely, wonderfully loved
us in Christ?

3. Let us strive to keep our vessels pure and clean, though they be small and
narrow; that however they are of a narrow capacity, yet being pure and clean,
God may delight to fill us, and to enlarge our hearts that we may receive more
of his fullness, Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God: The sight of God which a pure and holy heart qualifies us for, is the
enjoyment of God, i. e. Gods communicating his love in its sanctifying and
saving effects; and so we shall find, if we compare John 3.3. Except a Man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; with verse. 5. Except a Man be
born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

4. Labor to experience poverty of Spirit: The way to be rich in Grace, is to
be poor in Spirit; which poverty of Spirit, does not consist in having little
Grace, but in a sense that whatever we have little or much, its not of, or from
our selves, but from the fullness of God.

The more we empty our selves, (in that sense) the more God will fill us, Luke
3.5. Every valley shall be filled: The humble valleys are often fruitful when
the high hills are commonly barren: self-sufficiency discharges and disobliges
the all sufficiency of God, Luke 1.53. The rich he sends empty away; Now as by
the Rich we are here to understand, such as are rich in their own conceit, though
they be really poor; so by the poor in Spirit we are to understand them that
are convinced of their own original indigency, though by the Grace of God they
are enriched, and their spiritual wants supplied, Phil. 4.20.

This poverty of Spirit, though it pretend not to merit, yet has a meetness for
the fullness of God, Jer. 31.25. I have satiated the weary Soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful Soul.

5. From this Spiritual poverty arises a Spiritul hunger and thirst after more
of the grace of God, which temper of Soul lies directly in the way of that
promise, Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after
righteousness for they shall be filled: for it is upon him that is thirsty that
God promises to pour out water; and it is the dry ground that God promises to
satisfy with the floods, Isa. 44.3.

6. Attend in Conscience, and Faith, with constancy and perseverance, upon all
the Ordinances of the New Testament; you read, Zech. 4.12. of two olive
branches, that through the two golden pipes, empty the golden oil out of
themselves. Let the two Olive branches be the Person of Christ in two Natures;
the golden oil will then be his precious Grace; and the golden pipes, the
Ordinances of Christ, by which he empties out of himself that precious Grace,
into holy, and clean, though earthen vessels.

Amongst many other terms which the Ancients gave to the Lords Supper, they
called it, (...). The perfect or the perfection: so Zonoras, (...). To come to
the Perfection is to come to the holy Eucharist: And indeed where do believers
find their choicest derivations from God, their sweetest Communion with God,
but in that Sacred Ordinance worthily received?

7. And lastly, To all these we must add, and with all these we must join,
fervent and believing Prayer, which as it glorifies God, God will glorify it,
and make it the means of conveying down to our Souls such a measure of fullness
as may serve us in the time of our need: we can never be poor whilst we can
pray: He that is the Spirit of Supplication in us will be the Spirit of Grace
to us. Let us therefore pray with the Apostle, Romans 15.13, That the God of hope
would fill us with joy and peace in believing. Let us pray, that the God of all
Grace would make us perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle us, 1 Pet. 5.10. That
the God of Peace would sanctify us wholly, 1 These. 5.23. And let us pray, that
the same God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, would give us to
know the Love of Christ which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all
the fullness of God.

Quest. How are the ordinary means of Grace, more certainly successful for
Conversion, than if persons from Heaven or Hell should tell us what is done
there? SERMON VII.
Luke XVI. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rise from the dead.
WHether the Narrative of our Savior, beginning at the 19th verse of this
Chapter, concerning the Rich-man and Lazarus be an History relating really
matter of fact, or a simple Parable, representing the matter by way of
similitude? Or an useful discourse by way of Delineation partaking of both,
(...) Just. Martyr.
viz. a Parabolical History, or Historical Parable? Has been variously
determined both by the Ancients and Moderns Voss. These. Dispt. 5.
. One Lomierus.
indeed would go further and have it to be a Prophetical Parable, representing
by Dives, Judaism; and by Lazarus, Gentilism; This latter as he thinks from the
name Lazarus imports one (before Christ came) that had no help, forsaken of
all, kept out of doors amongst the Dogs. (...).
They who conceive it to be an History, argue it, from the proper Name of
Lazarus; others who judge it to be a Parable, (...) Dr. Lightfoot, etc.
allege that the Talmudists do frequently use Lahazar contractly for Eleazar;
yet here not as a proper Name, but common, denoting a destitute beggar
indefinitely, or him, who of himself is bereft of help, or one to whom help
should be showed. As Rachel is used Appellatively; Jer. 31.13. with Mat. 2.18.
and as Civil Lawyers propose a Case under the Name of Titius. Considering
further to speak properly, the Rich-man could have no tongue to cool, when his
body was in the cold grave, nor Lazarus a tip of a finger to dip in water,
whiles in a state of separation. But that which we are mostly to regard in this
Dialogue, is the main scope and design of our Savior, which is, as to set
forth the misery of the covetous uncharitabe rich, (who died impenitently) and
the happiness of the godly charitable poor (who walked according to Scripture
Canon): Gal. 6.16.
so to teach us, there is no mercy to those who die in their sins unrepented
of; (there being a great gulf fixed betwixt them, and those in Abraham's bosom,
advanced to chief dignity in Heaven, verse. 26.) and that there are no
revelations concerning eternal rewards and punishments, to be expected now from
the other World for Conversion in order to Salvation, by those who do not
really give credit to the written Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets. Christ
here intimating the approaching ruin of the unbelieving Jews (not willing to
come to him for life John 5.40.
) though one even he himself, should rise again from the dead: For this He aims
at here in my Text.

Wherein we have Abraham's concluding answer, to the Rich-mans request of one
from the Dead, in an Hypothetical form; as it were from the Denial of the
Consequent, or that which does necessarily follow from the Antecedent which is
here; [ having Moses and the Prophets,] whom they should have believed, but did
not: and therefore from more than a parity of Reason (my thinks) he does infer,
even as from the greater to the less, it certainly follows by a sure sequel or
consequence, that if they did not give credit to that (which Peter calls a)
surer word of Prophecy, Pet. 1.19.
yea, which cannot be shaken Heb. 12.28. v. 34, etc. (...).
, they would not to that which could have no such appointment and attestation
as the other already had; even of divine Authority upon their own concession.
If the ordinary means which was granted by themselves to be of Divine
institution, was not effectual to Conversion, it is not easy to imagine how a
Novel means extraordinary, which they had no proof of, (only in their own
conceit) should become successful. Which may be a sufficient ground to found
the Case upon, that I am desired, as I can practically, to resolve this
Morning, in the terms given me, viz.

How are the ordinary means of Grace more certainly succesful for Conversion,
than if persons from Heaven or Hell should tell us what is done there? In
resolving of which I shall endeavor to show,

I. That this Proposition, [The ordinary means of Grace are more certainly
succesful for Conversion, than if persons from Heaven or Hell should tell us
what is done there,] may be clearly deduced from the words, according to the
purport of it, in a short explication.

II. How or upon what grounds it so comes to pass. And then

III. Make some improvement of it in a short Application.

I. To explain the Proposition, That the ordinary means of Grace are more
certainly succesful for Conversion, than if some from Heaven or Hell should
tell us what is done there. That we may see it does clearly result from the
Text I shall speak to a few Particulars.

I. Concerning the ordinary means of grace, (...).
I understand what is here meant and prescribed by Moses and the Prophets,
which they had, and were to observe, v. 29. with 16. and elsewhere Matthew.
11.11. Luke 24.27.
, namely, the Holy Scriptures, and what is thereby required, the true and
saving Doctrine contained in the Oracles of God, which were committed to the
Jews Romans 3.2. -- 9.4. Psalm. 147.19. Deuteronomy. 4.10. -- 31, 9, 10. Isa. 2.3. Zach.
8.13.
, and admirably preserved by the diligence of the Massorites, who were very
solicitous that one iota, or tittle of it might not perish. Neither has the
Providence of God been less concerned, in the preservation of the Doctrine
therein contained, than of the Holy Writings. And if in preserving the whole
entire, it has suffered a variety of Reading to creep in about things of less
or no importance amongst the Copies we have, it may serve but as a Spur to
quicken us to search the Scriptures John 5.39.
, most frequently put absolutely in the New Testament for the written word of
God, the Bible (...) John 2.22. Mat. 22.42. and (...). Luke 4.17. John 20.30.
. So the Holy Scriptures Romans 7.2.
, and all Scriptures of Divine Inspiration 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
. And though Christ here by Abraham does expressly mention only Moses and the
Prophets; yet he coucheth the Historical Books under the Prophets, according to
the common acceptance of the Jews, and their usual manner of reading them in
the Synagogues Dr. Lightfoot.
(Canonizing them) as he does elsewhere Luke 11.49.
the Prophets and Apostles: Not only importing the Law given by Moses his
Ministry, and the writings of the Prophets; but also the Preachers of the same
Doctrine which Moses wrote, even of Christ John 5.46. with Genesis 3.15 and --
22.18. -- 49.10. Nu. 24.17. etc. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
, whose practice it was to demonstrate himself from Moses and the Prophets John
5.33. Luke 24.47. Mat. 21.42. -- 22.43, 44.
, which method the Apostles also used Acts 18.28. -- 24.14. -- 28.23.
. For Moses and the Prophets spoke of the Person of the Messiah, and his
Natures both Divine Jer. 23.5. Mic. 5.2. Prove. 8.12, 22.
and Humane Genesis 3.15. Isa. 7.14.
, his Offices Prophetical Deuteronomy. 18.15. John 1.45.
, Priestly Psalm. 110.4.
, Kingly Psalm. (...)
, and States both of Humiliation Isa. 52.2. etc. Psalm. 22.18.
, and Exaltation and 47.2. and 68.18. and 118.22.
, with the benefits thereof Psalm. 23.5.
: I might add, that the whole Scope of the Ceremonial Law was to prefigure
Christ, coming to suffer for man's Redemption, being the end of the Law to
every one that believes, for righteousness Romans 10.4. Gal. 3.24. Acts 7.2, 37.
what was taught by Moses about Sacrifices, having relation to the Sacrifice of
Christ, foretold by the Prophet Isaiah Is. 53. p. tot.
. This was acknowledged by Tryphon the Jew in his Discourse with Justin Martyr,
though denied by the Modern Jews. So that there is an Harmony and Identity, or
Sameness of Doctrine, and Rules of Practice, for substance, in the Old and New
Testament, the Old having in it the Life and Soul of the New, though different in
degrees; the same Object Christ, to whom all the Prophets witnessed Acts 10.43.
. And therefore, though the generality of the stiff-necked Jews did not give
credit to the main importance of the Old, yet the sincere ones, who did believe
the Prophets, as the Apostles exhorted Acts 26.27. John 20.31.
, they with Philip and Nathaneel, Israelites indeed, rejoiced they had found
him of whom Moses has written in the Law John 1.41.
, and whom the Prophet foretold should be the desire of all Nations Hag. 2.7.
, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel.
Wherefore I may very fairly hence under this First Head in the explication
deduce from my Text,

I. That the Holy Scriptures, read, preached, and heard, accompanied with
Prayer, and other institutions of Christ, as the Seals of the new Covenant, and
the Ministry of Reconciliation are the Means of Grace ordained of God, to bring
Men and Women to repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ Acts 20.21.
: That Men by the applying themselves sincerely to the use of these means
(which though they have no natural force in, and of themselves to the effecting
of a change) may by the efficacy of the Spirit exerting insuperable Grace, John
15.3. -- 17.17. Ephesians. 5.26.
be cleansed 5: God, the great Efficient, may in these helps of his own
ordaining, reveal his own arm Isa. 53.1.
, draw them unto Christ John 6.45. Rev. 1.16.
, make the Seed of the Word fruitful, and putting forth his own Power, bring
them to salvation in the Heavenly Kingdom, and rest sweetly in Abraham's Bosom,
where they shall not know trouble any more.

II. These are ordinary means, according to the order established by the
supreme Ruler, who knows what is best for those under his Government, in
opposition to extraordinary, which seldom happen, upon some singular work of
Judgment or Mercy to a Person or People. It Is true, the most Sovereign Agent,
who is most free, he may if he pleases, without means, by an immediate
Impression of Light and infusion of Grace work on the Soul, as he did on the
Apostles and Paul Acts 2.4. -- 9.1. etc. Gal. 1.12.
; but generally and for the most part God reveals himself mediately, by the
ordinary means he has settled to abide in his Church to the end, there being an
aptness and fitness in them under Divine Influence for converting the Soul
Psalm: 19.17.
, when Ambassadors come in Christ's stead, beseeching men to be reconciled to
God 2 Cor. 5.20.
, having a promise of his Presence with them to the end of the World Mat. 28.
ult.
, in communicating of the mind of God, by writing, or speaking; reading, or
interpreting; exhorting, and directing 2 Pet. 3.1. Acts 21.25. -- 4.20, 29. --
15.21. -- 8.30, 35. 1 Cor. 12.30. Acts 15.32. 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
; every way preaching for the begetting of Faith To. 10.13, 15
, when the advice of Gregory Nazianzen is observed, namely, (...), i. e. Pray
and search; having prayed with David, Open thou mine eyes (or reveal Psalm.
119.18.
) that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. It concerns us to be much
in meditating upon it -- 1.2. John 5.39.
. Gregory (called the Great) gives an account of an illiterate man, who bought
a Bible, hired one to read to him out of it, and thereby became a great
Proficient in the School of Christianity. Luther Melch. Adeon. in vita.
by reading of it was turned from Popery; so was John Hus by reading of our
Wickliff's Books, proving his Doctrine from it. We know Augustine was converted
by taking it up, and reading Confess. l. 8. chapter 8. 2. Nicephor. p. 5. 27.
. And it is said, Cyprian, by reading the Prophet Jonas: As Junius, by the first
Chapter of John's Gospel, though it is supposed neither of them then had much skill
in the Originals, but were beholding to Translations. Thus we see how the
Scripture is the means, and the ordinary means. The next thing in the
explication is to show,

II. That this means becomes more certainly succesful, or effectual. Certainly
is to be understood in opposition to that which happens uncertainly and
peradventure. Not as if every where that the Immortal Seed of the Word is sown,
Conversion did certainly and always follow, it being but a subservient
Instrument; some Seed meets with bad ground Mat. 13.4, 5.
; some reject the Counsel of God against themselves Luke 7.30.
; they put it from them, judging themselves unworthy of eternal Life Acts 13.46.
; i. e. by contradicting of the Word, they do as evidently deprive themselves
of eternal Life, as if the Judge did pass that Sentence upon the Bench. So what
is the Savor of Life to others, becomes the Savor of Death to them 2 Cor. 2.16
. The Rich-man, as he is brought in here, conceits after the mode of the Jews,
seeking for Signs John 4.48. -- 6.30.
, (which Christ gave check to, when by his accomplishment of the Prophecies, he
had demonstrated himself to be the Messiah, and they would have him to be a
Political or Temporal King Mat. 12.39.
) that one rising miraculously from the dead, and preaching, would keep others
from Hell. But Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, who knew what it was to
repent and believe, and be converted, was of another persuasion: He bids
hearken to the written word, read and preached; on which Faith and Repentance
was to be grounded; God's Providential Works, how admirable soever, not being
the Rule for Men to go by, but his Word: It being no good sense, that God's
extraordinary actings should be our ordinary Rule. He that would not Plow or
Sow till Manna be rained from Heaven, because it once did, may expect Bread
till he starve; and so may he that looks to be fed with Ravens, as Elias once
was: Man may be most certainly assured from God's Word what his Mind is: God
himself indeed does principally make any means effectual, or successful; Paul's
planting, and Apollo 's watering comes to nothing without him, his influence
and blessing 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. De Gratia Christi, chapter 24.
.) Augustine said right, Men may read and understand, behold and confess, not
by the Law and Doctrine sounding outwardly, but by the inward and hidden,
wonderful and ineffable power God, does not only work Divine true Revelations,
but also good Wills. Yet from the external preaching of the Word of God, as a
means of his appointment, there is a Godly Sorrow, or a sorrowing after God
wrought, which works repentance to Salvation 2 Cor. 7.10, 11.
. It proves successful to some, who are not hearers only, but doers of the Word
Jam. 1.22.
. It falls out prosperously and happily with them, using of the means. Solomon
says, Prove. 13.15
A good understanding gives favor and success: Be sure a good understanding
of Gods mind from his Word, becomes ordinarily more successful, that the Soul
may be in health and prosper 3 Epist. John v. 1.
, than any expectation of that which can only give an uncertain sound, till
evidenced to be from Heaven, as the Word is.

3. For Conversion, i. e. From all sin to God; which imports a through change of
Heart and Life, and that it is indeed from God the Author, by his Spirit 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Tit. 3.5.
, above the creatures power and activity John 1.13.
; yet God uses Christ's Ambassadors in the Ministry of Reconciliation 2 Cor.
5.19 20 Acts 26.18.
, and those who are Instructors in him Job 22.21.
, that we may be acquainted with God, receive forgiveness, and be built up 6
even an habitation of God, through the Spirit, upon the foundation (doctrinal)
of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ (personally) being the chief Cornerstone
Ephesians. 2.20.
: Wherefore Paul urges Timothy to read the Divinely inspired Scriptures, in
that they were able (as an Instrument in God's hands) to make him wise to
Salvation 2 Timothy 3.15.
, as they were a ground of hope and comfort to others Romans 15.4.
, by means of which we are begotten or born again Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23.
; yea, and from God's appointment and ordination; or (as it were) Common Law,
we are not only first converted from Sin to God, but are carried on in a state
of grace, till we, in exercising our selves unto Godliness, are afterward
brought unto glory. It remains before I leave the Explication that I touch upon

4. The Persons whom the Rich Man is here represented to desire to come from
Heaven or Hell, to give an Information to his Relatives how things go in those
unchangeable States of Happiness or Misery, are only brought in ex hypothesi,
upon supposition, or condition, granting it were so: Not that there is a ground
for the expectation of any new Messengers from the other World; we may yield
the thing possible, tho not probable; we are not to limit the Holy One who is
most perfect; he is not bounded as to his Omnipotency, any more than his
Omnisciency: He could, if he would, reveal himself now, as he did to John in
the Isle of Patmos Rev. 1.9.
. He might, if he would, in the dispensation of his Grace and Providence, use
the Ministration of Angels Heb. 1.14.
, without giving any account of his matters Job 33.12, 13
, and put them upon Obedience extraordinarily; for those Heavenly Spirits must
be at his Service, in the affairs of his Kingdom Rev. 22.9.
. Indeed the great instance of their Ministry was about the Person of Christ;
yet he did use them afterward to reveal his mind Rev 1.1. -- 19.10.
. How far he is pleased to do it at this day in any rare instance, is not for
me to determine: but some have pretended, to have Revelations from Angels,
which have proved Delusions. There is, it is true, a Ministry of them (in this
Chapter where my Text is, verse. 22.) to carry holy Souls to Abraham's bosom,
which is ordinary: But we will suppose there should be any extraordinary, yet
that would not be any more (if so much) regarded than the ordinary means; and
we should through the Grace given, be careful not to be wise above that which
is written Romans 12.3.
. Having thus explained the sense of the Answer to the Case before me; I hope,
according to the Explication given, you will come to conclude with me, that it
does clearly result from my Text, and is proved thence.

II. The Second General is to show, How, or upon what grounds the ordinary
means of Grace are more certainly succefsful for Conversion, than if Persons
from Heaven or Hell should tell us what is done there? as has been explained.

That I may do this as well as I can in a little room, I shall be concerned
like Bezaleel and Aholiab Exodus 36.7.
(though not with the like Wisdom) to lay by much of the good stuff would offer
it self to me in this case. Somewhat methinks I should premise in the General,
and then proceed to particular grounds.

1. Let me premise in the general these two or three things,

1. From my Text, and in a Christian Congregation, I am not necessitated, in
showing how this comes about, which I have deduced from it, to prove Moses and
the Prophets, or which is all one for substance, more largely, the Holy
Scriptures, to be the Word of God. That being the Hypothesis or what is
presupposed and not Questioned in this Dialogue between the Richman and the
Father of the Faithful, as we find verse. 29th as well as in the words compared
with verse. 16th of this Chapter. The Jews did acknowledge it, and never denied
it, when our Savior and his Apostles, did ever and anon show them how the
Scriptures were fulfilled, manifested, and accomplished. So that not to grant
this were to take away the substratum or foundation of the Case. Which the Jews
frankly yielded, John 9.29.
We know that God spoke unto Moses; indeed it was evident enough when he
refuted any objection against it, Exodus 3.2, 6, 14 -- 4.1, 2, etc. -- 14.31. --
20.1, etc. Numb. 11.17.
comforting of them by showing them that God was with him. We find they did
readily agree to it that God was the Author of the Old Testament. Apollos we
read Acts 18.24, 28.
did mightily convince many of the Jews from the Scriptures, i. e. those Books
which they did own to be of Divine inspiration. And by consequence if people be
not worse than Jews the New Testament should be owned to be so too, being the
Old directs to it. When Christ was transfigur'd, Moses and Elias appeared
talking with him Mat. 17.2, 3
, and so gave their Testimonies to the main subject and substance of the
Gospel, since In Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Col.
2.3.
.

2. Man in his innocent state had an innate pure light, consisting in the
knowledge of God the Creator, Lawgiver, Governor, and Rewarder; presently
enlarged by Revelation from without, in the Sacramental precept of the Divine
will under the first Covenant: Genesis 2.17.
and from the consideration of Gods works which were all very good Genesis 1.31.
, and this was necessary to that state. But since Man being mutable, sought out
many inventions Eccles. 7.27
, and harken'd to the Serpents suggestion Genesis 3.5.
had obscured this light, God of his infinite goodness, pitying the vanity of
fallen Man as mortal, not knowing how to deliver his Soul from the hand of the
grave, Ps2al. 89.47, 48
2 did think it necessary to reveal himself, and magnify his grace, in
condescending to enter into a new Covenant with this fallen creature; giving his
Word, or first Promise, that the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents
head Genesis 3.15. John 1.14.
. Herein Christ was promised, and hence called the Word: being He indeed,
concerning whom, that saving Word of God, or Word of Promise is made. As we
say, I will give you my word for it. We may easily conceive it requisite, from
that natural light which remained in the reasonable creature, that God the
Creator, and Governor is to be worshipped Acts 17.23. Romans 1.23, 25 1 Kings
18.21.
: and that no worship can be accepted of God, but what is instituted of
himself: and since there abides in Man naturally, a strong desire of truth and
immortality; of knowing how he may be accepted of God 2 Cor. 5.9. Psalm. 4.6. --
73.24.
, and enjoy Communion with him, that there should be some assured 2 Timothy 3.14.
Revelation John 1.18. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
(whereby he does manifest himself and declare his will) as the glass of his
Divinity 2 Cor. 3.18. -- 4.6.
, and the rule of his worship Isa. 1.10, 12. Matthew. 7.21. Col. 2.23, 24.
, that we may not be guilty of worshipping we know not what, or how, being he
is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth Joh. 4.22, 24
.

3. Though God in infinite Wisdom, during the time of the long-lived Patriarchs,
till some time after the flood, thought it sufficient, (notwithstanding there
was an early defection from his appointments, which yet in some measure, came
under the Reformation of Enoch Genesis 4.26.
, Noah Genesis 8.20. -- 9.5.
, and Abraham Genesis 17.1, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.5. -- 4.7, 8.
) to continue that way of Revelation from one to another, during the infancy of
his Church: however when she grew up, it became necessary, for the due
Conservation, Vindication and Propagation of his Word, that as all Nations by
the light of Nature are directed generally to the use of Laws, (his own Laws
reaching to the very motions of the heart,) should be written. Prove. 22.19, 20.
Luke 1.3, 4. Romans 15.4.
This is found to be the most credible way of Proposal, it being most fit we
should ascribe that to God, which is really consonant to the greatest Wisdom;
that the certainty of the Word of truth might be known and communicated, God
himself wrote his Laws Exodus 24.12 Hos. 8.12.
, and commanded Moses Exodus 34.1, 27.
, and the Prophets Hab. 2.2. Jer. 36.2. Scripta tabella manet. Dr. Templer.
to write his will and oracles. These coming as the credential Letters of the
supreme infallible Majesty which are to remain inviolable, not be rejected by
any, who could never see any demonstrative evidence to weaken the Authority
thereof. So that it would be most injurious to the Divine benignity, to suspect
that the All-wise and most gracious God would be wanting to his Church, in so
necessary a matter. The great Doctor of the Gentiles would argue, Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things?

These things being premised,

2. I shall proceed to the particular grounds of the Assertion: so as I would
hope they may not only satisfy real Christians; but such as are doubting of
the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, if not disposed to be
Antiscripturists.

1. The Assent of Divine Faith whereby a sinner is converted and brought nigh
to God, is only built upon the Authority of God the Revealer; considering his
infallible Veracity, that he is a God of truth and cannot deceive or be
deceived; having dominion over his Creatures, who are therefore to submit to
his Word, penned upon his command, by those who were divinely inspired 2 Timothy
3.16 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. Hos. 12.10. 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 These. 2.13.
, as they vouched and proved themselves to be, and we have no solid reason to
except against their Proof. Though the Prophets and Penmen of Scripture were not
always accompanied with miracles, when they delivered their Messages from God:
yet they required an attendance and obedience under an eternal penalty to be
inflicted upon those who did disobey the voice and Message of God, which if
they to whom it came did not receive with a Divine Faith, they did in Gods
account refuse to obey. There is no suspending our Assent, when God expressly
declares his Will, by himself or his Messengers coming in his Name, as in the
last days he did by his Son Heb. 1.1.
, who spoke with Authority and not as the Scribes Matthew. 7.29. (...).
. There was a Divinity discerned in it by the hearers, and so there was in some
proportion, in the Prophets of the Lord, somewhat Divine, which might be
discerned by those unto whom it came; (as by Paul distinctly) else it had been
hard for God to have charged their eternal and temporal welfare or ruin, Acts
22.9.
upon their discerning or not discerning a right* betwixt his Word in the mouth
of his own Prophets, and that Word which pretended only so to be in the mouths
of the false Prophets. We have a notable instance hereof, in opposition to
those who pretended to Prophecy in the Name of the Lord, to gain credit to
their lies. Jer. 23.22, 25, 28.
The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my Word
let him speak it faithfully: what is the Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord? Is
not my Word like fire, says the Lord? And like an hammer that breaks the
rock in pieces? The righteous God would not have required of Men under a
dreadful penalty to have assented to his Word, (in opposition to the impostors
dreams) had there not been most certain tokens, for the differencing of it from
that of the false prophets, whose words (as all others besides his) were as
Chaff, light and useless stuff for Man's food, which the Wheat, the bread of
life, might be easily known from, by those who had eyes to see, and did not,
because of their evil deeds love darkness rather than light John 3.19.
; we know they who by a good light, are conversant in receiving and paying of
moneys, do readily discern the genuine, from counterfeit coin. Whereupon Gerson
Pars prima, De distinctione verarum Visionum a falsis.
affirmed, that the true coin of Divine Revelation may be known from the
counterfeits of Diabolical Visions, as true Gold is from its counterfeit, by
its weight, flexibility, and durableness, (or continuity and incorruptibleness)
configuration and color. Gods holy Word had light and heat, and power proper
to it, which made it evident, though prejudice, and conceited interest hindered
many to whom it came, from giving entire credit to it, delivered by the Lords
true Prophets Isa. 53.1. Jer. 43.3.
, and Christ himself John 9.29. -- 12.37, 38.
, who will certainly manifest himself, as in displeasure to those who reject
him, revealing the Father; so in favor to those who receive him John 14.21
Matthew. 11.20.
. It Is no way likely that one from the dead should so manifest himself, if he
came to impart his experiences to his friends, yet in the state of the living:
who should in all reason consider, that if we receive the witness of Men, the
witness of God is greater 1 John 5.9.
; and consequently should be deemed more succesful for conversion. Hence,

2. The Scriptures prove themselves by their own light to be from God, and
appointed by him, to convince and convert sinners, and direct them to come to
him for rest. If God do reveal himself, his attributes, and will by his works
Psalm. 145.15.
which praise him, and manifest his eternal power and godhead Romans 1.20.
Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum.
, to leave Men inexcusable so far as that evidence goes: and likewise by the
voice of Nature, or the innate light, those common principles left in the
Consciences of Men exercised to discern betwixt good and evil; Romans 2.14, 15
then he having magnified his word above all his Name Psalm. 132.2.
, which is all that whereby he makes himself known, there be certainly more
clear characters and glorious impressions of the Divine Majesty, his Power,
Holiness, Goodness, Wisdom, and Grace to be discerned therein, than any where
besides. It Is rational to collect, that by the same Counsel God did inscribe
Ensigns of himself in the works of his own hands; Dr. Templer de Sacro Canone.
he did impress documents of Divinity on the words of his mouth, wherein the
lineaments of Heavenly Wisdom are as conspicuous, as the sagacity of Joab, in
the speech of the Woman of Tekoa unto David 2 Samuel 14.19
. Even as by the light of the Sun in the Firmament, we may see the glorious
body of the Sun it self: So by the Word of God, which is pure, enlightening the
Eyes 6, Psalm. 19.4, 8.
we may discern clearly who is the Author of it. By the condescending beams and
influences vouchsafed in that bright Sun, who is indeed the Father of lights,
from whom every good and perfect gift descends James 1.17.
, we may come to see our chief good, and the only way to enjoy it. In him is
the fountain of life, and in his light we shall see light Psalm. 36.9.
. God who is the true invariable light, in whom there is no darkness at all 1
John 1.7.
, can so shine upon the glass James 1.23. 2 Cor. 3.18.
of his Word, that we may see therein a lively Spiritual portraiture of
himself, and his pleasure toward us, with our duty unto him. For you know by
looking in a glass we see the glass it self, our selves, and other things
within reach in the room; and so by the Crystal glass of the Word we may see
God who speaks it, our selves, with our besmeared faces, and the emptiness of
the creatures in the same room with us; which may well engage us to seek to the
fountain of all fullness, God himself. But then, we should remember, (as an
Honorable Person advises Mr. Boil Style of Scripture, p. 72.
) to consider the Holy Bible as an harmonious Systeme, though written by parts
and piecemeal in several ages. It being like a fair suit of Arras, of which,
though a shred may assure us of the fineness of the colors and the richness of
the stuff, yet the hangings never appear to their true advantage, but when they
are displayed to their full dimensions and seen together. Besure the Scriptures
(to which we do well to take heed, as to a light shining in a dark-place 2 Pet.
1.19.
) will in this prospect clearly show their Author and original, namely that
they came from him who is the light of Men, and shines in darkness John 1.4,
5. 1 John 1.4, 5.
, to the good satisfaction of the Consciences of the honest beholders
themselves, whatever objections may be made by carnal reasonings to the
contrary; hereby being far more effectual to convert the Soul and rejoice the
Heart Psalm. 19.7, 8.
, than any appearances of prodigious specter giving some notice of what passes
in the other World, could ever do. Since the real resurrection of Lazarus had no
other influence on some of the Jews, than only to give them occasion of turning
informers to the Pharisees, against Christ, who had just before their Eyes,
wrought that most notable miracle John 11.46
. Hence,

3. The power and efficacy the Scriptures have had in changing the minds and
hearts of men, show that as to any future expectations, they are more
successful for conversion, than any new revelations or appearances from the
other World. The powerful effects of it, proving the Word of God, to be a
perpetual Ordinance, or covenant which God has commanded for ever Psalm. 111.9.
, deriving virtue from him for this very end, and by its powerfulness and
quickness evidencing him to be the undoubted Author of it Heb. 4.12.
, when it is received (though revealed to, and by Men immediately or mediately)
not as the word of Men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God, which works
effectually in them that believe 1 These. 2.13
, yea and brings men to believe, who are not preposess'd with prejudices and
corrupt affections, which cause a rage against Divine appointments, whereupon
the God of this World (the Prince of Darkness) blinds their minds, lest the
light of the Gospel of Christ, who is the image of the invisible God, should
shine into them 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
. Yet in the dispensation of the Word there is an evidence of Divinity in it,
commending it self to the Consciences of unprejudiced Men. The ordinary means
of grace being mighty through God, to the pulling down of the strong holds 2
Cor. 10.4, 5.
, yea every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, from whom
it came, and unto whom it directs us. Even great ones have been astonished at
the Doctrine of the Lord Acts 13.12. Psalm. 119.111.
, drawn from vicious courses into virtuous and holy practices; from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God Acts 26.18.
, when little good comparatively was done by Christ himself preaching at
Capernaum Mat. 11.23. -- 13.58.
. The Magazin of his Miracles, those extraordinary Discoveries of their Author.
In the use of the ordinary means of Grace, even at one Sermon of Peter's, we
find three thousand converted Acts 2.41.
; and afterward upon hearing of the Word, we meet with about five thousand
more that believed Acts 4.4.
, which may well evidence who was the Author of it, and in whose hand it was an
Instrument Ephesians. 2.20.
. Many have been built upon this Foundation, enlightened and directed by this
Light Ps. 119.105.
, fed with this meat Heb. 5.13, 14
, regenerated by this Seed 1 Pet. 1.23.
, which as a grain of Mustard Seed in a matter of Sixty Six years space, after
the sowing of it, grew into a great Tree, which Pliny Plin. Secund. lib. 10.
Epist. mox ipso tractu ut fieri solet, diffundente se crimine, etc.

Adversus gentes ipsa multitudine perturbatus.


, the Proconsul in Bythinia, employed by Trajan to root up Christianity (which
they accounted a Crime) did acknowledge. Tertullian, and others, prove the
spreading of it in the Second and Third Centuries. So mightily grew the Word of
God, and prevailed Acts 19.20.
in the primitive times, ingenerating unconquered Constancy of Faith and
Godliness in the minds of the Hearers, and always victoriously triumphing over
the Kingdom of Satan, and false Religions. In the beginning of the Reformation,
said Luther Tom. 4.282. Ubique experimur in Templo, in Rep. etc.
, We do everywhere experience in the Church, in the Commonwealth, in the
Family, certain fruits of the Word, which as Leaven does spread it self into
all the parts of the Commonwealth, the Offices, and all the States.

Afterward we find how it did diffuse it self in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. See the Fulfilling of Scriptures, p. 401, 414. Is. 46.10. John
10.35. Acts 1.16.
Notwithstanding they of the Antichristian state have labored to keep up their
Superstition and Idolatry, by feigned Apparitions, as may be seen in later
Collections of Popish Miracles, the History of Jetzer, etc.

4. The Holy Bible being the appointed Instrument wherewith the Holy Spirit
will work for the sanctification of the Soul John 17.17. 1 Pet. 1.22.
; it is indeed a surer word of prophecy (which the Spirit of Christ that spoke
in the Prophets themselves did signify 1 Pet. 1.11. (...).
) than that which came from Heaven at the transfiguration 2 Pet. 1.18, 19 Mat.
17.5.
. Not in regard of the truth, (for therein they were both equal but in regard
that at the Transfiguration was more transient, being heard but by a few; this
of the Scripture more firm and fixed, being written for an unalterable Record;
just so as Holy Men had it brought to them at several times by the Holy Ghost;
it was not of any private Conception, for it came not by the will of man, but
was brought into them by the will of God, who has strongly preserved it
amongst his People, notwithstanding the endeavors of Antiochus to destroy it
under the Old Testament; and afterward, when the Canon was completed, though
several of the Roman Emperors used their utmost power to burn it Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. l. 10. chapter 3, 4. and 8.2, 3. (...), etc.
. For rather than they whom the Spirit of God had wrought upon by it, in the
communication of Spiritual Light and Life would become Traditores (such
Traitors to God and their own Soul, as) to deliver it up to Dioclesian's
Officers, they in great numbers suffered themselves in Egypt to be bodily
destroyed, in humble confidence the Author of it would take their Souls into
Abraham's Bosom, to be for ever happy there. So successful a means is the Word
of God for the work of Grace in the Soul, that no marvel upon the Rich man's
speaking his own conceit, or odd wish, for some ones prodigious return from the
other World; as if a Preacher thence would bring his Brethren to return to God;
Father Abraham discovers himself to be of another mind, as it were giving him a
Reprimand, shows that the Written Word, giving more clear evidence of its
really coming from above, and so manifesting it self to be from God, should
rather do it, as being the stated means, which the Spirit uses in the
conversion of others. And therefore the hankering after Messengers to come anew
from Heaven or Hell, argues those who are so disposed to be such (as our
Savior showed in confuting the Sadduces) who really know not the Scriptures,
nor the power of God therein Mat. 22.29.
. For let us suppose one who had been dead, and known to be so, for several
years, should be wonderfully raised up by God, to warn his known Friends here
in this World, to flee from the wrath to come, and to return to God: What new
Arguments could He use, that had not been used in the Ministration of the Word
before, since therein he had been acquainted with the pure Precepts of the
Divine Majesty; and also his sure promises of Heaven to the Obedient, with the
certain threatenings of Hell to the Disobedient, and the never-ceasing pains
under the execution of them, felt by him who in this Parable here would have
warning given to his Brethren? What can He supposed to come from the other
World, offer more to the serious consideration of his Relatives? After a little
startling of them, who it may be would be somewhat concerned a little while at
the surprise; as the Drunkard, seeing his Pot-Companion fall down dead under
the Table, or others struck dead on every side in a dreadful Pestilence; yet
the Survivers remain unchanged in their Minds, Wills, and Affections of Love
and Hatred, Hope and Fear all this while. Though they have often heard the
Ministers of the Word even in Christ's stead, laying cogent Arguments before
them to gain their Assent, powerful Motives to work upon their Wills and
Affections from the sure Word universally suited to the Cases of their several
Souls; when it may be they had some common motions of the Spirit which they
have quenched, whereupon they may now be prone to doubt, whether this supposed
new and extraordinary Messenger be indeed Commissioned from God, unless he
produce his Credentials, and these be attested to by the Spirit Gal. 3.1, 2.
Lavater de Spectris.
. For, upon the appearance of an Angel, there might well be a suspicion, since
if a good one, his Message would accord with God's Word; if a bad one, he would
endeavor to deceive by his Lies: When the Angel did instruct Joseph by a
Vision, he forthwith adjoin'd a Testimony from the Prophetical Scripture Mat.
1.23. Isa. 7.14.
, which Christ and his Apostles had respect to, though they could work Miracles
to confirm their Doctrine.

5. God out of his infinite Wisdom has given us his Oracles, and sent his
Ambassadors in the ministry of reconciliation 2 Cor 5.19, 20
, men like to our selves, as more suitable to us in houses of Clay, than
Angels, which live out of the Sphere of our Commerce. God might think now their
Testimonies to his Church here below, would not be so convenient for his
Government, and so consequently not so successful for the beginning of
Conversion. He could have had the use of the Noblest Spirits for his Errand,
and Embodied them, if he would, for expedition, when he chose to employ Moses,
notwithstanding his excuses Ex. 3.11, 12.
; when the Promise of God's Presence with him on his Embassy might answer all
Ex. 4.10, 12.
; so that he found be might say with converted Paul, Phil. 4.13.
He could do all things through Christ enstrengthning him. Man is best drawn in
such a way as is most agreeable to his Nature: The Head, which is the governing
part in the Organical Body, may move most uniformly with Members of the same
nature Deuteronomy. 18.15.
, who have the irrefregable Authority of God's Word to back them, wherein they
speak for God to stubborn ones; and though the Treasure is presented in Earthen
Vessels 2 Cor. 4.7.
, yet the excellency of the Power is of God 1 Cor. 1.17.
. Converse with good Angels is a Dignity which our present state in the Body
cannot well bear, and therefore it is rare. There is indeed a Story related in
Bodin Lib. 1. de Magorum cum Satana commercio.
of one who had desired much the guidance and assistance of an Angel; and from
the thirty seventh year of his Age, he said, he had a Spirit that assisted and
followed him to his Death: He would knock and awake him early in the morning;
if he spoke unwary words, he would reprove him for it by a Dream in the night;
if he was reading a bad Book, the Angel would strike o^ the Book for him to
leave it; and give some pre-notice to him in a Dream when some accident was
like to befall him, etc. This is related from the Man as matter of Fact. But it
concerns us to be wary, and not to be wise above that which is written 1 Cor.
4.6.
. If we are not satisfied with the infallible Testimony of God himself, how
should the coming of a Creature in a strange way give us satisfaction? The
Father of Lies may impose on our simplicity, and deceive us in the Habit of an
Angel of Light 2 Cor. 11.14.
. Too many easy People have been imposed on by the Popish Legends. Luther In
Genes. c. 22.
being acquainted with such Impostures, said, Satan indeed has often tempted
me (even as Augustine, who deprecated, that an Angel might not appear to him)
that I might ask a Sign of God: But far be it from me that I should hearken to
this temptation. The Martyrs without the apparition of Angels, confirmed by the
Word alone, did meet. Death for the name of Christ; and why should not we
acquiesce in the same? It Is said, when once he had kept a day of Humiliation
and Prayer, he had a Vision of Christ, when he said, Away! away! In Cap. 37
Genesis pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo* etc.
I know no picture of Christ but the Scripture. And elsewhere, I have made a
Covenant with the Lord my God, that he may not send me Visions, or Dreams, or
Angels; for I am content with this Gift that I have, the Holy Scripture, which
does abundantly teach and supply all things that are necessary both to this and
a future Life. Let us all then content our selves with the ordinary means of
Grace, which are more successful for Conversion to carry it on from first to
last, rather than expect persons from Heaven or Hell to acquaint us what is
done there.

Except.
If some rare instance should be alleged of some Atheisttical Persons, who
having been intimate Companions in wickedness; had agreed that when either of
them should depart this World, and find a joyful Heaven, or dreadful Hell; he
would, if possible, acquaint the Survivor with it: And thereupon some Spectre
or Voice has been heard or seen (or fancied to be so) upon such a Discovery
there has been an inclination to return to God, and an amendment of Life.

Almost Christian, as Agrippa; and not such an Altogether Christian, as Paul
himself was, when Converted Acts 26.27.
upon the Call of Christ by whom God spoke to him Gal. 1.1. Heb. 1.2.
, having ordained to reveal himself by the Word; but we do not now find the
revelation by Angels, or the Spirits of those who are departed this Life, to be
any stated Ordinance of God for man's Conversion, as the Scriptures be. For
should we suppose Bad Angels to come to us, they are Enemies to man's
Conversion: Good ones, as God's Ministers, would confirm his Word; should we
suppose wandering Spirits or Specter from the Dead (according to Dives his
Conceit) to be Monitors of the living, we must reckon them to be either the
Souls of Believers or Unbelievers: If of Believers, they will after the example
of Christ their Head, send us to the Holy Scriptures, as Agustine thought he
heard a voice saying, Take and Read, Take and Read. They will say with God the
Father concerning his Son and our Savior, Hear ye him Mat. 17.5.
. If the Souls of Unbelievers, and wicked Miscreants; Who would hearken to
them, or give credit to what they Say? Further, what these supposed ones say,
do either agree with the Written Word, or are contrary to it: If the former,
they are received, not because they are believed by them, but because contained
in the Word of God, which has been found a successful means of God's own
appointment for man's Conversion. If the latter, i. e. They be contrary to the
Word, they ought by no means to be received. Should we suppose (that which is
not possible) an Angel from Heaven should speak to them. But I fear I am become
tedious; yet I beg your Patience a little longer, whiles I touch upon

III. Some short Appl^cation of this stated Case, that The ordinary means of
Grace are more certainly successful for Conversion, than if some Persons from
Heaven or Hell, should tell us what is done there. And it shall be, for,

1. The Reproof of those who disvalue the Sciptures, and discourage such as
would search them in the language they understand, according to our Saviors
injunction to search the Scriptures John 5.39.
: which we find to be Authentical, from God himself, as has been evidenced,
and might be further by other Arguments which have been urged by others See
Grotius, Mornaeus, Mr. Baxters Saints Rest. Sir Charles Wolsey, Mr. White, etc.
. The truth is, if God himself were not the Author of the Bible it must be some
Creature either Good or Bad. If Bad, why forbids he evil so rigorously, and
commands good so expressly, aiming at nothing but Gods glory, and Man's
happiness? If Good, why does he challenge to himself that which is proper to
God alone? As to make Laws for the heart, to punish and reward eternally. If no
Creature, God himself must be the Author. It Is highly blameworthy then to have
low thoughts of Gods own Book: Yet such is the corruption of fallen Man, that
even the generality of those who make some profession of the truth, are too apt
to set light by Moses and the Prophets, which Paul styles the Oracles of God
Romans 3.2.
. The Heathens were exceeding fond of their Oracles, which were but Riddles and
Cheats; but many under the Christian name do disregard the lively and true
Oracles of God; I mean not only those who of old looked upon the Old Testament
as not endited by the Spirit, Manichees, Weigelians, Papists.
or of later days as out of date under the New Testament, and all of it but as
a dead letter, and those who forbid the reading of it to the Laity: But such as
slight, and do not consult these infallible Oracles which really passed Gods
own hands, having his Signature upon them, and being able to make us wise unto
Salvation 2 Timothy 3.15
: yea, are there not to be found those, who though they professedly renounce
Popery, do yet droll upon the Holy Scriptures? Burlesque them, and make a
ridicule of them, (and such would deal so with Monitors from the dead) wherein
if we would indeed exercise our Spiritual senses to discern, we might see the
face of God and live. Alas! How does the speech of many bewray them Matthew. 27.73
? (because out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks) to have little
value for the Divine Oracles: Since they in all their talk seldom (if ever)
discourse of them with reverence. Which would indeed dispose one to fear, that
some under the name of Protestants have in reality no more value for the
Oracles of God, than the Popes of Rome, who put their own Canons and Decrees,
not only in the same rank with the Canonical Scriptures, but above them
Honoratus l. 2. Epist. 16.
.

2. We should not any of us tempt God in hankering after new Revelations or
extraordinary discoveries; but adhere to God, in the ordinary means, he has
appointed, and allowed to us for conversion and confirmation. It Is true as a
great Man Mirand. de fid. and ord. cred.
has well observed, All Religion does depend, or is presumed to depend upon
Revelations from above. Flesh and blood (says Christ Matthew. 16.17
) has not revealed it, but my Father which is in Heaven. But then when this is
consigned in a sufficient and clear Canon, undoubtedly attested with an
exclusion of additionals, under dreadful Plagues, Rev. 22.18.
we should rest satisfied, and not be reaching after novelties: yea, and we
should heartily acknowledge our gratitude to our gracious God for his true
light, which does perpetually cast out his rays, and as Polybius (...).
says, Of truth, it self, does by it self prevail and pulls down all the
falsehood, that perks up its head against it. Oh how thankful should we be for
the Liberty we do enjoy, for the good of our precious Souls, to worship God as
he has prescribed in his Word of eternal Truth! Heartily waiting as dependents
upon him, Matthew. 11.25, 26.
that he would open our Eyes to see the wonderful things contained in his Law
Psalm. 119.18
. We should be well contented with the proposals that God himself makes to us
in his unerring Word, and not expect to have our curiosities gratified with
strange Relations from the Dead. If the House of God amongst us be built upon
the foundation of the true Prophets and Apostles; We shall not need (as a
Learned Man says Dr. Spencer of Proph.
) daubing with such spurious Visions and Prophecies as the Romanists brag of.
Luther, vexed with their Impositions, writes, In Genesis c. 22. Ego soleo Deum
precari, etc.
I am wont to pray God daily, that He may not send any Angel to me, for any
cause; if any should be offered, I would not hear; unless he should signify
somewhat of political necessity: even as pleasant dreams, and glad tidings are
sometimes wont to cheer us up, in civil matters: and yet I know not whether
even in such a case I would harken to him and believe him. But in Spiritual
things we do not desire Angels. The ordinary means of grace which I have been
discoursing of, as being ordained of God, do discover what he would have us to
do, and what he will do for us, is that which the Holy Spirit joins himself to,
and makes more effectual usually to a saving change of the heart, than
prodigious and sensible Alarms, which uneasy Souls desire to pry into: when as
the Holy Angels desire to peep into the mysteries revealed to the Church, and
made known by the manifold or embroidered Wisdom of God 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians.
3.10.
.

3. There should be no seeking to familiar Spirits, or consulting of Conjurers
and cunning Men; as they would be thought to be, who converse with Satan, since
we are called to the Law and to the Testimonies. If any pretenders to new
lights, or discoveries from the other World, which speak not according to this
Rule, that is already revealed and sealed, it is because there is no light in
them Isa. 8.20. See Engl. Annotat.
, some expound it; If they be otherwise minded than they have from God been
advised; and will resolve to run after Witches and Wizards, there shall no
daylight of prosperity befall them; but all darkness of affliction and misery
shall betide them. God allows not a going to the Witch at Endor, having written
Laws by which he will Rule and Judge the World. His people of old were not to
hearken unto the word of those false Prophets that gave a sign or a wonder
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. 2 These. 2.9.
, though God permitted it to come to pass, for their trial, when pretended to be
an attestation to that which God abhorred. But they were to harken unto the
Prophet whom God would send, even Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy 18.15, 22. Matthew. 17.5.
unto whom the true Prophets under the Old Testament did refer, and who has
silenced all lying Oracles. Which the true Oracles do caution us to take heed
we be not deceived with Mat. 10.16. -- 24.23, 24 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. 2 These. 2.9, 10
. Christ's Apostles brought the Conjurers, by the power of Gods Word, to confess
their delusions, and bring their Books to be burned openly, Acts 19.18, 19.
which were of the same kind in effect with some Prognostications about future
contingencies, that there can be no true foundation for, in genuine Astrology,
though that be pretended, to the prejudice of the Divine Oracles. To which, who
ever refuses to give entire credit, upon due deliberation, he gives ground of
suspicion that he has none of the Spir^^ of Christ 1 Cor. 12.3.
, neither would he ever believe Christ himself returning in the flesh, and all
the Angels, or those from the dead. Hence we may take notice how the wonderful
boldness of Satan bewrays it self; Beza.
as well as the incredulity of Men in receiving the Truth, and their credulity
in embracing of Fables. For how many are there who account for such, those
things concerning eternal punishment, which are declared by the Son of God? And
on the other hand, how many, partly by mere fictions, partly by true nocturnal
Apparitions of unclean Spirits assuming dead corpse? but to deceive miserable
Men, have on purpose given themselves occasion to be deceived. (Not heeding
Paul's fear, lest through the Serpents subtilty, their minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ 2 Cor. 11.3.
). To which impostures the Popish Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead, Invocation of
Saints, and that which they call the Adoration of Relics, owe their Original.
When the Lord has of old forbidden, that the dead should be consulted or heard
Deuteronomy. 18.11.
. To conclude,

4. Lets be exhorted to mind Moses and the Prophets. Lets labor in the light
of the Scriptures to see the Author of them Psalm. 36.9. -- 84.11.
, that we may thereby as the most successful means, be brought to repentance of
our sins, avoid the torments of Hell, and enjoy the pleasures of Heaven. And if
any of us under temptation, as looking for somewhat more sensible and lively;
fall into doubting concerning the Divine Writ, or Word of God, as written;
which yet I have showed is more credible, for that it shows it self in a
Diviner way being written; as Water in the Fountain, or Light in the Sun: which
while it is strained, passing through the Pipes and Instruments of Mortals, in a
traditionary way, is defiled or obscured. Lets then take off our Eyes from
curiosities, and not think to delight our senses with novelties, and
Preter-Evangelical Doctrins, knowing the great Apostle, has Anathematized, or
cursed all them, who bring another Gospel, or Doctrins besides the Gospel, in
the beginning of his Epistle to the Galathians Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
. Christ here in my Text represents Abraham as preferring the Sacred
Scriptures, to be more worthy of credit, and beneficial to Conversion, than the
Reports of those raised from the Dead: and Paul (by whom Christ himself speaks)
not writing rashly and unadvisedly, (when moved by the Holy Ghost) but upon
mature deliberation, with a great deal of gravity repeats, [As we said before,
so say I now again] (confirming what he and others for substance had
de-deliver'd) for greater certainty. [If any man preach any other Gospel unto
you] he does not say (as some of the Ancients have observed Chrysostom
Theophylact. (...).
) any contrary, but any the least thing besides that we have preached and ye
have received, though he be an Angel from Heaven, let him be accursed. He prefers
the Divine Writ to the Angels coming down with a message from Heaven.
Evangelical Doctrins to Angelical, could it be supposed, and that deservedly.
Because, the Angels though great, yet are Servants and Ministers Heb. 1.14.
, whereas all the Holy Scriptures are not commanded and sent of Servants to be
written; but of God himself the Lord of all, as has been showed 2 Timothy 3.16. 1
Pet 1.11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. John 20.31.
. Lets then depend solely, upon the sure Word, which is most effectual to
convert and comfort us. Here Is a firm support, for if this Earthly Globe we
stand upon, though heavy and bulkey, hang up, encompassed by the Heavens, not
stirring from its center, though it has no Shoars to uphold it, but the Word of
God Heb. 1.3.
, certainly it concerns us to stay our selves securely, on the infallible
promise of the eternal God, admiring the excellency of his Holy Writ; which
(says Augustine Tract. 35. in Joh. Lucerna ardens est idonea, and alia quae
tenebris operiebantur nudare, and seipsam tuis oculis demonstrare
) is a burning light fit both to make bare those things which are covered with
darkness; and to demonstrate it self to thine Eyes. For indeed it contains the
purest Precepts, the best Counsels, the clearest Examples, the strongest Helps,
and the most cogent motives and encouragements to Duty, the most dreadful
Threatenings of Wrath to the Disobedient; and the surest, and fullest Promises
of Rest to the Obedient.

Quest. How may it convincingly appear, that those who think it an easy matter
to believe, are yet destitute of saving Faith? SERMON. VIII.
Ephesians. I. 19, 20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward
who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead?
THE Design of this Epistle is to set forth the Free Grace of God in Man's
Salvation by Christ.

I. More generally, verse. 3. who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings.

II. By a particular enumeration of those eternal Blessings which were decreed
for us in Christ, viz. Election and Adoption, verse. 4, 5.

Having thus looked so far back before the foundation of the World, verse. 4.
the Apostle sets down what Christ did in time for us in his own Person, when he
took our Nature upon him, and entered into the Office of a Mediator, as our
Head, completing our redemption in himself by dying for us, in whom we have
redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins, verse. 7. Then follow the
Blessings that we our selves, as Members of Christ, are Partakers of in this
Life; and they are all comprehended in Faith, and in the certain consequents of
it.

These Ephesians were called to this Faith by the preaching of the Gospel,
which (the Spirit of God accompanying it) became effectual to beget Faith in
them. Paul was mightily affected with the success the Gospel had among the
Ephesians, gives God thanks for it, verse. 15. and prays heartily for a further
increase of that Faith in them, verse. 16. and shows what a wonderful thing it
is, that any are brought to believe in Jesus; it is as great a Miracle as the
Resurrection of Christ from the Dead; that was an effect of Divine Power, and
so is this.

I have made what have I could to bring down my Discourse to the Text, and to
the Point or Question that I am desired to speak to this morning, viz. How it
may convincingly appear that those who think it an easy matter to believe, are
destitute of saving Faith?

In stating this Case, I shall do these three things.

1. Show what a difficult thing it is to believe.

2. Give the reason why many Professors count it an easy thing to believe.

3. Prove that those who count so, are destitute of saving Faith.

First. The Difficulty of Believing.

I. That which requires the greatest-power and strength to effect it, is no
easy thing; but believing requires the greatest power to effect it, therefore
it is no easy thing to believe.

I prove the Assumption, viz. That the greatest power in Heaven and Earth is
required to raise up Faith in us.

Because Faith deals with the power of God only about those things which it
believes, bears it self up upon that; and when God is about to persuade a
Sinner to believe his Free Grace, he first convinces him of his power, that he
is able to perform his promises.

1. God asserts his Power, he declares himself to be an Almighty God. So to
Abraham, Genesis 17.1. and in the new Testament he often asserts his Power, that
all thing are possible to him. Omnipotency sticks at nothing, knows no
difficulties; what cannot the exceeding greatness of his power do?

2. God does exert and put forth his Power in some visible exemplification of
it, that fully demonstrates his Omnipotency, and can signify nothing less;
such an instance we have in the Text, in the Resurrection of Christ, this overt
act Speaks out his infinite power, it is matter of fact and cannot be denied.

3. God gives the Saints some feeling and experience of the exceeding greatness
of his power put forth in their own Souls, by working faith in them; they see
it is the Lords doing that nothing in Man would ever lead him out to it, if God
did not persuade him, and bring over his heart to believe the Gospel.

Believers under the new Testament though they hear much of the power of God
set forth in the letter of the word, and though they experience the efficacy of
this power in their own hearts yet that which puts the matter quite out of
doubt with them, is this undeniabl instance of divine power in the Resurrection
of Christ: Abraham wanted this, though he saw much of the power of God toward
him, in calling him alone from his Fathers house, and greatly increasing him
afterward, when he became two bands, Genesis 32.10. and in giving him a Son in
his old age, etc. yet the greatest proof of Gods power to Abraham was the
inward efficacy of it upon his own heart, that he should be brought to believe
a Resurrection, when there was never any instance of such a thing in the world
before; it is a sign he was satisfied in the almighty power of God, accounted
that God was able to raise him up, Heb. 11.19. though he received him from the
dead in a figure; Isaac was not really slain, therefore Abram's Faith was more
remarkable, that he should believe that God could raise his Son from the Dead;
and that he would do it, rather than break his promise, he resolved to obey God
for the present, and to trust him for the future: All that we believe now is
but the consequent of Christ's Resurrection, and follows upon it; the Head being
risen, the Members will also rise, every one in his own order; not only by a
bodily Resurrection at the last day, but by a Spiritual Resurrection in their
Souls here, when the time of their Conversion and Regeneration comes. That
which convinces us of the Almighty Power of God to perform his Promises, is the
Resurrection of Christ; but that which was the chiefest proof of God's Power to
Abram, was the inward impression of it upon his Heart when he was first called.

That he who as a Man had this Law written in his Heart, That he should not
kill, should so readily yield to the killing of his Son; and when he was
resolved so do, had the Knife in his hand ready stretched out, was under the
highest impulse of Faith to do what God commanded him; that he should presently
be taken off from it by a counter-command from Heaven: How did God try Abram,
as if he had set himself to puzzle him; turns him and winds him this way and
that way, backward and forward; he must not kill, and then he must kill; and by
and by he must not kill; God was resolved his Faith should move as he would
have it, according to his Will; and Abram was as ready to comply, He is my God,
says Abram, and I will obey him; Isaac shall die, and Isaac shall live; what
God will: He sees further than I do, I Will follow him, though I know not whether
I go, nor what I do; God knows, that is enough for me, I Will trust him; Lord,
what will thou have me do? tell me, and I Will do it; shall I kill my Son, or
shall I spare my Son? it shall be as thou will, Lord. -- Herein Abram excelled
all Believers under the New Testament: though they have some experience of
God's Power put forth upon their Souls in believing, yet they don't bear only
upon this as Abram did; they have the Resurrection of Christ to support their
Faith, which Abram had not, and yet believes a Resurrection Power as firmly as
they who saw Christ risen from the Grave: God appeared to Abram, and made such
immediate Impressions of his Power upon his Heart, that he needs no Sign, no
visible Instance to confirm his Faith, he was satisfied without it; he saw that
in God himself, that made him never to dispute his Power afterward.

Saints now, though they have experience of a Divine Power touching their
Hearts, and drawing them to Christ, yet they cannot so clearly discern this
conquering subduing Power of God in themselves, as they may in Christ their
Head, because they are under many infirmities not yet removed; they don't see
Sin and Death, and the Devil and the World quite overcome in themselves, but
they see all overcome in Christ; his Resurrection proves all; and they are fain
often to reflect upon that, to strengthen their Faith and Assurance of Victory
in their own persons at last; they know that Christ did not die for himself,
nor rise for himself, but for them; they see Christ crowned with Glory and
Honor, Heb. 2.9. he suffers no more in his Person, though he still suffers in
his Members; but they shall e're long be as free from Suffering, as the
glorified Person of Christ now is in Heaven; thus it will be when Christ
mystical shall have all things put under his Feet; then Christ and his Saints
will reign gloriously to all eternity, all tears shall be wiped from their eyes
then, and this will as surely come to pass as Christ himself is risen from the
Dead. Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, I have, and you shall
overcome it; in me you already are more than Conquerors, and in your own
Persons you shall be, when I come again.

II. Because no natural Principle in Man can take in the objects of Faith,
Flesh and Blood cannot reveal them to us; Faith is an act above Reason; how is
it possible for a Man, as a Man, to act above his Reason? it is absurd and
irrational to think so; Gospel Truths are so deep and mysterious, that they do
transcend our humane capacities, and cannot be discerned but by the light of a
Divine Faith: What is humane, we may undertake, and count that easy to us; but
what is Divine is above us, quite out of our reach; therefore Faith is said to
be the work of God, fulfilled by his Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. The knowledge of
Faith, by which we are persuaded of that which we conceive not, is higher than
all rational understanding; we acknowledge the truth of that, as Christians,
which as Men we do not Scientifically know by any Logical Demonstration: Faith
gives us the certainty of those things which we comprehend not.

III. That which makes believing so difficult, is the seeming contradictory
acts of Faith, it seems not to consist with it self. Here I take Faith more
generally, as it has for its Object the whole Word of God, the Law and the
Gospel, the special Object of Faith, as Saving, is the Promise; Saving Faith
seeks Life which is not to be found in Commandments and Threats, but in a
Promise of Mercy. Faith acting upon the whole Word of God, seems to contradict
it self; for Faith believes a Sinner is to die according to the Law, and that
he shall live, according to the Gospel; Faith has the Word of God for both,
both for the Death and Life of a Sinner, and both are true; the Law must be
executed, and the Promise must be performed; but how to reconcile this is not
so obvious and easy to every one: Is the Law then against the Promises of God?
God forbid, Gal. 3.21. it is impossible both should be accomplished in the
Person of a Sinner; he cannot die eternally, and live eternally, yet both are
wonderfully brought about by Jesus Christ, according to the manifold Wisdom of
God, without any Derogation to his Law and Justice; God and his Law are
satisfied, and the Promise of Salvation made good to the Sinner, and so both
Law and Gospel have their ends; not a tittle of either falls to the ground,
Heaven and Earth may sooner pass away, than this can be. O what a mystery is
Christ! Flesh and blood cannot reveal this to us, every believer assents to the
truth of the Law as well as the Gospel; he knows that both must have their full
course, the Law is fulfilled in inflicting Death, the Gospel in giving Life;
the Law contributes nothing to the eternal Life of a sinner, but kills him and
leaves him weltering in his blood; is no more concerned about him for ever; if
God will bring this dead sinner to life again, he may dispose of him as he
please, the Law has done its utmost against him; so the Law did against Christ,
spared him not, but killed him outright, and left him for a time under the
power of Death; but having slain a Man, who was God as well as Man, Death was
too weak to hold him, he swallows up Death in victory; he whom the Law slew as
Man, rises as God, by the power of his godhead; the Law contributed nothing to
his Resurrection; the Law had the chief hand in his Death, but none in his
Resurrection: And here begins our eternal Life, in the Resurrection of him who
dies no more, and is the Resurrection and Life to all who believe in him.

IV. The reigning unbelief that is among the generality of Men, even among
those who are of greatest reputation for Wisdom and Learning; Ay, and among
those who carry the vogue for Zeal and Religion, are counted the Head and
Pillars of the Church: Some pretending to Infallibility, others set up
themselves and are cried up by many, as such competent Judges in all matters of
Faith, that their judgment is not to be questioned, but readily complied with
by all who would not be counted singular and Schismatical. So 'twas in our
Saviors time, the Jews who had been the only Professors of the true Religion
for many ages, in opposition to all Idolatry and false Worship, they stumble at
the Gospel: the Greeks who were the more Learned sort of the Heathen World,
they counted it foolishness. And thus was the whole World set against Christ,
here was the greatest outward hinderance of the belief of the Gospel that could
be imagined; and add to this the indefatigable pains and industry of the Devil
to keep out the light of the Gospel from shining in upon us; he blinds the Eyes
of Men by a cursed influence upon their corrupt minds, that they should not
believe: Is it not a hard matter under all these discouragements to embrace the
Gospel, and declare our belief of it? Have any of the Rulers, or of the
Pharisees believed on him? But this people who know not the Law, John 7.48, 49.
Why should any regard what a company of poor illiterate people do? Their
following Christ is rather an argument why we should not follow him, they are
all but fools and idiots that do so; A cursed sort of people. This is the
judgment the Men of the World have of believers. There is nothing among too
many self-conceited Scepticks lies under a greater imputation of folly and
madness, than faith in the Lord Jesus Christ: O what a pass are things come
too, that after so many hundred years profession of Christianity, we should
grow weary of Christ and the Gospel!

V. The notorious Apostasy of many Professors this day, who have made Shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. may convince you all that it is no
easy matter to believe; so to believe as to persevere in the Faith.

VI. Believers themselves find it a difficult matter to act their Faith; if
their Lives lie upon it, they cannot act it at their pleasure, without the
special aid and assistance of the Spirit; it is God must work in us both to will
and to do of his good pleasure.

Believers are hardly put to it, great is the labor and travel of their Souls
in believing, they meet with much opposition from flesh and blood in every act
of Faith they put forth; they are forced to cry out for help in the midst of an
act of Faith, lest they should fail in it. I helieve, Lord help my unbelief, q.
d. I am now under some light and power of Faith, but I see I cannot hold it, if
thou do not help me. I feel flesh and blood rising up against my Faith, I
begin to stagger already, Lord help me that I may not be run down by my carnal
Heart. Temptations shake our Faith many times; there is a perpetual conflict
between Faith and Diffidence, yet Faith fails not utterly, there it is still,
Psalm. 31.22, 23. Psalm. 42.6, 9. Faith upholds the Heart still, Psalm. 116.7.
Unbelievers they tremble and turn away from God, but true believers in their
greatest frights and fears, do run to God, Psalm. 56.3. make toward him still.
Were it an easy matter to believe, such sudden fits of unbelief would not
come so strongly upon believers themselves.

Secondly, The Reason why many Professors count it an easy thing to Believe.

The main Reason is this, and I will insist upon no other, viz. Because they
mistake a formal Profession of Faith, for real believing; this undo's
thousands, who because they are qualified as National Protestants, for all
worldly preferments, here they rest, and make no other use of their Religion,
as if the Articles of their Faith obliged them to nothing. A formal Profession
is general, takes up Religion in gross, but is not concerned in any one point
of it. But real Believing is particular, brings down every Gospel Truth to our
selves, shows us our concernments in it: Save thy self, says Faith, and work
out thy own Salvation, see you neglect it no longer; no Man can save another
Man's Soul by his Faith, his own he may; Faith busies it self about our own
Salvation, shows us what we must do to be saved; were there more of this Faith
among Professors, we should every one have work enough upon our hands, and not
find it so easy a matter to secure our Souls into eternity. General Professors
carry it as if they had nothing to do, were sure of Heaven already; at this
rate we may count it an easy matter to believe, but when we come to die we
shall not find it so: any Faith may serve some Men's turns to live by, but every
Faith will not serve our turns to die by; when we are dying in good earnest, a
feigned Faith signifies little to our comfort, we see through it, and sink under
it.

If your Faith do not often call upon you to look to your own Souls, it cannot
be saving Faith; he that seeks not to save himself, let him talk what he will
of his Faith, it is not saving Faith, that is, intent upon the salvation of a
believer, and finds enough to do in carrying on that work, with fear and
trembling lest it should not go through with it. You who have been at this work
in good earnest, don't find it so easy as some would make it; new doubts, new
difficulties, new temptations do arise every day, that put the Faith of the
best Christians to it; if Faith does not bestir it self, the Devil may be too
hard for you and your Faith too; if the righteous are scarcely saved, surely
it is no easy matter to get to Heaven; you must run, wrestle, strive, fight,
contend earnestly, else you may miss of Heaven, and come short of all your
expectation of eternal glory: I speak not this to discourage you, but to awaken
you to that diligence and care that so weighty a business calls for.

Saving Faith is to cast my Self and my own Soul upon Christ for salvation;
what ever your Faith may be it is not come to saving Faith, till you do this you
may carry all your knowledge and all your Faith to Hell with you; any Faith
that is not saving, but remains separate from it, will prove a damning Faith to
you; 'twill greatly aggravate your condemnation, that you who knew such things,
believed such things, assented to such Truths and Gospel Doctrins, should never
put forth an act of saving Faith for your own Souls in particular, according to
the import of those Doctrins; it is strange to see how many Professors do leave
themselves quite out of their own Faith; they will not be at the pains to act
it for themselves, but in general they believe as the Church believes; but let
me tell you, it is not the Church, nor all the Churches in the World, it is not
all the Angels in Heaven, nor all the Saints upon Earth can believe for you;
you must every one believe for your selves, and act your own business, cast
your own Souls upon Christ for Salvation else they will be eternally lost: How
many knowing historical Believers are there in Hell, who have Prophesied in his
Name, Prayed in his Name, have Written, Disputed, Argued strongly for the
Faith, have done every thing that belongs to a common Faith, but could never be
brought to put forth one act of saving Faith upon Christ for the Salvation of
their own Souls?

Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. is this done? till you personally
come to Christ for the pardon of your sins, and for the Justification of your
persons by name, John, Thomas, Mary, whatever your names are, he or she, I am
sent this day to give you a particular call to come to Christ; and I do warn
every one of you, and exhort every one to go to Christ by a personal act of
your own Faith for eternal life; he has purchased it for all who come unto him,
if you neglect it and will not go, your blood be upon your own heads, I have
delivered my own Soul.

Brethren be persuaded to hearken to the invitation that is given you in the
Gospel, before it be too late. O what a do is there to bring a sinner to
Christ! O that you would bethink your selves this day, and set about saving
Faith! act that Faith that will save you; and say, Lord, after all my Knowledge
and long Profession, after all my Praying, Hearing, Reading, I now see these
are but means in order to something else, the end of all is real believing in
Christ; and I am now at last come to do that, to commit my self wholly to
Christ, to cast my sinful Soul upon him for Righteousness and Life; Lord help
me to do this, bring me to a through reliance upon Christ, and keep me in the
frequent exercise and lively actings of this Faith every day, that I may see my
self safe in him, who is faithful, and will keep that which I so commit unto
him. The Just shall live by his own Faith which he acts for himself and for his
own Soul; if you do not thus commit your selves to Christ every day, by a
renewed act of Faith, you may lose the joy of your Salvation ere you are aware.

If you say this is done, I will not ask you when you did it first? that may
seem too nice a question to some, but I will ask you when you did it last? I
hope you do it every day, if you are at any stand in your thoughts about this,
your wisest course is to act over this saving Faith more distinctly, more
particularly, more frequently, for the Salvation of your own Soul; then your
Faces will shine, and your Hearts will rejoice, we shall know you have been
with Jesus.

It Is impossible to experience the power and efficacy of saving Faith till we
act it in our own case, for our own Souls; then it comes home indeed to our
selves, then we feel the comfort of it; we may own the general Doctrine of
Faith, and be little affected with it, or concerned about it; but when the
Grace of Faith comes and makes a particular application of that Doctrine to thy
Soul, and my Soul, then we believe for our selves, and are filled with joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, that we should be received unto mercy, have all
our sins pardoned, our persons accepted, and our Souls eternally saved; all
this Faith makes out to us by name, from such undeniable grounds and reasons,
that we cannot gainsay.

They count it easy to believe who shut all acts of self-denial quite out of
their Faith; they live as they did before, it may be walk on more securely in
their evil courses, from a presumptuous persuasion of mercy at last; pray God
deliver us from such a Faith that gives encouragement to sin: If your Faith do
not strongly incline you to a holy Life, you may be sure it is not right saving
Faith. It Is a sad thing to consider how little influence the Faith of some
confident Professors has upon their Lives; they are not, they will not be
governed by the Faith which they profess; the Devil allows of such a
profession, and it is all the Religion he will admit of in his followers;
provided they don't touch upon the power of godliness, all forms are alike to
him; and in some cases the purest and most Scriptural serve his turn best, when
separated from the power of godliness, then he has some Scripture on his side,
to persuade them that all is well; then he cries, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are ye; settled in a Church way, according to all the Rules
of Discipline laid down in the Word; and is not this Religion enough to save
you? Thus the Devil will sometimes give the best form its due commendation from
Scripture, when it may serve as an Argument to persuade a formal Christian to
sit down short of the power of Godliness; he knows God's own form will not save
us then, though he would make them believe otherwise: He put the Jews upon
pleading this, and possessed them that all was well, while they held to the
outward form of Worship that God had appointed, which made the Lord himself so
often to declare against them; and the outward forms of Worship that he had
appointed, because he saw they rested in them, and played the Hypocrites under
them. Let us have a care in these Gospel Times, that we do not rest in
Gospel-forms only, placing the whole of our Religion in that which God has made
but a part of it; and such a part, that should never be divided by us, from the
Power and Spirit of the Gospel. We talk of damnable Heresies, and there are
such, the Lord keep us from them; but let me tell you, you may pass (though
more silently) into Hell through a formal Profession of the Truth, and have
your porticn with Hypocrites, who professed what you do, had the same form of
Godliness that you have, but denied the power of it: I don't say as some of you
do, I hope otherwise of you all; but let every one examine himself what
powerful Influence those Gospel Truths have upon him, which he has lived so
long under the profession of; you know this best, and others may more than
guess at it, by your Lives and Conversations; but I spare you, having laid my
finger upon the soar place, I take it off again, and leave every one to his own
feeling.

Obj. You seem as if you would put us off from our Profession.

Answ. It may be, better off than on in some respects; but my design is to
bring you up to your Profession, that you may be real in it, and not mock the
Lord, nor deceive your selves: I have often thought that he who makes a solemn
Profession of his Faith, and says, I believe in God, and in Christ, had need
consider well what he says, lest he lie unto the Holy Ghost; though what you
profess be truth, yet your Profession may be a Lie, if you say you believe what
you do not believe; with the Mouth Confession is made, but with the Heart Man
believes; believing is Heart-work, which the Searcher of Hearts only can judge
of; therefore you should consult your Hearts, whether you do indeed believe,
before you tell God and Man that you do; it is a sad thing, that the frequeut
repetition of our Creed, and the renewed Profession we make of our Faith,
should be charged upon us as so many gross Lies, as Psalm. 78.36, 37.

Thirdly, They who count it an easy matter to believe, are destistute of
Saving Faith.

I prove it thus,

1. They who have never found any Conflict in themselves about believing, are
destitute of saving Faith.

But they who count it an easy matter to believe, have never found any
Conflict in themselves about believing, ergo.

If Faith did not act in opposition to carnal Reason, and carry it against all
the strong reasonings of the Flesh to the contrary; Supernatural Truths, which
never enter, never be admitted, never find acceptance in the Soul, we should
never be brought over to assent to them, so as to make them the sure ground of
our trust and confidence in God; but Faith captivates all rebellious thoughts,
that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10.5.
as if they could disprove all that the Gospel says; but the demonstrations of
the Spirit are with that power, that we cannot resist them: Christ teaches, as
one having Authority; besides the instructive evidence of Truth in clear
reasonings, and full demonstrations of it by the Spirit, there is Authority and
Power to back all this; so that having nothing to object that is and fully
answered, we dare not but obey, because of his Authority lesh Power over us;
were it not for this Authority and Power proud F the would pertinaciously stand
out against all the Reasonings of the Spirit; but when the Rationale of the
Gospel is made out by art Spirit beyond all contradiction from Flesh and Blood,
the carnal p et is nonplust and silenced, cannot speak sense against the
Gospel; y e however, 'twill be muttering and kicking against the Truth; her
comes in the Authoritative Act and Power of the Spirit, suppressing the
insolence of the Flesh, and commanding the Soul in the Name of God to obey, and
not stand it out any longer against such clear evidence, resisting the Wisdom
of the Holy Ghost. You must know that Flesh and Blood, i. e. that carnal
corrupt part that is in every Man is never convinced, it is not capable of any
such thing; but the Power of the Spirit of God brings on a Conviction upon the
Soul from a higher Light, notwithstanding all that the Wisdom of the Flesh can
say to the contrary: Flesh is Flesh still in all chose who are born of the
Spirit, but it is overpowered and kept under by the stronger reasonings of the
Spirit, which is the cause of that continual Conflict that is between the Flesh
and Spirit, to talk of easy believing, without any resistance from our own
corrupt minds, is to talk of that that never was, nor can be in any man
whatever; Saints are inclined two contrary ways; though one Principle be
predominant, yet the other is not extinct, has not yet lost all its power;
'twill stir, and fight, and resist, though it cannot overcome, and Faith it self
feels the struglings of unbelief, and bears up with more Courage against them.

2. They who were never convinced of the sinfulness of sin, and of the
dreadfulness of God's Wrath against Sinners, are destitute of Saving Faith, but
they who count it an easy matter, etc. ergo.

I don't mean that all must pass under the like terrors of Conscience; some
have a more easy passage from a state of Nature to Grace, from Death to Life,
from Terror to Comfort; they may sooner get over their Tears, and attain to
peace, than others may. But this I say, that all who have fled for refuge unto
Christ, are sensible of this, that they have escaped eternal Death, are
delivered from the wrath of God, they remain under this conviction; and it adds
much to their comfort, that they have escaped so great danger, and glad they
are to see themselves safe under the Wing of Christ; they live in a constant
admiration of the goodness of God to them, in bringing about so great Salvation
for them, who had no might nor power to do any thing for themselves; it was not
their own Arm that saved them; they who know not the Nature of sin, may think
it an easy matter to be saved; slight wounds are easily cured, but old
putrified Sores require more Sovereign Remedies, and good skill to apply them.
Sin is an old Sore, they who know the plague of their own Hearts do count it
so; it is more than a cut Finger, it has infected the very Vitals, and will
prove mortal; if the Blood of Christ be not applied as the only remedy in that
case, nothing else will do. Slight thoughts of sin is the cause of all that
neglect and contempt of Christ that is in the World; the whole need not a
Physician, but they that are sick; it is a fatal Symptom when the Brain is
affected, and the Senses taken away; when the malignity of sin has quite
stupify'd the Conscience, and wrought a numness and mortification, there is
little hope of such a one; and thus it is with too too many hardened, seared,
senseless Sinners, who think themselves safe, though they are at the brink of
destruction; they bless themselves, and cry, Peace, peace, when the Curse of
God lies upon them, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

3. Those who have never been tempted to unbelief, are destitute of Saving
Faith: but those who count it an easy matter to believe, were never sensible
of any temptation to unbelief. No man ever got over temptations to unbelief
without difficulty; unbelief has much to say for its self, and 'twill be sure
to say all it can to hinder the Soul from closing in with Christ: When we come
to set our Faith against all the strong Reasons that Flesh and Blood urges to
the contrary; then tell me whether it be an easy matter to believe? here comes
in all the trouble the Saints meet with in their way to Heaven; the sinking of
their Faith discourages them, and lets in the strength of the Enemy upon them;
they overcome the World by Faith, but if that fail, every thing is too hard for
them; they stumble at every straw, who before could remove Mountains, and make
nothing of 'em; all things are possible to him who believes, and every thing is
next to impossible to him who believes not, is clouded and darkened in the
apprehensions of his Faith, is not under the clear evidence of things not seen;
he must have good eyes who discerns things that are not seen.

4. He who is not much in Prayer, much in the use of all means to increase and
strengthen his Faith, is destitute of saving Faith; but he who counts it an
easy matter to believe, takes no pains this way, he can believe at any time;
then thou can do that that Flesh and Blood never did, that no mortal man ever
did in his own strength.

5. He who does not look upon a Life of Faith to be a careful, studious,
laborious Life, is destitute, etc. Faith has new rules, counsels, and methods
of living, that a man was never acquainted with before; he meets with many
scruples, doubts, and intricate cases, that put him to it, to find out the
right way of pleasing God; for that is the great design of Faith to walk before
God unto all well-pleasing; Faith lives in a continual fear of offending God,
is very circumspect and watchful, lest it should take a wrong step: The Saints
are busied much in building up themselves on their most holy Faith, Jude 20.
they know all will run to ruin, if the spiritual building be neglected; it
must be often viewed; we must see what is lacking in our Faith, what repairs
are necessary; care must be taken that we fall not from our own stedfastness;
when we begin to yield to a temptation, to move never so little from any point
of truth formerly received, we may be quickly beside the foundation; therefore
be unmovable from the hope of the Gospel; when once you begin to move from
Christ, you know not whether you may be carried, as the Galatians were, Gal.
1.6. all this shows what a careful laborious Life a Life of Faith is.

That those who count it an easy matter to believe, are destitute of saving
Faith: But how shall we fasten a conviction of unbelief upon the persons
themselves, who count it an easy matter?

Hazael, What is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great thing? 2 King.
8.13. Do you count me such a Villain, such a Wretch! and yet in an hour of
temptation he acted over all that wickedness. Tho men may throw off all, and
turn away from the light of their own Consciences; yet it is good to furnish
Conscience with Arguments beforehand, that may be produced in a fit season; if
not to the conviction, yet to the silencing of those who talked so fast before
against all they were charged with; tho you cannot convince a Man of this or
that sin that you know he is guilty of, yet it is good to charge him home, and
to lay convincing Arguments before him, that may be of great use when
Conscience is at leisure to consider them, as it may be, and will be when the
temptation is ended. And let me add this, I do conceive it possible even by
reason to convince a Man of his unbelief, tho not of the sin of unbelief; that
is a further work, a special work of the Spirit. But you may by reason convince
a Man of unbelief; whether he do well or ill in not believing, that is another
case; but that so it is, that he does not believe such convincing evidences of
this may be laid before him, that he cannot but own himself to be an
Unbeliever. I don't speak now of negative Infidelity among Pagans, who never
heard of the light of the Gospel, this needs no proof; Heathens do own their
infidelity, they openly profess it: but I speak of positive wilful unbelief, in
those who live under Gospel light, and under an outward profession of Faith
too, yet really do not believe; they say they have Faith, but have it not: How
to find out such Men, and to convince them of their unbelief; How to dig up
this Fox that is so deeply earthed under a specious profession of Faith; This
requires some skill, we shall find it difficult work, yet I conceive it may be
done; they may be so narrowed up, that unless they deny their sense and their
reason, they must own their unbelief.

Though we cannot by reason bring Men to believe, yet we may by reason convince
them of their unbelief; here we offer nothing new or surprising to them, we
only state the matter as it is in their own Hearts, which they know to be so;
we do but bring them to reason, to their own reason; we make them Judges of
themselves in a matter of fact, of their own doing; though they say they have
Faith; yet being close put to it, they must needs unsay that again; the
evidence of the thing it self overthrows all they can say against it.

I would argue thus with them,

1. Let them if they can produce any of those fruits and effects of Faith that
are inseparable from it, James 2.14. etc. To pretend to such an active
principle as Faith is, and yet do nothing by it, is very unreasonable; they say
they have Faith, they may as well say they have Wings and can fly, though they
cannot bare up themselves one inch from the ground, unless some part of the
body rest upon it; indeed if a Man's feet be upon the ground, all the other
parts of the body may be erect; but for the whole body to carry all its weight
upwards through the Air, this is flying: It Is equally absurd for Men to say
they have Faith, are risen with Christ, are in an ascending posture, when they
visibly rest upon the Earth; nay, when they lie flat upon it, are sunk into it,
covered all over with it, are as it were buried alive in their carnal
affections: Men may say what they will, it is apparently otherwise: upwards and
downwards cannot be so confounded, that one should be taken for the other, it is
against common sense; Men may and must be convinced of this, that what is
contrary to Faith is not Faith, Faith without works is dead; were there any
thing of the true Nature, Life and Spirit of Faith in them, they could not
carry it as they do.

They make Faith an easy thing who make just nothing of it, and do nothing by
it; nay, they do that which they might with far more color of reason do, if
they did not at all pretend to Faith; but to say they believe in Christ, and
yet act in a direct opposition to him, and to their own Faith also, is that
which no Man in his wits will give credit too.

2. Let them try their skill in those indispensible acts of Faith that Christ
requires in all his followers, Mat. 16.24, 25. The reading of those words is
enough to convince any considering Man, that it is no easy matter to believe;
that which is not easy to do, is not so easily believed.

3. Let them consider the misterious points of Faith, that are above our reason
and do transcend our humane capacities, as the Doctrine of the Trinity, of the
incarnation of Christ, of the Resurrection, of Justification by imputed
Righteousness; how have Men stumbled at these things? could never come to any
satisfaction in, by their own reason? and shall we say it is an easy matter to
believe these things? they are stupidly ignorant of the mysteries of Faith who
say so; if this be easy there is nothing hard or difficult in the World.

Object. How comes it to pass that any do believe?

Answ. Because God puts forth his power in some and not in others; there is not
a greater instance of the power of God in the whole World than this, In
bringing over the heart of a sinner to believe in Christ. O the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe! This is the undoubted experience
of every true Believer. You who know not how you came by your Faith, but slid
into it by custom, education, and long continuance under the means of Grace,
and have always counted it an easy thing to believe; let me tell you, you know
not what it is to believe, to this day. It Is true God makes it easy to
believe, but so that we still see it impossible to believe without his help. I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me: I live, yet not I: We may
soar aloft when upon Eagles wings; we may move any where as we are carried; but
all this while we know we are not the cause of our own motion; the Spring of it
is not in our selves, acti agimus, we act as we are acted; the root bears us,
not we the root; we feel Christ living in us; We live, because he lives in us.
What we receive from another, is ours when we receive it; but it is not from our
selves because we receive it from another: God makes us so to work, in such a
dependence upon him, that we see it is He that works in us both to will and to
do: To ascribe the free acts of own will to another, requires a humble mind
sensible of its own weakness, and of the secret ways of Gods divine
communications to his creature Man, exactly suited to the rational nature of so
free an agent as Man is; the freedom of whose will is preserved under a
constant dependence upon God in every thing he does: God that gave him this
freedom, can cause him freely to act it as he pleases; otherwise Man would not
be a governable creature, if the natural freedom of his will did exempt him
from a due subjection to God that made him; in which subjection he is as free,
as he could be supposed to be, if left to himself to do what he list: A
Believer lists and wills what he does, and yet he does not do what he lists,
but freely subjects his own will to the will of God, whose service is perfect
freedom. A Saint keeps up the liberty of his will, by a voluntary obedience to
the will of God, and this is his Grace; till our stubborn Hearts are brought to
this, they are, and will be rebellious against God.

What I have said may be convincing to these easy Believers, that they are
void of true saving Faith, unless they resolve not to be convinced; and though
they do so resolve, yet they must be convinced whether they will or no: Truth
and Reason plainly proposed never want a witness in the Conscience of Man, that
will speak sometime or other as the thing is.

Quest. What Is the danger of a deathbed Repentance? SERMON IX.
Luke XXIII. 42. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom.
WE have in this little History of the two thieves crucified with our Lord
Jesus, a great instance both of Man's wickedness, and of Divine grace.

I. Of Man's wickedness in both these thieves, who had spent all their time in
sin, even to the last hour of their lives; but especially in the impenitent
thief, whom neither Bonds, nor Trial, nor Condemnation had humbled or
mollified, or brought to repentance; but being still under the power of an
hardened heart, we find him at the last gasp railing on a Savior instead of
believing in him, and belching out his blasphemies in the very mouth of Hell,
verse. 39. If thou be Christ save thy self and us.

II. Of Divine grace in the penitent thief.

First, Converting grace, and that

1. In the power and efficacy of it; for how powerful must that grace needs be
which had wrought so great a change, had suppled that heart in an instant which
had been hardening in sin for so many years? overcome so many stubborn
inveterate lusts at once, and made the Man all on a sudden commence one of the
most eminent Saints the World had ever yet had, and act faith to such an hight,
as might not only have become the chiefest of the Apostles, but did really
exceed any they had hitherto shown? The Disciples of Christ who had sat so long
at their Masters feet, yet were hardly induced to believe his Resurrection,
even after he was risen, Luke 24.25. When this thief who hitherto had been a
stranger to him, and now saw him hanging on a Cross, and dying, yet by faith
sees him in his Kingdom triumphing over his Cross and Death too.

2. In the freeness of it, for

1. Gods grace did not wait for his preparations, good moods, good
dispositions; (these were all over if ever he had any) but it takes hold of him
when at the hight of sin, and not only was void of grace, but seemed past
grace, i. e. never like to come to it by any ordinary methods.

2. It seized on him and passed by the other, though no worse (that we know of)
than himself. Grace makes a difference where none was before: of these two, in
the like case, it takes one and leaves the other.

II. Pardoning grace, This appears in our Lords answer and carriage to him,
verse. 43. He does not upbraid him with the abominations of his forepast life,
his Theft, or Rapine, or Violence, his hardness of Heart, or long Impenitence;
but easily, readily, gently receives him, and is so far from denying him a
pardon, that he assures him of a present Salvation. To day shall thou be with
me in Paradise.

The case of these two thieves does in a good measure parallel the case of
other dying sinners, though dying upon their beds. They were in the extremity
of their lives, drawing their last breath, both full of pain and anguish in
their Bodies, and very likely full of shame and confusion in their Minds,
considering their death was not only cruel and grievous, but reproachful in the
eyes of Men, and accursed by the sentence of God. So that here was much to
interrupt, disturb and distract them in so great, so close and serious a work
as Repentance is. And is it not so with others who live in sin all their days
and pretend to Repent at last? They are taking their leave of the World,
groaning under their Diseases, racked with pains, and have many things (tho not
the same the thieves had) to discompose, disquiet, and divert them from or
hinder them in the like work. But if we look to the issue, the parallel will
not reach so far. Here is Man for Man, one of the thieves humble, believing,
repenting, and accordingly accepted; the other unbroken, unbelieving,
impenitent, and dying like a reprobate. This equality is not to be found among
other dying sinners, (as hereafter we shall see.) However from the example of
these two thieves we may safely infer this Proposition,

Two parts there are of this Proposition, 1. That even a deathbed repeentance
may be sincere; this I shall speak to by way of Concession. 2. That yet it is
dangerous running the hazard of it, by deferring repentance till such a time;
this I shall handle by way of Assertion.

I. It is possible that a deathbed repentance may be sincere.

In speaking to this I shall briefly

1. Premise something in general concerning the nature of Repentance.

2. Lay down the reasons of this Concession.

First, For the former. Repentance may be considered either

I. In the Act or exercise of it, which the Scripture usually expresses by
turning or returning, implying that sinners are out of the way to God, and
their own happiness, till by repentance they return into it. If we speak
distinctly of it, we may consider,

1. The Essence of repentance, which is the turning mentioned; a turning from
sin to God, i. e. from all sin both of Heart and Life, as to the love, and
allowance of it, and subjection to it; and a turning to God as our Sovereign
Lord from whom we had revolted, to walk with him in all known ways of obedience
and holiness. And tho we cannot attain to a legal perfection in this Life,
either as to freedom from all Sin, or the practice of all Duty, yet there is
(not merely a temporary and transient, but) a peremptory, fixed, and settled
purpose for the one, and against the other, which is more than a promise de
futuro, and amounts to a present breach with all sin, and an actual will to
engage in every duty, a respect to all Gods Comandments, Psalm. 119.6. in the
degree of our obedience to which, we notwithstanding may oftentimes fail.

2. The causes from which it proceeds.

First, A right sense of sin, as to the guilt, defilement and dominion of it.
Its being offensive and odious to God, Jer. 44.4. as well as hurtful to our
selves, in the danger to which it exposes us, the blot it leaves upon us, and
the tyranny it exercises over us.

Secondly, An apprehension and belief of the mercy of God in Christ Jesus to
them that do repent. This is always the principle from which Evangelical
repentance proceeds. Tho the terrors of the Law may help to drive Men from sin,
yet there must be Gospel attractives to draw them to God, either in a way of
faith or repentance. Who will dare to trust him from whom he expects no mercy,
or care for serving him from whom he looks for no acceptance? Hence it is that
Gods mercy is used as the grand motive to persuade Men to repentance, Matthew.
3.2. The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; and Isa. 55.7.

From these proceed both that Godly sorrow for sin, and that hatred of it which
always accompanies Gospel repentance, and in a good measure promotes it. Paul
seems to place Godly sorrow among the causes of repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10.

II. If we consider repentance in the habit, I need say no more but that it is
that grace of the Holy Spirit which he infuseth into the Soul, as the immediate
standing principle of actual repentance, and whereby it is both enabled, and
disposed to it.

Now this repentance being a grace of Gods Spirit, and yet inherent in Man as
to the habit, and exercised by him as to its acts, or, which is the same, being
Gods work, and yet Man's duty; we are to consider what is Gods part in it, and
what is Man's.

First, Gods work is,

1. To infuse the grace or principle, repentance in the habit, which constantly
is ascribed to God in Scripture, Acts 11.18. Granred repentance, 2 Timothy 2.23.
If God will give them repentance.

2. To actuate and enliven that Principle when infused (as he does other
Graces, Phil. 2.13.) not merely in a moral way, by suggesting such Reasons and
Arguments as may excite and move the Will to the exercise of Repentance, but by
the powerful and efficacious Influence of his Grace drawing out the habit into
that exercise, or causing the Soul to act suitably to this Divine Principle
infused into it.

Secondly, Man's Duty is,

1. To seek and labor after Repentance in the use of all means, by which God
is wont to work it in the hearts of Men, such as diligent attendance on the
Word (Repentance no less than Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.) and what
external means of Grace are appointed in it: Intention of the Mind in that
attendance on the means, Men's applying the Truths delivered to themselves,
comparing their Cases with it, examining themselves by it, considering their
ways, etc. which are but the actings of their reasonable Faculties, and as much
in their power as other moral Actions are, and need not the Supernatural
Influence of Divine Grace, but only those common assistances God affords to Man
in the ordinary actions of a rational Life; and in a word, these are but such
kind of workings as show them to be Men, not to be Saints, Isa. 46.8. To these
means, in the use of which God is wont to work repentance, I refer Prayer for
it, which though by an unregenerate Person, it cannot be performed graciously,
and unto acceptance; yet we may say it may be thus far performed successfully,
as that those Prayers may be heard, and answered in relation to the Grace they
seek, and in the Elect of God they are heard, though not with respect to the
Persons, (which being graceless, faithless, cannot be accepted of God) yet with
respect to his own thoughts of Love toward them, and his eternal purpose of
conferring that Grace upon them.

2. To excite and stir up in himself the Grace of Repentance, when God has
wrought it in him, for the putting forth Acts agreeable to the Principle he
has received, and to which by that Principle he is both empowred and inclined;
unto the production of which Acts he is no more to question the concurrence of
God's Special Grace, than his common concurrence to the ordinary actings of his
Reason and Will; it being God's usual method to work with his Creatures
according to their Natures; and those Principles of Acting he has put into
them. Though God quickens Grace as well as works it, yet Man is to use those
means for the quickening it in himself, which God has appointed, and with which
he is wont to work.

2. The reasons of this Concession, or which prove that a Deathbed Repentance
may be sincere.

1. It appears by the the instance of this Thief, that a late Repentance, and
as late as one upon a Dying Bed, has been sincere, and therefore the like may
be again: He did truly repent, and therefore it is possible others may. And
that his Repentance was sincere, we have sufficient Proof, not only from
Christ's gracious acceptance of it, manifested by the peremptory promise he
gave him of admitting him into his Kingdom, To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. But by the other Graces we here find him exercising in concurrence
with his repentance.

I. Faith, which is the Principle of Evangelical Repentance, and which never
fails to work it, where it is it self sincere. He owns Christ as a King, when
he mentions his Kingdom, and prays him to remember him when he comes into it.
This likewise implies his belief of, and confidence in the Grace and Love, as
well as Power of Christ, when he commits his departing Soul into his hands,
expecting his Salvation from him. And indeed his Faith was not only sincere,
but strong and vigorous. God had put as much of the Spirit of Faith into a poor
Novice in Religion at the very first, as he does into many an old Disciple at
the last. It is a good argument of a strong Faith, when it bears up against
great discouragements, as we see in Abraham's Faith, Romans 4.19, 20. and that of
the Woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. from v. 22. to 28. Two great discouragements
the Thief had, which yet could not hinder his Faith.

1. The heinousness of his Sins, aggravated by long impenitence and
perseverance in them to the last hour, in a manner, of his Life. Well might he
fear that God was so provoked by the continual rebellion of his wicked Life, as
totally to reject him now at his Death.

2. The low and despicable condition he saw Christ in, condemned as well as
himself, and hanging upon a Cross as well as himself, slighted and mocked at by
so many he might look on as better and wiser than himself, no less than the
Governors of the Church, v. 33. The Rulers derided him. This might have made
him think there was little hope of help from him. What was there in a crucified
dying Man, that, to an eye of reason, could make him look like a Savior? Mere
Nature would as soon have looked for Life in Death it self, nay Heaven in Hell,
as eternal Salvation in one, who not only had formerly been so mean, but now
seemed so miserable.

II. Several other Graces we find in him, as the fruits, at least the
concomitants of his Repentance.

1. A free, ingenuous, and open confession of his Sins in the face of the
World, and thereby giving glory to God, v. 41. We indeed justly, etc. Nor can
it be said that his Confession was extorted from him by the Torments he
suffered, when we see his Companion impenitent under the like.

2. He owns the Justice that had brought him to that end: We receive the due
reward of our deeds. He neither murmurs against God, nor quarrels with Men.

3. He sharply taxes the impiety and profaneness of his fellow Thief in
reviling Christ, as well as his still continuing obstinate and impenitent, v.
40. Do not thou fear God, etc. and hereby he shows his indignation against
Sin, when he so heinously resents it, not only in himself, but in another. Like
David he beholds a transgressor, and is grieved, Ps. 119.158.

4. He does what he can to bring his Companion to repentance: Do not thou
fear God? The Reproof implies an Exhortation, as well as Instruction. Now the
communicativeness of Grace is a good argument of the sincerity of it. Had he
had none himself, he would not have been so much concerned for the others want
of it.

5. He makes a public profession of his faith in Christ, and owns him to the
very teeth of his Enemies, and that too when Peter had denied him, the other
Disciples forsaken him, and those that had rallied after their rout, and were
now come to be the Spectators of the most doleful Object had ever been
presented before their eyes, were so far from making any such public
confession of him, that their Faith was ready to expire with him, chapter 24.21.

II. Repentance being Gods gift, and God being a Sovereign Agent, he may give
it where, and when he pleases; as to whom he will; to one and not to another;
so at what time he will; to one sooner, to another later. He may give it to one
early in the morning of his days, to another late, and when his Sun is Setting.
And if the great Master of the Vineyard shall call some into it, not only at
the sixth or ninth hour, but even at the last minute of the eleventh hour, what
is that to any? who shall call him to an account for it?

3. God, being not only a Sovereign Agent, but an Almighty one, can by his
Power, and that in an instant, remove all hindrances on the Creatures part, and
whatever might obstruct his work; and so with one turn of an Omnipotent hand,
bring about the heart of the most obdurate Sinner, work repentance in the most
unlikely Subject, and where there is most within to make head against him, and
resist his Grace, suppose the most obstinate and rooted habits of sin. Grace is
an infused and supernatural habit, and the power that works it a supernatural
and creating Power; and we are not to confine God in his working Grace, to
those methods whereby men acquire natural or moral habits. In these, I grant,
there may need time to unlearn, and extirpate those vicious habits they have so
long been contracting, and to acquire new ones by a long series of, and
accustoming themselves to better actions. Custom in Men may be strong, and like
another Nature, and they may not be able presently to overcome it, nor on the
sudden to bring themselves to a readiness and easiness in doing those things,
which tho their reason approves, yet their boisterous appetites, (strengthened
too by custom) hurry them against. But let the habit of sin be never so deeply
radicated in the Soul, and the Heart of Man never so averse to holy actions,
yet God can soon make a change; soon remove the sinful disposition, and enable
and incline the Soul to what it was most averse and impotent. He can even in a
moment overcome that love of sin, and hatred of holiness which is either
natural to a Man, or contracted by him, and both abate, lessen, weaken the
power of sin in the Soul, whereby it was wont to resist the workings of his
Spirit, and restrain and suspend any actual resistance it might make. Let the
mind of a Man be as dark as darkness it self, yet he that caused light to shine
out of darkness can enlighten that mind when he pleases, 2 Cor. 4.6. Let the
Soul be never so dead in sin, and destitute of all Spiritual Life, yet he that
quickens the dead, and calls things that are not as tho they were, Romans 4.17.
can quicken it, and breathe the Breath of Spiritual Life into it; and whatever
there be in the Soul to oppose him in his working, yet the same power can at
once quell the opposition, and produce the Grace.

4. God having infused the habit can as easily enliven it, and draw it out into
act, in those that are capable of exercising grace wrought in them, as I
suppose dying sinners to be, at least when they are capable of exercising their
rational faculties. For there is less to make opposition against God than in
the former case, the prevailing power of sin being broken; and something in the
Soul to take Gods part in the work, viz. grace now begun, and some habitual
promptness and disposedness of the heart to spiritual good, and compliance with
the will of God. It does not require more power to awaken a vital principle,
tho dormant, than to infuse it where there was none before.

5. It may be for Gods honor sometimes to give Repentance to dying sinners;
the honor of his Sovereignty, and free Grace, in showing that he has mercy on
whom he will, Romans 3.18. and that the deepest guilt even of an old hardened
sinner cannot hinder the outgoings of his grace and mercy: and the honor of
his power when it prevails over the most settled habits of corruption. Should
God work only upon lesser sinners, and who are not so confirmed in evil, Man
might be apt to think that he could not do it, and that Men's lusts might be too
hard for his power, and so reflect on his Omnipotence; or to think he could not
find in his heart to do it, and so reflect upon his Mercy.

II. By way of Position or Assertion, It is a very dangerous thing to run the
hazard of a deathbed Repentance, or defer Repentance till the approach of
death; that is, to neglect the doing a Man's own part in order to the obtaining
this grace (as was above premised) viz. the seeking it of God, and using all
those means by which he ordinarily works it. The danger of this neglect may
appear by the following considerations.

1. That no Man knows the time of his death, any more than the manner of it, or
means by which it shall be brought about. Our breath is in Gods hands, Dan.
5.23. No Man has a lease of his earthly Tabernacle, but is Tenant at will to
his great Landlord. Who knows when he shall die, or how? Whether a natural
death or a violent one? To how many thousand unforeseen accidents are Men
subject? Not only Swords and Axes may dispatch them, but God can commission
Insects and Vermin to be the executioners of his justice upon them. Hatto
Archbishop of Mentz.
A great Prelate may be eaten up of Mice, and a potent Prince devoured by
Worms, Acts 12.23. And who does not carry the principles of his own dissolution
perpetually within him? Death lies in ambush in every vain, in every member,
and none know when it may assault them. It does not always warn before it
strikes. If some Diseases are Cronical, others are Acute and less lingering, and
some are as quick as lightning; kill in an instant. Men may be well in one
moment, and dead in the next. God shoots his arrows at them, they are suddenly
wounded, Psalm. 64.7. How many are taken away not only in the midst of their
days, but in the midst of their sins? The lusting Israelites with the flesh
between their teeth, Numb. 11.33. Julian (if Historians speak truth) with
blasphemy in his mouth; and how many frequently with the Wine in their heads?
In such cases what place, what time for repentance, for seeking it, for using
means to attain it, when they have not room for so much as a thought of it?

2. Suppose Men have time and warning given them; Death knocks at the door
before it enters, and besieges them before it storms them: they lie by the
brink of the grave before they fall into it: yet, they may want the Means of
grace by which God ordinarily works, when he brings Men to Repentance. Public
Ordinances in such a case they cannot have, and private ones they may not have.
They may have none with them that have the tongue of the Learned, to speak a
word in season to them, Isa. 50.4. they may lack oil, but have none that can
tell them where they may buy it. None that understand the nature of Repentance,
none that can instruct them in it, or direct them how they may attain it.
Friends may be as carnal and ignorant, and unacquainted with the things of God
as themselves: and so may Ministers be sometimes. They may seek a vision of the
Prophet, but the Law may perish from the Priest, and counsel from the Ancient,
Ezekiel. 7.26. True indeed, God can work repent^nce in Man or any grace without
means, by his immediate power, or by some extraordinary means; but he never
promises to do it, and therefore it is a bold presuming, and tempting of him
to expect he should. What if God once stopped a sinner in the midst of his
carrear, when not only running away from the means of Salvation, but bidding
defiance to them, and converted him in a miraculous way, by a glorious light
shining about him, and the immediate voice of Christ to him, Acts 9.
shall others hope for the like? Live in sin all their days and look for
conversion by miracle at last?

3. If they have means when they come to die, yet they may not have an heart to
use them.

First, By reason of bodily weakness, failing of natural Spirits, racking and
tormenting pains which often afflict Men in such a cas^. These may blunt and
dull Men's minds, or distract them, and draw away the intention of them from
other things, and hold them only to the consideration of their present anguish.
How unfit are Men for serious minding even of their Worldly affairs when under
bodily indispositions, and how much more than unfit for Spiritual work? When
the Soul is wholly taken up with helping the body, (with which it sympathizes)
to bear its present burden, it is ill at leisure to think of any thing else.
The Israelites harkned not to Moses (tho sent of God to deliver them) for
anguish of Spirit and cruel bondage, Exodus 6.9. and is it any wonder if a Man
groaning under a distemper, scarce able to bear his pain, or think of any thing
but his pain, be in an ill case to look into his Heart, consider his ways,
listen to the best counsil, join with the best prayers, etc. If Gods children
that have grace in their Hearts, yet in time of sickness may through present
weakness find much indisposedness in themselves to the actings of grace, so
that they are fain to bring forth their old store, and comfort themselves with
their former experiences rather than with the present frame of their Hearts,
what wonder is it if they that are altogether graceless be alike indisposed to
seek for grace?

Secondly, By reason of contracted hardness. Men are naturally backward to
good, but much more when habituated to evil: for the more inclined they are to
evil, the more averse they are to good; and the more accustomed they are to
sin, the more inclined they are to it. The practice of sin hardens the Heart,
and strengthens the sinning disposition; and still the longer Men continue in
sin the stronger such dispositions grow. Hence the Apostles advice to the
Hebrews, chap. 3.13. Exhort one another, while it is called to day, lest your
Hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, implying that that would
follow upon their continuance in sin. We see even in natural things that Men's
being accustomed to one sort of actions, unfits them for another. When Men have
lived in the practice of sin all their days, and their natural disposition to
sin is hightned into an habit, it is not strange if they be much more averse to
the contrary good, Jer. 13.23. How can you that are accustomed to evil, learn
to do well? If one gross sin in a believer may so debilitate and enfeeble those
gracious dispositions that were before in him as to unfit him for, and deaden
him to spiritual duties, to what a superlative hardness may a thousand and a
thousand repeated acts of wilful sin bring the Heart of a carnal Man, and to
what, not only aversness to any good, but confirmedness against all?

4. They cannot work repentance in themselves, not make the means effectual for
the enlightening of their minds, the changing, softning, spiritualizing their
Hearts, or working a vital principle in them. If they say they can, either they
must assume to themselves a Creating power, a power of making themselves new
Creatures, or creating this grace in their own Hearts, there being nothing of
it in them by nature, and antecedently to their making such a change: Or they
must say that there is some seed of grace in them beforehand, some root or
stock which being watered and cultivated by outward means, diligence and
industry may be made fruitful; so that the working repentance in them is not
the infusing a new principle into them, but a correcting of the old one:
Conversion, not the giving or creating in them a new nature, but only a freeing
the old one from its former impediments, and setting it at liberty to its
proper actions. But this is

1. Contrary to the whole current of Scripture, which affirms Man's will since
the fall of Adam to be void of all saving good, and impotent to it till renewed
by grace, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing, Romans 5.6. When we were
without strength, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves: And prone to evil, Job 15.16. Man drinks iniquity like
water, Prove. 2.14. Rejoices to do evil, Romans 6.17. He is a servant of sin,
Genesis 6.5. All the imaginations of his Heart are only evil continually, Ephesians.
2.1. He is dead in trespasses and sins. This is broadly to charge a lie upon
the God of truth.

2. To deprive God of the glory of one of his chiefest works, the new Creation,
in which he is said to put forth the same power which he did in creating the
World at first, 2 Cor. 4.6. and in raising up Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19,
20. compared with, chap. 2.1. They are said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.5.
And not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of
God, John 1.15. Whereas they that assert the contrary, take Gods work out of
his hands, and grudge him the honor of it.

3. To go contrary to the common sense of the believing World. Believers
generally know, as having found it by experience, that they are naturally
impotent to spiritual good. They find much weakness in themselves after grace
is wrought in them, and nothing but weakness before God work it. They
acknowledge they cannot work any degree of grace in themselves, when some
already they have; much less could they work it in themselves when they really
had none. And how come others to have more strength than they? Did not they
fall in Adam? Or had his Apostasy a less malignant influence upon them than
upon others? How come they to have such a reserve of Spiritual strength when
the rest of the World has lost it?

4. If they can work repentance in themselves why do they not do it sooner? Why
do they defer it so long when they cannot deny but one time or other it must be
wrought? Is it a fit return to God for the goodness he has shown them all
their days, to live in sin all their days and turn to him when they can live no
longer in it? Or will it be an acceptable answer to him, when he calls them to
a reckoning, that they had not served sin long enough, nor had their fill of
their lusts, or else they would have turned to him sooner?

5. And how many be there who to encourage themselves in their present
impenitency, and the enjoyments of their sinful pleasures, fancy they can turn
themselves when they please; yet if God open their eyes, and awaken their
Consciences, and they begin in good earnest to set themselves to labor after
repentance, they are soon convinced of the hardness and deadness of their
Hearts and their utter disabilities to such a work, and are fain, in spite of
all their high thoughts, and conceits of themselves to look up to God, and
implore his assistance, and depend upon him for the working of that grace in
them which they fondly imagined they could work in themselves?

5. God may not give them grace to repent when they come to die. Admit they
have time and means, yet God may not give a blessing to the means. Let it be
considered,

First, To how few God ever gives repentance at the last, even of those who
have as good means and helps as their weak, and dying condition will admit of.
It is one of the saddest parts of a Ministers work to visit dying sinners. How
few do they leave any better than they find them? How few give any hopes of a
through change wrought in them? How few can they persuade to believe in Christ
when they have an hundred times before rejected him? How few can they bring to
repentance then, when they never minded it before? Ministers even the best are
but Men and not God, flesh and not Spirit; and means, instructions,
exhortations, are but means, whose whole efficacy depends on Gods cooperation
with them; and when he withholds his Blessing, they are altogether
ineffectual. When they judge of man's eternal State, though their judgment is
not to be rash nor peremptory, yet it should be reasonable; some good grounds
they should have for it. But alas! if they keep to Scripture-rules, in how few
of them that never repented before, do they find, when dying, so much as a
foundation for a charitable judgment of their Spiritual state?

1. If we set aside those that die in gross ignorance of the things of God, of
the very first Principles of Religion, the nature of God, the Offices of
Christ, the ends of his Death, the necessity of satisfaction for sin, the
nature and use of Faith, the terms of the Covenant, etc. Ignorant indeed of
those truths, some knowledge of which is necessary to the very being of saving
Grace. How many such do we find? and what hope can we have of the truth of
their Repentance, and so of their Salvation? How can their Hearts be holy, when
their Minds are so blind? What Heavenly heat can their be in there affections,
when there is such an hellish darkness in their understandings? Such may read
their doom, Isa. 27.11.

2. Set aside those that die stupid, without any awakenings of Conscience, any
sense or concernedness about their spiritual state, and so die as much like
Beasts as they lived.

3. Those that die despairing, filled with horror, and void of hope;
overwhelmed with the sense of sin, the thoughts of approaching vengeance, and a
fearful expectation of appearing before the Tribunal of that righteous God,
whom they cannot escape, and dare not trust. They have not hearts to pray to
him, hope in him, or commit their Souls into his hands when they die, having
never loved, nor served, nor regarded him while they lived.

4. Those that die presuming. Such are the ignorant before mentioned; such are
Formalists, Moralists, proud Pharisees, conceited self-justifiers. The
Innocence of their Conversation, the Profession they make, or the Duties they
perform, are the righteousness by which they expect to be justified. Nay, how
many after a Life of sin hope to be saved, merely by the mercy of God, without
respect to any righteousness at all, either of Justification, or
Sanctification; either imputed to them, or inherent in them; either that
whereby they may have a title to glory, or meetness for it? Sure I am, such as
these are void of repentance; and when the greatest part of dying Sinners may
be reduced to one or other of these sorts, to how few does God give repentance
at the last, of those, who did not before seek it of him?

Secondly, With how many is the day of Grace past, and the time of God's
patience run out? and then we may be sure God will not give them repentance:
They have so many times rejected the counsel of God against themselves; Luke
7.30. refused the Offers of Grace, turned a deaf ear to the calls of the
Gospel, stiffned their necks, and refused to return, that now they are past it.
God that waited on them so long, will wait no longer. They had a time of
acceptance, a day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. but that being over, they are to
have no more. God was nigh to them, and might have been found of them, Isa.
55.7. but is now withdrawn from them, and they may seek Christ, and die in
their sins, John 8.21. the may seek and not find, call, and God give them no
answer, Prove. 1.28.

Thirdly, God may have judicially hardened their Hearts, when they had sinfully
hardened them before. And this seems to be one great cause of that stupidness
and insensibleness we so often find in Sinners at the time of death. True, God
infuseth no sin into them; yet he may wholly abandon them to the power of the
hardness they have contracted, and give them up into the Devils hands, to
delude and blind, to act and manage them according to his pleasure, and their
own corrupt inclinations. They may not have so much as an heart to desire to
repent, or pray to God for Grace to enable them to to it, all those common
assistances of Gods Spirit they sometimes had, being wholly withdrawn from them
and it.

1. Partly as a punishment for their former wilful impenitency. It is one of
the most dreadful Judgments God ever executes upon any on this side Hell, when
he punishes one sin with another, one hardness with another, which yet
sometimes he does, Prove. 81.11, 12. Israel would none of me, etc. so I gave
them up, etc.

2. As a terror to others, and a warning too, that they that hear it may fear,
and not dare to live impenitently, lest they should die impenitently; God not
being bound to give them the Grace he denies to others, who perhaps were not
greater Sinners than themselves.

Obj. The great encouragement Men have to embolden them in sin, and yet to hope
for repentance at last, is the instance of this poor Thief, which they stretch
beyond the intention of the Holy Ghost in leaving it upon Record, when they use
it as a means to strengthen their presumption, which was designed only to
prevent despair. The Thief on the Cross repented at last, says a Sinner, and
why may not I?

Answ. Why should not the example of the other Thief's impenitency affright
them, and drive them to repentance, as well as the example of the good Thief
encourage them to sin? It is but setting one against the other; and if they
argue, God gave repentance to one, and therefore may give it them: Why may they
not as well argue, God denied it to one, and therefore may deny it to them too?

2. It is but a single instance against thousands on the other side. And though
one instance is sufficient to evert the generality of a Rule; and therefore we
cannot certainly conclude from Gods not giving repentance to thousands at the
hour of Death, that he will give it to none, because we have the example of
this Thief to the contrary; yet with what reason can men expect that God should
give that to them, which he gave to one, rather than that he should deny that
to them, which he has denied to thousands? If general Rules are to be drawn
from particulars, it is much more rational to ground them on a multitude of
particulars, than on any single one. The most therefore any Men can infer from
this example, is only, that it is not impossible but God may give them
repentance.

3. Some things seem to be singular in the case of this Thief, which are not to
be found in the case of others, who therefore cannot reasonably argue from it.

1. He was one (so far as we can judge) that had never formerly rejected
Christ, never saw him before his Sufferings, never heard his Doctrine, never was
a Witness of his Miracles which might convince him of the truth of it. He was
one that had otherwise employed himself, than in attending on Christ's Ministry,
and might more likely have been found robbing on the Road, than worshipping in
the Temple; or breaking up Houses, than hearing of Sermons; and therefore
though he had sin enough in him for which God might have denied him Repentance,
and nothing in him which might move the Lord to give it him; yet it is very
probable this was the first of his being brought to the knowledge of a Savior,
and so he was not guilty of the great Gospel-sin of Unbelief, and refusing the
offer of Christ and Salvation by him, which does so often provoke the Lord to
leave men to themselves, and deny them his Grace. If it be said, the same was
the case of the other Thief; I grant it: But God being a Sovereign Agent, and
his gifts most free, he might make use of his Prerogative in dispensing them,
and so grant repentance to the one, and deny it to the other, admit their
circumstances were every way the same. And why then may he not deny repentance
to those now, that are (in some respect) worse than either, in that they have
so many times resisted his Spirit, stood out against his Calls, and slighted
the offers of his Grace made to them? and where is the Sinner that lives under
the means without repentance, but as he has daily repeated calls from God, so
he daily rejects them, and thereby abundantly justifies the Lords refusing him
that Grace at the last, which he did before not only never seriously seek, but
wilfully reject: I should have more charitable thoughts, and better hopes of
the veriest Varlets upon earth, that were never called till the last hour, than
of those that are otherwise guilty of much less sin, but have abused and
resisted greater Grace.

2. The instance of this Thief seems particularly designed by God for the
honor of his suffering Son. God would have a Witness even upon the Cross; one
to adore him when so many despised him: He would have his Sons Death honored
by his giving Life to a poor Wretch even at the point of Death, and make him
known to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and remission of sins,
Acts 5.31. by his giving both to such a Sinner, and at such a time.

3. Another end may be, to render them that Crucified Christ inexcusable, when
this Malefactor made so honorable a confession of him, to expose and shame the
unbelief and hardness of the Rulers and Pharisees by the faith and repentance
of a most flagitious Offender, and therewithal confirm the Word of Christ
spoken formerly to them, that the Publicans and Harlots entered into the Kingdom
of Heaven before them, Matthew. 21.31.

6. Suppose God do give them repentance at the last, yet they may have very
little, it may be no comfort in it.

I. They may be ready to question the sincerity of it, and then they can have
little comfort in it. Admit their condition be safe, yet comfortable it cannot
be, so long as the truth of their repentance, from which their comfort should
proceed, is so uncertain and questionable. To say nothing of their ignorance of
the nature of repentance, and the methods of the Spirit in working it, having
never found the like in themselves before, nor been acquainted with what others
have felt, many things there are which sometimes may make them call what they
find in themselves in question.

1. The experience they have already had of the deceitfulness of their own
hearts, and perhaps of others in the like condition. It may be they have known
others upon a sick bed look as like Penitents as they now do, who yet upon
their recovery from their Diseases, have relapsed into sin, and by returning to
their former Lusts, have confuted their Profession, and evidenced their
repentance to have been unsound and hypocritical. And this may make them fear
lest things may be no better with themselves, and their repentings no more real
than their Neighbors. Or it may be they themselves formerly, when under a
Sentence of Death, have had strong convictions of sin, been filled with horror
of Conscience, and dismal apprehensions of approaching damnation. It may be
they have greived for sin, been vexed at themselves for their old Follies; it
may be they have had good desires and purposes, made promises and vows of
devoting themselves to the fear of God, and never again returning to their
former sinful courses, if it should please the Lord to restore them; and yet no
sooner were they raised up again, but they changed their purposes, brake their
promises, stifled or wore off their convictions, and grew worse than before;
the Devil that went out of them when they were sick, returned into them when
well, and seven more with him, Matthew. 12.43. etc. And they know not but things
might be as bad with them now, if God should restore them, as they have
heretofore been; They fear lest their Hearts, which they have found so
deceitful, fickle, slippery, should play tricks with them, and dissemble, and
pretend what they never mean; and so from the trial they have had of them they
dare not trust them, but suspect all their present relenting, mourning,
confession, mortification, to be false and counterfeit.

2. It may be more difficult at such a time to discern the principle from which
their repentance proceeds; whether from Faith in Christ, love to God, and
hatred of sin, or only from fear of Wrath and Hell; whether they mourn as
Children under a Fathers hand, or only as slaves under a Masters whip. When
they lie upon the brink of the grave, and expect every moment to drop into it;
their Souls are dislodging, leaving their bodies, and by and by to appear naked
before their Judge; this may affect them, fill them with fear, and fear with
sorrow for sin, whereby they have exposed themselves to the danger of
damnation; and both together put them upon resolutions against sin, which is
usual in such cases. Now though there may be something else at the bottom, yet
this lying uppermost, and most obvious to their view, they may fear that it is
the only prevailing argument, and great cause of their repentance; which can
then be no better than merely legal, as having no better a foundation.
Principles are usually latent, and discoverable only by their workings, and
that too more easily or difficultly in proportion to the intenseness or
weakness of these workings; and in this case the more weak and feeble stirrings
of Faith or Love may be so outdone and overtop'd by the vehement and strong
motions of fear, that themselves can hardly be perceived, much less the
principles they flow from. A dying sinner may feel his fear when he cannot
perceive his Faith, and suspect he has no Faith because he is so full of fear;
and consequently question his repentance which cannot be Evangelical without an
Evangelical principle.

3. They are apt to doubt of the truth of their repentance for want of seeing
the fruit of it. And indeed in their circumstances, when they have so little
time to live, they cannot see much. The fruits of repentance in an holy,
humble, mortified conversation, are the best proof of its sincerity, and so
most like to bring in the comforts of it. But their repentance being young,
green, and unripe, they know not whether ever it might bring forth fruit, and
so may easily be induced to suspect the nature of it. How warm soever, for the
present, their hearts are, yet they may question the continuance of such a
frame if life should continue. As much as at present they are set against sin,
yet they know not but if they should again be in a capacity of committing it,
they might be again reconciled to it. They have but newly entered upon the ways
of God, and know not whether they should like them upon further trial of them;
whether as sickness and fear of death have begun to mortify their lusts, so
the temptations of life and health might not again restore them. They never yet
knew what it is to be Godly in time of health and ease, in the midst of the
snares and allurements of the World, and so know not whether that appearance of
godliness they now have, be any more than an appearance, which upon the
approach of agreeable temptations might easily vanish. Men seldom judge of
Trees but by the fruit they bear. A Crab-tree may have as fair a blossom as the
sweetest Pipin. Here may be fair buds, and leaves, and blossoms, sorrow for
sin, resolutions against it, purposes of new obedience; yet they may suspect
all for want of seeing the fruit of their repentance in the acts of obedience;
a settled course of walking with God, and progress in mortification.

4. The Devil is most like to be busy with them at such a time. He is a never
failing enemy to Men's Souls, and shows his enmity to their very death; and as
he makes it his business to keep them from repentance, so if he cannot do that,
he labors to bereave them of the comfort of it, by making them question the
truth of it. As where it is false he is ready to flatter them, and persuade
them it is true that he may draw them into presumption; so where it is sincere
he labors to terrify them, by persuading them it is hypocritical, that he may
run them into despair. Thus he does with Men while they live, and why may he
not do the same when they die? He is like at that time either for ever to have
them, or for ever to lose them: his temptations then are his last efforts, and
therefore most vigorous; and such they may be, as though, the grace of God
preventing, they may not hinder the true repentance of a dying sinner, yet, the
wisdom of God permitting, they may cloud and obscure it and render it
questionable, and thereby bereave him of the comfort of it.

II. They may be ready to question Gods acceptance of their repentance, and
indeed that must needs be, if they question the sincerity of it, when God never
accepts any but what is sincere. But besides, they may be ready to fear they
have outstood their time, that the day of grace, which is the only time of Gods
accepting them, is at an end: Or, that God will not accept of them as his
Servants, when they cannot live to do him any service; or not accept of their
returning to him now, who have forsaken him so long; not accept of their sorrow
for formerly dishonouring him, when they are past time for glorifying him; and
in a word, not look upon them as his Children at the last hour, who have been
the Devils Children all their days. Now if this be their case, how
uncomfortable is a deathbed repentance, admit it be sound, when Men know not
that it is sound, but are wholly in the dark as to the sincerity and acceptance
of it, and so set in a cloud and fear a storm? They may have even just so much
hope as may keep them from despair, not what may cause any rejoicing in them; a
secret and almost insensible support, but no enlargement. They do but (as was
said of the penitent Thief in the Text) steal into Heaven, and are so saved as
that no body in this World knows it, nor they themselves till they find it. And
God may purposely conceal it to prevent the folly and presumption of others. If
Gods Children after many years spent in serious and diligent serving him, yet
(for reasons best known to the Divine Wisdom) have sometimes died in the dark;
they then that spend their days in sin, and think to repent at last, should
remember that the best they can reasonably expect, if God should give them
repentance, must be to die between fear and hope, or it may be more full of
fear than hope. No comfort they can expect in reflecting upon their forepast
life, where they see nothing but sin; and little in the hopes of future glory,
when they have not one clear evidence of their title to it.

To conclude. May not the consideration of a Man's repenting no sooner, abate
his comfort in repenting at last? May not, will not that gracious ingenuity God
has now wrought in such a one, make severe reflections upon his long
impenitency, and not turning to God till he was past serving him? And then may
not the Devil set in and maliciously aggravate it to the sinners Conscience,
and hold the mind so fixed and intent upon the thoughts of repenting no sooner,
as to divert it from the contemplation of that grace which has now wrought
repentance in him, and thereby diminish the comfort he might take in it?

For Information. If it be so dangerous to run the hazard of a deathbed folly
that do so? They that defer their repentance till they come to die, show
themselves fools.

1. In putting off the greatest work till they have least time for the doing of
it, if any at all. A Man would be accounted a fool as to the concernments of
this life that should idle away the time of his youth, and vigorous age, and
defer seeking for an Estate, and providing for his Family, till he were old and
decrepit and past working. And is it not a greater work to provide for Eternity
than for time, to drive a Spiritual trade than a Civil one, and get a stock of
Grace than of Riches? And then what fools are they that put off such a work to
the last, and leave themselves no time for it but that which is most unfit for
it, as well as uncertain whether they shall enjoy it? Repentance as to the
exercise of it, is not the work of a day, but should be the work of all a Man's
days; and what folly is it to thrust that into a little corner of a Man's life,
which should be extended through the whole of it? A Christians work is not to
be done all at once; it is a walk, a race, a course of holy, gracious actings,
and that requires time. Repentance (as it implies our first turning from sin to
God) is but the entrance upon or beginning of that course, and how foolish are
they that think to run their race in an instant, to begin their course and
finish it at once?

2. It is a reckoning upon time which they cannot command. Men may with Job,
chap. 29.2. wish that they were, as in the months past, but they cannot make
themselves be so. And so likewise they may wish time back, but cannot bring it
back, or stop its motion as it runs, nor have they the least particle of it in
their power. How foolish then is it to defer repentance while they have time
for it, till they come to a sick bed where they are not secure of any! Alas
they can no more add one inch to their time than one cubit to their stature.

3. It is a promising themselves the doing of that which is not in their own
power to do. Though the exercise of repentance, as above was said, is Man's
duty, yet it is such a duty as he cannot practice without the grace of
repentance wrought in him; (the principle must be ere the act can be) and that
grace is the gift of God; and if he do not give it, Man cannot have it; and if
he will not give it, who can force him to do it? They that would command Gods
grace, must command God himself; and they that defer their repentance till they
die, must suppose either that they can work it in themselves, which has
already been disproved, or that God will be at their beck to do it for them;
which needs no disproving.

4. It is a thinking to do the work best when they have made it most difficult
and painful. Though (as was before said) God can by his power in an instant
remove all obstructions, and work repentance in the most obdurate sinner; yet
in his ordinary method he works gradually, and in the way of means, Men's
attendance upon Ordinances, Seeking, and Laboring after repentance, etc. and
Men have no reason to expect that God should disuse his wonted manner of
working to gratify their sloth and loytering. Now it is certain that the
longer Men live in sin, the more their hearts will cleave to it, and be hardened
in it; and then the more loath they will be to be divorced from it, and the more
averse to the use of those means whereby such a separation might be effected.
The more sweetness they have tasted in sin, the more bitter will the very
thoughts of repentance be: Strong affections to their lusts will make prayers
cold and endeavors faint against them. Hence we see God handles old stubborn
sinners more roughly, when he reduces them, for the most part, than others upon
whom he works more early. Indeed their case requires it. They need more of the
Lords terrors, (2 Cor. 5.11.) to drive them off from sin, more Law-thunder to
awaken their Consciences, and rouse them out of their security; and more severe
means to humble and break them, to imbitter sin to them, and make them heartily
willing to forsake it. What pangs and tortures, horrors of Conscience,
Soul-convulsions do foolish sinners procure to themselves, by their lingering,
and delaying, which had they been more quick and speedy in their work might
have been prevented, at least very much mitigated?

Exhortation. Let sinners take heed of deferring their repentance at all, much
more of putting it off to the end of their lives. Consider,

1. Can you have the face to put God off with the worst you can give him? And
the least too, of your time, and strength, and service, when he calls for the
best, and deserves all? Has God given you a life of many years, and can you
afford him only the service of a few days; it may be hours, it may be minutes;
nay, it may be none at all? Is it fair, ingenuous, reasonable to give the Devil
your strength, and God your weakness? To give the Devil and your lusts, your
health, and God your sickness? To serve sin with your might, and vigor, and
God with your distempers, and infirmities? Not to be willing to part with your
sins till you are parting with your lives, nor begin your work till your time
is ending? and, in a word, to begin then only to serve God, when you can serve
your selves, your Friends, nay your Lusts no longer?

2. The sooner you set about the work, the more easy you will find it. You
will have fewer Sins to repent of, and mourn over, and turn from, less guilt to
terrify and dishearten you, less stupor in your Consciences, less hardness in
your Hearts, less strength of sin to be wrestled with. The Dominion of sin will
not be so confirmed with a long tract of time; nor the cords of your iniquity
hold you so fast. Tho it be true, that how soon soever you begin, and set about
the work, you cannot of your selves effect it; God's Grace must do that; yet
the sooner you begin, the less sin there will be in you to resist his Grace,
and the more hope that God will afford you Grace to overcome that resistance
which is made. And tho Grace can subdue and conquer the most strong, old,
overgrown Lusts, yet still you will be more ready to hope it will do it, when
you have not the guilt of a long impenitent Life; and refusing former calls to
encourage your unbelief, and check your hopes, and sink your hearts.

3. You may expect more comfort in it, for the more able you will be to discern
its sincerity, as having less cause to doubt of it. To turn to God when you
have something to deny for him, some time to spend in his Service, and which
might have been spent in the service of sin, looks much more like true
repentance, than to turn to him when you are immediately to appear before him.
The less force and fear there is in your repentance, the more like it is to be
kindly and evangelical; when tears flow, and are not squeezed; you are rather
drawn than driven; and your Obedience is freely yielded, rather than extorted.
But the further ye apprehend your selves from Death and Judgment, the less
there usually is to force your repentance, and so the less to make it
suspicious, and hinder your enjoying the comfort of it. And so the sooner you
repent, the more time you will have to prove its sincerity by its fruits, and
the more fruit you bring forth meet for repentance, Matthew. 3.8. the better
satisfied ye will be as to the truth of it, and have the more comfort in it.
When you cannot so well judge of it by looking to it immediately in the
principle, you may be better able to judge of it by its actings; as tho the
root of a Tree be hid under ground, yet good fruit will show it to be good.

4. Consider what you lose by putting repentance off to the last; beside the
comfort of your death (as was above intimated) ye lose no less than all the
comfort of your Lives; the comfort of all the good you might have done, all the
Grace you might have acted, all the glory you might have brought to God. A
Christians greatest comfort is the comfort of faith and holiness, the comfort
of walking with God, and communion with him in Duties and Ordinances, the
comfort of exercising his Graces, and reflecting upon his Graces, of seeing his
privileges, his interest in the promises, his title to his inheritance, etc.
so that where no Grace is, there no true comfort can be; and where repentance
is not, there no other Grace can be; no Faith, for that is always the cause of
Evangelical repentance; and no holiness, for that always supposes Repentance
as the beginning of it. There can be no walking in the narrow way, if there be
not first an entering in at the strait Gate. Wisdoms ways are ways of
pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. but they only experience that pleasantness that walk
in that way; and walk in it you cannot, if you do not enter into it, and that
must be by repentance, which is your very first stepping into it. Think then
what comforts the Saints enjoy in their Lives, what it is that makes them
cheerful in their Duties, courageous against their enemies, strong against
temptations, patient in sufferings; what it is makes them go on singing in the
ways of the Lord, Psalm. 138.1. and glorying in tribulations, Romans 5.3. and
remember that all this comfort you lose, by being so late e're you come into
the way, wherein alone it is to be found.

5. Think what others, beside your selves, lose by your thus deferring your
repentance. Every Saint is a public Good; the World is the better for him: But
while you go on in sin, and never think of repenting till the last, who is the
better for you? nay, who are not losers by you? Angels in Heaven lose the joy
they might have had in your Conversion; Ministers lose the comfort of being
instrumental in it, your Families lose the Instruction they might have had of
you, your Neighbors the provocation they might have had to holiness by your
example; the wicked lose the convictions they might have been brought under by
the power of holiness appearing in your conversation, Saints the comfort and
refreshment they might have had by your Society, Discourse, Experience, and all
generally, what good they might have got by your Prayers; and, that which is
more than all, does not God lose the glory you might have given him, had that
time, that life and strength been spent in his Service, which you have spent
upon your Lusts!

I need not tell you over again what you hazard; even your never repenting at
all; your being forsaken of God, given up to the Devil and your Lusts, and so
having your hearts hardened, your minds blinded, your Consciences seared, and
your Souls in conclusion damned. If it be not so, no thanks to your selves. If
God be merciful to you (and no body in this World knows whether he will or not)
yet you do your part to bereave your selves of that mercy, and plunge your
selves into the Abyss of eternal misery.

Obj. If you say, you are fully resolved to repent of your sins, when you come
to die, and then ask pardon for them.

Answ. Do but seriously consider,

1. The Vanity and Folly of such resolutions. What is more uncertain, more
fickle, more variable than man's mind? you resolve upon this to day, and are
you sure you shall not break that resolution to morrow? Do you know what will
be your minds two or three days hence, if not, how can you know twenty or
thirty years beforehand? are you sure you shall never meet with any accident,
any temptation that may change your mind? And if you do know your mind, what it
will certainly be when you are dying, yet do you know what God's mind will be
then, whether he will give you repentance when you set about it, and give you a
pardon when you seek it? If you do know it, I pray, how came you by that
knowledge? When did God tell you so, and where? In what text of Scripture has
he revealed it? where does he promise you repentance, and pardon at the last,
when you had never seriously sought either all your days?

2. The wickedness and profaneness of them. You resolve you will repent when
you die, and that implies, you will not repent till then, i. e. you do and
resolve still to love sin as long as you live, but you intend to leave it when
you can live no longer in it: you hate God now, and resolve to hate him till
you die, and then you will begin to love him. You will make work for repentance
now, and seek for repentance at last; offend God, and provoke him, and make
work for pardoning mercy all your days, and then sue to him for it. You will
persevere to affront the grace of Christ, and throw his blood back into his
face, and then expect to be washed in it from your sins, and saved by it when
you go out of the World.

It is to as little purpose to say, You will then send for the Minister to
instruct you, to pray with you, etc.

For, what if you do? your case may be such, that all the good Men, good
Ministers, good Instructions, good Counsels in the World may not help you, not
save you: All may come too late, and signify no more to your Souls than
Physicians and Physic, at that time, do to your Bodies. Alas what can
Ministers do for you? Can their instructions enlighten your minds when God has
blinded them? Can their counsels soften your hearts, when he has hardened them?
Can the breath of prayer waft your Souls to Heaven, in the last moment of your
life, when you have been stearing toward Hell all your days? What can your
Spiritual Physicians do for the cure of your Souls, when the great Physician of
all has left you as incurable, and will never any more visit you?

Do not tell me, on the other side, That repentance is Gods gift, and you
cannot have it till he give it you, and therefore you must tarry till he do.
For,

1. It is as much Gods gift at last as at first,

2. Tho it be Gods gift, and you cannot work it in your selves, yet cannot you
seek it of God, desire him to work it in you? And can you not use the means by
which he ordinarily works it? And are you not as capable of so doing when you
live and are in health, as when you are sick and dying? When you are sick you
cannot heal your selves; health is Gods gift as well as grace is, tho of
another kind. But do you then use to lie still, and say you must wait till God
restore you? Or do you not rather send for your Physician, and betake your
selves to the use of means by which God is wont to work it? You cannot get an
estate unless God give it you; riches are his gift, Prove. 10.22. Do you
therefore sit still and fold your hands in your bosom, and say you must tarry
till God give you an estate? Or do you not rather engage in some honest
Calling, or Trade, as the ordinary way God is wont to bless to that end? The
diligent hand makes rich, verse. 4. and why do you not do so here too? If you
will go on in sin, and say you wait till God give you repentance, you may wait
long enough, when every day you continue in sin, so much the farther off from
repentance you are, and so much the more you provoke God to deny it you.

To conclude. Take heed especially of those things which are the ordinary
hindrances of a timely repentance.

I. Wrong notions of repentance.

1. That it is an easy thing, and so may be done at any time; that it is but
sorrowing for sin, and crying God mercy for having offended him. This prevails
with too many, that know not wherein the nature of it consists. Remember
therefore that it is no easy thing to get a through change wrought in your
hearts; to divorce your lusts to which you have been so long wedded, to part
with those sins you love best, and engage in those ways of strict holiness,
which of all things in the World you hate most. The old Man will fight hard ere
he die. The flesh will never yield, and hardly be overcom. And if ever God work
repentance to you, he will so work it as to make you work at it too, and labor
after it, his grace using and employing your faculties. And what can you ever
do either in seeking repentance before the infusion of the grace, or exercising
it when infused; but you will find sin opposing you in it, and so creating
difficulties in your work?

2. That it is a sour and an unpleasant thing, made up of sorrow and sadness
and unquietness of Spirit. They know no delights but sensual ones, and think if
they part with the pleasure of sin, they part with the comfort of their lives.
Do not therefore look merely on the dark side of repentance, or what may make
it seem uneasy to you: look through it and you will find that which will make
it more pleasant. In the very sorrow you fear, if it be right, i. e. godly
sorrow, there will be such a mixture of Love, as will make it in a good measure
delightful to you. If it seem painful to you to strive against sin, and there
be trouble in the combat, yet when you prevail over it you will find comfort in
the Victory. You will be more pleased with having denied your selves, than you
could with having gratified your selves. Our Saviors promise, Matthew. 5.4.
Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted, one would think should
reconcile you not only to any seeming trouble in the work of repentance, but to
all the greatest difficulties and severities of the most strict and mortified
life. If indeed your repentance be merely legal, proceeding from fear of wrath,
or Popish, for the expiation of your sins, I grant it may be a sad and
unpleasant thing; but if it be a true Protestant repentance, i. e. an
Evangelical one, mixed with Love to God, and proceeding from the Faith of Free
Grace and remission of sin through the Blood of Christ, it need not be such a
scarecrow to you as to make you hazard your Salvation by shifting your duty.

II. Presumptuous thoughts of Gods mercy: that God may be merciful to them, and
give them repentance and pardon their sins at the very last. Consider therefore,

1. As merciful as God is, yet his will sets bounds even to that infinite mercy
as to the actings and outgoings of it, and beyond those bounds it will never
pass. There is a time, a day, a now of grace, which when it is once over, no
mercy will be shown you. Offers of mercy, invitations made to sinners, and the
acceptance of them are but for a time; the door is open but for a time, and
when that is past it will be shut, Matthew. 25.10. and all your calling and
knocking will never prevail with God for the opening of it again. And what then
shall you be the better, the nearer repentance, or nearer pardon for all that
Ocean of mercy that is in God, if you seek it too late, and when he will not
let out one drop of it to you?

2. Gods justice is as great as his mercy: All his Attributes are alike
infinite, one does not overtop the other. And then if you delay and put off
repenting to your latter end, why may you not as reasonably fear lest he should
in justice punish you for your long impenitency, as in mercy give you
repentance?

Quest. How does Practical Godliness better rectify the Judgment than doubtful
Disputations? SERMON X.
Romans XIV. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful
Disputations.
THIS Epistle to the Romans is an Epitomy or Body of Divinity, containing Faith
and Love in Christ Jesus; from which Rome degenerating has separated from her
self and the Scriptures of Truth, the only grand Charter of all Christianity.

In the beginning of the Epistle the Apostle discourses about Original Sin,
(...) having infected the whole Nature of Man with its guilt and filth, (...)
Jews and Gentiles all become abominable, fallen short of the glory and image of
God, Chap. 3.23. For by one Man Sin entered upon all, Chap. 5.12. and Death by
Sin. Whence he infers there is no possibility of our Justification by the
Works either of the Ceremonial or Moral Law; so that he concludes a necessity
of our being Justified by Faith without the Works of the Law, Chap. 3.28.
Through the Redemption of Jesus Christ. But though we are justified freely by
his Grace, yet we are not to live freely and licentiously in Sin, because Grace
abounds, God forbid, Chap. 6.1. for holiness is inseparably entailed on our
most holy Faith, Jude 20. Then he proceeds to show the Privileges of the
adopted Children of God, that there is no condemnation due to them, Chap. 8.1.
For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, has made them free from the
Law of Sin and Death; and that they are heirs of God, verse. 17. which is more
than all the World. Till he arriveth at the Head-spring of all Grace, and that
is Eternal Election, Chap. 9. without any foresight of Faith or Works. But as
in time he chose first the Jews, rejecting them he chose the Gentiles, without
any view of Merit or Eligibility in either of them before others; for the Jews
were the smallest and meanest of all Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.7. and the Gentiles all
overrun with Idolatry and Profaneness: Yet this Conversion of the Gentiles was
foreknown and therefore forewilled of God from the beginning, Acts 15.18. After
these sublimer Doctrins he descends, Chap. 12. to Practical Duties, and he who
will understand the eleven first Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans, must
practice the five last; be acquainted with the mysterious Duties of Love, and
then you will better understand the mysteries of Faith.

Chap. 13.8. He exhorts them to owe no body any thing but Love; be in no
bodies debt, yet owe every one Love; a debt always to be paying, and yet always
owing; yet still abiding our proper treasure.

This 14th Chapter is a branch of some particular Duties of Love, and this
Verse is the sum of this whole Chapter of Charity; which words are said to have
occasioned the Conversion or Confirmation of Alipius, as the foregoing words
were of Augustines: Such is the Authority and Energy of the naked Word of God
upon the Consciences of Men, in the day of Christ's Power. And the naked Sword
cuts better than when it is sheathed in a gaudy scabbard of the enticing words
of Man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4,

The Apostles were frequently exercised with difficulties, how to compose the
differences among Christians; the Jewish Converts were eager to bring their
Circumcision, with their observation of times and meats, along with them into
Christianity, Gal. 4.10. The Gentiles were not accustomed to these things, and
therefore opposed them, yet were as ready to bring a Tang of their own old
Errors with them also, as their Doctrine of Demons, 1 Timothy 4.1. and their
worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. and probably some of their Heathenish
Festivals and Customs: So that both parties were in an error, and neither of
them fully understood that liberty Christ had brought to them from these
beggarly Elements, Rudiments and Ordinances to which they were in bondage. For
if God saw good to free his Church from those Ceremonies which were instituted
by himself, he would never allow them to be in a slavish subjection to the
Superstitions and Ceremonies of worldly Men's inventions, though never so
Dogmatically and Magisterially imposed. For as Learned Davenant on that Col.
2.18. observes, such injunctions are apt to grow upon Men, forbidding first not
to touch or eat such and such meats* then not to taste, after not so much as to
handle them.

Now to compose these differences the Apostles met at Jerusalem, Acts 15.20.
where they made no positive injunctions for the Christians to practice any
Ceremonies or Observations of either party against their Consciences; but
limited the exercise of their liberty, which they truly had by the Gospel; but
that they should abstain from Fornication, which to explain is too great a
digression, Blood, things Strangled, and what was offered to Idols. These they
would have them to avoid, that they may not offend those weak Jews who could
not suddenly concoct these practices, till Judgment should be brought to
Victory over these feeble fancies. And they laid this also as a burden on them
for a time, till they could be brought to better understanding; and all this by
way of advice from the Apostles, Elders, and the whole Church, verse. 22. their
Letter also was read to the whole multitude, verse. 30. So here the Apostle
advises the Romans, how to do in the like case with these weak ones, Him that
is weak receive, etc.

1. Here is the description of the person who is to be considered, ((...)) not
him that is weak and sick to death, erring in the foundation of Faith; one who
does not hold the Head, Col. 2.19. Who denies the Lord who bought him; these
are destructive Heresies which bring on Men swift damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1. we are
not to say to such God speed you, 2 Epistle John 10. their very breath is
blasting to Men's minds.

2. Nor is it one who is sick about questions, 1 Timothy 1.4. 2 Timothy 3.23.
foolish, endless, unlearned, unedifying questions, which only engender
contention: such are idle busybodies, seekers, and disputatious quarrellers
about some minute things, which hypocritical and vain minds Trade in, to keep
themselves buzzing about the borders of Religion, that they may keep off from
the more serious duties, and substantial parts thereof.

3. But he is one who is weak in the Faith, who though he has embraced the
Doctrine of our Savior, yet is not of a mature concocted judgment, clear enough
about the abolition of Ceremonial observations, things he judges ought to be
forborne or done. Now let things be never so indifferent in the general,
definition or Thesis; yet when they come to be used and exercised in their
individual circumstances they will be determinately good, or determinately
evil, in all moral agents and actions. And that which in general seems
indifferent to one is not so to another; these Gentiles could freely eat things
strangled, but the Jews could not. Therefore it is a very strong weakness or
wilfulness in some who love to turn Straws into Trees, and Feathers into Birds,
and not to leave things as Christ has left them, and as they are in their own
nature, but will transpeciate as others transubstantiate by their own breath in
their own Opinions; and more fiercely contend for their own Laws than the
commands of God, as Saul was more severe on Jonathan for tasting honey, than on
himself for rebelling against Gods express command. These heats indicate an
Hectic Fever to be in the body, preternatu^^^^y eating up and preying on the
vital heat, Love to God and our Neighbor; the zeal for Men's own Chimnies
eats up the House of God.

II. Here is the injunction of Charity toward weak ones ((...)) take them to
you, receive them into your Houses, use Hospitality toward them, supply their
necessities, Romans 12.13. not magnificent receptions, such as Levi gave our
Savior ((...)) Luke 5.29. But when they fly for their Religion and Lives,
supply their wants though they be not just of your size or Opinion, do not
force him to practice what he cannot freely do to buy your Charity; this is a
dear purchase and a cruel sale. Generous hospitality is a duty of another
fashion, receive them into your Arms, into your bosoms, into your Love and
Converse, that you may instruct them and win upon them, receive them into your
Society, into your Communion, treat this weak Brother with all humility,
condescension, love and kindness; yea, with all the warm graces Christianity
has endued you with. Let not these least differences cause the greatest
distances (as often they do) if he has so much candor as he will be received,
and be not sullen and angry, receive him; and by strength of Love, bear with
him, and forbear him, till by Love you soften and overcome him, by heaping
coals of fire upon his Head. For if he be weak, yet seriously and sincerely a
lover of Christ, and beloved of him, the Lord has received him, verse. 3.
therefore do you also receive him.

3. The limitation of this exception, not to doubtful Disputations, ((...))
some would render it discerning of thoughts, and 1 Cor. 12.10. there was such
an extraordinary gift, as the discerning of Spirits. So there may be an
ordinary prying into Men's thoughts, and what is Mark 9.4. (...), is Luke 5.22.
(...). Jesus seeing their thoughts, and thoughts are but Men's dialoguing and
discoursing with themselves, and so the sense it thus, Receive him, but not to
the discerning or judging of his Opinion or Thoughts, or that he should be
hardened to judge others Thoughts to be altered because they receive him. But
receiving is, receiving him into their Society; therefore not receiving him
must be not to something which was apt to be in their Society and among them,
which was not the discretion of the strong, but their disputes which were not
fit for these weak ones. And the word most commonly signifies disputing with
others, Acts 19.9. Paul disputed daily in the School of Tyrannus. And Mark
9.34. The Disciples disputed who among them should be greatest. But in Jude 9.
both words are met together, Michael contending with the Devil, disputed about
the body of Moses.

Doct. Christians are to receive such as are weak in the Faith, into their
Hearts by Love, and not to trouble or heat their Heads with cramping disputes.

For practical Piety will sooner rectify the judgment of the weak, than fierce
argumentations. Lay aside this heat about Ceremonies on all Hands, and attend
to Reading and Hearing the Word, and Exhortation; Pray and Praise God together,
and Converse in holy Ordinances in Love to each others Souls; let but this fire
live upon the Altar of your Hearts and then all other strange fire and heats
will die away.

1. I will show you that weak Christians cannot well judge of arguments.

2. That the practice of known duties is the way to get more light.

3. That Christian Love will sooner win others from error than rigid Arguments.

4. The Inferences from all for Instruction and Direction.

First then, Disputations and Arguments are not easily judged of by such as are
weak in Faith and Knowledge of Christian liberty. Now this is evident from the
first Dispute that ever was in the World. For Satan was a Disputer from the
beginning, and is still the Father and Author of all insnaring and contentious
Disputations. The first thing he disputed was Gods command. The Prohibition and
Threatening was absolute, (...)
Moth tamuth, Genesis 2.17. but the Woman who was first in the Transgression
faltreth in the recital of it, with a perhaps we shall die, Genesis 3.3. But by
this first dispute with the Serpent, our first Parents, when in uprightness and
strength of the image of God newly stamped on them in knowledge and holiness;
yet this Father or fomenter of Disputes foiled them; and so all mankind being
naturally and federally in them, was drawn into their guilt and filth. So that
reason is ever since debased and deposed, and no Man is able to rule himself,
much less another; his rule and measures being broken, he has only some
fragments and splinters of the Tree of Knowledge which he darts against God and
himself: The holy Lamp and Flame is so extinguished, that now he only
compasses himself about with his own sparks till he lie down in sorrow, Isa.
50.11. Creatures as Creatures are fallible and failable (witness Men and
Angels) especially by the impulse of false Arguments. It is God's only
Prerogative to be intrinsecally Infallible and Immutable. And it is a
perfection incommunicable to Men or Angels. But now sinful Man is in a much
more dark and doleful state. For,

1. He cannot form an Idea of any thing, nor frame a true notion of any thing
as it is in it self; but he conceives by the Air of Metaphors, Smilitudes and
Phantasms; he cannot see into things themselves nor their Essences: He is
hardly put to it to tell what dull Matter or Body is, much more what nimble
forms, motion, or Spirits are, or what his own Soul is, though so nigh to him
and part of himself: He is so in the dark he cannot define what light it self
is. If any be so confident as to think he knows any thing, our Apostle tells
him, He knows nothing as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. He is not sufficient
as of himself for one good or true thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. which cuts the top
sinew of Pelagianism and the Champions of the power of Nature.

2. His judgment therefore must needs be dubious or wrong whereby he is to
compare things that differ or agree together. If God leave him or give him up
to himself, the Prophet is a fool, and the Spiritual Man is mad, Hos. 9.7. so
as he will put darkness for light and light for darkness, bitter for sweet and
sweet for bitter, call good evil and evil good, Isa. 5.20. Conscience, the
Souls taster, and common sense is so vitiated and defiled, Tit. 1.15. that he
has no true judgment or discretion, having not his senses exercised to discern
between good and evil, Heb. 5.14.

3. His conclusions therefore must needs be distorted from these premises, and
the Errors in the first and second concoction are not corrected and amended by
the third; he who cannot make one strait step can never take three together.
All the Errors and Fallacies in the World are but the products of his
Ratiocinations, viz. I can go to the Tavern or Exchange, I find therefore I can
Repent and Believe when I will; whereas these are actions of another Life and
Nature, which he was never born to, unless Regenerated by the Spirit of God; To
Repent and Believe are God's gift, Acts 5.31. His work in us, John 6.65. and
Ephesians. 2.8. Though for this very Doctrine many of his ignoranter Disciples went
back and walked no more with him, John 6.66. And so Men jog on in their
sensuality, presumptuously, as if there was something in the pleasures of sin,
which was sweeter and dearer to them than God or Heaven; and when they have no
more strength to serve their Lusts, nor any thing else to do but to die, they
can in one quarter of an hour make their peace with God, (as one of that herd
said to me, who soon after drawing Water out of his own Well, and being Drunk,
was by the weight of the Bucket drawn into the Well and drowned). Another
says, I may sin because Grace abounds, this is a most disingenuous and
unnatural argument; I may hate God and my Savior, because he has so loved me;
when holy Herbert said, Let me not Love thee, if I love thee not; love being
stronger than Death or Hell, in the Hearts of Gods beloved ones. So without
holiness none shall see God, therefore we must be justified by our Evangelical
Obedience and Righteousness, whereas this is only a concomitant for the cause;
for God pronounces and declares none to be Righteous, but such as are
Righteous; now there is none Righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10. but in the
Righteousness of Christ, who of God is made Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Redemption, Dav. de Just.
1 Cor. 1.36. In sound Davenant's words, An Alderman sits in the Court not
because he is to come in his Gown, but because he is an Alderman by Election,
etc. So you must obey the Laws of the Church, if that wedge will drive, if not
the Laws of the State, both which are inconsequent if they be not according to
the Law of God; the establishing perverseness by a Law, Psalm. 94.20. made
neither David's nor Christ's sufferings the worse, but their sin the greater who
twisted such a Law. So that we need a new Logic from (...), the Eternal Word,
as a directory to our Reasonings, as well as the common Logic which teaches
us the regulation of the operations of our minds.

II. As we are lame in our Feet by our Naturals, so even those who by the light
of the Gospel and Grace are brought over to better understanding, yet by virtue
of the old crasiness they are not thoroughly illuminated and refined. The very
Apostles themselves, Luke 18.34. were plainly told by our Savior, that he
should suffer Death, and rise again the third day, yet they understood none of
these things; these sayings were hid from them, until he opened their
understandings to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. We have all a dark
side, and Paul says, We know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. we see but one side of
the Globe, we cannot view things round about, they are above our Hemisphere.
These weak Jews were Zealous for their Ceremonies as being instituted by God,
the Gentiles as hot for theirs; let no Man think himself infallible, for these
were all out and mistaken. Form, Custom and Education do wonderfully confirm
Men in Error: How hardly were People in our first Reformation drawn from their
Prayers in Latin to English, yet they understood not Latin? as hardly would
they still be weaned from little formalities, though it were to entertain the
most real and reasonable service in the World. So great a Tyrant is tough
custom over Phlegmatic Souls; so apt are Men to heats for trifles, by which
Straw and Stubble they turn the Church into a Brick-kiln.

These Jews had Divine Right to plead, and the usage and practice of all the
seed of the Faithful, enough to stagger a weak Christian; Errors fairly set off
may pass for Truths, and if but weakly confuted may hang a doubt in Men's minds:
so Truths ill guarded may go for Errors; objections not well cleared had better
never have been started, for they may puzzle a weak Head and Heart, and make
them both ache with fear of mistakes. A Sophistical Disputant will prove there
is no Motion, the best way to confute him is in our Saviors words, rise up and
walk, John 5.8. which is a real silent demonstration of it.

III. Nothing so convulseth Men's reason as interest, as Hobs says, Though
there is no Problem in Mathematics more demonstrable than that all strait
Lines drawn from the Center to the Circumference are equal, yet if this did but
cross any Man's interest it would be disputed. Now 1 John 2.16. the Apostle
reduces the whole World to those three Elements, the lust of the Flesh, the
lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life; a threefold cord, strong enough to pull
any Truth in pieces, as easily as Sampson did his Wyths.

1. The lust of the Flesh, modo hic sit been, pleasing the Flesh goes a great
deal further than the Monks Bellies, who yet have a lusty share in it; as one
of their own said, They had all things so complacent, that they wanted only a
Vicar to go to Hell for them when they should die. The Bishop of Romes Kitchen
and Purgatory mutually support one another. Disorders of Life hold up Celibacy
in Men in Orders. The lust of Idleness inviteth to Stage Plays, the nurseries
of Vanity and Vice; to Cards and Dice, in defiance of that Canon which
pronounces them unlawful Games. A lusty Dinner makes the Veins so strut, they
can leap or fly to Heaven by their Free Will, without the necessity of
Free Grace, so strong is Flesh and Blood without the Spirit of God. Sure he who
has an Immortal Soul within him, and a Dubious State to himself, as that
dreadful Eternity before him, should never be sick of his time that lies upon
his Hand, one hour whereof millions of Wolds cannot redeem.

2. Covetousness is a weighty Argument: Thousands are enough to break the Loins
of most Men's minds, too heavy for the back of the strongest Rationalist in the
World; the Scale of Judgment cannot turn while this beam is in the Eye, nor any
Argument counterpoise this dead and deadly weight; but Tithe, Mint and Cummin,
will outweigh Faith and the Love of God, Luke 11.42. St. Briget prophesied,
Fox's Martyr.
The Roman Clergy would ruin the Church by their avarice, for she said, They
had already reduced the Ten Commands to two words, da pecuniam.

3. Pride of Life swells Men till they break all bonds and bounds, like Stum in
the Cask makes all the Hoops fly off. The zeal of a party, and having declared
for a way, makes Men they cannot retreat; but will spur on for honor and
profit, though the Angel of the Lord oppose them, till they are crushed to the
Wall. If Christian Religion be founded in Self-denial, Mortification, and
bearing the Cross, they who seek their own glory are not of God, John 7.18.
that is either no Gospel, or these certainly are no Disciples of Christ. We had
need look to ourselves, for this lust of domination and glory, as Charon says,
Is the very Shirt of the Soul, on from the first, but last put off.

Secondly, I am to show you that the practice of holy Duties clearly commanded,
is the ready way to have our minds enlightened in the knowledge of Principles:
Reading the Scriptures, discoursing about Heaven, and about their Souls
everlasting welfare; Reproving one another, and admonishing, Romans 15.14.
comforting and supporting the weak and dejected Soul, 1 These. 5.14. To exhort
one another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb.
3.13. Duties so much out of fashion in these days, that it is not counted good
manners or civility to practice them; friendly reproof is esteemed want of good
breeding. But are they not strange Christians who are strangers to Scripture
Duties?

1. These Practical Duties performed would give us light, He that does the
Truth comes to the light, John 3.21. not only out of boldness but discovery of
knowledge; Truth is nothing but goodness explained, and goodness is nothing but
Truth consolidated. Rudiments of knowledge are prerequisite to practice, but
examples clear all things to us. Demonstration by the Compasses makes the
Maxim evident. He that does best, knows best, for he sees the actions as
they are in themselves and circumstances, he does (...), he sees the bottom by
diving into them, (...)
Psalm. 119.130. (pethac pethaiim) the very entrance into the command gives
light, the Door is a Window to him that has a weak sight; even those things
Men have formerly ridiculed, practice has reconciled them to be their Diana
and great delight. As the Gnostick in Clem. Alex. who could not taste lewdness
till he was in all evil, as it is Prove. 5.14. If wicked practices darken the mind
(as all the works of darkness do) than holy actions illuminate the Soul.

2. The exercise of holy Duties advances light; every step a Man takes he
goes into a new Horizon, and gets a further prospect into Truth. Motion is
promoted by motion, actions breed habits, habits fortify the powers, the new
life grows stronger and fuller of Spirit. The yoke of Christ is easier,
smoother and lighter, by often wearing it; this anoints us with the oil of
gladness, and makes the ways of Wisdom pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. Life and light
are nearly related, John 1.4. The life was the light of Men, Acts 1.1. These
things Jesus first did, then taught, and so he was mighty in Deed and in Word,
Luke 24.19. very airing and motion heateth to a flame, this made his light
burn, verse. 32. and shine too. Truth incarnate, in action, seems a lively
resemblance of God in flesh; the unfolding a doubt to another, has often
expounded and resolved it to the proponent.

3. If any be in danger of Error, or got into an ill way, keeping up warm
Duties, Meditation and Prayer will keep him in, or help him out; communion with
the Saints is an admirable antidote against sin or Error. As in a Team of
Horses if one lash out of the way; if the other hold their course they will
draw the former to the right path, 1 John 2.20. ye have an unction, and ye know
all things; when there are Antichrists and great Apostacies, keeping to Duty,
like keeping the Road, preserves us from bypath. I remember a Snowy night
when many wandering homeward were frozen to death; A Shepherd feeling himself
foiled, by often falling, set down his Crook in one point and beat a path
round, and so preserved his life and kept him out of precipices and ditches.
And we have a promise of light, if we press to the mark and prize of our high
calling, Phil. 3.15. carry the Goal in your Eye and it will direct you a path
where there is none upon a plain. Sincerely aim at Gods glory, and your Souls
salvation, and you shall not miss your way. If in any thing you should miss it,
and be otherwise minded, God will reveal even this unto you. Yea, our great
Lord and Master assures us, John 7.17. He that does the will of God, he shall
know the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or I speak of my self. But if Men will
make bold with God and Conscience, and act for their own ends and glory, they
rob God of his supremacy, and will lose both their way and their end. He that
walks uprightly has God for his guard and guide, with devout Zachary he is
within the Vail, and if he be in a mistake God will reveal it to him: For the
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will make them know his
Covenant, Psalm. 25.14. Go to thy Oracle and pray, and a ray of heavenly light
shall direct you, as the Wise-mens Star, to the holy Jesus; their minds are
Gods candles, Prove. 20.27. and as Father of Lights, he will light them when
they approach him with ardent supplication.

Thirdly, I am to show that Christian charity and reception will sooner win
weak ones to the Truth, than rigid Arguments, for so the Apostle advises them
who were to deal with people weak in Faith and strongly zealous for Ceremonies,
dispute not with them but receive them first.

1. In regard opposition breeds oppositions; a Man will never believe that he
Loves his Soul, who cuts his purse, belies his actions, torments his Body.
Passion begets passion, but love only kindles love; when Men do hotly Dispute
they jostle for the way, and so one or both must needs leave the path of Truth
and Peace. The Saw of contention reciprocated, with its keen teeth eats up
both Truth and Love. For such contentions are rather for Victory than Truth.
Now passion does nothing well, which made one Emperor say over his Alphabet to
get the Dominion over his anger; Ahasuerus fanned himself in his Garden, Esth.
7.7. and he in Plutarch would not smite his Servant because he was angry.
Passionated persecution makes only Hypocrites become Proselites; and in their
Breasts also lodge such a revenge as will be satisfied one time or another,
upon them who have made them offer violence to their Consciences. Religion is a
free choice upon judgment, or it is not Religion, therefore it gets in by
persuasion, not persecution. Yet it is strangely true, they who are so tender of
their own Wills, that God must not touch them unless by Argument, yet laxate
themselves to Club Law with their Brethren, not content with a moral swasion.

2. Loving converse takes off those prejudices which hinder Men's minds from a
true knowledge of others Principles and Practices; which at a distance seem
horrid and monstrous Opinions and Practices, when as a little free converse
with them breeds quite other apprehensions. The Papists picture the
Protestants as bruits with Tails, as Devils with Horns, to terrify the Vulgar;
but knowing Merchants dare trust them: So some Protestants have represented the
Puritans as Pestilent and Seditious persons, as Mad and having a Devil, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did John Baptist and Christ; but the plain hearted people
saw thorough those pious frauds and tricks, and were astonished at their
Doctrine and Life, when they healed Souls and Bodies on the Sabbath day.

3. Sincere love and converse breeds a good opinion of persons who differ
from us; they can taste humility, meekness and kindness better than the more
speculative Principles of Religion. These get into Men's affections, and so bore
away into their judgments, and cause them to alter their minds. Two Heads, like
two Globes, touch but in one point, the whole Bodies at a distance; but two
Hearts touch in plano, and fall in with each other in all points. Love opens
the Heart and Ear to cooler consideration and second thoughts. The Spirit of
God directed Elijah, 1 Kings 19.12. not in the strong Wind which rent Rocks and
Mountains, nor in the Earthquake or Fire, but in the silent whisper or tranquil
voice.

Use of Instruction, How to carry our selves toward them who are weak in the
Faith, in these days, and doubtless it is a sickly season when there are so
many feverish heats among us. I will not say, what once a Romanist said to me,
That these are the spuria vitulamina, the Bastard frisks of our Reformation in
Henry the Eighths days; But I rather think the violent endeavors after
External Uniformity without the Inward, the smothering of the industrious Bees
in one Hive, was a great cause of their castling into several Swarms. Threshing
the Corn has driven it out of the Floor, and the grasping so hard the Granes,
all into the Hands and Power of some, has made them creep out through their
Fingers. Rigid Impositions, and violent Prosecutions and Exactions of
Conformity to things extra Scriptural and Divine Institution, and without any
manifest tendency to Edification, have and will make fractions without end. As
D. W. said, Till Men be Infallible, and the World Immutable, moderation
becomes every Man who is in his senses and considers himself.

1. There are some who have all Faith, believe incredibly, as that Katharina
Senensis, praying for a new Heart, she had her real Heart cut out of her Body,
and after some days had a new Heart formed by Christ, put into her. That making
a cross on the Body with a Finger drives the Devil away. That a Priest by
these words, this is my Body, transubstantiateth the Bread into the Body of
Christ, and so he offers that Sacrifice to deliver Souls out of Prison; and
then by his Dirges conducteth them to Paradise.

2. Others have no Faith at all, as that Infallible one who said, What vast
Wealth has this Fable of Christ acquired to the Church! So when some had
Disputed about the Immortality of the Soul, most gravely determined in a Verse,
Et redit in nihilum quod fuit ante nihil.

That which is nothing must needs come to nothing. And I fear there are more
Atheists than Papists, who seem to believe all on the Stage, nothing in their
retiring thoughts. We are not bound to receive such into our Bosoms or
Communion, lest we sting our own Breasts; out of charity to our Souls we must
take heed of receiving such.

3. But there are others who seem seriously to believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel, yet have a weakness in their judgments about little things. These we
must receive and instruct them, Romans 14.17. That the Kingdom of God is not in
Meat or Drink, but Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Show them
all kindness, pity them, pray for them, and let them see, Col. 2.5. Nothing but
your order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ.

1. Stand fast and fixed in the good Word of God, which is settled for ever in
Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. as the Copy of the Divine Nature and Law. Stand having
your Loins girt about with Truth, Ephesians. 6.14. and having on the Breastplate of
Righteousness. This is the grand and perfect rule of Faith, Worship and Life.
Keep within these Trenches and you have an assurance of protection. I know no
other method possible to Peace but in an universal resolution to impose nothing
upon others but what Christ himself has imposed, what Scripture commands,
Matthew. 28.20. Teach Men to observe whatever I have commanded you, and then I am
with you to the end of the World. This is a Minister of Christ's Commission, and
he cannot look for Christ to be with him, if he go either contrary to, beyond,
or not according to his instructions. Let this be first done, and then Men may
consider whether any thing further be necessary or convenient. Let us
therefore, in the Name of God, beg his holy Spirit, whom Christ has promised,
and that he shall lead us into all Truth, John 16.13. He is the only infallible
Interpreter of Gods mind, He shall take of mine, says our Savior, and show it
unto you, verse. 14. Then read the Scriptures as Christ himself did, Luke 4.16.
his custom was, he went into the Synagogue, on the Sabbath day, and stood up
for to read, and when the Book of God was delivered to him, he read the 61 of
Isaiah, a Prophecy of himself, and so he closed the Book and gave it to the
Minister; then he expounded and applied it to the present circumstances, That
he came to preach to the poor, heal the broken hearted, give deliverance to the
captives, open the Eyes of the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised.
Oh blessed pattern for every Minister of Christ to follow! And sing the Psalms
or Hymns, as we read he also did, Matthew. 26.30. and the Ancient Christians, as
Euscbius and Pliny also says, Used early to sing Psalms and Praise to Christ,
Administer the Sacraments in the very words of Christ: But guard the Door that
the grossly ignorant and profane may not come in, 1 Cor. 5.11. If any degenerate
so, as first and second admonition reclaim not, shut the Door upon him, Let him
be to you as an Heathen or a Publican, for so is the rule of Christ, Matthew.
18.17. Every Natural Body, and Civil Body, or Society, has a power to take in
or cast out, such as are for the Benefit or Damage of the Community, to
Infranchise or Disfranchise when there is just cause. The Church is Christ's
Body, and a Society of visible Saints. Most Epistles to the Churches in
Scripture were directed to the Saints at Rome, Romans 1.7. at Corinth, 1 Epist.
1.2. and so on. Now if out of Custom, carnal Policy, Flattery, or other ill
motive, the whole World must come into the Church, and the Church and the World
( which lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19.) are one thing; then in comes also
the god of this World too, And will Christ have fellowship with Devils? If
Swearers, Drunkards, and Unclean persons come in, it may be a Market-house, or
House for Merchants, but not the Lords-house, John 2.16. A Drunken Saint, an
Unclean Saint, a Swearing Saint, if they be not contradictions, yet they sound
very harshly. No sin has less tentation of gain or pleasure than Swearing and
Cursing, and no sin more debaucheth the Conscience, and strips it even to
Atheism of all reverence; and for Men to have no more pity on them than to let
them cram damnation down their Throats, as soon as they have made the
imprecation on themselves is dreadful. I remember an Ear-witness told me, he
heard Dr. Ham. preach before King Charles the First, at Oxford, when his
Affairs were at a low ebb, and he told him, While God-dam-me led the Van, and
the Devil confound me brought up the Rear, he would be routed in all his
designs. And they are very unlikely to be good Subjects to Princes who are open
Rebels to the Laws of God and Men, and their own reason. But let us keep to the
Rule, the Principles of Christ's Kingdom are Rock and Steel, not calculated for
the soft Meridians of this World, but can abide and stand in all times the
same; they need not load the secular Arm to hold them up. Let us be faithful
Executors of our Lords Will, not Lawmakers or Testament-makers, for untempered
Mortar will be always falling and fowling them who daub it up. Let us therefore
stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; he and his Truth
only can make us free from all Errors and mistakes, John 8.36. Let us be of the
same mind which was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. then nothing will be done out
of contention or vainglory. But God will make good his own Promise, all his
shall have one Heart and one way, Jer. 32.39. then our Lords Prayer shall be
answered, Joh. 17.21. That all his may be one, as he and his Father are One.
One in the World, that is impossible; but let them be one in us, in our
appointments, and then the World will believe that thou have sent me; otherwise
Divisions will breed such tentations, as if Christianity was no reality. Now
what can any Man say against this method? Who are they that make Divisions, but
they that make more Duties in Religion and Worship than Christ has made? They
who build upright on the foundations, or they who will jet over and drop upon
their Neighbors?

2. As we should keep to our rule, so practice accordingly; let the one Foot of
the Compass keep the Center, and the other walk the rounds; let us live so as
M. Felix says, Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus; We do not talk great things but
live them. Exact walking would be as a miracle in this loose age, to confirm
the Faith we do profess; Catechize your Children and Servants, as Abraham did,
Genesis 18.19. to walk in the way of the Lord; so most excellent Theophilus was
Cathechized and instructed in the things of Christ, Luke 1.4. Pray in your
Families; daily bread you have twice at least, then you are directed to daily
prayer for it. If Nations and Kingdoms have Gods wrath poured out upon them
that call not on his Name, Psalm. 79.6. then surely Families much less can
escape. We and our Families need daily Grace, daily Pardon as well as daily
Bread; therefore unless we dare die in our Sins we should daily pray; for in
Gods hands is our breath, and his are all our ways, Dan. 7.23. who then dare
breath a day without compassing him about with Prayer and Praises? And let us
adorn our Profession of Godliness with honesty, Tit. 2.10. 1 Timothy 2.2. Labor
to think as near to the truth of things and actions as you can, and as they are
in themselves, Job 26.3. then speak and declare the thing as it is in your
mind, Jos. 14.7. then do as you speak, Psalm. 15.3. (...), simplifie your self,
in Epictetus's phrase, from all composition of Frauds, Policies and Hypocrisy;
then besure you be just and do as you would have others do to you, the grand
skale of Righteousness; if Men would but weigh their Thoughts, Words and
Actions by this standard of equity, Matthew. 7.12. how would this make Ministers,
Lawyers, Physicians, and all others, take as much care of Peoples Souls, Bodies
and Estates as of their own? then would come that golden age wherein they would
have, if not so many dirty Fees, yet a cleaner and a greater reward of Peace of
Conscience and joy in God. Let us all be humble, meek, and patient, as our
Lord, modest in Apparel, and all civil Conversation, as those that resolve to
walk in Christ as they have received him, Col. 2.6. and to wear him as they
have put him on, Romans 13.14. 1 Timothy 2.9. This Primitive simplicity would revive
charity, which is frozen to pieces in this cold Age, this being the fulfilling
of the Law, Romans 13.10. All the commands of God must needs be broken, by the
very want of it. When all is done live so accurately, Ephesians. 5.15. as if you
were to be justified by your works; and then as unprofitable Servants cast your
selves wholly on Free Grace in Christ, Luke 17.10. least by the conceit of any
merit, when you have anointed our Saviors feet, you fling the box at his Head,
and rob him of his Priestly Office and Crown.

As for disputing of Controversies, let your discourses be rather in private,
than before others, that you argue in Love to the Souls of your Brethren, not
for Victory and Triumphing over their infirmities. The Jewish Rabbis say, He
deserves Hellfire who puts his Brother to the blush. Therefore in meekness
of Wisdom argue with your week Brethren, that Christ was faithful in Gods House
or Church, Heb. 3.2. in commanding all things necessary for Salvation, and the
Worshipping of God in Spirit and Truth; that Paul had declared to the Ephesians
all the counsel of God, and kept back nothing that was profitable to them, Acts
20.20, 27. therefore we may safely venture in this bottom; and that those Men
who will venture to tender God a Worship which he has not commanded, they take
upon them to be wiser than God, Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and can tell
what will please God, better than himself can. If with Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.33.
they will set up a Worship of their own devising, to keep up his Golden Calves;
they must have very low thoughts of God, as if he was taken with our voluntary
humility, in fancies and postures, rather than the simplicity as it is in
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. when he has told us, the words his Father had given him,
he had given to his Disciples, John 17.8. all other Traditions may very safely
be rejected.

Yet neither must we altogether abandon all Disputations, our Savior indeed
never called for a Sword but to cut his way to a Miracle, but remit them to the
Schools or the Press: Honest Men may wear Swords, and learn to use them,
because Robbers ride armed. But let such take heed they dispute not with God,
his Providence or Grace. I remember a Disputation publicly in the Schools,
where the Respondent in Divinity defended this Question, That the term of a
Man's life was moveable, he was presently seized with a Fever and died. I say
not, that Providence determined the Question. But if all times, much more ours,
are in Gods hands, Acts 1.7. not our own, Eccles. 8.8. When Ames was invited to
be Professor at Franeker, Episcopius then at Leyden, in his Lectures in the
Schools, read against Ames, who hearing of it, sent a bold Challenge, That he
would come to Leyden, and before the University answer Episcopius 's arguments,
and oppose his determinations, if he pleased: I know not why Truth may not be
as bold as Error. But Episcopius wisely refused and declined it, knowing that
Ames had a Scholastical Head, and close Arguments would rout loose Harangues,
his Fist would be too hard for his Palm: Those Doctrins are born up in the
World by looseness of manners; they who are so much for Free Will, are for
Free-life too. Never more of that Doctrine, and never more licentiousness, which
argues some kindred and relation to be betwixt them. But as D. H. has said of
Old, If Arminians be not the most godly, holy, heavenly, every way the best of
Men, they are the very worst, since they assert they have so much power to be
good. Sir W. T. observes where this Opinion was born, it was looked upon as a
midway betwixt Papists and Protestants, the Blew to that Bow-die. But I am sure
Gods Word says, He works in us to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. and the Tenth
Article is expressly against this Doctrine of Free Will.

When Free Will and Wit have got the Ascendant over true Reason and Conscience,
Satan will ride Post his last Stage: for they will convert Men into Foxes and
Wolves, to deceive and devour each other, yea into Devils to torment and insult
over one another miseries. And whoever above ground will build upon these
self-centered Globes, shall find their foundation will soon roll and slide from
under them. When the Earth was corrupt then came the Flood of Waters, Genesis
6.13. Christendom is so corrupted from true Christianity, that these Giants in
wickedness and violence presage a deluge of Blood. But if when the Son of Man
comes he shall find no Faith on the Earth, then his coming is near. Then come
Lord Jesus, and put an end to all violence, fraud and wickedness, and shut up
Hell in Hell, Hypocrites and Devils in the same Cloisters, Matthew. 24.51. and
gather thy Saints together to Worship thee in the beauty of Holiness. Be thou
the desire and delight of all Nations, build thy own Jerusalem (for Men cannot
or will not) and appear in thy glory, Psalm. 102.2. shine in it as the
perfection of Beauty, Psalm. 50.2. make it an habitation of Justice, and a
mountain of Holiness, Jer. 31.23. and a City of Truth, that it may be said,
Jehovah Shamma, the Lord is there, and has the third time whipped the Traders
out of his Temple, and set it upon everlasting Foundations; all Administrations
being according to his own measure, that Golden Rule, and the pattern in the
Mount.

Quest. How is Sin the most formidable Evil? SERMON XI.
Genesis XXXIX. 9. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
THE Text is the Record of Joseph's innocence and victory, Consecrated in
Scripture for the honor and imitation of that excellent Saint in succeeding
Ages. He had been tried by sharp afflictions, the conspiring envy of his
Brethren, and the cruel effects of it, banishment and servitude, and possessed
his Soul in patience: here, he was encountered by a more dangerous temptation
in another kind, and preserved his integrity. Adversity excites the Spirit to
serious recollection, arms it with resolution to endure the assaults, and stop
the entrance of what is afflicting to nature: pleasure by gentle insinuations
relaxes the mind to a loose security, softens and melts the Heart, and makes it
easily receptive of corrupt impressions.

Now to represent the Grace of God that preserved Joseph, in its radiance and
efficacy, we must consider the several circumstances that increased the
difficulty of the double Victory, over the Tempter and himself.

1. The Tempter, his Mistress, who had divested the native modesty of the
blushing Sex, and by her Caresses and blandishments sought to draw him to
compliance with her desires. Her superior quality might seem to make her
request have the force of a Command over him.

2. The Solicitation, lie with me. There are no sins to which there is a
stronger inclination in our corrupted nature, than to acts of sensuality. The
temptation was heightened by the lure of profit ^^d advancement, that he might
obtain by her favor, and interest in her Husband, who was an eminent Officer
in the Egyptian Court: Regeramus ipsae crimen, atque ultro impiam Venerem
arguamus: scelere velandum est scelus. Senec. Hippolitus.
and the denial would be extremely provoking, both in respect it seemed to be a
Contempt injurious to her Dignity, and was a disappointment of her ardent
expectation. Hatred and revenge upon refusal, are equal to the lust of an
imperious whorish Woman. We read the effects of it, in this Chapter; for upon
his rejecting her desires, rapt up with rage; and to purge her self, she turned
his accuser, wounded his reputation, deprived him of his liberty, and exposed
his life to extreme peril. Joseph chose rather to lie in the dust than to rise
by sin.

3. The Opportunity was ready, and the object present: it is said, there was
none of the Men of the House within. She had the advantage of secrecy to fasten
the temptation upon him. When a sin may be easily committed, and easily
concealed, the restraints of fear and shame are taken off, and every breath of
a temptation is strong enough to overthrow the Carnally minded. The purest and
noblest Chastity is from a principle of Duty within, not constrained by the
apprehension of discovery and severity.

4. The Continuance of the temptation: she spoke to him day by day. Her
Complexion was lust and impudence, and his repeated denials were ineffectual to
quench her incensed desires, the black fire that darkened her mind. She caught
him by the garment, saying, Lie with me: she was ready to prostitute her self,
and ravish him.

5. The Person tempted, Joseph, in the flower of his age, the season of
sensuality, when innumerable by the force and swing of t^eir vicious appetites
are impelled to break the holy Law of God.

6. His Repulse of the temptation was strong and pere^^tory: How can I do this
great wickedness? He felt no sympathy, n^ sensual tenderness, but expressed an
impossibility of consenting to her guilty desire. We have in Joseph exemplified
that property of the Regenerate, He that is born of God cannot sin: by a sacred
potent instinct in his breast, he is preserved not only from the consummate
acts, but recoils from the first offers to it.

7. The Reasons are specified of his rejecting her polluting motion. Behold my
Master knows not what is with me in the House, and he has committed all that
he has to my Hands, there is none greater in his House than I, neither has he
kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou art his Wife; How then can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against God? 'Twas a complicated crime of
injustice and uncleanness: a most injurious violation of the strongest ties of
duty and gratitude to his Master, and of the sacred marriage Covenant to her
Husband, and the foulest blot to their persons: Therefore how can I commit a
sin so contrary to natural Conscience, and supernatural grace, and provoke God?
Thus I have briefly considered the narrative of Joseph's temptation, and that
Divine grace preserved him unspotted from that contagious fire, may be
resembled to the miraculous preserving the three Hebrew Martyrs unsinged, in
the midst of the flaming furnace. The patience of Job, and the Chastity of
Joseph are transmitted by the Secretaries of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, to be
in perpetual remembrance and admiration.

From this singular instance of Joseph, who was neither seduced by the
allurements of his Mistress, nor terrified by the rage of her despised
affection to sin against God: I shall observe two general Points.

I. That temptations to sin how alluring soever, or terrifying, ought to be
rejected with abhorrenc.

II. That the fear of God is a sure defense and guard against the strongest
temptation.

I will explain and prove the first, and only speak a little of the second in a
branch of the Application.

I. That temptations to sin how alluring soever, or terrifying, are to be
rejected with abhorrence.

There will be Convincing proof of this, by considering two Things.

1. That sin in its Nature, prescinding from the train of woeful effects, is the
greatest Evil.

2. That Relatively to us, it is the most pernicious destructive Evil.

1. That sin considered in it self is the greatest Evil. This will be evident
by considering the general Nature of it, as directly opposite to God the
supreme good. The definition of sin expresses its essential Evil; it is the
transgression of the Divine Law, and consequently opposes the rights of Gods
Throne, and obscures the Glory of his Attributes that are exercised in the
Moral Government of the World. God as Creator is our King, our Lawgiver and
Judge. From his propriety in us arises his just title to Sovereign Power over
us: Psalm. 100.
Know ye that the Lord he is God, it is he that made us, not we our selves, we
are his people and the Sheep of his pasture. The Creatures of a lower order,
are incapable of distinguishing between Moral Good and Evil, and are determined
by the weight of Nature to what is merely sensible, and therefore are incapable
of a Law to regulate their choice. But Man who is endowed with the powers of
Understanding and Election, to conceive and choose what is Good, and reject
what is Evil, is governed by a Law, the declared will of his Maker: accordingly
a Law the rule of his Obedience, was written in his Heart.

Now sin the transgression of this Law, contains many great Evils?

1. Sin is a Rebellion against the Sovereign Majesty of God, that gives the
life of Authority to the Law. Therefore Divine Precepts are enforced with the
most proper and binding motives to obedience, I am the Lord. He that with
purpose and pleasure commits sin, implicitly renounces his dependence upon God,
as his Maker and Governor, overrules the Law, and arrogates an irresponsible
license to do his own will. This is expressed by those Atheistical designers, who
said, Psalm. i2.4.
With our Tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us.
The Language of Actions that is more natural and convincing than of Words,
declares that sinful Men despise the Commands of God, as if they were not his
Creatures and Subjects. What a dishonor, what a displeasure is it to the God
of glory, that proud dust should fly in his Face, and control his Authority?
Daniel 7.10. Psalm. 103.20.
He has ten thousand times ten thousand Angels that are high in dignity, and
excel in strength, waiting in a posture of reverence and observance about his
Throne, ready to do his will: How provoking is it for a despicable Worm to
contravene his Law, and lift his Hand against him? It will be no excuse to
plead the Commands of Men for sin: for as much as God is more glorious than
Men, so much more are his Commands to be respected and obeyed than Men's. When
there is an evident opposition between the Laws of Men and of God, we must
disobey our Superiors though we displease them, and obey our Supreme Ruler. He
that does what is forbidden, or neglects to do what is Commanded by the Divine
Law, to please Men, though invested with the highest Sovereignty on Earth, is
guilty of double wickedness: of impiety in debasing God, and idolatry in
deifying Men.

It is an extreme aggravation of this Evil, in that sin as it is a disclaiming
our homage to God, so it is in true account a yielding subjection to the Devil.
For, sin is in the strictest propriety his work. The original rebellion in
Paradise was by his temptation, and all the actual and habitual sins of Men
since the fall, are by his efficacious influence. He darkens the carnal mind, 2
Cor. 4.4.
and sways the polluted will, he excites and inflames the vicious affections,
Ephesians. 2.2.
and imperiously rules in the Children of disobedience. He is therefore styled
the Prince and god of this World. And what more contumelious indignity can
there be, than the preferring to the glorious Creator of Heaven and Earth, a
damned Spirit, the most cursed part of the Creation? It is most reasonable,
that the baseness of the Competitour, should be a foil to reinforce the luster
of Gods authority: yet Men reject God and comply with the tempter. O prodigious
perverseness!

2. Sin vilifies the ruling Wisdom of God, that prescribed the Law to Men.
Although the dominion of God over us be Supreme and Absolute, yet it is exercised
according to the council of his Will, by the best means, 1 Timothy 1.17
for the best ends: he is accordingly styled by the Apostle, The eternal King,
and only wise God. It Is the glorious Prerogative of his Sovereignty and Deity,
that he can do no wrong: for he necessarily acts according to the excellencies
of his Nature. Particularly, his Wisdom is so relucent in his Laws, that the
serious contemplation of it, will ravish the sincere minds of Men into a
compliance with them. They are framed with exact congruity to the Nature of
God, and his relation to us, and to the faculties of Man before he was
corrupted. From hence the Divine Law being the transcript not only of Gods Will
but his Wisdom, binds the understanding and will, our leading faculties, to
esteem and approve, to consent and choose all his precepts as best. Now sin
vilifies the infinite understanding of God with respect both to the precepts of
the ^^w, the rule of our duty, and the sanction annexed to confirm its
oblig^^^on* It does constructively tax the precepts as unequal, too rigid ^^d
severe a confinement to our wills and actions. Thus the impious Rebels
complain. The ways of the Lord are not equal, as injurious to their liberty,
and not worthy of observance. What St. James says, to correct the
uncharitable, censorious Humor of some in his time, James 4.11.
He that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the
law and judges the law; as an imperfect and rash rule, is aplicable to Sinners
in any other kind. As an unskillful Hand by straining too high, breaks the
strings of an Instrument, and spoils the Music, so the Strictness and Severity
of the Precepts, breaks the harmonious Agreement between the Wills of Men and
the Law, and casts an Imputation of Imprudence upon the Lawgiver. This is the
implicit Blasphemy in Sin.

Besides, the Law has Rewards and Punishments to secure our Respects and
Obedience to it. The wise God knows the Frame of the reasonable Creature, what
are the inward Springs of our Actions, and has accordingly propounded such
Motives to our Hope and Fear, the most active Passions, as may engage us to
perform our Duty. He promises his favor that is better then life, to the
Obedient, and threatens his wrath, that is worse then death to the rebellious.
Now Sin makes it evident, that these Motives are not effectual in the Minds of
Men: And this reflects upon the Wisdom of the Lawgiver, as if defective in not
binding his Subjects firmly to their Duty; for if the Advantage or Pleasure
that may be gained by Sin, be greater than the Reward that is promised to
Obedience, and the Punishment that is threatened against the Transgression, the
Law is unable to restrain from Sin, and the Ends of Government are not
obtained. Thus Sinners in venturing upon forbidden things, reproach the
Understanding of the Divine Lawgiver.

3. Sin is a Contrariety to the unspotted Holiness of God. Of all the glorious
and benign Constellation of the Divine Attributes that shine in the Law of God,
his Holiness has the brightest Luster. God is Holy in all his Works, but the
most venerable and precious Monument of his Holiness is the Law. For the
Holiness of God consists in the Correspondence of his Will and Actions with his
moral Perfections, Wisdom, Goodness and Justice; and the Law is the perfect
Copy of his Nature and Will. The Psalmist who had a purged Eye, saw and admired
its Purity and Perfection. Psalm. 19. Psalm. 119.140.
The Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes. The word is very
pure, therefore thy servant loves it. It Is the perspicuous and glorious Rule of
our Duty without Blemish or Imperfection. The Commandment is holy, just and
good. It injoyns nothing but what is absolutely Good, without the least
Tincture of Evil. The Sum of it is set down by the Apostle, to live soberly,
that is, to abstain from any thing that may stain the Excellence of an
understanding Creature: To live righteously, which respects the State and
Situation wherein God has disposed Men for his Glory: It comprehends all the
respective Duties to others, to whom we are united by the Bands of Nature, or
of civil Society, or of Spiritual Communion: And to live godly, which includes
all the internal and outward Duties we owe to God, who is the Sovereign of our
Spirits, whose Will must be the Rule, and his Glory the End of our Actions. In
short, The Law is so formed, that prescinding from the Authority of the
Lawgiver, its Holiness and Goodness lays an eternal Obligation on us to obey
it. Now Sin is not only by Interpretation, a Reproach to the Wisdom and other
Perfections of God, but directly and formally a Contrariety to his infinite
Sanctity and Purity; for it consists in a not doing what the Law commands, Romans
11.
or doing what it forbids. It Is therefore said, That the carnal mind is Enmity
against God: An active, immediate and irreconcilable Contrariety to his holy
Nature and Will: From henee there is a reciprocal Hatred between God and
Sinners: God is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, without an infinite
Displicence, the Effects of which will fall upon Sinners; and though it is an
Impiety hardly conceivable, Romans 1.
yet the Scripture tells us, that they are haters of God. It Is true, God by the
transcendent Excellence of his Nature is incapable of suffering any Evil, and
there are few in the present State, arrived to such Malice, as to declare open
Enmity and War against God. In the Damned this Hatred is explicit and direct,
the Fever is hightned to a Frenzy, the blessed God is the Object of their
Curses and eternal Aversation: If their Rage could extend to him, and their
Power were equal to their Desires, they would Dethrone the most High. And the
Seeds of this are in the Breasts of Sinners here. As the fearful Expectation of
irresistible and fiery Vengeance increases, their Aversation increases. They
endeavor to raze out the Inscription of God in their Souls, and to extinguish
the thoughts and sense of their Inspector and Judge. They wish he were not
All-seeing and Almighty, but Blind and Impotent, incapable to vindicate the
Honor of his despised Deity. The Fool has said in his heart there is no God:
The Heart is the Fountain of Desires, and Actions interpret the Thoughts and
Affections, from whence the Inference is direct and conclusive, that habitual
Sinners, who live without God in the world, have secret Desires; there was no
Sovereign being, to observe and require an account of all their Actions. The
radical cause of this Hatred is from the Opposition of the sinful polluted
Wills of Men, to the Holiness of God; for that attribute excites his Justice,
and Power, and Wrath, to punish Sinners. Therefore the Apostle says, They are
enemies to God in their minds through wicked works. The naked representing of
this Impiety, that a reasonable Creature should hate the blessed Creator for
his most Divine Perfections, cannot but strike with Horror. O the Sinfulness of
Sin!

4. Sin is the Contempt and Abuse of his excellent Goodness. This Argument is
as vast as God's innumerable Mercies, whereby he allures and obliges us to
Obedience: I shall restrain my Discourse of it, to three things wherein the
Divine Goodness is very Conspicuous, and most ungratefully despised by Sinners.

1. His Creating Goodness. It Is clear without the lea st shadow of Doubt, that
nothing can give the first being to it self; for this were to be before it was,
which is a direct Contradiction: and it is evident that God is the sole Author
of our Beings. Our Parents afforded the gross matter of our compounded Nature,
but the Variety and Union, the Beauty and Usefulness of the several Parts,
which is so Wonderful, that the Body is composed of as many Miracles as
Members, was the Design of his Wisdom, and the Work of his Hands. The lively
Idea and perfect Exemplar of that regular Fabric, was modeled in the Divine
Mind. This affected the Psalmist with Admiration: I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, Psalm. 139.14, 15, 16.
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. Thine eyes did
see my substance, yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them. And Job observes, Thy hands have made me and fashioned me round about.
Job 10.8.
The Soul, our principal Part, is of a celestial Original, inspired from the
father of Spirits. The faculties of Understanding and Election, are the
indelible Characters of our Dignity above the Brutes, and make us capable to
please, and glorify, and enjoy him. This first and fundamental Benefit, upon
which all other Favors and Benefits are the Superstructure, was the Effect
from an eternal Cause, his most free Decree, that ordained our Birth in the
spaces of time. The Fountain was his pure Goodness; there was no necessity
determining his Will, he did not want external declarative Glory, being
infinitely happy in himself, and there could be no superior Power to constrain
him. And that which renders our Maker's Goodness more free and obliging, is the
consideration he might have created Millions of Men, and left us in our Native
Nothing; and, as I may so speak, lost and buried in perpetual Darkness. Now,
what was Gods end in Making us? Certainly it was becoming his infinite
Understanding, that is, to communicate of his own Divine Fullness, and to be
actively glorified by intelligent Creatures. Accordingly it is the solemn
Acknowledgement of the Representative Church. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to
receive glory, and honor, and power: For thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they were created. Who is so void of rational Sentiments, Rev.
4.11.
as not to acknowledge it is our indispensable Duty, Our reasonable service, to
offer up our selves, an entire living Sacrifice to his glory? What is more
natural, according to the Laws of incorrupt Natures (I might say, and of
corrupt Nature, for the Heathens practiced it) than that Love should correspond
with Love, as the one descends in Benefits, the other should ascend in
Thankfulness. As a polished Looking-glass of Steel, strongly reverberates the
Beams of the Sun shining upon it, without losing a spark of light, thus the
understanding Soul should reflect the Affection of Love upon our blessed Maker,
in Reverence, and Praise, and Thankfulness. Now Sin breaks all those Sacred
Bands of Grace and Gratitude, that engage us to love and obey God. He is the
just Lord of all our Faculties Intellectual and Sensitive, and the Sinner
employs them as Weapons of Unrighteousness against him. He preserves us by his
powerful gracious Providence, which is a renewed Creation every Moment, and the
Goodness he uses to us, the Sinner abuses against him. This is the most
unworthy, shameful and monstrous Ingratitude. This makes forgetful and
unthankful Men, more brutish than the dull Ox, and the stupid Ass, who serve
those that feed them; nay, sinks them below the insensible part of the
Creation, that invariably observes the Law and order prescribed by the Creator.
Astonishing Degeneracy! Hear O Heavens, give ear, O earth, I have nourished and
brought up Childen, and they have rebelled against me, was the Complaint of God
himself. The considerate Review of this, will melt us into Tears of Confusion.

2. 'Twas the unvaluable goodness of God to give his Law to Man, for his rule,
both in respect of the matter of the Law, and his end in giving it.

1. The matter of the Law, this as is forecited from the Apostle, is holy,
just, and good. It contains all things that are honest, and just, and pure, and
lovely, and of good report, whatsoever are virtuous and praiseworthy. In
obedience to it the innocence and perfection of the reasonable creature
consists. This I do but glance upon, having been considered before.

2. The end of giving the Law. God was pleased upon Man's creation, by an
illustrious revelation to show him his duty, to write his Law in his Heart,
that he might not take one step out of the circle of its precepts, and
immediately sin and perish. His gracious design was to keep Man in his love;
that from the obedience of the reasonable creature, the divine goodness might
take its rise to reward him. This unfeined and excellent goodness, the sinner
outragiously despises: for what greater contempt can be expressed against a
written Law, than the tearing it in pieces, and trampling it underfoot? And
this constructively the sinner does to the Law of God, which contempt extends
to the gracious giver of it. Romans 7.10.
Thus the Commandment that was ordained unto Life, by sin was found unto Death.

3. Sin is an extreme vilifying of Gods goodness, in preferring carnal
pleasures to his favor, and Communion with him, wherein the life, the
felicity, the heaven of the reasonable creature consists. God is infinite in
all possible perfections, all-sufficient to make us completely and eternally
happy: he disdains to have any competitour and requires to be supreme in our
esteem and affections: the reason of this is so evident by Divine and Natural
light, that it is needless to spend many words about it. It Is an observation of
St. Austin Omnes Deos colendos esse sapienti. Cur ergo a numero caeterorum ille
rejectus est? nihil restat ut dicant, cur hujus Dei sacra recipere noluerint,
nisi quia solum se coli voluerit. Aug. de Consens. Evang. c. 17.
, That it was a rule amongst the Heathens, that a wise man should worship all
their Deities. The Romans were so insatiable in Idolatry, that they sent to
foreign Countries to bring the gods of several Nations: an unpolisht Stone, a
tame Serpent, that were reputed Deities, they received with great solemnity and
reverence. But the true God had no Temple, no Worship in Rome, where there was
a Pantheon dedicated to the honor of all the false gods. The reason he gives
of it is, that the true God who alone has Divine Excellencies, and Divine
Empire, will be worshipped alone, and strictly forbids the assumption of any into
his Throne. To adore any besides him is infinitely debasing, and provoking to
his dread Majesty. Now sin in its nature is a conversion from God to the
creature; and whatever the temptation be, in yielding to it, there is
signified, that we choose something before his favor. Sin is founded in bono
jucundo, something that is delectable to the carnal Nature: it is the universal
character of carnal Men, they are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God.
To some riches are the most alluring object. The young Man in the Gospel, when
our Savior commanded him to give his estate to the poor, and he should have
treasure in Heaven, went away sorrowful, as if he had been offered to his loss.
To others the pleasures that in strict propriety are sensual, are most
charming. Love is the weight of the Soul that turns it, not like a dead weight
of the Scales, but with election freely to its object: in the carnal balance
the present things of the World are of conspicuous moment, and outweigh
Spiritual and Eternal blessings. Although the favor of God be eminently all that
can be desired, under the notion of riches, or honor, or pleasure, and every
atom of our affection is due to him; yet carnal Men think it a cheap purchase
to obtain the good things of this World, by sinful means, with the loss of his
favor. This their actions declare. Prodigious folly! as if a few sparks struck
out of a Flint, that can neither afford light or warmth, were more desirable
than the Sun in its brightness. And how contumelious and provoking it is to
God, he declares in the most moving expressions; Be astonished, O ye Heavens,
Jer. 2.12, 13.
at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. For my
people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out broken cisterns that can hold no water. This
immediately was charged upon the Jews, who set up Idols of jealousy, and
adored them, rather than the glorious Jehovah: and in proportion, it is true of
all sinners; for every vicious affection prefers some vain object, before his
Love, and the enjoyment of his glorious presence, that is the reward of
obedience.

5. The sinner disparages the impartial Justice of God. In the Divine Law there
is a connection between sin and punishment; the evil of doing and the evil of
suffering. This is not a mere arbitrary constitution, but founded on the
inseparable desert of sin, and the rectitude of Gods nature, which unchangably
loves holiness, and hates sin. Although the threatening does not lay a strict
necessity upon the Lawgiver always to inflict the punishment; yet God having
declared his equal Laws as the rule of our duty, and of his judgment, if they
should be usually without effect upon offenders, the bands of Government would
be dissolved, and consequently the honor of his justice stained both with
respect to his nature and office: for as an essential attribute it is the
correspondence of his will and actions with his moral perfections, and as
Sovereign Ruler, he is to preserve equity and order in his Kingdom. Now those
who voluntarily break his Law, presume upon impunity. The first rebellious sin
was committed upon this presumption: God threatened, if you eat the forbidden
fruit you shall die: the Serpent says eat, and you shall not die, and assenting
to the temptation Adam fell to disobedience. And ever since Men are fearless to
sin upon the same motive. Psalm 50.
God charge the wicked, Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as
thy self: not concerned to punish the violation of his sacred Laws. The sinner
commits the Divine Attributes to fight against one another, presuming that
Mercy will disarm Justice and stop its terrible effects upon impenitent
obstinate sinners: From hence they become bold and hardnen'd in the continuance
of their sins. Deuteronomy. 29.17, 19, 20.
There is a root that bears gall and wormwood, and when the curse of the Law
is declared and denounced against sin, the wicked blesses himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, tho I walk in the imagination of my heart,
to add drunkenness to thirst. This casts such a foul blemish upon the Justice
of God, that he threatens the severest vengeance for it. The Lord will not
spare him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that
Man, and all the curses written in this book shall be upon him, and the Lord
shall blot out his name from under Heaven. Psalm 50.
Consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver.

6. The sinner implicitly denies Gods omniscience. There is such a turpitude
adhering to sin, that it cannot endure the light of the Sun, or the light of
Conscience, but seeks to be concealed under a mask of virtue, or a vail of
darkness. There are very few on this side Hell, so transformed into the
likeness of the Devil, as to be impenetrable by shame. What is said of the
Adulterer and Theif, sinners of greater guilt, and deeper dye, Job.
is true in proportion of every sinner: If a Man sees them, they are in the
terrors of the shadow of death. Now from whence is it that many who if they
were surpised in the actings of their sins, by a Child or a stranger, would
blush and tremble, yet although the holy God sees all their sins in order to judge
them, and will judge in order to punish them, are secure without any fearful or
shameful apprehensions of his presence? Did they steadfastly believe that their
foul villainies were open to his piercing, pure and severe Eye, they must be
struck with terrors, and covered with Confusion. Will he force the Queen before
my face, was the speech of the King inflamed with wrath, and the prologue of
Death against the fallen favorite. Would Men dare to affront Gods authority,
and outragiously break his Laws before his face, if they duly considered his
omnipresence and observance of them? it were impossible. And infidelity is the
radical cause of their inconsideration. It was a false imputation against Job,
but justly applied to the wicked, J^^ 22.13, 14
Thou say, How does God know, can he judge through the dark cloud? Thick
clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not. And such are introduced by the
Psalmist declaring their inward sentiments; The Lord shall not see, neither
shall the God of Jacob regard it.

Lastly, The sinner slights the power of God. This attribute renders God a
dreadful Judge. He has a right to punish, and power to revenge every
transgression of his Law. His judicial power is supreme, his executive is
irresistible. He can with one stroke dispatch the Body to the Grave, and the
Soul to Hell, and make Men as miserable as they are sinful. Yet sinners as
boldly provoke him, as if there were no danger. We read of the infatuated
Syrians, that they thought that God the Protector of Israel, had only power on
the Hills, and not in the Valleys, and renewed the War to their destruction.
Thus sinners enter into the lists with God, and range an Army of lusts against
the Armies of Heaven, and blindly bold run upon their own destruction. They
neither believe his all-seeing Eye, nor all-mighty Hand. They change the glory
of the living God into a dead Idol, that has Eyes and sees not, and Hands and
handles not, and accordingly his threatenings make no impression upon them.

Thus I have presented a true view of the evil of sin considered in it self:
but as Job says of God, how little a portion of him is known? May be said of
the evil of sin, how little of it is known? For in proportion as our
apprehensions are defective and below the greatness of God, so are they of the
evil of sin that contradicts his Sovereign will and dishonours his excellent
perfections.

2. Sin relatively to us, is the most pernicious and destructive Evil. If we
compare it with temporal Evils, it preponderates all that Men are liable to in
the present World. Diseases in our Bodies, disasters in our Estates, disgrace
in our Reputation, are in just esteem far less evil than the evil of sin: for
that corrupts and destroys our more excellent and immortal part: The vile Body
is of no account in comparison of the precious Soul. Therefore the Apostle
enforces his exhortation, Dearly beloved brethren, abstain from fleshly lusts,
that war against the Soul. The issue of this War is infinitely more woeful, than
of the most cruel against our Bodies and Goods, our Liberties and Lives: for
our Estates and Freedom if lost may be recovered; if the present Life be lost
for the cause of God, it shall be restored in greater luster and perfection;
but if the Soul be lost, it is lost for ever.

All temporal Evils are consistent with the love of God: Job on the dunghill,
roughcast with Ulcers, was most precious in Gods sight: Lazarus in the lowest
poverty, and wasted with loathsome Sores, was dear to his affections; a guard of
Angels was sent to convey his departing Soul to the Divine Presence. But sin
separates between God and us, who is the fountain of felicity, and the center
of rest to the Soul.

Other evils God who is our wise and compassionate Father and Physician, makes
use of, as Medicinal preparations for the cure of sin: and certainly the
Disease which would be the death of the Soul, is worse than the Remedy, though
never so bitter and afflicting to sense.

Sin is an evil of that malignity, that the least degree of it is fatal. If it
be conceived in the Soul, though not actually finished, it is deadly. One sin
corrupted in an instant angelical excellencies, and turned the glorious Spirits
of Heaven into Devils. It Is a poison so strong, that the first taste of it shed
a deadly taint and malignity into the veins of all mankind.

Sin is such an exceeding Evil, that it is the severest punishment Divine
Justice inflicts on sinners on this side Hell. The giving Men over to the power
of their lusts, is the most fearful judgment, not only with respect to the
cause, Gods unrelenting and unquenchable anger, and the issue, everlasting
destruction, but in the quality of the judgment. Nay, did sin appear as odious
in our Eyes as it does in Gods, we should account it the worst part of Hell it
self, the pollutions of the damned to be an evil exceeding the torments
superadded to them.

Sin is pregnant with all kinds of Evils, the seeds of it are big with
Judgments. The evils that are obvious to sense, or that are Spiritual and
Inward, Temporal and Eternal Evils, all proceed from sin, often as the Natural
cause, and always as the Meritorious. And many times the same punishment is
produced by the efficiency of sin, as well as inflicted for its guilt. Thus
uncleanness without the miraculous waters of Jealousy rots the Body, and the
pleasure of sin is revenged by a loathsome consuming Disease, the natural
consequence of it. Thus intemperance and luxury, shorten the lives of Men and
accelerate damnation. Fierce desires, and wild rage are fuel for the
everlasting fire in Hell. The same evils considered Physically are from the
efficiency of sin, considered legally are from the guilt of sin, and the
justice of God.

This being a point of great usefulness, that I may be more instructive, I will
consider the evils that are consequential to sin under these two Heads. 1. Such
as proceed immediately from it by Emanation. 2. Those evils, and all other as
the effects of Gods justice and sentence.

1. The evils that proceed immediately by emanation from it: and though some of
them are not resented with feeling apprehensions by sinners, yet they are of a
fearful nature. Sin has deprived Man of the purity, nobility, and peace of his
innocent state.

1. It has stained and tainted him, with an universal, intimate, and permanent
pollution. Man in his first Creation was holy and righteous: a beam of beauty
derived from Heaven was shed upon his Soul, in comparison of which sensitive
beauty is but as the clearness of Glass, to the luster of a Diamond. His
understanding was light in the Lord, his will and affections were regular and
pure, the Divine Image was impressed upon all his faculties, that attracted the
love and complacency of God himself. Sin has blotted out all his aimiable
excellencies, and superinduced the most foul deformity, the original of which
was fetched from Hell. Sinners are the natural Children of Satan, of a near
resemblance to him. The Scripture borrows comparisons to represent the defiling
quality of sin, from pollutions that are most loathsome to our senses: from
pestilential Ulcers, putrefying Sores, filthy Vomit, and defiling Mire. This
pollution is universal through the whole Man, Spirit, Soul and Body. It darkens
the mind, our supreme faculty, with a cloud of Corruption: it depraves the
will, and vitiates the affections. It Is a pollution so deep and permanent, that
the Deluge that swept away a World of sinners did not wash away their sins: and
the fire at the last day, that shall devour the dross of the visible World, and
renew the Heavens and the Earth, shall not purge away the sins of the guilty
Inhabitants. This pollution has so defiled and disfigured Man, who was a fair
and lovely type, wherein the skill and perfections of the Creator was
conspicuous, that it repented God, that he made Man. As an Artificer having
formed a surprising piece, either a Statue or Picture, wherein Art almost
equaled the life and luster of Nature; if it be torn or broken, throws it from
his sight with sorrow, impatient to see it so rudely defaced: thus God is said
to hide his face from sinners, to express his displeasure, as unwilling to
behold the Disparagement of his Masterpiece, the excellent Product of his
Wisdom and Power.

2. Sin has degraded Man from his native State and Dignity. Man by his
Extraction and Descent was the Son of God, a little lower than the Angels,
consecrated and crowned, as a Priest for the Service and Communion with his
glorious Maker, and as King over the World. But being in honor, he understood
not his dignity, his duty and felicity, and became like the beasts that perish.
By his Rebellion against his Creator, he made a Forfeitute of his Dominion, and
lost the Obedience of sensible Creatures, and the Service of Insensible; which
I only mention, and shall restrain my Consideration, to show how he is become
like the Beasts, as an Effect resulting from his Sin. He is divested of his
White Robe of Innocence, and his noblest Perfections, Reason and Religion.
Sense and Imagination, the leading Faculties in Brutes, are his Rulers: The
rational governing Powers of Man, have lost their superior Sway, and the Carnal
Passions rove without Reins to forbidden Objects. The lower Appetites are
predominant, which is the most ignominious and cruel Servitude wherein humane
Liberty can be entangled and fettered. His Understanding and Will, that were
capable of taking a flight for the Discovery and Fruition of celestial and
eternal things are debased, and limited to sensual perishing things, and derive
vilifying Qualities from them. He is earthly minded, his Aims, Contrivances,
Desires are fastened to the Earth: the divine Spark within him is covered under
Ashes. He is carnally minded, always studying and making provisions for the
flesh: This is a viler Debasement, than if the Counselors of State were
employed in the sordid Offices of the Kitchen or Stable. Nay, it is a Diminution
below the Rank of Beasts, for by nature they are incapable of directing their
Eyes and Desires toward Heaven; but Man is Brutish by his voluntary Sin. To
see the Head of a rapacious Wolf, or fierce Tiger, or lustful Horse joined to
the Body of a Man, how monstrous would it appear? But it is more unnatural and
ignominious, for Men, in whom Reason and Religion should govern, to resemble
them in the brutish Appetites of Lust and Rage; for there is a nearer Affinity
between the Body of a Man and of a Beast, that agree in the common sensible
Nature, than between the Immortal Spirit of a Man, and the Beasts that perish.
In short, Sin has enslaved Men to Satan an Infernal Fiend: They are taken
Captives by him at his pleasure: And which is the lowest Degradation, they are
the Servants of Corruption.

3. Sin has broke the sweet Peace and blessed Concord in the Soul, the Felicity
of our innocent State. Peace is the Tranquillity that results from Order and
Unity. In Man there was a regular Harmony of all his Faculties; the Affections
were Consonant with his Will, his Will with his Understanding, and his
Understanding with the Law of God. This was the inward State of his Soul in his
Creation; for having a derived being, it was natural and necessary, that he
should be appointed to his End, and receive his Rule for the obtaining it, from
the Understanding and Will of his Maker. Now whilst there was a Correspondence
in his Faculties, and their Operations with his Rule and End, the Will of God,
and the Glory of God, the Result of it, as well as the Reward of it, was
Spiritual Peace with God, Internal Peace with himself, External Peace with
others. Now Sin has dissolved this Unity, violated this sacred Order: And from
hence,

1. Peace with God, that consisted in his Favor and Friendship to us, and our
filial dependence upon him, which is the Spring of full and satisfying Joy, is
broke. God appears a fearful Enemy against the Sinners; the penal Effects of
his Wrath, I shall speak of distinctly under the second general: And that
Divine Calm in the Conscience, that Peace joined with the purest Pleasure, that
was the refleex of Gods Favor on the Soul, is changed into anxious
Apprehensions of his just Power to punish us. Guilt generates Fear, and Fear
Hatred, and both cause a woeful flight from God.

2. Internal Peace is broke by Sin. Whilst the Passions were subordinate to the
Empire of Reason, and in accord among themselves, there was perfect Peace; but
Sin has raised an intestine War in Man's Breast. The Law of the Members rebels
against the Law of the Mind: for there is no Man so prodigiously Wicked, and
spoiled of his primitive Endowments, but still there remains some Principles of
Morality in the Mind, P^^^^a hae^ ^^t ^^^io qu^^^ ^e j^d^^^ nem^ n^c^^^
ab^^^vi^.
so that his Conscience discovers and condemns the Vices he allows and
practices, which makes the Sinner uneasy to himself, and mixes Vinegar with
his Wine. Besides, since the Passions are disbanded, into what Confusion is Man
fallen? How Various how Violent are they, and often repugnant to one another?
How often do we change their Habits and Scenes in a day? Sometimes we are
vainly Merry, and then as vainly Sad; sometimes Desirous and then Averse, and
with respect to our selves, sometimes Pleased, sometimes Vexed, sometimes
Aimable, and sometimes Odious; we are more mutable than the Planet that is the
Emblem of Inconstancy. How often do Clouds of Melancholy darken the bright
Serenity of the Spirit, and cast a dreadful Gloom over it? How often do Storms
of Passion disturb its Tranquillity? The Breast of Man, that was the Temple of
Peace, is become a Den of Dragons; every exorbitant Affection tears and
torments him. It Is true, this is also a penal Effect from Divine Justice: There
is no peace says my God to the Wicked: With which that saying of St. Austin is
Consonant, Jussit Domine, and sic est, omnis inordinatus affectus est sibi
paena.

3. Sin has broke our Agreement with one another. Wh^^ there was a regular
Consent between the superior and lower Faculties in all Men, they were in Unity
among themselves, for they were perfectly alike. But the tumultuous and
tyrannical Passions have engaged them in mortal Enmity. It Is the account St.
James gives, From whence come wars and fightings among you? Come they not
hence, even of your Lusts, that war in your Members? Sin kindles and blows the
fire of discord, in Families, Cities, Kingdoms: Sin is the fury that brings a
smoking fireband from Hell, and sets the World into combustion. Ambition,
Avarice, the greedy desires of Rule and Revenge, have made the World a Stage of
not feigned, but the most bloody Tragedies. In this Men are not like, but worse
than the Beasts: for the fiercest Beasts of Africa or Hyrcania, have a respect
for their own likeness: though they devour others, yet they spare those of their
own kind: but Men are so degenerate as to be most cruel against their Brethren.
These are some of the Evils, that proceed from sin as their natural Cause. And
from hence it is evident, that sin makes Men miserable, were there no Hell of
torment to receive them in the next State.

2. I will consider the Evils consequent to sin, as the penal effects of the
sentence against sin: of Divine Justice that decrees it, and Divine Power that
inflicts it; and in these the sinner is often an active instrument of his own
misery.

1. The fall of the Angels is the first and most terrible punishment of sin.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, reserved in
chains of darkness to judgment. How are they fallen? From what height of glory
and felicity into bottomless perdition? How are they continually rackt and
tormented with the remembrance of their lost happiness? If a thousand of the
prime Nobility of a Nation were executed in a day, by the sentence of a
righteous King, we should conclude their crimes to be atrocious: innumerable
Angels dignified with the titles of Dominions and Principalities, were expelled
from Heaven, their native seat, and the sanctuary of life, and are dead to all
the joyful operations of the intellectual nature, and only alive to everlasting
pain.

One sin of pride or envy, brought this terrible vengeance; from whence we may
infer, how provoking sin is to the holy God. We read of King Vzziah that upon
his presumption to offer incense, he was struck with a Leprosy, and the
Priests thrust him out, and himself hasted to go out of the Temple: a
representation of the punishment of the Angels: by presumption they were struck
with a Leprosy, and justly expelled from the Celestial Temple, and not being
able to sustain the terrors of the Divine Majesty, they fled from his presence.
It Is said, God cast them down, and they left their own habitation.

2. Consider the penal effects of sin with respect to Man. They are
comprehended in the sentence of death, the first and second death, threatened
to deter Adam from transgressing the Law.

In the first Creation Man while innocent was immortal, for although his B^^y was
compounded of jarring Elements, that had a natural tendency to dissolution, yet
the Soul was endowed with such virtue, as to imbalm the Body alive, and to
preserve it from the least degree of putrefaction. But when Man by his
voluntary sin was separated from the fountain of life, the Soul lost its
derivative life from God, and the active life infused by its union into the
Body. It cannot preserve the natural life beyond its limited term. A righteous
retaliation. Thus the Apostle tells us, Sin came into the World, and death by
sin. Even infants who never committed sin, die having been conceived in sin.
And death brought in its retinue evils so numerous and various, that their
kinds are more than words to name and distinguish them. Man that is born of a
Woman is of few days, and full of trouble: at his birth he enters into a
labyrinth of Thorns, this miserable World, and his life is a continual turning
in it: he cannot escape being sometimes pricked and torn, and at going out of
it, his Soul is rent from the embraces of the Body. It Is as possible to tell
the number of the waves in a tempestuous Sea, as to recount all the tormenting
passions of the Soul, all the Diseases of the Body, which far exceed in number
all the unhappy parts wherein they are seated. What an afflicting object would
it be, to hear all the mournful lamentations, all the piercing complaints, all
the deep groans from the miserable in this present state? What a prospect of
Terror, to see Death in its various shapes, by Famine, by Fire, by Sword, and
by wasting or painful Diseases, triumphant over all mankind? What a sight of
woe, to have all the Graves and Charnel-houses opened, and so many loathsome
Carcasses, or heaps of dry naked Bones, the trophies of Death exposed to view?
Such are the afflicting and destructive effects of sin. For wickedness burns as
a fire: it devours the Briars and Thorns.

Besides other miseries in this life, sometimes the terrors of an accusing
Conscience seize upon Men, which of all evils are most heavy and overwhelming.
Solomon who understood the frame of humane Nature, tells us, The Spirit of a
Man can bear his infirmity: that is, the mind fortified by Principles of moral
Counsel and Constancy, can endure the assault of external Evils: but a wounded
Spirit who can bear? This is most insupportable when the sting and remorse of
the mind is from the sense of guilt: for then God appears an enemy righteous
and severe: and who can encounter with offended Omnipotence? Such is the
sharpness of his Sword, and the weight of his Hand, that every stroke is deadly
inward. Satan the cruel enemy of Souls, exasperates the wound. He discovers and
charges sin upon the Conscience, with all its killing aggravations, and
conceals the Divine mercy, the only lenitive and healing Balm to the wounded
Spirit. What visions of horror, what spectacles of fear, what scenes of sorrow
are presented to the distracted mind by the Prince of darkness? And which
heigthens the misery, Man is a worse enemy to himself than Satan: he falls upon
his own Sword, and destroys himself. Whatever he sees or hears, afflicts him,
whatever he thinks torments him. The guilty Conscience turns the Sun into
darkness, and the Moon into blood: the precious promises of the Gospel, that
assure favor and pardon to returning and relenting sinners, are turned into
arguments of despair, by reflecting upon the abuse and provocation of mercy,
and that the advocate in Gods bosom is become the accuser. Doleful state!
Beyond the conception of all, but those who are plunged into it. How often do
they run to the grave for sanctuary, and seek for death as a deliverance?

Yet all these anxieties and terrors are but the beginning of sorrows: for the
full and terrible recompenses of sin shall follow the Eternal Judgment,
pronounced against the wicked at the last day. It Is true the sentence of the
Law is past against the sinner in this present state, and temporal evils are
the effects of it, but that sentence is revocable: at death the sentence is
ratified by the Judge upon every impenitent sinner; it is decicive of his state,
and involves him under punishment for ever: But the full execution of judgment
shall not be till the public general sentence pronounced by the everlasting
Judge, before the whole World. It exceeds the compass of created thoughts to
understand fully the direful effects of sin in the Eternal State: For who knows
the power of Gods wrath? The Scripture represents the punishment in
expressions, that may instruct the mind, and terrify the imagination: that may
work upon the Principles of Reason and Sense by which Men are naturally and
strongly moved.

1. Sinners shall be excluded from Communion with the blessed God in Heaven, in
whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore. In the clear and transforming vision of his glory, and the intimate
and indissolvable union with him by love consists the perfection and
satisfaction of the immortal Soul. The felicity resulting from it, is so entire
and eternal, as God is great and true, who has so often promised it to his
Saints. Now sin separates lost Souls forever from the reviving presence of God.
Who can declare the extent and degrees of that evil? For an evil rises in
proportion to the good of which it deprives us: it must therefore follow, that
Celestial blessedness being transcendent, the exclusion from it is
proportionably evil: and as the felicity of the Saints results both from the
direct possession of Heaven, and from comparison with the contrary state: so
the misery of the damned arises, both from the thoughts of lost happiness, and
from the lasting pain that torments them.

But it may be replied, if this be the utmost evil that is consequent to sin,
the threatening of it is not likely to deter but few from pleasing their corrupt
appetites: for carnal Men have such gross apprehensions, and vitated
affections, that they are careless of Spiritual glory and joy. They cannot
taste and see how good the Lord is: nay, the Divine Presence would be a torment
to them: for as light is the most pleasant quality in the World to the sound
Eye, so it is very afflicting and painful to the Eye when corrupted by a
suffusion of humors.

To this a clear answer may be given: in the next state where the wicked shall
for ever be without those sensual objects which here deceive and delight them,
their apprehensions will be changed; they shall understand what a happiness the
fruition of the blessed God is, and what a misery to be incapable of enjoying
him, and expelled from the Celestial Paradise. Luke 15.28.
Our Savior tells the infidel Jews, There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and you your selves shut out. How will they pine with envy
at the sight of that triumphant felicity of which they shall never be
partakers? Depart from me, will be as terrible a part of the judgment, as
eternal Fire.

2. Gods justice is not satisfied in depriving them of Heaven, but inflicts the
most heavy punishment upon Sense and Conscience in the damned: for as the Soul
and Body in their state of union in this life, were both guilty, the one as the
guide, the other as the instrument of sin, so it is equal when reunited they
should feel the penal effects of it. The Scripture represents both to our
capacity, by the worm that never dies, and the fire that never shall be
quenched: and by the destroying of Body and Soul in Hell fire. Sinners shall
then be tormented, wherein they were most delighted: they shall be invested
with those objects, that will cause the most dolorous perceptions in their
sensitive faculties. The lake of Fire and Brimstone, the blackness of darkness,
are words of a terrible signification, and intended to awaken sinners to fly
from the wrath to come. But no words can fully reveal the terrible ingredients
of their misery: the punishment will be in proportion to the glory of Gods
Majesty that is dishonored and provoked by sin, and the extent of his power.
And as the Soul was the principal, and the Body but an accessory in the works
of sin, so its capacious faculties will be far more tormented, than the more
limited faculties of the outward senses. The fiery Attributes of God shall be
transmitted through the glass of Conscience, and concentered upon damned
Spirits: the fire without them is not so tormenting as this fire within them.
How will the tormenting passions be inflamed? What rancour, reluctance, and
rage against the power above that sentenced them to Hell? What impatience and
indignation against themselves for their wilful sins the just cause of it? How
will they curse their Creation, and wish their utter extinction as the final
remedy of their misery? But all their ardent wishes are in vain: for the guilt
of sin will never be expiated, nor God so far reconciled as to annihilate them.
As long as there is justice in Heaven, and fire in Hell, as long as God and
Eternity shall continue, they must suffer these torments, which the strength
and patience of an Angel cannot bear one hour. From hence we may infer, what an
inconceivable evil there is in sin, and how hateful it is to the most High,
when God who is love, who is styled the Father of mercies, has prepared and
does inflict such Plagues for ever for the transgression of his holy Laws: and
such is the equity of his judgment, that he never puni^^es offenders above
their desert.

I shall now apply this Doctrine, by reflecting the light of it upon our minds
and hearts.

1. This discovers how perverse and depraved the minds and wills of Men are, to
choose sin rather than affliction, and break the Divine Law for the obtaining
temporal things. If one with an attentive Eye regards the generality of
mankind, what dominion present and sensible things have over them, how securely
and habitually they sin in prosecution of their carnal aims, as if the Soul
should not survive the Body, as if there were no Tribunal above to examine, no
Judge to sentence and punish sinners, if he has not marble bowels, it will
excite his compassion or indignation. What comparison is there between the good
things of this World, and of the next in degrees or duration? Aerie honor,
Sensual pleasures, and Worldly riches, are but the thin appearances of
happiness, shadows in masquerade, that cannot afford solid content to an
immortal Spirit: the blessedness of Heaven replenishes with everlasting
satisfaction. What proportion is there between the light and momentary
afflictions here, and a vast eternity filled with indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, and desperate sorrow? What stupid Beast, what monster
of a Man, would prefer a superficial transient delight, the pleasure of a short
dream, before ever-satisfying joys? Or to avoid a slight evil venture upon
destruction? Yet this is the true case of sinners: if they can obtain the World
with the loss of Heaven, they count it a valuable purchase, if they can
compound so, as to escape temporal troubles, tho involved under guilt that
brings extreme and eternal misery, they think it a saving bargain. Amazing
solly! Either they believe or do not, the recompenses in the future state: if
they do not, how unaccountable is their impiety? If they do, it is more
prodigious they do not feel the powers of the World to come so as to regulate
their lives and control the strongest temptations to sin against God. A
wicked believer is more guilty than a wicked infidel. How could we conceive it
possible, were it not visible in their actions, that Men who have judicative
faculties to compare and distinguish things, and accordingly be moved with
desires or fears, should with ardent affections pursue despicable vanities, and
neglect substantial happiness, and be fearful of the shadows of dangers, and
intrepid in the midst of the truest dangers! He is a desperate gamester that
will venture a Crown at a throw, against some petty advantage: yet this is
really done by sinners who hazard the loss of Heaven for this World: they hang
by slender strings, a little breath that expires every moment, over bottomless
perdition, and are insensible, without any palpitation of Heart, any sign of
fear.

How strong is the delusion and concupiscence of the carnally minded? The lusts
of the flesh bribe and corrupt their understandings, or diverts them from
serious consideration of their ways and the issues of them. From hence it is
they are presently entangled and vanquished by sensual temptations; they are
cozened by the colors of good and evil, and Satan easily accomplishes his most
pernicious and envious design, to make Men miserable as himself. How just is
the reproach of Wisdom* How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and
fools hate knowledge? The light of reason and revelation shines upon them, they
have not the excuse of ignorance, but the righteous and heavy condemnation of
those who love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. It Is
no mean degree of guilt to extenuate sin, and make an apology for sinners. The
wisest of Men, tells us, Fools make a mock of sin: they count it a fond
niceness, a silly preciseness to be fearful of offending God. They boast of
their deceitful arts and insinuations, whereby they represent sin as a light
matter, to corrupt others. But it is infinitely better to be defective in the
subtilty of the Serpent, than in the innocence of the Dove. A mere natural, who
is only capable of sensitive actions, and is distinguished from a Brute by his
shape, is not such a forlorn sot, as the sinful fool. What the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of one who gets riches unjustly, that he shall leave them, and in the
end die a fool, will be verified of the wilful obstinate sinner: in the end he
shall by the terrible conviction of his own mind be found guilty of the most
woeful folly: and how many have acknowledged in their last hours, when usually
Men speak with the most feeling and least affectation, how have they in words
of the Psalmist arraigned themselves, So foolish have we been, and like beasts
before thee?

2. From hence we may be instructed of the wonderful patience of God, who bears
with a World of sinners, that are obnoxious to his justice, and under his power
every day. If we consider the number and aggravations of Men's sins, how many
have out-told the hairs of their Heads in actual transgressions, how mighty and
manifest their sins are, that the Deity and Providence are questioned for the
suspending of vengeance, and yet that God notwithstanding all their enormous
injuries, and violent provocations is patient toward sinners, it cannot but
fill us with admiration. His Mercy like the cheerful light of the Sun visits us
every Morning, with its benign influences; his Justice, like Thunder, rarely
strikes the Wicked. He affords not only the supports of life, but many comforts
and refreshments to the unthankful and rebellious.

It Is not from any defect in his Power that they are not consumed, but from the
abundance of his Mercy. He made the World without any strain of his Power, and
can as easily destroy it: he has an innumerable company of Angels attending his
Commands, and every Angel is an Army in strength, one of them destroyed a
hundred and fourscore and five thousand in a Night: he can use the most
despicable and weakest Creatures, Frogs, and Lice, and Flies, as instruments of
vengeance to subdue the proudest Pharaoh, the most obstinate Rebels. -- He sees
sin wherever it is, and hates it wherever he sees it, yet his Patience
endures th^^ crying sins, and his long sufferance expects their repentance. The
Lord is not slack, as some Men count slackness, but he is long-suffering to
usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. He spares sinners with such indulgence, in order to their
Salvation. It Is deservedly one of his Royal Titles, the God of Patience. Our
fierce Spirits are apt to take fire and revenge for every injury real, or
supposed; but the great God, who is infinitely sensible of all the indignities
offered to his Majesty, defers his anger, and loads them with his benefits
every day. What is more astonishing than the riches of his Goodness, unless it
be the perverse abuse of it by sinners to harden themselves in their impieties?
But although his Clemency delays the punishment, the sacredness and constancy of
his Justice will not forget it: when patience has had its perfect work, Justice
shall have a solemn triumph in the final destruction of impenitent unreformed
sinners.

3. The Consideration of the Evil of Sin, so great in it self, and pernicious
to us, hightens our Obligations to the Divine Mercy, in saving us from our
sins, and an everlasting Hell the just Punishment of them. Our Loss was
unvaluable, our Misery extreme, and without infinite Mercy, we had been under
an unremediable necessity of Sinning and Suffering for ever. God saw us in this
wretched and desperate State, and his eye affected his heart, in his pity he
redeemed and restored us. This is the clearest Testimony of pure Goodness: for
God did not want external Glory, who is infinitely Happy in his own
Perfections: he could, when Man revolted from his Duty, have created a new
World of Innocent Creatures: for infinite Power is not spent nor lessened by
finite Productions, but his undeserved and undesired Mercy appeared in our
Salvation. The way of accomplishing it, ren^ers Mercy more Illustrious: for to
glorify his Justice, and preserve the Honor of his Holiness unblemished, he
laid upon his Son, the Iniquity of us all. This was Love that passes all
Understanding: Our Savior speaks of it with admiration; God so loved the
world, and hated Sin, that he gave his only begotten Son to dye for it, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

And how dear are our Engagements to Jesus Christ? The Judge would not release
the Guilty without a Ransom, nor the Surety without Satisfaction, and the Son
of God most compassionately and willingly gave his precious Blood to obtain our
Deliverance. If his Perfections were not most aimable and ravishing, yet that
he died for us, should infinitely endear him to us. To those who believe he is
precious: to those who have felt their undone Condition, and that by his Merits
and Mediation, are restored to the Favor of God, he is eminently precious. Who
can break the Constraints of such Love? If there be a spark of reason, or a
grain of unfeigned Faith in us, We must judge, that if one died for all, then
all were dead, and those that live, should live to his Glory who died for their
Salvation.

Add to this, that in the Sufferings of Christ there is the clearest
Demonstration of the Evil of (...), and how hateful it is to God, if we
consider the Dignity of his Person, the Greatness of his Sufferings, and the
innocent recoilings of his humane Nature from such fearful Sufferings. He was
the eternal Son of God, the Heir of his Fathers Love and Glory, the Lord of
Angels; he suffered in his Body the most ignominious and painful Death, being
nailed to the Cross in the sight of the World: The Sufferings of his Soul were
incomparably more afflicting: For though heavenly Meek he endured the Derision
and cruel Violence of his Enemies with a silent Patience, yet in the dark
Eclipse of his Fathers Countenance, in the desolate state of his Soul, the Lamb
of God opened his Mouth in that mournful Complaint, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? His innocent Nature did so recoil from those fearful
Sufferings, that with repeated ardency of Affection, he deprecated that bitter
Cup: Abba Father, all things are possible to thee, let this cup pass from me:
He addressed to the Divine Power and Love, the Attributes that relieve the
Miserable, yet he drank off the dregs of the Cup of Gods Wrath. Now we may from
hence conclude, how great an Evil Sin is, that could not be expiated by a
meaner Sacrifice, then the offering up the Soul of Christ to atone incensed
Justice; and no lower a Price, than the Blood of the Son of God, the most
unvaluable Treasure could Ransom Men who were devoted to Destruction.

4. The consideration of the evil of sin in it self and to us, should excite us
with a holy circumspection to keep our selves from being defiled with it. It Is
our indispensable duty, our transcendent interest to obey the Divine Law
entirely and constantly. The tempter cannot present any motives, that to a
rectified mind are sufficient to induce a consent to sin and offend God. Let
the scales be even, and put into one all the delights of the senses, all the
pleasures and honors of the World, which are the Elements of carnal felicity,
how light are they against the enjoyment of the blessed God in glory? Will the
gain of this perishing World, compensate the loss of the Soul and Salvation for
ever? If there were any possible comparison between empty deluding vanities,
and celestial happiness, the choice would be more difficult, and the mistake
less culpable, but they vanish into nothing in the comparison; so that to
commit the least sin that makes us liable to the forfeiture of Heaven, for the
pleasures of sin that are but for a season, is madness in that degree that no
words can express. Suppose the tempter inspires his Rage into his Slaves, and
tries to constrain us to Sin by Persecution; how unreasonable is it to be
dismayed at the Threatenings of Men, who must dye, and who can only touch the
Body, and to despise the terrors of the Lord, who lives for ever and can punish
for ever? Methinks we should look upon the perverted raging World, as a swarm
of angry Flies, that may disquiet, but cannot hurt us. Socrates, when
unrighteously prosecuted to Death, said of his Enemies, with a Courage becoming
the Breast of a Christian, They may Kill me, but cannot Hurt me. How should
these Considerations raise in us an invincible Resolution and Reluctance
against the Tempter, in all his Approaches and Addresses to us? And that we may
so resist him, as to cause his flight from us, let us imitate the excellent
Saint, whose Example is set before us.

1. By possessing the Soul with a lively and solemn Sense of Gods Presence, who
is the Inspector and Judge of all our Actions. Joseph repelled the Temptation
with this powerful Thought, How shall I sin against God? The fear of the Lord
is clean, it is a watchful Sentinel, that resists Temptations without, and
suppresses Corruptions within: It Is like the Cherubim placed with a flaming
Sword in Paradise, to prevent the Re-entry of Adam when guilty and polluted.
For this end we must, by frequent and serious Considerations, represent the
Divine Being and Glory in our Minds, that there may be a gracious Constitution
of Soul; this will be our Preservative from Sin: for although the habitual
thoughts of God are not always in act, yet upon a Temptation they are presently
excited, and appear in the view of Conscience, and are effectual to make us
reject the Tempter with Defiance and Indignation.

This holy Fear is not a mere judicial Impression, that restrains from Sin, for
the dreadful Punishment that follows; for that servile affection, though it may
stop a Temptation, and hinder the Eruption of a Lust into the gross act, yet it
does not renew the Nature, and make us Holy and Heavenly. There may be a
respective dislike of Sin with a direct affection to it. Besides, a mere
servile Fear is repugnant to Nature, and will be expelled if possible.
Therefore, that we may be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, we must
regard him in his endearing Attributes, his Love, his Goodness and Compassion,
his rewarding Mercy; and this will produce a filial Fear of Reverence and
Caution, lest we should offend so gracious a God. As the natural Life is
preserved by grateful Food, not by Aloes and Wormwood which are useful
Medicines; so the Spiritual Life is maintained by the comfortable Apprehensions
of God, as the Rewarder of our Fidelity in all our Trials.

2. Strip Sin of its Disguises, wash off its flattering Colors, that you may
see its native Ugliness. Joseph's reply to the Tempter, How shall I do this
great wickedness? Illusion and Concupiscence are the Inducements to Sin: When a
Lust represents the Temptation as very alluring, and hinders the Reflection of
the mind, upon the intrinsic and consequential Evil of Sin, it is like the
putting Poison into the Glass: but when it has so far corrupted the mind, that
Sin is esteemed a small Evil, Poison is thrown into the Fountain. If we
consider the Majesty of the Lawgiver, there is no Law small, nor Sin small,
that is the Transgression of it. Yet the most are secure in an evil course, by
conceits that their Sins are small. It Is true, there is a vast difference
between Sins in their nature and Circumstances: there are insensible Omissions
and accusing Acts, but the least is Damnable. Besides, the allowance and number
of Sins reputed small, will involve under intolerable Guilt. What is lighter
than a grain of Sand? you may blow away a hundred with a Breath, and what is
heavier than a heap of Sand condenst together? It Is our Wisdom and Duty to
consider the Evil of Sin in its essential Malignity, which implies no less,
than that God was neither wise nor good in making his Law, and that he is not
just and powerful to vindicate it: And when tempted to any pleasant Sin, to
consider the due Aggravations of it, as Joseph did, which will control the
Efficacy of the Temptation. I shall only add, that when a Man has mortified the
lusts of the flesh, he has overcom the main part of the infernal Army that Wars
against the Soul. Sensual objects do powerfully and pleasantly insinuate into
carnal Men, and the affections are very unwillingly restrained from them. To
undertake the cure of those, whose Disease is their pleasure, is almost a vain
attempt: for they do not judge it an evil to be regarded, and will not accept
distastful remedies.

3. Fly all tempting occasions of sin. Joseph would not be alone with his
Mistress. There is no virtue so confirmed, and in that degree of eminence, but
if one be frequently engaged in vicious Society, it is in danger of being
eclipst and controlled by the opposite vice. If the Ermins will associate with
the Swine, they must lie in the mire: if the Sheep with Wolves, they must learn
to bite and devour: if Doves with Vultures, they must learn to live on the
prey. Our surest guard is to keep at a distance from all engaging snares. He
that from carelessness or confidence ventures into temptations, makes himself
an easy prey to the tempter.

And let us daily pray for the Divine Assistance to keep us from the evil of
the World; without which all our resolutions will be as ineffectual as ropes of
sand, to bind us to our duty.

5. The consideration of the evil of sin is a powerful motive to our solemn and
speedy Repentance. The remembrance of our original and actual sins, will
convince us, that we are born for repentance. There are innumerable silent
sins, that are unobserved and do not Alarm the Conscience, and although a true
Saint will neither hide any sin, nor suffer sin to hide it self in his breast,
yet the most holy Men in the World, have great reason with the Psalmist to say
with melting affections, who can understand his errors, O cleanse me from my
secret sins, discover them to me by the light of the Word, and cover them in
the blood of the Redeemer: There are sins of infirmity and daily incursion,
from which none can be perfectly freed in this mortal state: these should
excite our watchfulness, and be lamented with true tears: There are crying
sins, of a crimson guilt, which are to be confessed with heartbreaking sorrow,
confounding shame, and implacable antipathy against them, and to be forsaken
for ever. Of these, some are of a deep die in their nature, and some from the
circumstances in committing them; some are of a heinous nature, and more
directly and expressly renounce our duty, and more immediately obstruct our
Communion with God. As a mud-wall intercepts the light of the Sun from shining
upon us. 2. Some derive a greater guilt from the circumstances in the
commission. Such are, 1. Sins against knowledge: for according to the
ingrediency of the will in sin, the guilt arises. Now when Conscience
interposes between the carnal Heart and the temptation, and represents the evil
of sin, and deters from compliance, and yet Men will venture to break the
Divine Law, this exceedingly aggravates the offense; for such sins are
committed with a fuller consent, atd are justly called rebellion against the
light. And the clearer the light is, the more it will increase the disconsolate
fearful darkness in Hell.

2. Sins committed against the Love as well as the Law of God are exceedingly
aggravated. To pervert the benefits we receive from God to his dishonor, to
turn them into occasions of sin which were designed to endear obedience to us,
to sin licentiously and securely in hopes of an easy pardon at last, is
intensive of our guilt in a high degree. This is to poison the antidote, and
make it deadly. There is a Sacrifice to reconcile offended Justice, but if Men
obstinately continue in sin, and abuse the Grace of the Gospel, there is no
Sacrifice to appease exasperated Mercy.

3. Sins committed against solemn promises and engagements to forsake them,
have a deeper die: for perfidiousness is joined with this disobedience. The
Divine Law strictly binds us to our duty, antecedently to our consent; but when
we promise to obey it, we increase our obligations, and by sinning break double
chains. In short, any habitual allowed sin, induces a heavy guilt, for it
argues a deeper root and foundation of sin in the Heart, a stronger inclination
to it, from whence the repeated acts proceed, which are new provocations to the
pure Eyes of God. Accordingly in repenting reflections, our sorrow should be
most afflicting, our humiliation deeper, our self-condemnation most severe for
those sins which have been most dishonorable to God, and defiling to us. Not
that we can make any satisfaction for our sins, tho we should fill the Air with
our sighs, and Heaven with our tears, but it becomes us to have our sorrows
enlarged in some proportion to our unworthiness. And this mournful disposition
prepares us for the grace of God. The Law does not allow repentance, but exacts
entire obedience: it is the privilege of the Gospel that repenting sinners are
assured of forgiveness: without this qualification it is inconsistent with the
Majesty, Purity, and Justice of God to extend pardoning Mercy to Sinners: for
they will never value, nor humbly and ardently seek for Mercy, till they feel
the woeful effects of sin in their Conscience; only the stung Israelite would
look to the brazen Serpent: and this is requisite to prevent our relapsing into
sin: for the dominion of sin being founded in the love of pleasure, the proper
means to extinguish it is by a bitter repentance: the Heart is first broken for
sin, and then from it.

To Conclude, Let us renew our repentance every-day: let not the wounds of our
Spirits putrify: let not the Sun go down upon Gods wrath: let us always renew
the applications of Christ's blood that alone can cleanse us from Sin.

The Case, or Question, which comes to be spoken unto this morning, is; Quest.
How may Private Christians be most helpful, to promote the entertainment of the
Gospel? SERMON XII.
Colossians IV. 5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without --
YE have heard the Question; And, (as I conceive) a due attendance unto the
words read, may lead us far, toward the Resolution of it. And, for that reason,
was this Text chosen. I design not, therefore, to frame a set Discourse upon
it, but only to lay it, as a groundwork, to support that which I have to
offer, toward the Answering of the Question propounded.

We have, before us then, a serious Exhortation, [Walk in wisdom, toward them
that are without] And therein we may observe,

1. The Persons, to whom the Apostle does direct it: And, they are private
Christians. This is apparent; (1.) In that, here is no intimation given, that
he intended any other. Not one of those Characters are set upon them, whereby
the Pastors, or Guides of the Church use to be distinguished from the Community
of Believers. (2.) The Duties, which he exhorts them unto, may undoubtedly, and
ought to be performed by private Christians: As, To continue instant in prayer,
and to watch in the same with thanksgiving, verse 2. To pray, in special, for
the Apostle himself, that he might receive Divine Assistance, and be blessed
with success, in the Ministry of the Gospel, verse 3, 4. To walk in wisdom,
toward them that are without, redeeming the time, verse 5. That their speech be
always with grace -- ver. 6. With all which, the same persons are charged. Now,
to walk in wisdom toward them that are without, is a Duty of a great latitude.
And if it comprehend the promoting of their Conversion, and Salvation, (as
certainly it does, having an aptitude, tendency, and efficacy to help it on.)
Then must private Christians take themselves to be concerned therein: For, to
them is this Exhortation directed. And so we have gained a very considerable
point. That we may, from this Text, charge the Duty upon the Consciences of
private Christians, in the name, and authority of Jesus Christ. 2. We have an
account of the Persons, with respect to whom, in a special manner, private
Christians are counseled [to walk wisely.] And they are described by this
Periphrasis: [Them that are without] i. e. Such as had not as yet entertained
the Gospel, nor professed subjection to it, but still continued in a state of
Infidelity. This is clear, from 1 Cor. v. 12, 13. What have I to do, to judge
them also, that are without? Do not ye judge them that are within? But them
that are without God judges. The sum whereof is this: That scandalous
Christians are to be corrected by Church Censures, when milder remedies prove
ineffectual. But those flagitious persons, who are out of the Pale of the
Church, are to be left to the judgment of God, and of the Civil Magistrates.
Thus we are advanced one step farther. For we have discovered that those to
whom private Christians may be very helpful, may be such, as are without. i. e.
Heathen, or Infidels, and therefore they must not cast off all care of them.

3. We are to enquire, what is that special work, and business, in the
disposal, and management whereof, private Christians are charged [To walk
wisely toward them, that without.] I suppose, none are so weak, as to surmize,
that the Apostles intent, and meaning, was, to caution them, to make sure, and
advantageous bargains, when they traded with Infidels, who being false and
crafty, might be likely to overreach them. This was too low, for the Apostles
Spirit. It was something of a more sublime import, and tendency, viz. To
admonish, and excite private Christians so to demean themselves in all things,
that they might beget, even in the Heathen themselves, a due veneration for the
Gospel, and a love, and liking of that holy Religion, which they professed.
And, to enforce this his Counsel, the Apostle did set them a fair example, in
his own practice, 1 Cor. x 33. Even as I please all men, in all things, not
seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. And
hence, we learn further, That private Christians in their negotiations with
Heathens, and Infidels should not mind only, the enriching of themselves, but
chiefly, the promoting of the Conversion of those poor miserable Souls to the
Faith of Jesus Christ.

4. In order to the winning over of Infidels to Christ, private Christians
ought sedulously, to endeavor to promote the admission of the Gospel among
them. For the Gospel is the glorious Chariot, in which Christ is carried about
the World. And, that it may be entertained among them, to procure the Preaching
of it to them. For that is Gods method; and the Apostles way of reasoning, is
clear, and strong, Romans x. 14, 15. How shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach,
except they be sent? Here, then are many things wherein private Christians may
be very helpful. As in seeking out and procuring those, who may preach the
Gospel among them: Encouraging, and supplying those who give up themselves to
that blessed work: In disposing those poor creatures, (as much as they may)
toward the Reception of the Gospel, and preventing, or removing all impediments
that might obstruct their entertainment of it. This shows us, In what private
Christians should desire, and endeavor to be Helpful, viz. In promoting the
entertainment of the Gospel.

5. The last thing (the former four being established and admitted) is to
enquire, How private Christians may be most helpful herein? The Text gives a
general Direction when it enjoins them to walk in wisdom, toward them that are
without. And this will administer to us occasion, to lay out this general
direction, more distinctly, and particularly. Thus, I hope, the opening of the
Text has reflected some light upon the Question, and all that I have to offer
may be gathered up in this Observation:

Private Christians, walking in wisdom, toward them them that are without, may
be exceeding helpfu l, to promote the entertainment of the Gospel among them.
This, they may do and more. For they may be helpful to promote their
Conversion, and Salvation. To further the entertainment of the Gospel among
them, is but the Means: To promote their Conversion, and Salvation is the End.
And the Means are for the end. Now, it is expressly affirmed, That a Private
Believer may save an Infidel, 1 Cor. vii. 16. For what know thou, O Wife,
whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or, how know thou, O Man, whether thou
shall save thy Wife? i. e. The believing party may be induced to cohabit with
the unbeliever, upon a hopeful prospect, that it is possible to conquer them by
love, to attract them to have an esteem for holiness, by an exemplary
conversation, and to obtain Gods grace for them, by ardent prayers, and so be
the Means of saving their Souls. The Apostle Peter exhorts Christian Women, who
were yoaked with unbelievers, to become eminent for their Modesty, Chastity,
Humility and Respectfulness to their Husbands, by the same argument, 1 Pet.
iii. 1, 2. Likewise, ye Wives, be in Subjection to your own Husbands, that if
any obey not the word, they also may, without the word, be won by the
conversation of their Wives: while they behold your chaste conversation, coupled
with fear. Christian graces being so exercised, that they may be seen, in their
proper luster, are excellent Orators, and have a mighty power to persuade. It
is more to live virtue, than to commend it. Let me have leave to say to women
professing godliness, (as the Apostle styles them, 1 Timothy: ii. 10.) O, live to
such an eminent pitch of holiness, that ye may raise an admiration of you, in
the judgments of such, as otherwise, would have no great reverence for
religion, and give them occasion to say (as it is reported that Libanius an
Heathen Philosopher, did) Proh, Quales faeminas habent Christiani! Oh, what
excellent women have these Christians!

The Correspondence between the Text, and the Question, having been (as I
think) sufficiently insisted upon; I shall now apply my self, to give a direct,
and satisfactory answer, to the Question propounded. And that I may speak to
it, the more intelligibly, and profitably, I shall consider,

1. The Persons mentioned in it; and they are [private Christians.]

2. Their Duty, and work; and that is [to be helpful, to promote the
entertainment of the Gospel.]

3 The way, that they are to take, and the Means that they are to make use, of,
that they may be most helpful, in the carrying on of that blessed work.

1. The Persons specified. And they are [private Christians.] In which, is
intimated, (1.) Their general Character [as Christians] (2.) The restrictive
term that is added, to denote their special circumstance, as they are [private
Christians] which limits our Enquiries, or calls on us, to speak more
specially, at least, of the Duty, and work of private Christians, in the
undertaking mentioned in the Question.

(1.) It is supposed, That Christians only, will be willing, or proper to be
made use of, in this holy work. We may conclude, that they who reject the
Gospel, and put away Salvation from them, (as those did, who are mentioned,
Acts 13.46.) will never (while they continue in that temper, and disposition)
promote the entertainment of the Gospel, but will endeavor, to obstruct, and
hinder it.

But all Christians (in the most comprehensive latitude) both stand obliged in
point of Duty, and may also, Eventually, be helpful, to promote the spreading
of the Gospel, even every one, who names the name of Christ, 2 Timothy ii. 19.
Or, that is called by his name, as, Jer. xiv. 8. Even, those Christians as are
such, only by External profession, tho they remain destitute, of Internal, and
Real Sanctification, may be helpful herein, by their common Gifts, their
Interests, their Services, and by contributing their Assistance, and
Encouragement, to those, who are engaged in this holy work. And they may be
influenced by such Motives, and Inducements, as may excite, and engage them
thereunto. Such as these (for ought I know) may be admitted to contribute their
help to Build the Temple of the Lord, and are not to be excluded. For,
probably, Christ's Aphorism, Mark ix. 40. He that is not against us, is on our
part, may be understood of such. But, how far such may be Accepted, or
Rewarded, falls not under our present Enquiry. This, I presume, will be
admitted by all, That such only as are Christians indeed (as Christ said of
Nathanael, John i. 47. Behold an Israelite, indeed) are the only Persons, who
are rightly principled and will be found sincerely affected to this blessed
work, and will be most vigorously Active, in carrying it on. This may suffice
touching the Persons, under their general Character, as [Christians.]

(2.) Their special circumstance, as they are [Private Christians] whereby they
are distinguished from such as are invested with public Offices. Such are
Christian Rulers, and Magistrates, who are the Ministers of God, who bear the
Sword; and such as are called to preach the Gospel, who are Ministers of the
Word. I confess, these come not, directly, within the compass of our Question,
for that concerns [Private Christians;] neither yet ought they wholly to be
excluded out of it: because they are Christians, and therefore are not silently
to be passed over. And so I shall say something, yet but little of them.
Doubtless, both Christian Magistrates, and Ministers of the Gospel, are as much
obliged, in point of Duty, to promote the entertainment of the Gospel, as
private Christians; and they may do more, because they have greater Advantages
put into their hands; for that is a Rule, laid down by our Savior himself,
Luke xii. 48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required.

(1.) For Christian Rulers, when their Hearts are thoroughly knit to Christ, in
Faith, and Love, and they act upon Gospel-principles, and according to the
Rules thereof, what wonderful things may they perform, toward the enlargement
of the Kingdom of Christ in the World? If a poor Bond-slave, who lies in the
lowest rank of men, may, in his Station, serve the Lord Christ, Col. iii. 24.
What eminent services may Princes, and Potentates do him, who are placed in the
highest rank of men, and dignified with the title of Gods? The zeal of
Constantine the Great. for the Christian Religion, is praised by more, than are
disposed to imitate it. But when those who have given their Strength, and Power
to the Beast, shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate, and devote their
Crowns, and Scepters to the Lamb, we may hope for those blessed days, wherein
the light of the Gospel, shall shine forth so gloriously, as to illustrate the
whole World. This should excite all Private Christians, to pray hard, that God
would put it into the Hearts of Kings, and those who are in Authority, to kiss
the Son, by whom they reign.

(2.) As for the Ministers of the Gospel; all they who understand, and attend
unto their Office and Duty, must acknowledge; that they are under the
strictest, and most forcible engagements in the World, to lay out themselves
entirely, and (to the uttermost of their Capacity) to serve the Lord Jesus, and
to help forward the enlargement of his Kingdom. And yet, it is not the Duty,
and Work of every ordinary Minister to go up and down the World, to preach the
Gospel, for the Conversion of the Heathen, as the Apostles, and Evangelists
did. [ Romans xv. 20. Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, where Christ
was not named.] Because they are commanded by Christ, to attend upon their
proper flocks, Act. xx. 28. 1 Pet. v. 1, 2. But, what Measures they are to take
farther, or what Methods, they are to pursue, to promote the spreading of the
Gospel, is indeed, a very Christian, and noble enquiry. At the debate whereof,
I should most gladly stand, as a silent Learner, and not presume to be a
Director. However, I hope, it will be excusable, if I offer one thing to the
Consideration of those whose Piety, and Learning may challenge a due esteem in
the Hearts of all that fear God. We have had among us, Committees for the
Encouragement, and Increase of Trade. And what if there were some to consult,
How the Gospel might be propagated? The Papists have at Rome their Congregatio
de propaganda Fide. Their design may be very ill, while they contrive not, How
that Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, may be propagated; but how
the Leven of their own Superstition may be diffused, and especially, How the
Popes Kingdom may be enlarged. And yet, to deliberate, How the Gospel of the
Grace of God, may be carried into the dark corners of the Earth for the
Conversion, and Salvation of them who are ready to perish, and so the Kingdom
of Christ get ground in the World, is, I am sure, a most holy, and excellent
design; and so I recommend this also to the Prayers of Godly, private
Christians.

These few things being suggested touching those Christians, who bear a Public
Character, I, now, shall address my self to all Godly, Private Christians; and
I must exhort, and beseech them, with all the fervor I can, to set their
hearts sincerely, upon this glorious work, and to bestir themselves in it with
all their might. This belongs to every Christian, as such, in what
circumstances soever the Providence of God does dispose of them, whether they
be High, or Low; Noble, or Base; Rich, or Poor; Learned, or Unlearned; Male, or
Female: None are to be excluded, or exempted.

But, it is likely, This may seem strange to many Private Christians. That they
should be charged, in the Name of Christ, to be helpful, to promote the
spreading of the Gospel all the world over. Alas! will one say, (with the
Eunuch) I am a dry tree, and no such fruit is to be expected from me. And I
(will another say) am but a Cipher, and make no Figure in the world (as the
Phrase goes) and therefore, I can signify nothing. But, let me beseech all
Private Christians, to take heed of shifting off from themselves, any Duty, or
Service, that Christ calls them to, or would employ them in. And, To suspend
their Determination a little, until I have showed them (as Christ shall enable
me) How, and wherein, Private Christians may be helpful, in this Great, and
Good work. And then, I hope, they will see, That they may do much more therein,
than, possibly, they have, hitherto, apprehended.

The second thing mentioned, is, Their Duty, and Work. Which is, To be helpful
in promoting the Entertainment of the Gospel. And the third thing, is, How, or
in what ways, and by what means, they may be most helpful in it. But (for
dispatch sake) I shall speak, to both these, Conjunctly.

Now, That I may proceed herein, the more clearly, and profitably, I think it
may be useful, to place Private Christians, according to their several
Circumstances, and Capacities (as to the matter now under consideration) in
three Ranks, or Orders.

1. There are many Private Christians, who live very remote from such Places,
and People, as have not the Gospel preached unto them: Or, at least, have not,
hitherto, entertained it.

2. There are some Private Christians, who may, Occasionally, go into, or may,
Providentially, be cast, into such Places.

3. There are some Private Christians, who live among such people, in a more
fixed, or constant Residence; As, In our Factories abroad; Or, In our
Plantations in the Indies, or other Heathen places.

Now, Though it be the Duty of all Private Christians, To promote the
entertainment of the Gospel; yet all cannot take the same Measures, nor be
Active in the same ways. And therefore, it may be to very good purpose, To let
each of them to see, wherein their Proper work does lie, That they may
contribute their assistance, accordingly.

1. Most of the Private Christians, among us, live very Remote from those
People, who have not, as yet, entertained the Gospel. And so, They cannot be
helpful unto them, by Personal instruction, or counsel: Neither can they
attract them by the Example of their holy conversation. And yet, they may
greatly contribute toward the promoting of the entertainment of the Gospel
among them. And that they may do, several ways, e. gr.

1. They may, and ought to pray in Faith. That the Gospel may be sent among
them. That it may be Received by them. And be blessed to the Conversion, and
Salvation, of all that are ordained to Eternal life, among them. For such
Prayers, being according to the Will of God, They may be confident, that he
hears them, 1 John v. 14. And that God requires, and expects such Prayers
from them, cannot be unknown to any, who acquaint themselves with the
Scriptures. For, (1.) Our Lord Jesus Christ recommendeth this matter to the
Prayers of private Christians, Matthew. ix. 37, 38. Then, says he unto his
Disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few. Pray ye
therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth Laborers into
his harvest. Here we may take notice, (1.) That by the Metaphor, or Allegory of
an Harvest our Savior would instruct us, That, as when the Corn is ripe, Men
use to employ Reapers, to cut it down, and gather it in: So there are some
blessed Seasons, wherein God has decreed, to send the Gospel among a People,
and accordingly prepares, and disposes them for the Reception of it, and
raises in them a propensity, and strong affection toward it. Thus it was, when
John the Baptist came, and Preached, That the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand,
Matthew. iii. 2. and it follows in verse the 5th, Then went out unto him,
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan. And our
Savior sets a special remark upon that time, Matthew. xi. 12. And from the days
of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force. When, therefore, ye hear, That the Day of the
Gospel, begins to Dawn, in any of the dark corners of the Earth, Then, Lift up
a Prayer, That the Grace and Power of the Spirit, may accompany it, and make it
successful. (2.) Our Savior teaches you to pray, That the Laborers may be
increased, proportionably to the work; as when he says, [The Harvest is
plenteous, but the Laborers are few.] Pray then, that God would employ such as
are Skilful, and Industrious; such as Paul describes, 2 Timothy ii. 15. Study to
show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth; And pray, That God would employ such a
number of them, as is sufficient for the work. A Reverend Person among us,
has, for many years, complained, That, in many places, where there is but One
to labor in the Ministerial Work, there is enough for three, or four, though all
of them be very industrious. But it seems that Men either cannot, or will not
make better provision. (3.) Private Christians, when they perceive, How the
case stands, should be importunate with God, that he would send forth Laborers
into his harvest. [Send them] by the Efficacious word of his Power. [(...) ut
ejiciat, vel extrudat.] Thrust them out by his Grace working in them, and his
Providence ordering of circumstances concerning them. It is no wonder if Flesh
and Blood shrink from the employment of carrying the Lord's Message to a
barbarous people. Moses would fain have been excused, from going into Egypt,
and he multiplied Evasions, and Pretenses, till the Lord was angry with him,
Exodus iii. 10, 11, 14. and Chap. iv. 1, 10, 13. When the Lord sent Paul to
Preach the Gospel among the Gentiles, that he might hearten him, for that
difficult, and dangerous work, he promised him Protection, Act. xxvi. 17, 18.
Delivering thee from the People -- to whom I now send thee: To open their eyes
-- They stand in need of a mighty presence of God with them, who have just
cause to fear, That those people will seek their death, to whom they bring the
word of Life, and Salvation. I thought this Scripture so apposite to the matter
in hand, and so directive to private Christians, that it may plead my excuse
for this enlargement upon it.

(2.) That Private Christians may be sure to mind it, our Savior has put it
into the Rule of Prayer, Matthew. 6.10. [Thy Kingdom come.] I have read, That it
is one of the Jews Maxims, touching Prayer; Ista Oration, in qua non est memoria
regni Dei, non est Oration: That Prayer, in which there is no mention made of
the Kingdom of God, is no Prayer at all; when we pray [Thy Kingdom come] we
beg, That the Gospel, which is the Rod of Christ's Power, and the Scepter of
his Government, may spread all the world over. For where the Gospel is
believed, and obeyed, there does Christ reign over fallen Man, as Mediator.

(3.) The Saints, under the Old Testament, prayed for the Calling, and
Conversion of the Gentiles, under the Gospel Dispensation, Psalm. lxvii. 2, 3.
That thy way may be known upon Earth, thy saving health among all Nations. Let
the people praise thee, O God; Let all the people praise thee.

(4.) When, by the Preaching of the Gospel, in any place, the people were
wrought upon, and brought to Believe in Christ, They were exhorted to pray,
That the Word of the Lord might be carried to all other parts of the
Gentile-world, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 1. Finally, Brethren, Pray for us, that the Word
of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is with you. And
such Prayers are not to be thought to be lost, or put up to God in vain. That
Prediction, or Promise [ Romans xvi. 20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet, shortly] did, doubtless excite many a Prayer; and That Promise
was eminently accomplished, and those Prayers which were grounded upon it, and
put up to God, in faith, took effect, when the Kingdom of Satan (administered in
the Idolatries of the Gentiles) was laid waste, and the Christian Profession
was advanced by Constantine the Great. Having now, so inviting an occasion
offered to me, give me leave to present a Request to you, and it shall be, in
the words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. v. 25. Brethren, Pray for us; for those who
labor among you, in the Word, and Doctrine. And, I hope, I may, without vanity,
enforce this Request, by the same Apostles Argument, or Motive, Hebr. xiii. 18.
Pray for us: for we trust we have a good conscience, in all things, willing to
live honestly. Many reflect upon us with disparagement, and we are very
sensible of our own many, and great infirmities. But, Help us with your
Prayers, That we may Be better, Live better, and Preach better. It is no
Paradox, but a well-weighed Truth, That a godly private Christian, upon his
knees, in his Closet, may assist the Minister, in his Study, and in the Pulpit.
And that I may prevail in my Request, I can assure you, That whatsoever Gifts,
or Graces, ye obtain of God, for your Ministers, by your Prayers, they will
come as Blessings upon your selves; like the vapors that rise from the Earth,
being concocted in the Middle-Region, fall down upon it again, in fruitful
showers, 1 Cor. iii. 21, 22. For all things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas -- If any say, This is a Digression from the Case which I was to
speak to, I would entreat them to consider, what is the general scope, and
design of it, and they will find, That it comports very well with it. Once, I
am sure, That it is as much the Duty, and Concernment of private Christians, to
pray for the Success of the Gospel, that it may be blessed to the Conversion,
and Salvation of Souls, in England, as that it may be preached, entertained,
believed, and obeyed, in the uttermost parts of the Earth. And so, I will
return, to prosecute my Discourse with two Remarks.

(1.) That, From what has been said, touching the Prayers of private
Christians for the spreading of the Gospel, we may be assured, That God has
determined to bestow those Mercies, for which he commands his people, to pray.
And more than That, He usually bestows them, in the disposal of his Providence,
upon the intervention of his Peoples Prayers, as may be collected from Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean
from all your filthiness, -- ver. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes. -- ver. 30. I will multiply the fruit of the
tree, and the increase of the Field. -- compared with ver. 37. Thus says the
Lord, I will yet for this, be enquired of, by the house of Israel, to do it for
them.

(2.) That no godly private Christian can object against his Duty, in praying
that the Gospel may be carried to all Nations, and be entertained by them, nor
allege any excuse, or pretense, why they should be exempted from it. If any
hesitate, let me expostulate the matter with their Consciences. Have ye
received the Spirit of Christ, as the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication, and
can ye not pray? Do ye feel the Love of Christ, warming, stirring, and
constraining your hearts, and will ye not pray? ye dearly value the Glory of
God, and sincerely desire, That the earth may be full of the Knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: And can ye refrain from praying, that this
may be performed? ye tenderly compassionate the miserable condition of Poor,
Perishing Souls, and will ye not afford them so much as your Prayers, that they
may be relieved? Are ye not greatly affected with the distinguishing Grace of
God, in bringing the Gospel to you, and opening your Hearts to receive it? How,
then, Can ye offer up your Praises to God, for so signal a Mercy, without
making some reflection on the deplorable state of those who have not, as yet,
obtained the like favor, without lifting up a Prayer for them, that they may
be made partakers of the same Grace?

Or will ye reply, That you do pray indeed, That God would visit the heathen
World with the Gospel of Salvation: But ye cannot think, that your Prayers will
contribute much toward so great, and good a work. Suffer me to debate this
also, a little, with you. Why will you reproach the Spirit, and Grace of
Prayer, in saying, it can avail little, or nothing, when God himself, says,
Jam. 5.16. The effectual, fervent Prayer of a Righteous man avails much?
Those Prayers, which can mount as high as Heaven, are able also, to reach the
ends of the Earth. Why will ye, by your disobedience, (as much as in you lies)
make void the Commandments of Christ? Does not He expressly charge you, To pray
to the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest? And, to pray, That his Kingdom may come? And, will ye say, That the
Lord Christ, does injoin his Servants to do that, which is insignificant, and
impertinent? Why will you, by your unbelief, go about to make the Promises of
God of none effect? When as, he himself has assured us, That, He will fulfill
the (regular) desires of them that fear him, Psalm. cxlv. 18, 19. And that,
whatsoever we ask, according to his will, he hears us, 1 John v. 14. For ever
then, beware of entertaining that Temptation, which is formed and cherished in
the hearts of the ungodly; Who say unto God -- What profit should we have, if
we pray unto him? Job xxi. 14, 15. I shall close this, when I have added, That
were the Prayers of private, godly, Christians more frequent, intense, and
importunate, for the spreading of the Gospel, it would be an hopeful
indication, that the Gospel is about, through the blessing of God, to find
better entertainment in the World, than it has done, of later years.

This may suffice to have been spoken, touching the first way, and means,
wherein private Christians, who live remote from those places, where the Gospel
is not entertained, may be helpful to promote the spreading of it, that it may
be brought to them, viz. by the Prayers, which they put up to God, in Faith,
for the propagation of it.

2. The second way, and means, whereby private Christians, who live remote from
those places, whither the Gospel is not yet come, may promote the reception of
it, among them, is, By a ready, cheerful, and liberal contribution of supplies,
and encouragements to them, who labor in that holy work. And, here, the
different Abilities, and Capacities of private Christians are to be considered.
They who are rich, may cast in much, into the Lords Treasury; and, for the
proportion, the Apostles Rule, and Measure should be attended unto, 1 Cor. xvi.
2. [Every one, as God has prospered him.] When the Tabernacle was to be made,
every one brought something. They who had gold, silver, and precious stones,
offered them; they who could bring but rams-skins, and badgers skins, were
accepted. And those good Women, who had nothing to bring, did, yet, spin with
their hands, and brought that which they had spun, and they also were
accounted, and recorded among the Contributers. What private Christian is
there, who can afford Nothing? They who subsist by the labor of their hands
should spare something for works of Piety, and Charity, Ephesians. v. 28.

To excite, and encourage you, to comply with this Direction, I shall lay
before you* several Examples, which will show you, how Practical, and
Acceptable a work, this is. (1.) Private Christians were helpful to our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, in his preaching of the Gospel, in the days of his flesh,
upon Earth. Tho all things were made by him, and he upholds them by the Word of
his power, and so the Earth is His, and the fullness thereof, yet, for our
sakes* he became poor, and was pleased to receive provisions, for his
subsistence from some godly women, who ministered to him of their substance,
Luke viii. 1, 2, 3. (2.) The Apostle Paul records it, to the praise of the
Philippians, That they were careful of him, and made provision for him, not
only, when he labored among them, and when he was in Bonds for preaching the
Gospel, (And I heartily wish, that all private Christians, among us, yea, and
such as glory in their profession, would keep pace with them, so far,) but
also, when he was employed in the service of the Lord, among such as were,
then, strangers to Christ, and the Gospel, Phil. iv. 15, 16. Now ye
Philippians, know also, that, in the beginning of the Gospel, when I departed
from Macedonia, no Church communicated with me, as concerning Giving, and
Receiving, but ye only. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once, and again, to my
necessity. (3.) St. John drawing up the fair character of Gaius, a private
Christian, places this, as a beautiful flower in his garland, That he was
hospitable, and liberal to those who for Christ's names sake, went forth
(preaching the Gospel) among the Gentiles, taking nothing of them, 2 Ep. John
ver. 5.6, 7. Let private Christians take notice, that the name of Gaius, and
his Charity, are registered in the sacred Scripture, and if their disposition,
and practice, be like to his, theirs also shall be written, in Christ's book of
remembrance, Mat. x. 41, 42. He that receives (and so he that encourages) a
Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. (4) Take
notice, that it stands as a Blot in the Escutcheon of the Corinthians, that
they were altogether for (...), Gratuitum Evangelium. A Gospel that should cost
them nothing. Corinth was the most convenient, and so the most frequented Port,
for Trade, in all Greece. The Inhabitants are said, to have been very Wealthy,
Proud, and Voluptuous. They had abundance to spend upon Themselves, but could
find nothing for Paul, while he resided among them, and preached the Gospel to
them. For this, the Apostle makes a very mild, but a very close reflection upon
them, enough to make their Consciences to start, if they had any Spiritual
life, and sense; and their Faces to blush, if they retained any sparks of
Ingenuity in them, 2 Cor. xi. 8, 9. I robbed other Churches, taking wages of
them, to do you Service; For, when I was present with you, and wanted, I was
chargeable to no man, for, that which was lacking to me, the Brethren which
came from Macedonia supplied. It is a sad word, but too frequently experienced;
That a faithful Minister of Christ may Labor, and yet Live in want, in a
wealthy City. And, I think, it cannot be rationally supposed, that such as
suffer those to want, who labor among them, will be very forward, with their
purses, to assist them who preach the Gospel to Infidels, in the remote parts
of the World.

Upon this Head, give me leave to say a little, as I did upon the former.
London does outshine Corinth in Trade. God grant that it may still flourish in
wealth, and yet be preserved from those Vices, which are the usual Attendants
of it. May London ever have the Corinthians advantages, and the Philippians
spirit. It will be, I hope, to the praise of God, and of many of Londons
Citizens, to Recollect what has been done here, to help on, the propagation of
the Gospel, in New England; and I hope also, that the care of that work is not
extinct, but will revive, as there may be a necessity, and opportunity for it.
When I showed how private Christians might he helpful, to promote the Gospel,
by their Prayers, I made a Request to you, that ye would not fail to befriend
those who preach it at home, with your prayers, that they may receive grace,
and assistance from God, and be blessed with Success. And now, I shall take the
liberty, to present another, to you, in the behalf of many, who preach the
Gospel among us; your Contributions for Wales, and the Collection made at
Pinners-hall, for the encouragement of several poor Ministers, in the Country,
has afforded matter of rejoicing to many: And, I doubt not, have drawn forth
many praises, and prayers to God, on your behalf; and let me beseech you, be
not weary of well-doing, in this Instance. The Apostle found, that Professors
are as likely to faint, and tire, in works of Charity (especially if they be
frequent) as in any Christian duty whatsoever, and therefore, he fixes his
Counsel, and Encouragement there, Gal. vi. 9. And let us not be weary of well
doing, for in due season, we shall reap, if we faint not. Bear with me, if, in
special, I commend to your care, those whom the Providence of God has disposed
of, in good Market Towns, and Corporations. Possibly, some may think, that such
are well enough provided for. But many find, that the Corinthian temper has
not left the World. Even in good Towns, Ministers may Preach, and want. I
think, I shall not speak beside the purpose, if I shut up this with, 1 Timothy v.
8. He that provideth not for his own, is worse than an Infidel.

This may suffice to have been spoken touching the second means, whereby
private Christians, (who live remote from such places, as have not entertained
the Gospel) may be helpful toward the bringing of it, among them.

3. The third way, wherein private Christians (who live far from those places,
where the Gospel is not entertained) may be helpful, to promote the admission
of it, among them, is to use their interest in those, who on several occasions,
may go to such places, by importunate persuasions, and pertinent directions, to
excite them, to carry a Love, and Zeal for Christ, in their own hearts, and
from that principle, to act to the uttermost of their capacity, for the
spreading of his Gospel, and the enlargement of his Kingdom. It was (I think) a
good design of Hugo Grotius, who (as he tells us) wrote his Book, Of the verity
of the Christian Religion, for the use of his Countrymen, who Sail to the
uttermost ends of the Earth, to furnish them with proper Arguments, which might
leave a due impression thereof, upon the hearts of the poor Heathen. Private
Christians may also write to their friends, who live abroad, to endeavor to
convince the miserable Captives of Satan, that their Idols are vanities. This
course did the Prophet Jeremy take, to excite, and direct the Jews, who were in
Babylon, how they should deal with those among whom the providence of God had
cast them, Jer. x. 11. Thus shall ye say to them; The Gods who have not made
the Heaven, and the Earth, even they shall perish from the Earth, and from
under the Heavens. It is observed by learned men, that this verse is written in
the Chaldee tongue, tho the rest of the book be written in Hebrew, whereby, he
does, as it were, put the words into their mouths, that they might speak to
them, in their own language, so as to be understood by them, and by this, he
does instruct us, That it is not sufficient for the worshipers of the true God,
to keep themselves from the pollutions of Idols: but they must do more, for
they must make Profession of the true God, and his worship. The like course may
private Christians take, to promote the conversion of the Ignorant, Earthly,
and Profane, at home, with whom they have no personal converse, and that is, To
stir up others, who have that advantage, to deal with them, about the
everlasting concernments of their Souls. Thus I have spoken something touching
the case of such private Christians, as come within the first Circumstance,
viz. Such as live remote from the places, where the Gospel is not entertained,
and in what ways they may be helpful in order to their reception of it.

2. I proceed to consider the case of such private Christians, as occasionally,
or providentially, are brought among those people, which have not entertained
the Gospel; and to show, how they may be helpful, in bringing them into
acquaintance with the Doctrine of Salvation. Let none pretend, that because
this work does, specially, belong to the Ministers of Christ, that, thereupon,
private Christians, are exempted, or discharged from that which God has made
their Duty. Let none think to excuse themselves, by saying, They are not
learned: for they are a Reproach to Christianity, who have not learned the
Essentials of their Religion; and the enforcing, and inculcating of these, must
lead the way in the Conversion of Infidels. Let none say, They have enough to
do, to mind their own business: For, I doubt not, but if they minded the
Interest of Christ more, their own would prosper the better. But if they drive
on any Design, that is contrary to the Faith, or Precepts of the Gospel, it
will be found their Duty, and safety, to extricate themselves out of it, as
soon, as they can. If they suggest, that it would be a vain thing for them to
expect, or attempt to do any good among Infidels: That will be found to be only
the sluggards Plea; There is a Lion in the way, Prove. xxvi. 13. He who has no
heart to an undertaking, will not fail to lay, in his own way, huge Mountains
of insuperable difficulties. But, to prevent, or remove all Evasions, it shall
be proved, that among private Christians (if we may judge by circumstances, or
visible appearance) few or none, (if they really be such as they profess
themselves) do labor under such disadvantages, or improbabilities of
succeeding in their attempts of recommending Christ, and his Gospel, as many of
those were under, whom, yet, the Lord made use of, and eventually blessed, in
communicating the knowledge of Himself, to such as were, before, strangers to
him. To manifest this, I shall produce four Examples; two out of the holy
Scriptures, and two out of Ecclesiastical History. Out of the holy Scriptures,
one shall be out of the Old Testament, the other out of the New. Out of the Old
Testament, it is surprising and astonishing to observe what a glorious work,
the Lord brought about, by the Instrumentality of a little captive Maid, whom
the Syrians had brought out of the Land of Israel. Read 2 Kings v. 2, 3. to
verse 19. The brief summary whereof is this; The poor, little Girl, waiting on
her Lady, dropped a few words, [ Would God, my Lord were with the Prophet in
Samaria! for he would recover him of his Leprosy.] Another takes up those
words, and reports them to Naaman. Many such Discourses are breathed, and
expire in the same moment. The more wonderful is the conduct of Gods
Providence, who works all things according to the counsel of his will. I may
accommodate to this case, what was spoken upon a very different account, James
iii. 5. Behold, how great a matter, a little spark kindled! For, by various
steps, the Conversion of Naaman was, at last, accomplished; and, considering
his Character, and Interest, we may probably conjecture, that his Example, and
Counsel might prevail with others also, to turn from Idols, and to serve the
living and true God. We cannot well pass by this strange, and remarkable
Instance, without staying so long as to observe, (1.) That this little Girl
appears to have been seasoned with the knowledge of the True God, and to have
been acted, in what she said, by a principle of Faith. This she showed by her
confidence, That God would work a miracle, by his own Prophet, and Servant
Elisha; for it was He whom she intended, as the sequel discovers. Samaria was
then, like Athens, a City wholly given to Idolatry; therein had Ahab built an
Altar, and an House for Baal, and he had four hundred, and fifty Priests to
attend his Worship. The Inhabitants may well be supposed to have been,
generally, of the Court-Religion, only some few resorted to Elisha, and they,
it is likely, in a more private way. We read of the good Woman of Shunem, 2
King. iv. 22, 23. that was one of his Disciples; and this Girl seems to have
been of that way. Happy are those young ones, upon whom the Fear of God, makes
early impressions. (2.) God opened the way to Naamans Conversion, by a little
Maid. The weaker the Means, the more is Gods Power glorified. (3.) A few good
words dropped occasionally, may operate very successfully, especially when they
are suitable, and seasonable, Prove. xxv. 11. Let private Christians mind this.
(4.) A poor, little Maid carried into captivity, opened the way to the
Conversion of one of the greatest Personages in the Country. It is very
lamentable to hear so frequently of Men, and Women, Boys, and Girls, carried
away captives, by Turks, and Tartars. But who can tell, whether God may not, in
his own good time, by some or other of them, convey the knowledge of Christ to
some perishing Souls? This may suffice touching the Example produced out of the
Old Testament.

The Example out of the New Testament, shall be of those who were driven out of
Jerusalem, in the persecution that followed the Martyrdom of Stephen, of whom
ye may read, Acts viii. 4. [Therefore they who were scattered abroad, went
every where preaching the Word] in the strange countries whither providence led
them, and a wonderful blessing went along with them, as ye may see, Acts xi.
19, 20, 21. Now they who were scattered abroad upon the persecution, that arose
about Stephen, traveled as far as Phenice. -- Which when they were come to
Antioch, spoke unto the Grecians, preaching the Lord Jesus. And the hand of the
Lord was with them; And a great multitude believed and turned unto the Lord.
These were private Christians, for any thing that appears to the contrary. And,
what they did, was no more, than every private Christian Regularly may, and, in
duty, ought to do, if the Criticism of the late learned Annotator, be allowed,
who says, That tho (...) and (...) do Materially signify the same thing: Yet,
perhaps, they differ in the manner. For (...), is a work that lies in common;
any Christian may publish the glad tidings of the Gospel, and give a Relation
of our Lord Jesus Christ, his Doctrine, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection,
etc. Which was permitted to be done by Women themselves. But (...), to proclaim
the Gospel, as Heralds, appointed, and authorized thereunto by Jesus Christ.
This is proper to the Ministers of the Gospel, and belongs to their Office.
Upon this, I shall leave one Remark only, That it were greatly to be wished,
that all such as for their adherence to the Gospel, are, by persecution, driven
from their Habitations, and Countries, were persons of the same Spirit with
those who were scattered abroad from Jerusalem, such as bring the Grace, and
word of God with them, whithersoever they come; so would they prove great
Blessings to all that receive them. This may suffice to have been spoken of the
New Testament instance.

To the examples, taken out of the Holy Scriptures, I shall subjoin two also,
out of Ecclesiastical History. The one is related by Ruffinus, who gives this
account of the Conversion of the Kingdom of the Iberians to the Faith. There
was, says he, a certain poor woman, who had been taken Captive, and lived
among them. She was, at first, taken notice of, for her Sobriety, and Modesty:
and then, for her spending so much ^ime in Prayer. These raised a great
admiration of her in the minds of the Barbarians. At last, they brought to her
a sick child, which, upon her prayers, was restored to health. This spread her
fame abroad, so that the Queen of the Country was brought to her, and by her
prayers recovered. Whereupon the King, and Kingdom were won over to Christ, and
the King sent to Constantine the Great, for some to instruct them farther in
the Christian Religion. Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10. The holy Conversation,
and the ardent Devotions of private Christians are excellent means to recommend
the Gospel, and to represent it, as most amiable, and desirable.

The other is of Frumentius and Aedesius. These being Christians, were left
young in one of the Kingdoms, of the Inner India, and were, after some time,
for their excellent parts, and unspotted life, honored, and employed by the
Queen of the Country, during the Minority of her Son. In process of time, some
Roman Merchants came to traffic among them. Then Frumentius, understanding
that there were some Christians among them, invited them to reside with him,
and provided a place for them, where they might offer up their prayers to God,
after the Christian manner; and himself, having obtained leave of the Queen,
went to Athanasius, in Alexandria, requesting him to send some Bishop to that
Kingdom to promote the farther entertainment of the Gospel among them, to which
they were well inclined, and disposed for the reception of it. Athanasius
ordained Frumentius himself, who returned, and by Gods blessing, met with
wonderful Success, Ruffin. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 9. Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c.
15. Sozomen. l. 2. c. 23. If providence shall bring these lines to the view of
Christian Travelers, Merchants, and Mariners, who come among the poor Heathen,
let the examples laid before them, excite, and encourage them to use their
endeavors to bring them to the knowledge of Christ, and the entertainment of
the Gospel.

Thus much touching the case of those private Christians, who occasionally, or
providentially may come to, or be brought to those places, where the Gospel is
not entertained as yet.

3. Such private Christians as live, in a more settled way, among the Indians,
and other Heathen Nations, and were placed in the third rank, or order, come to
have their case to be considered. How they may be most helpful, to promote the
entertainment of the Gospel?

To assist those whose hearts the Lord shall bow over to mind this excellent
work, I shall lay before them two Directions. (1.) They must carefully avoid
all those things, that have a proper tendency to alienate their minds, and
affections from the Gospel, or to exasperate them against it. (2.) They must
endeavor to use such means, and to take such courses, as have an aptitude to
beget in them an esteem, and veneration for the Gospel, and so dispose them to
embrace it.

1. They who design, and endeavor to win upon others, and to dispose them for
the Reception of the Gospel, must carefully avoid all such things, as have an
aptitude to alienate them from it. I shall exemplify this Direction in some
instances; as,

1. Private Christians must prevent, or suppress all bitter contentions among
themselves. It is sad to observe, That differences among Brethren are usually
managed with such mutual accusations, and reproaches, as make the name of
Christians despicable, or odious, especially to those, who are prejudiced
against them. Contentions and Animosities among Christians break out, on two
Occasions. (1.) There may Quarrels arise, about Earthly things. What can
Heathens think of them, when they see them to malign, and worry one another,
for such things, as their own Philosophy has taught them, to make little
account of? Abraham was very apprehensive of the evil consequences, that might
have attended the strife between his, and Lots Herdsmen, probably, about their
pasturage, or watering-places, and therefore he would not insist upon such
pleas as he might reasonably have alleged on his own side, but stifled the
contention, and sought an amicable composure, because he dreaded the scandal
which would have been given to the Heathen, by their brabbles. This is
suggested, Genesis xiii. 8, 9. The Canaanite, and the Perizzite dwelt in the Land.
The Contentions, and wranglings of the Corinthians, about things that appertain
to this life, and their going to Law for them, especially the bringing of their
suits before Heathen-tribunals, was to cast reproach on the Christian Religion,
as the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. vi. 1, 2. How can Christians, without
blushing, and confuting themselves, persuade others, To embrace the Gospel,
which teaches them to set their affections on things above, and not on things
on the Earth. To have their hearts crucified toward the world, and yet, for the
sake thereof to violate all the precepts, and to despise all the Promises of
the Gospel? And (like Dogs, that fight about a bone) to tear out one another
throats, in their rage and fury? we may then conclude, that men, in whom a
worldly Spirit is predominant, are very unfit to recommend the Gospel unto
others. (2.) The Cross-sentiments which men espouse, and vindicate in things
wherein Religion seems to be concerned, have beg^tten the widest breaches, and
the most furious contentions that were ever found among Christians. If we
enquire, what spark has kindled this raging fire? We shall often find, that
this Earnest contending is not for that Faith, which was once delivered to the
Saints, but a dispute who shall be greatest; or, it may be, about something
that is dark, doubtful, or unnecessary: or about some undetermined Mode. Or,
possibly, as in some great conflagrations, we see the fire preys upon, and
devours all, and yet we know not, who kindled it, or how it began. This is, and
must be for a Lamentation. Once, I am sure, the divisions among Christians, and
the bitter zeal which manageth their controversies about Religion, is a mighty
impediment, and obstruction, that stops the progress of the Gospel. In the
writings of the Ancients we find that the Heathen fortified themselves in their
infidelity, and resisted the arguments and persuasions of those who recommended
the Faith of the Gospel to them, with this Objection; Ye Christians are not
agreed among your selves, ye are broken into many Sects, and Factions, ye
confute, and condemn one another; therefore it is more advisable for us, to
continue as we are, than to leave our present station, before we know, where to
fix with any assurance that we are in the Right. All that I am able to do, at
present, for the removal of this scandal, is to beseech private Christians, in
the bowels of Christ, To value, love, and follow after the things that make for
peace, Romans xiv. 19. For, I fear, the Gospel will hardly get ground in the
world, until the Spirit of Love, reigning, and acting the hearts of those that
profess it, do open the way for it. In the first planting of it, the Concord of
believers, ( Acts ii. 42.) did greatly contribute to its entertainment. It
became a Proverbial speech touching Christians, Ecce quam se diligunt invicem!
Behold, how they love one another. This is a Subject, that cannot be too much
insisted upon, nor too zealously enforced. I account them excellent, and happy
persons indeed, who have a right to bear that Motto, Beati Pacifici. This may
suffice touching the first obstruction, that hinders the entertainment of the
Gospel.

2. It is apparent, that they do not promote, but obstruct the entertainment of
the Gospel, who would obtrude on those, whom they persuade to embrace it, such
things to be believed, or practiced (as a part of their Religion) as are no
where to be found in it, much more, if they be directly contrary to it. e. gr.
The Gospel does expressly determine, that God only is to be the Object of
religious worship, Mat. iv. 10. How then, can they recommend the Gospel, who
tell their Proselites, that they may admit mere Creatures, to be sharers with
God, in that worship which is appropriated to him? The Gospel says, That there
is but one Lord, Mediator between God, and Man, 1 Cor. viii. 6. 1 Timothy ii. 5.
And yet, there are these, who pretend to win over men to the Gospel, who tell
them, they must conjoin Angels, and departed Saints, with Christ in his Office,
and Work of Mediator: The Gospel severely charge all those who believe it, to
fly from Idolatry, 1 Cor. x. 14. 1 John v. 21. which is the enforcement of the
second Commandment [ Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, etc.]
What then, can they whom they are to instruct, think of it, when they see them,
in profound devotion, to creep to, fall down before, and worship Images?
especially, when, upon that very account, it is notorious, that Jews, and
Mahometans, abhor the Gospel upon a supposition, that the worship of Images, is
either Taught, or allowed therein. If I may have leave to declare my
apprehensions, I must say, That the Gospel propounded in its own Native purity,
and simplicity, as our Lord Jesus Christ delivered it, and as they who were
divinely inspired, have recorded it, without any Additional supplements, or
foreign mixtures, is the most effectual way, that God has appointed, and
promised to bless, for the subduing of the world, to Jesus Christ. And I should
beseech those who endeavor the Conversion of Heathens, to press nothing upon
them (except the presupposed Light, and Law of Nature, right Reason, and
Discipline, to cultivate, civilize, and prepare them) save the naked Truths,
Ordinances, and Rules, of the Gospel, in all plainness, and simplicity. So much
for the second Obstruction.

3. To symbolize, or comply with those, whom we would persuade to embrace the
Gospel, in their Superstitious Customs, and Observances, is not the way, to
promote the entertainment of it, but to obstruct it. Under the name of Customs,
I do not comprehend, the using of the same Diet, or wearing the same Stuff, or
Fashion in Apparel: for, possibly, the Temperature of the Climate, and other
considerations may make them Necessary. Nor, do I mean, merely Political
Customs, which are subservient to public order, justice, and tranquillity: But
I intend Superstitious customs, and observances, wherein somewhat of Religion,
or sanctity is placed. There are some things, which may pass in the rank of
indifferent, in their own nature; which, yet, become Superstitious, when men
place Religion, or Holiness in them. It is well, known, that Tertullian wrote
his Book, De Corona militis, to justify the practice of a Christian Soldier,
who refused to wear a Crown, or Garland of leaves on his Head, because the
Gentiles were wont to go so adorned, in their Solemnities, and Processions,
accounting it a Religious Rite. But, in regard that the Jesuits, are reported,
to practice, and applaud their Method of Compliance with their Converts (as
they call them) in India, or China, and other places; so far as to allow them
to retain their Pa-gods, and to worship them, with some Mental reservations,
and the right direction of their Intentions; it will be necessary to say
something more of this, because I have mentioned it as an Obstruction, that
hinders the entertainment of the Gospel. I shall therefore, briefly, set before
you, (1.) What we may collect from the Authority of the Scripture; touching the
case we are upon. (2.) What have been the Sentiments of some, in after-ages.

1. What the Scripture has determined, touching the compliance of the people
of God with the superstitious customs of the Heathen, whether it be in way of
approbation or allowance of them, or of symbolizing, and conforming to them,
tho under the pretense of taking that course, to gain them over to the true
Religion, e. gr. I suppose, that none will deny, That it was the duty of the
Jews, to endeavor to proselyte others, to the Faith, and Worship of the true
God. Let us, then, observe, what God did prescribe, in order thereunto. Did he
allow them, to imitate their Rites, or Customs? No; but quite contrary, He
severely charge, That, in no wise, they should symbolize with them, lest they
should be entangled, or corrupted with their manners, Deuteronomy. xii. 30, 31.
Learned men have bestowed much study, and diligence, to find out the Reasons of
many Injunctions, and Prescriptions, which God appropriated to the Jews. In
some of them, they have clearly discovered a Typical use, that they prefigured
Christ, or his Church. In others, they find Virtue, and Morality to be
instilled. In others, Provision to be made for Health, Decency, etc. But for
several of them, they have resolved, that God imposed them on purpose, to set
them at a greater distance from Idolaters: and to guard them from those evil
impressions, which the Familiarizing of their customs, might make upon them,
as, they might not wear a garment of linen, and woollen wrought together,
Deuteronomy. xxii. 11. because (as is said) the Egyptians used such. So, they were
forbidden, To round the corners of their head, or, to mar the corners of their
beard, Levit. xix. 27. because Idolaters, and particularly the Egyptians were
so trimmed. It seems also, that other nations, who offered up their hair to
their Demons, out of devotion, were polled after some such manner. It is
undeniable, as might be argued, from these, and several other reasons. That it
was utterly unlawful for the Jews, to symbolize with the heathen; in their
Superstitious Rites. Neither is there a greater latitude for Christians under
the Gospel. They are, certainly, obliged, to fly as far from Idolatry, as the
Jews were. Some, indeed, in the Church of Corinth, took too great a liberty in
their compliances with Idolaters, for they went, with their friends, into the
Idols Temple, and feasted there with them, on the Remainders of the Sacrifices
which had been offered to the Idols. And, it is probable, That they pretended,
that, by such a condescension, in a thing indifferent, they designed to engage
their friends affections, the better to recommend the Christian Religion to
them. But the Apostle does severely censure such Temporizing, 1 Cor. viii. 10,
11. with chap. x. 20, 21. Thus, ye have had a short account of the Scripture
Authority, resolving the Case.

2. Let us, now, hear, what have been the Sentiments of some, in after-ages.
They were of opinion, That, to adopt some heathenish observances, into the
Christian worship, was not only warrantable, but also commendable, provided,
that care should be first taken, to deal with them, as the Jews were to treat
those captive heathen-women, whom they intended to marry, and that was, to
shave their heads, and pair their nails, Deuteronomy. xxi. 11, 12. Thus they converted
many Heathenish Rites, into Christian Ceremonies, when they had cleansed, and
varnished them, as by changing their Object, End, or Mode. For instance; A
learned man of our own, has proved, That the Invocation of departed Saints,
was nothing else, but the old doctrine of Demons revived. (Mr. Joseph Mede's
Apostasy of the latter times.) Let not any one surmize, That this is an undue
Reflection, or a false Insinuation, seeing a very learned English Prelate has
written, a small Tract, to show, That the Ecclesiastical Government observed by
the British, and ancient English Pagans, they being converted unto
Christianity, many of the Paganish Ceremonies, and Usages, not contrary to the
Scripture, were still retained in their Christian policy. By means whereof,
tranquillity, and peace were preserved, and the alteration in the state, less
dangerous, or sensible. (Bishop Andrews his learned Discourse, of Ceremonies
retained, and used in the Christian Churches.) How far those reasons did
influence some, when we departed from Popery, I know not. But I suppose, some
things were retained, which seem not to have been desirable upon any other
account, than, to make the change less sensible in its self, and less dangerous
to the State. As for the Thing it self; For some Centuries before the
Reformation, there was so much borrowed from Jews, and Pagans, and lodged in
the Church, that, at last, the Christian Religion, became much like to that of
the Samaritans, 2 Kings xvii. 24. to verse 35. A compound of the worship of the
True God, and of Idols blended together. So that the Church of God groaned for
a Reformation. Much was done at first by our Worthies, possibly as much as the
Times could then bear. What they could not do, they left to be completed by
their Successors. And, what little reason we have now to think to ingratiate
our selves with the Pagan-Christians (as some think they have ground enough to
style the Papists.) I would rather ye should hear from a learned Doctor, than
from me, who delivers this, among his Documents (as he calls them.) Seeing we
are so well assured, that the Papacy is the Kingdom of Antichrist, or that City
of Babylon, wherein the people of God, were held captive, we should leave no
string, or tassel of our ancient captivity upon us, such, I mean, as whereby
they may take hold on us, and pull us back again into our former Bondage: but
look upon our selves as absolutely free from any tie to them, more than in
endeavoring their Conversion, and Salvation. Which we knowing so
experimentally not to be compassed by needless symbolizings with them, in any
thing, I conceive our best policy, is studiously to imitate them in Nothing:
But for all indifferent things, to think rather the worse of them, for their
using them. As no Person of Honor, would willingly go in the known garb of any
lewd, and infamous Persons. Whatsoever we court them in, they do but turn it,
to our scorn, and contempt, and are the more hardened in their own wickedness.
[Dr. Hen. More, Divine Dialogues, Part ii. page 398.] How easily soever Pagan
Rites were admitted into the Christian Church, I am sure many of them have
taken such deep root, that it is very difficult to eradicate, and purge them
out. So much for the third Obstruction.

Fourthly, They who desire to be helpful in promoting the entertainment of the
Gospel, must not, unnecessarily provoke, and exasperate those, whom they would
win over to it. Moses refused to permit the Israelites, to sacrifice to the
Lord, before the faces of the Egyptians, lest they should be enraged thereupon,
and stone them, Exodus viii. 25, 26. They must not, indeed, forbear to do that,
which, under all due circumstances, God has made to be their present duty. Yet
even, in such cases, they should remember my Text, [Walk in wisdom, toward them
that are without.] And learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice. They must declare against their idolatry, and endeavor to convert
them to the true God, as Paul did, Acts xiv. 15. We preach to you, that ye
should turn from these vanities unto the living God. And his success therein
was wonderful, as Demetrius testifies, Act. xix. 26. Moreover, ye see, and
hear, that not only at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has
persuaded, and turned away much people, saying that they be no Gods, which are
made with hands. But this must not be done with revilings, reproaches, and
insultations: but with judgment, tenderness, and meekness, 2 Timothy ii. 25, 26.
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves.] We may conclude then,
that it is none of Gods way, (from whomsoever men have learnt it,) to convert
Heathens by robbing them of their Goods, and Estates, and butchering their
Persons, which was the method that the Spaniards took to Gospellize the
Indians, or to send Dragoons as Missionaries, to torment those, whom they call
Heretics, thereby to reduce them to their Catholic Church. That Is the fourth
Obstruction.

Fifthly, They must religiously avoid that which is the greatest Obstruction of
all. The profligate, and flagitious lives of some that call themselves
Christians. If men were prompted, and employed by the Devil himself, they could
not take a more effectual course, to make the Gospel to be abhorred, than by
living as some Christians do. How can it be expected, That the poor, ignorant
Heathen, should have any reverence for the great, and Sacred Name of God, when
they hear those, who pretend, that they have a deep veneration for him, to
Reproach, and Blaspheme it? They will conclude, That men do but prevaricate,
when they tell them, That Christ gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit.
ii. 14. and yet live so, as if Christ died, only to procure for them a License
to continue in sin, or to purchase impunity for them that do so. Will they
believe those that tell them, Christ was made manifest, to destroy the works of
the Devil, and that they act under him as the Captain of their Salvation, while
they employ all their time, parts, and power to establish, and defend Satan's
Kingdom! Can ye persuade men, That ye believe there is an Hell, and eternal
Flames prepared for the ungodly, and impenitent, and that the wicked shall be
cast into it, when they observe those that say, They believe this, to run
posting, sporting, and laughing unto it? They will never apprehend, That the
Heaven, which they are told the Gospel promises to the Faithful, and Holy, is
any other than a Poetical Elysium, or a Mohammedan Paradise, while they perceive
that such as call themselves Christians, do prefer the world, and sensual
pleasures before it. Can any man convince them, That the Saints are such
excellent Creatures, when they see those who call themselves so, to live like
Bruits, or Devils? It is a vain attempt to persuade others, To believe, and
obey the Gospel, until they who profess it have learnt better, what it teaches
them, Tit. ii. 11, 12. To deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this present world.

These are some of the stumbling Blocks, which are to be removed out of the
way, before any successful persuasions, Motives, Inducements, or other Means
will prevail, to dispose, and incline, those who have not received the Gospel,
to embrace it.

2. But these Obstructions being removed, what ways are to be taken, to help on
the Entertainment of the Gospel? To answer that Question, I shall recommend
unto you some Few, among many, which, I conceive to be most obvious,
practicable, and effectual, e. gr.

1. Private Christians should endeavor to oblige those whom they would
persuade, by Civilities, Kindness, and doing good Offices for them, that they
may be assured, that they love them, and seek their real, and eternal good. Our
blessed Savior, who best understood what Attractives were most proper, and
powerful to draw men to receive Him, and his Gospel, took this Method, Act. x.
38. He went about Doing good. He did Good to men's Bodies, that he might do good
to their Souls. The Miracles which he wrought, were generally, of Beneficence,
and Obligations, as, To heal the Sick, To give Sight to the Blind, etc. It Is
true, He had a superior Aim, and End in working Miracles; which was, To show
forth his Glory, to confirm his Doctrine, to strengthen the Faith of his
Disciples, etc. Joh. ii. 11. and xx. 31. yet secondarily, it was, To testify
his Kindness, and Compassion toward those, whom he designed to persuade, to
believe on him, Matthew. xv. 32. -- I have compassion on the multitude -- and
thereupon, he wrought a Miracle, for their Refreshment, ver. 36, 37, 38.
feeding Four thousand Men, beside Women, and Children, with seven Loaves, and a
few little Fishes. And, to this we may add the Apostles advice, Gal. vi. 10. As
ye have opportunity, let us do good unto all men; even to such as are not of
the household of faith; i. e. tho they be Infidels. Very pertinent hereto, is
that remarkable passage in Eusebius, who acquaints us, That the Christian
Religion gained a very high esteem among the Infidels, upon this occasion; when
Famine, and Pestilence raged extremely, in the reign of Maximinus, the
Christians showed a tender compassion to the Pagans, when they were neglected
by those of their own Superstition, for they Buried their Dead: attended, and
ministered unto their Sick: and every day, distributed Bread, to those who were
ready to perish; and so, by their works, declared themselves to be the true
worshippers of God, through Jesus Christ, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 8.

2 Private Christians must be very just, and punctual, in their Negotiations,
and Traffic, with those whom they would persuade, to embrace the Gospel. They
must inviolably keep their word, and promise with them, and take no advantage
of their want of Skill, or Experience, thereby to overreach, and defraud them.
Mr. Terry, that was Chaplain to Sir Thomas Row (as I remember) Ambassador at
the Court of the Great Mogul, and has written of those Countries, has this
passage, which cuts to the quick, That when the Indians offered a Commodity in
Sale to a Christian, and he bade very disproportionably to the price demanded,
they would usually reply, Do you think that I am a Christian? intimating
thereby, That they made no conscience in Buying, and Selling, but thought all
gain lawful, which they stuck not to purchase, by Flattery, Lying, and
Unrighteousness. If then they should measure the Rules of the Gospel by the
Practice of such as Profess it (which is very ordinary) they would despise it,
as falling short of their own Philosophy, or Morality, which were greatly
refined about Matters of common Right, and Justice.

3. Private Christians should abound in the exercise of those amiable Graces,
the Evidences, and Effects whereof fall under the notice, and observation of
Others. Such as are mentioned, Gal. v. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.
They who are Strangers to the Gospel, understand not the sublime Mysteries of
Faith: But they can judge of things, that fall under the perception of Sense,
and Reason. They understand not what a man's notions may be in Speculation; But
they can tell, when a man is just, sober, humble, courteous, etc. and when
those excellent Qualities do show themselves, they may be brought, to enquire
into, and to admire those hidden Causes, that produce such rare, and desirable
Effects.

4 Private Christians should labor, to maintain, and discover an even, and
undisturbed frame of Spirit, under various revolutions of Providence: neither
over-joying their Comforts, nor Over-grieving their Crosses. 1 Cor. vii. 29,
30, 31. But this I say, Brethren, the time is short. It remains, that both
they that have wives, be as though they had none: And they that weep as though
they wept not, and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they
that buy, as though they possessed not: And they that use this world, as not
abusing it. -- What a convincing Argument must this needs be, to one who is
acted by no higher a Principle, than Flesh, or Nature, to behold a Christian,
to live above the Gaieties of the world, as having more pure, spiritual, and
heavenly Enjoyments to entertain his Soul withal? And to observe, That Crosses,
and Afflictions, do not abate his Love to God, his Reverence, which he has for
God, or his Joy in him.

5 Private Christians should make themselves remarkable, and considerable in
the faithful discharge of Relative Duties. With these, they are frequently, and
earnestly charged; and that upon this particular account, because the Honor,
and Interest of the Gospel, is so much concerned in them, 1 Timothy vi. 1. Let as
many Servants as are under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all
honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed. It is evident,
that Heathen-Morality was greatly defective, in the regulating of Domestic
Offices; and therefore, the Rules, and Directions given in the Gospel
concerning them, must highly advance it, in the esteem, and judgment of all
considering persons.

6 Private Christians should order the whole course of their lives and
conversations, so as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. i. 27. that
thereby, they may adorn the Doctrine of God, and our Savior, in all things,
Tit. ii. 10. when men see such glorious rays of Holiness sparkling, and shining
in the whole tenor of a Christian's conversation, they must needs be
convinced, That the Gospel does furnish them with those Principles of Light,
and Grace, that infinitely transcend those obscure, and broken notices of Good,
and Evil, that are found in Lapsed, but Unrenewed Nature.

These Instances, among several others, that might be mentioned, may direct
private Christians, How they may be helpful to promote the Entertainment of the
Gospel. Which was the Enquiry, at first propounded, to be answered.

Application. And now, After that all this has been spoken, It is likely, That
some Private Christians, who mean well, may think this whole Discourse very
remote from their concernments, and that it tends but little to their
Edification, and thereupon infer, That the Subject was ill chosen; and that
something more profitable might have been pitched upon. But I would entreat
those, who have entertained any such prejudices, before they pass their
censure, maturely to consider, what it is, that has been insisted upon, and
then I hope, that they who are sincerely Godly, and Prudent, will not think
themselves unconcerned, in that which so nearly relates to the Glory of God;
the Sanctifying of his Name, and the enlargement and Prosperity of the Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Such prejudices being removed, There are two things,
that I would earnestly recommend to godly private Christians.

1. Charge your Consciences with this, as a necessary, excellent, honorable,
and comfortable Duty, That ye stand obliged, in all ways prescribed by God,
according to your circumstances, to be helpful toward the promoting of the
entertainment of the Gospel. Look upon your former failings, as sinful, and to
be repented of: and, for the future, apply your selves more vigorously, and
cheerfully to this blessed work. To move, and encourage you hereunto,

1. Excite your Faith to receive, and reallize those many glorious Promises,
which are made to Christ, as Mediator, touching the Establishment and
Enlargement of his Kingdom in the world; as Psalm. ii. 8. Ask of me, and I shall
give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth, for thy possession; with abundance more of the same import.

2. Consider that the Preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means, whereby
subjects are gained to Christ, and brought under his Government, Romans x. 14,
15, 17. If ye then promote the spreading of the Gospel, ye enlarge the Kingdom
of Christ.

3. Tenderly pity, and compassionate the many Millions of the Sons, and
Daughters of Adam, who were hewn out of the same Rock, and dig'd out of the
same hole of the Pit with your selves, who, as yet, lie in thraldom under
Satan, and are Members of his visible Kingdom: It would, doubtless, be very
grateful to you, if your assistance might contribute any thing toward their
deliverance out of that miserable bondage: and the means to procure it, is to
help on, as far as ye may, the bringing of the Gospel among them; for that is
God's appointed way to effect it, Luke iv. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent
me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives -- Acts
xxvi. 17, 18. -- and from the Gentiles, to whom I now send thee, To open their
eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and an inheritance among them
which are sanctified --

4. Remember, That Grace, when it has its freedom of exercise, will draw you
off, from centering in Self, and raise in you a spirit of freedom, and
nobleness to seek the good of others, especially to advance the Glory of God,
in the Salvation of Souls. Take heed, that ye be not found in the number of
those, of whom the Apostle speaks, Phil. ii. 21. For all seek their own, not
the things, which are Jesus Christ's.

5. I hope ye do not desire to be excused, or excluded, from bearing any part,
in that honorable and glorious work, of being employed by Christ, (in your
Stations, and according to your Capacities) in the affairs of his Kingdom: but
that it would grieve you at the very heart, to be laid aside, as a despised,
broken Idol; when all this is recollected, and maturely pondered, where is that
godly private Christian, that will deliberately say, I am not concerned, to be
helpful, in such ways as are proper for me, in promoting the Entertainment of
the Gospel?

Secondly, As for those godly private Christians, whose hearts are sincerely
willing to be serviceable to the Lord Jesus Christ, and would exceedingly
rejoice to contribute all the assistance, that they are able to afford, for the
Conversion, and Salvation of perishing Souls; but complain, That the work in
which this Discourse would engage them, lies a great way off, and is out of
their reach. But could they be employed about any thing of that nature, within
the compass of their sphere of activity, they would most gladly embrace it, and
vigorously bestir themselves in it. If that be, really, the Case of any, Then,
I say to such, Up, and be doing, and the Lord be with you, to direct, help, and
succeed you; for ye will find enough to do at your own doors, and, probably, in
your own Houses. Briefly and plainly then, the matter stands thus: There are
many, who have entertained the Gospel, as far as a general, ignorant, customary
Profession will go: but are so far from admitting the spirit, life, and power
of it, into their hearts, that they are not only utter strangers to it, but are
full of bitter enmity against it. Will ye be helpful, now, to prevail with them
to receive it, with Faith, Love, and Obedience? It will be as acceptable (and,
I fear, ye will find it as difficult) a work to bring a wicked, hard-hearted
Christian, to believe in Christ, to the Salvation of his Soul, as an open
Infidel to make profession of the Gospel. Ye will find many as ignorant of the
very Essentials of Christianity, as the very Pagans; as froward, perverse, and
opposite to all means of Instruction, as Indians; many that love their Lusts,
and hold them as fast, as any in the world. The Barbarians are prejudiced
against our Religion, because they understand it not, or have had it
misrepresented to them: but the more plainly, and truly, it is set forth
before profane ones, at home, the more bitterly do they hate it, and discover
the greater aversation to it. So ye see, That though the Scene of the Question
seemed to be laid afar off, yet the purport, and design of it reaches us at
home. And I believe, No godly private Christian will say, that he is not
concerned to seek the Conversion and Salvation of the ignorant, sensual,
profane, and ungodly ones, among whom they live. If ye ask me then, How may we
be helpful thereunto? I answer, That generally, the same Methods are to be made
use of, that have already been insisted upon. As, To endeavor, in our several
Stations and Capacities, That such may be employed, and encouraged to Preach
the Gospel, as are themselves seasoned with the Spirit, and grace of it, and
zealously seek the Conversion, and Salvation of Souls. To Pray more fervently
for the pouring out of the Spirit, to make the Preaching of the Word
successful. To remove all Impediments and Obstructions, as far as we can, out
of their way. To assist them with what help we can, by obliging, instructing,
and persuading, and walking exemplarily before them. But I shall not proceed
farther in this, because it would draw out the Discourse to too great a length:
and I think it would be for your Edification, to review over again, what has
been already insisted upon, and then, upon second thoughts, ye may discover
more, than fell under your notice, in the first cursory reading. I shall
conclude all with Jam. v. 19, 20. Brethren, If any of you do err from the
faith, and one convert him, Let him know, that he which converteth the Sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude
of sins.

Quest. How Christ is to be followed as our Example? SERMON XIII.
1 Pet. 2.21. lat. part. Leaving us an example, that ye should follow his
steps.
THE Persons to whom the Apostle wrote this Epistle; are in the beginning of
it, styled Strangers. So they were, because dispersed and scattered in several
Kingdoms of the Gentiles; (...), Joh. 3.7.
and they were Pilgrims and Sojourners in the Earth it self; being regenerated
and born from above; and minding a better Country; than was to be found here
below. The Apostle endeavors to strengthen their Faith, to enliven their Hope,
to fix their hearts upon the incorruptible and undefiled Inheritance: and to
keep them in the way that leads to it.

In this Chapter, where my Text lies, He admonishes them to abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the soul: he exhorts them to a conversation,
that would glorify God, convince the World, and adorn the Gospel: their Zeal
ought to be so great of those works that are good; that they should not think
much to suffer for well doing. Bona agere, and mala pati; to do good, and to
hold on in so doing, though very ill requited for it; this is high and noble
indeed; this is an honor not vouchsafed to the elect Angels; who are not
capable of suffering; this is to be a Christian in truth and eminency: and to
resemble Christ himself who suffered for us; leaving us an example that we
should follow his steps.

In the words which I have read, you may take notice,

1. Of one end of Christ in Suffering; and that is, that he might leave us an
example. To say that this was the principal end of his passion; to deny his
satisfaction, as if it were impossible or needless; is heretical in a very high
degree; to deny the Blood of Christ to be the price of our redemption, is to
deny the Lord that bought us: And truly the only propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin
being rejected; there is no other remaining; but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and of fiery indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. And
yet though Christ bare our sins in his own body on the tree; He is not only our
Redeemer, but our Example. He has bequeathed Blessings never enough to be
valued, in his Testament: he has also left us an incomparable Example. The
Greek word (...), which signifies Example, is either taken from excellent
Writing-Masters, who set a fair Copy for their Scholars to write after; or it is
taken from Painters, who draw a curious Masterpiece, for inferior Artists
their Admiration and Imitation.

2. They were remarkable steps that Christ took when he was here in the days of
his flesh: and among them all he did not take one wrong one. He was made of a
Woman, made under the Law; and he did not in the least transgress the Law. He
came upon this Earth to do his Father's Will; Heb. 10.7. Lo, I come (in the
volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. And never did he
any thing that was in any degree contrary to it.

3. The Steps of Christ are to be followed. Good men in Scripture are our
patterns, whose Faith and Patience we are to follow, Heb. 6.12. That ye be not
slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promise. The Cloud of witnesses is to be minded, and the bright side of it
gives a good light unto our feet: but there is a dark side of the Cloud which
may make us cautious: we must take heed of resembling the best of Men in that
which is bad, in their falls and infirmities. Abraham is renowned for his
faith; yet not to be imitated, in the carnal shifts he made for the saving of
his life. Barnabas was to be blamed, for being carried away by Peter's
dissimulation. But Christ is such an example; as to walk according to it; and
to walk by the strictest rule is all one: for our Lord did whatsoever became
him; and exactly fulfilled all righteousness.

4. Here is a special intimation, (as appears by the context) of a Christian's
Duty patiently to bear injuries, and to take up the cross. Though the Gospel be
the gladdest tidings, yet Suffering is a word that sounds very harsh to flesh
and blood. But the Apostle bids us behold Christ in his Sufferings, and not
think much of our afflictions, which were but a drop, compared with His, which
were a vast Ocean. The Sufferings of Christ the Head, were unconceivably
greater, than those which any of his Members at any time are called to undergo.
And indeed when he drank the Cup his Father gave him: he drank out the Curse
and bitterness of it; so that it is both bless't and sweetened to the Lambs
followers who are to drink after him.

5. The Sufferings of Christ and his Example, being joined together in the
Text: here is a signification, that by his Death he has purchased Grace to
assist and enable us to follow his example. Our Lord knows our natural
impotency; nay, averseness to follow him, or so much as to look to him. His
death is effectual therefore to kill our Sin; and to heal our depraved Nature:
his power rests upon us that we may tread the Path in which he is gone before
us. I am able to do all things, says the Apostle, through Christ strengthening
me.

I am desired this Morning to speak of Christ as our Example: and to show how
Christians are to follow him. This is a Theme that commends it self to you; by
its excellency; usefulness; and seasonableness, in such an Age; wherein there
is such a sinful, sad, and almost universal degenerating from true and real
Christianity. Glorious Head! had thou ever on earth a Body more unlike thee
than at this day. How few manifestly declare themselves the Epistles of Christ
written by the Spirit of the living God! Few Professors have his Image, who yet
bear his superscription.

In the handling of this Subject; I shall, 1. Premise some things by way of
Caution. 2. Show you in what respects Christ is an Example to be followed. 3.
Produce some Arguments to persuade you to the imitation of him. 4. Close with
some Directions how this duty may be done effectually.


In the first place I am to premise some things by way of Caution.

1. Think not as long as you remain in this world, to be altogether free from
Sin as Christ was. He indeed was from his Conception in the Womb, to his
Ascension far above all visible Heavens, altogether immaculate and without
blemish. Some have fancied spots in the Sun; but sure I am, in the Sun of
righteousness there is none. The Sins of all that are saved were laid upon him:
but no Sin was ever found in him, or done by him. The Apostle tells us, that he
was holy, harmless and undefiled, Heb. 7.26. You are indeed to imitate Christ
in Purity; but perfect Holiness you cannot attain to; while you carry such a
body of Death about you, and are in such a world as this. It may comfort you,
to consider; after the fall of the first Adam, and the sad consequences of it;
how the second Adam stood and conquered, and kept himself unspotted from the
world, all the while he conversed in it; But as long as you remain on Earth,
some defilement will cleave to you; to admonish you where you are; and to make
you long for the heavenly Jerusalem. More and more holy you may; and ought to
be; but to be completely holy; is the happiness not of Earth, but Heaven.

2. Think not that Christ in all his actions is to be imitated. There are
Royalties belonging to our Lord Jesus which none must invade. He alone is Judge
and Lawgiver in Zion: and that worship is vain which is taught by the Precepts
of Men. Christ is all in all, he fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. When the Fathers
of the last Lateran Council, told Leo the Tenth, That all Power was given to
him in Heaven and Earth: As it was blasphemous flattery in them to give; so it
was blasphemous pride and right Antichristian arrogance in Him to accept the
honor. When our Lord was upon Earth; there were several acts of Power which he
exerted, as, giving sight to the blind, raising the dead, and such like; which
Christians now must not think of doing. Elegit Apostolos humiliter natos,
inhonoratos, illiterat^^; ut quicquid Magnum essent and facerent; Ipse in eis
esset and faceret. Aug. de C. D. l. 18. c. 49.
I grant that the power of working Miracles was communicated to the Apostles
and others; but it was Res unius aetatis, a thing that lasted little longer
than One age. These Miracles were necessary when the Gospel was first to be
planted in the world; but now they are ceased: and if there were but a general
exactness and exemplariness, in Christians lives and practices; this might be
majus omni miraculo, a great deal more than Miracles toward the Gospels
Propagation.

3. Think not that your obedience can be meritorious, as was the obedience of
our Lord and Savior. The Apostle tells us; that by the obedience of One, i. e.
the second Adam; many are made righteous; and to this obedience is owing, that
abundance of grace which believers receive; the gift of righteousness; and also
reigning in life eternal, Romans 5.17.19. The Merit of our Lord Jesus is so every
way sufficient; that Believers Merit is as needless; as all things considered,
it is impossible. It was very Orthodox Humility in Jacob, when he confessed he
was less than the least of all mercies. And Nehemiah though he speaks again and
again of the good deeds he had done: was certainly very far from the opinion of
Merit. As appears, Neh. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also; and
spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.

4. You must not imagine that your greatest sufferings for the sake of
righteousness; are in the least expiatory of sin; as Christ's Sufferings were.
Christ was delivered for our offenses, and by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. the offering was but one; the
Sacrifice of himself: and it was offered but once: other Sacrifices are
unnecessary; it is unnecessary that this should be again offered. Our Lord upon
the Cross with his last breath, cried out, (...), It is finished, Joh. 19.30.
q. d. All is done, all is undergone that was needful for my Churches
acceptance with God; and the full remission of all their Trespasses.
Understand; that no Sufferings, that you can undergo for Christ's sake, are
satisfactory for your iniquities: do not by such a thought offer to derogate
from Christ's complete satisfaction. We read of some that came out of great
tribulation; but did the blood of these Martyrs justify them? no such matter;
they washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev.
7.14.

In the second place, I am to show you in what respects Christ is an Example to
be followed.

1. Christ is to be followed in his great Self-denial. It had been a great
Stoop in the Son of God; if his Deity had been veiled with the Nature of
Angels: a greater Stoop, it would have been to be made Flesh; though he had
been born of an Empress; and had been as glorious a Temporal Monarch, as the
Jews fancied he would be. But this is exceedingly amazing to behold Him, that
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, making himself of no reputation,
and taking upon him the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7. He did not abhor a poor
Virgins Womb; nor afterward to be laid in a Manger. And though he was Lord of
all, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be
rich; 2 Cor. 8.9. thus he pleased not himself. Romans 15.3. neither did he seek
himself and his own honor, but the honor and glory of him that sent him. Joh.
7.18.

How can he be a follower of Christ who is so utterly unlike him in being
selfish? Our Lord knew the prevalency of self-love; and how opposite it is to
the love of God, and care of the Soul: therefore he strictly requires
Self-denial. Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
(...), seipsum abdicet, as Beza translates it. Self-abdication is called for; a
man must have no regard to himself, to his own ends and inclinations; as they
are opposite unto, and lead him away from God, and from his Duty. Oh, act as
new Creatures, and as those that are not your former selves! seek not your own
things. Let nothing be done through vain glory; be ever diffident, and jealous
of your selves. Self is the Enemy that is always present; and most within us,
and that has the greatest power to sway us: We are not our own, we are bought
with a price; we should glorify the Lord that has bought us, as those that are
Debtors, not to our selves, but of our selves to Him.

2. Christ is to be followed in his Patient enduring the worlds hatred; and the
slights and contradiction of sinners. It was the Fathers and the Sons love to
the world, that brought Christ into it: and he came not to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3.17. Yet what strange kind
of usage from the world did he meet with! The world was mad upon Sin, venturous
upon Hell and wrath: and with contempt and hatred rejected the only Savior.
His Person they are prejudiced against; his Doctrine they contradict; and his
Design they oppose, though their Deliverance and Salvation was designed.

Christians should not think it strange; that they meet with hard and unworthy
usage from the world. Cain did quickly show his enmity against Abel his
Brother, because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1 John
3.12. If the world hate you, says Christ, ye know it hated me before it hated
you; if ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you, Joh. 15.18, 19. Now as Christ was unmoved by the worlds Malice
either from doing his work, or from looking to the joy that was set before him;
so should Christians also be. Conquer the world by contempt of its fury;
overcome its evil with good: and as Christ made intercession for the
transgressors, that cried, Crucify him, crucify him; so do ye love your
Enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; pray for
them that despightfully use you, and persecute you, Mat. 5.44.

3. Christ is to be followed in his resisting and overcoming the Prince of
darkness. Satan assaulted the first Adam, and was too hard for him. He was so
bold, as to set upon the second Adam; but was foiled by the Captain of our
Salvation. If you read the History of Christ's Temptation, Mat. 4. you may
perceive that nothing from the tempter fastens upon our Lord Jesus. The
subtlety of the old Serpent was in vain; and by the Sword of the Spirit, all
his force was repelled.

Christians are to look upon the Evil one; as an Enemy that Christ has
conquered, and this should encourage them in their conflicts with him: they are
to despise his offers; they are not to be persuaded by his misapplication of
Scripture to any thing that is unjustifiable, and irregular. The Word of God
should abide in them; that they may be strong; and overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.14. The Head always resisted; shall the Members yield to this Destroyer?
Let not your hearts be filled with Satan; let not your heads and hands be
employed by him; who works in the Children of disobedience.

4. Christ is to be followed in his contempt of the worlds glory, and
contentment with a mean and low estate in it. Never was the world so set forth,
in such an alluring dress; as when the God of it in a moment of time, showed
unto our Lord Jesus all the Kingdoms of the world, and all the glory of them,
Luke 4.5. yet the heavenly Mind of Christ is not taken with the sight; he knew
he saw nothing but what was Vanity: and his Kingdom which was not of this
world, was a far better thing, than the worlds best Kingdom. Instead of
pursuing, he flees from a Crown; which the people were ready to force upon his
head.

Ambition and covetousness after worldly grandeur and gain; which make us so
unlike to Christ; should be far from us. If the world be the great thing with
us; Mammon will have us at command; and Christ will have but little service
from us. Why should that be high in the esteem and affection of your hearts,
which Christ so little minded? Love not the world, neither the things that are
in the world, 1 John 2.15. Set your affection on things above, not on things
that are on earth, Col. 3.2. If you have the worlds riches, let not your minds
be high, nor your hearts set upon them; and be rich in good works; if you are
in a meaner estate, be satisfied; remember who said, The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head. The best men in the world; that have done most good in the world, have
least cared for the world; and have been most willing to leave the world; and
go to a better.

5. Christ is to be followed in his living a life so very beneficial; doing
good being his perpetual business. The Apostle Peter, who was one of his
greatest and most constant attendants, says, that he went about doing good,
Act. 10.38. to do thus was meat and drink to him. How great was his Kindness
and Compassion to Souls; how much Mercy does he show to the Bodies of Men!

You that are Christians, be very active in the best sense; the true Members of
Christ have the Spirit of the Head in them, whose fruit is in all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5.9. What have you Faith for, but that it may
work by Love? Why are you created in Christ Jesus, but that you may be employed
in good works, which God has before ordained, that you should walk in them?
Ephesians. 2.10. Be sure to do justly; be injurious to none; render unto all their
dues: and do not only consult the dues of others; but their needs also; and
love to be merciful; and let the perishing Souls, as well as the distressed
Bodies of others; have a great share in your Compassions. As you have
opportunity do good unto all men; and good of as many sorts, as may be;
especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. The Apostle speaks with great
authority and asseveration, when he presses Christian practice. This is a
faithful saying; and these things I will that thou affirm constantly; that they
who have believed in God, might be careful to maintain good works; these things
are good and profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. A Christian by Profession, who
lives wickedly, is not a true Member; but a Monster in the Church; and will not
be endured long, but is near to be cut off and destroyed. It Is a true Saying,
(...). Death does not destroy the Soul; but it is an ill Life that ruins it.

6. Christ is to be followed in his most profitable and edifying Communication.
We read, Psalm. 45.2. That grace was poured into his Lips: the gracious words
that proceeded out of his mouth, were the wonder of the hearers, Luke 4.22.
Exact truth always accompanied his Speeches: he never spoke a word that was
offensive to God, or injurious to any man. Was he chargeable with guile? or
when he was reviled did he revile again? No, no; he gave a better example: he
speaks words to awaken Sinners; to search Hypocrites; and how does he comfort
the mourners; calling all the weary and heavy laden to come to him for rest? He
takes occasion almost from every thing; to discourse of the heavenly kingdom.
His parables of the sower, of leaven, of the Merchant man seeking goodly
pearls, and such like; plainly show that the most ordinary things may
spiritually be improved unto great usefulness.

All Professors! and especially you of London! set a watch before the door of
your lips; and let your words be like the words of Christ Jesus. Your lying and
corrupt communication; your slanderous and backbiting words; your passionate
and angry speeches and revilings; are these like Christ's language? An unbridled
tongue, though it utters many a falsehood; yet it speaks one certain truth, that
your Religion is but vain, Jam. 1.26. Let Conscience be tender; and purpose
with the Psalmist, that your mouths shall not transgress. Let the word of
Christ be more in your Hearts; for out of the abundance of the Heart the mouth
speaks. Let your speech be always with Grace, Col 4.6. Discourse as those who
do believe, you are debtors of edifying words one to another; that idle words
are heard by him that is in Heaven; and an account must be given of them in the
day of judgment.

7. Christ is to be followed in his manner of performing holy duties: never was
He negligent in an Ordinance. His cries were strong, his tears many, Heb 5.7.
and how does he wrestle with his Heavenly Father!

Christians should take heed of doing the work of God deceitfully, they should
be fervent in Spirit when serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. Look to your Hearts in
all your performances, for Gods eye is fixed upon them: and if they are not
present and right with him; your duties are but dead duties; and dead duties
are really dead works: so far from being acceptable; that they are an
abomination. When Christ was here upon the Earth, as he taught in other places,
so he went to the Temple, and to the Synagogues; though there was much
corruption in the Jewish Church. Christians should learn so much moderation, as
to own what is good even in them in whom there are mixtures of much that is
bad, and there should be a cause that will pass for just and sufficient at the
great day; before they resolve upon a total separation from their Brethren.

8. Christ is to be followed in his great humility and meekness, Mat. 11.29.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and
ye shall find rest unto your Souls. Pride overcame the first man; he affected
Divinity, and would needs be as God: but behold the Lord Jesus, who is the
Eternal God, and he humbled himself and became Man. Humility was the constant
attire and ornament of the Man Christ Jesus.

Though this great Redeemer be the chief of all the ways of God; though more of
God is visible in Him than in the whole Creation besides: Though he glorifies
his Father more than all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth put together: and
though he is exalted far above all Principalities and Powers, and Might and
Dominion, no^ only in this World, but in that which is to come: Yet our Lord
never was in the least High-minded.

Humility is one most remarkable feature in the image of Christ; therefore
resemble him in being humble. Be not proud of Habit, Hair, and Ornaments, 1
Pet. 5.5. (...). Etymologists derive the word from (...), which signifies
nodus, a knot. Be clothed, or be knotted with Humility: I wish that other
knots were less, and this which is incomparably most becoming; were more in
fashion. Let not your Estates puff you up. Riches are not always to men of
understanding; and there may be a great deal of Gold in the Purse, where there
is no true Wisdom in the Head, no Grace at all in the Heart: Let not your
natural parts; your acquired endowments; your spiritual Gifts, though never so
excellent; make you to look upon others with contempt; upon your selves with
admiration: you owe all Glory to that God from whom you have received all. Let
Humility look out at your Eyes; a proud look is one of the seven things which
the Lord hates, Prove. 6.16, 17. Let Humility express it self at your Lips; let
it attend you in all your addresses to God, and beautify your whole behavior,
and converses with Men. The more humble you are, the more of every other Grace
will be imparted to you; the more Rest and Peace you will have within your
selves; and since you will be ready to give him all the Praise; the Lord is
ready to put the more honor upon you in making you useful unto others.

9. Christ is to be followed in his love to God; great care to please him; and
fervent zeal for his Name and Glory, Joh. 14.31. The World may know, says
Christ, that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me Commandment even so I
do. He obeyed that first and great Commandment, and loved the Lord his God,
with all his Heart, and Soul, and Mind, and Strength. Christ's love made him do
whatever his Father pleased, Joh. 8.29. He that sent me is with me; the Father
has not left me alone, for I always do those things that please him. Christ's
love was stronger than Death; no Waters, no Floods, could drown it; neither
could the Baptism of blood quench it. Christ was consumed with Divine and Holy
zeal; and he matters not what befall him; so he might but glorify his Father;
and finish the work which was given him to do.

Oh let us bring our cold and careless Hearts hither; to the Consideration of
this Great Example; that the frost may melt; care may be awakened; and there
may be something in us, that may deserve the name of Warm zeal for God. Let us
be importunate in Prayer, and restless, till we feel the constraints of the
Love of God forceable; till we find really the greatest delight and pleasure in
doing that which pleases him; and, aiming at his Glory; we think not much of
labor, difficulty, and hazard; that this our end may be attained.

10. Christ is to be followed in his Sufferings and Death; and unto this my
Text has a more particular reference. Christ's Faith was strong; though he was
under a dismal Desertion. The Sun of Righteousness did set in a dark cloud. He
submitted to his Fathers will; and being confident of a joyful Resurrection, he
endured the Cross, and despised the shame.

When Christians come to die, their Faith should be most lively; as being near
finishing; it should by no means fail when there is most need of it. Though he
slay me, says Job, yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15. Christians should
submit, when the Lord of time will grant no more time to them; and they should
gladly enter upon a holy and blessed Eternity: When the body is about to be
sown in corruption; by Faith they should see that its lying there will be to
advantage; for it will be raised in Incorruption and Glory, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.
Let Death be more natural, or violent; it is yours in the Covenant; if you are
true Believers, 1 Cor. 3.22. Fear not to follow our Lord Jesus through that
dark passage into the House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. And
all the while you remain on Earth, study a Conformity to your Lords death, by
crucifying the Flesh, and dying to the World: The more dead you are with Christ
in this sense; you will live to the better purpose, and die in the greater
Peace.

In the third place, I am to produce some Arguments to persuade to the
imitation of our Lord Jesus.

1. Consider the greatness of the Person that gives you the Example. Christ has
this Name written on his Vesture, and on his Thigh; King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Rev. 19.16. A Roman Historian commends a Prince who is maximus imperio,
Velleius Paterculus. l. 2.
exemplo major, greatest in authority, and yet greater by his example. Every
thing in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth does bow, and is subject to the
Lord Jesus, and yet whose obedience ever was so exact as his was? He gives us
precepts, and he himself is the great Pattern of performance. Claudian the Poet
has a notable passage concerning the examples of Monarchs; and what a mighty
influence they have: -- Tunc observantior aequi
Fit populus; nec far vetat, cum viderit ipsum
Autorein, parere sibi; componitur Orbis
Regis ad exemplum; nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent; quam vita Regentis.


Kings have many observers, who very much Eye them, and their high estate both
awes and allures their Subjects to the imitation of them. If they keep within
the bounds of their own Laws, their Subjects will be the more unwilling to
transgress them. Christ is the universal Sovereign who commands both Heaven and
Earth; and has the whole Creation at his beck. He has kept the Laws, he gives
his Church; it is duty, it is interest, it is reasonable, it is honorable to
resemble him in obedience.

2. Remember the Relation, wherein you that are Saints do stand, unto the Lord
Jesus. You are espoused to Him; and should you not consent to be like to him,
who has betrothed you unto himself in Loving Kindness, Mercy and Faithfulness
for ever? Hos. 2.19, 20. Nay you are members of his body. Therefore you should
grow up into Him in all things which is the Head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15. You
should discover such a mind as Christ had; you should manifest the same Spirit;
and act as he acted when he was here in the World.

3. Consider, that God did fore-ordain you that are Believers to a conformity
to the Lord Jesus; Romans 8.29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son; that he might be the
firstborn among many Brethren. If you would appear with Christ in Glory, you
must be now changed into his Image; Holiness, and patient suffering will make
you like him, and is the decreed way unto his Kingdom.

4. Walking as Christ walked will make it evident that you are indeed in him, 1 John 2.6. He that says he abides in him, ought to prove what he says, and
himself so to walk even as he walked: To be in Christ, is to be a new creature.
And these new Creatures do all resemble him; for he is formed in them. Naming
the name of Christ will never demonstrate your Christianity; unless you depart
from iniquity, which makes you so unlike unto your Lord.

But likeness to him, will prove you His in Truth. And an evidence of this;
what strong consolation will it afford? If you are in Christ; how safe are you?
you are secured from the curse of the Law; the stroke of vindictive Justice;
the wrath of the Destroyer, the bondage of Corruption and Sin; the sting of the
first Death, and the power of the second. If you are in Christ; His God is your
God, his Father your Father, Joh. 20.17. You are loved as He is loved, Joh.
17.23. That the World may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me. And v. 26. That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may
be in them, and I in them. You are joint-heirs with Christ unto the same
incorruptible inheritance; how firm and sure is your title! how certain and
soon will be your possession! and after possession is taken, you shall not be
dispossessed unto Eternity.

5. Your following the Example of Christ very much honors Him; and credits
Christianity, it is a sign, that Christ's death, has a mighty virtue in it, when
it makes you to die to Sin; and to be unmoved by the biggest offers, that
Mammon makes to you. It Is an argument that He is truly Christ, when you are
truly Christians; that He is indeed alive, when he lives in you, and makes you
to live to him* and like him; It Is a demonstration that our Lord is risen
indeed, when you rise with him, and seek those things that are above, Col. 3.1.

Christ is very much unknown, and being unknown, is undesired and neglected;
because so little of him is seen in Christians conversation. How few deserve
digito monstrari; to be pointed at, and to have such a Character given them?

There go the persons who discover such a Spirit; who talk, and walk too after
such a manner, that it is evident Christ dwells, and speaks, and walks, and
works in them!

Be all of you prevailed with; to honor your Lord Jesus; by showing the world,
what he was when here upon Earth; and how powerfully he works in you, though
now he is in Heaven. Chrysostom with great reason does call good works (...),
unanswerable Syllogisms, and demonstrations to confute and convince Infidels.
The World would flock into the Church; being struck with the Majesty and Glory
shining forth in Her; if She were but more like unto her glorious Head. But
when they who are called Christians, are so like unto the World; it is no wonder
if the men of the World continue still as they are.

6. Christ frequently speaks to you to follow him; and observes whether, and
how you do it. His word is plain, that you should learn his Doctrine, and live
after his example. And his eyes which are as a flaming fire: are upon
Professors ways. His Omniscience should be more firmly believed, and seriously
considered by the Church it self, Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I
am He which searches the Reins and Hearts; and I will give to every one of you
according to your works. I shall here by a Prosopopeia, bring in our Lord Jesus
speaking to you; and himself propounding his own Example, that you may hear,
and heed, and follow the Lamb of God. To this effect Christ speaks to you:

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of the Earth! Look unto me, and
become like me, all you that profess your selves to be my Members! What Do you
see in me, that in any reason should turn away your faces or your hearts from
me? Blessed is He whosoever shall not be offended in Me. The Father is well
pleased in Me, and so should you; as you value his favor, and would consult
your own interest. I never took so much as one step in the ways of misery and
destruction; be you sure to avoid them. I always trod in those paths which to
you will prove pleasantness and peace; though to satisfy for your deviations,
and going astray; I was fain my self to be a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief. Consider your Lord and Master; you that call your selves my disciples.
Many look upon you that will not look into my word, and will judge of Me by
your practices. Be not so injurious to Me; by misrepresenting Me; as if I
allowed those evils which you allow your selves in. Why should I be wounded in
my honor in the house of my Friends? Why should you crucify me afresh: And put
me to an open shame?

When you yield to Satan's temptations, are you like to me? When you are eager
after worldly wealth; the applause of men; and flesh-pleasing delights; are you
like to me? When you are proud and haughty; bitter, envious and revengeful; do
you at all resemble Me? When you seek your selves, and please your selves, and
matter not how much God is forgotten and displeased; Am I in this your example?
O all you upon whom my name is called, content not your selves with an empty
name! Be my disciples in truth; and let the same mind that was in me be in you
also: be my disciples indeed; live as I did in the World; to honor God, and to
do good to man, let it be your business; for I have left you an example, that
you should follow my steps.

7. Follow Christ's Example, that you may enter into his glory. For, if we be
dead with him, says the Apostle, we shall live with him; if we suffer with him,
we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Be of good courage, and conflict
(but do it in his Strength) with your Spiritual enemies; and you shall be
conquerours, nay more than conquerours over them; and hark what Christ promises
to them that overcome: Nay to every one of them; Rev. 3.21. To him that
overcomes will I give to sit with me in my throne, even as I overcame, and am
set down with my Father in his throne. Conformity to Christ in his Humiliation,
will end in a conformity to him in his Exaltation: All in the next world shall
resemble in glory; whom grace in this world has made to resemble him, Col. 3.4.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory.

8. One word farther I would speak to my self and my brethren in the Ministry
of the Gospel. We are under special obligations to follow Christ's Example. All
the flock should be like the great Shepherd; but especially the Vnder-Shepherds
should resemble him, that they may be able to say with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
11.1. Be ye followers of us, for we are followers of Christ. How clear should
be the light in our Heads! who have special instruction from him, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. With what authority
should we speak, who speak in his Name: Who speak his words and preach his
everlasting Gospel: and what we bind on Earth is bound in Heaven! and what we
loose on Earth is loosed in heaven!

How should we have compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the
way! How faithfully should we warn the secure, to flee from wrath! How
earnestly should we entreat sinners to be reconciled! How should we long after
Souls in the bowels of Jesus Christ! Phil. 1.8. And since He thought not his
blood too dear to redeem them; we should not think much of our Prayers, Tears,
Study, Sweat and Labor for their Salvation.

How self-denying should we be! counting it far greater wisdom to win Souls;
than to seek great things for our selves! How exemplary should we be in Word,
in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity Memento voci tuae
dare vocem virtutis; ut opera tua verbis concinant. Cures prius facere q^am
docere. Sermo quidem vivus and efficax exempl^m est operis, facile faciens
suadibile quod dicitur, dum monstrat factib^^ quod suadetur Bernard, Epist.
201. Passione ostendit quid pro veritate sustinere; Resurrectione, quid in
aeternitate sperare debe^mus, Aug. de C. D. lib. 18. c. 49.
: 1 Timothy 4.12. In all things we should show our selves patterns of good works.
That our Sermons being practiced by our selves as well as preached; may be with
greater efficacy upon others.

And since our Lord Jesus after he had preached the Kingdom of God, was himself
a Sacrifice; we should not be unwilling to confirm the doctrine we deliver with
our blood; nor refuse if called to it to be offered upon the Sacrifice and
Service of the Churches Faith, Phil. 2.17 This kind of Spirit made the Apostle
like to Christ indeed, Acts 20.24. But none of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear to my self, that I may finish my course with joy; and the
Ministry I have received of the Lord Jesus Christ, to testify the Gospel of the
grace of God.

In the fourth and last place, I am to conclude with some Directions how you
may be able to follow the Example of our Lord Jesus.

1. Let your unlikeness to Christ be matter of your great humiliation. It
should be your trouble, that you have been so long learning, and have learned
Christ no better: That so much of the old Man remains to be put off; that no
more of the new man is put on. Look upon the passions and lusts of the flesh as
so many foul blemishes, as so many deforming wrinkles of the Old Adam; the more
of these, there is in you; they make you the more unlike to him who is
altogether lovely. Be humbled for your sin, and hate it; that is the way to be
rid of it. Sin cannot stand before a perfect hatred, but languishes and dies
away; whereas love to it is the life and strength of it.

2. Study more the admirable excellency and fairness of the copy Christ has set
you. And how desirable it is still to be growing up more and more into him in
all things. The beauty of Men and Angels is black to Christ's fairness; to be
like Him, is to have that which truly deserves the name of excellency; With
open face and intentive eyes behold, as in a glass, the glory of your Lord,
that you may be changed into the same image; and become glorious your selves, 2
Cor 3. ult.

3. Being sensible of your own impotency, live by Faith on the Son of God.
Remember it is in Him that you have both righteousness and strength, Isa. 45.24.
Grace to be like Christ is from him. He strengthens the weak hands; he confirms
the feeble knees, that we may work and walk after his Example. If you should
attempt to do this in your own might; that attempt would be, not only vain, but
an argument of your pride and ignorance. Can the branch bear fruit of it self?
It Is from the Vine, that sap is communicated to it, to make it fruitful: You
must be, and abide in Christ, and ever be deriving life and virtue from Him;
that you may bear fruit worthy of Him, Joh. 15.4, 5. Abide in me, and I in you;
as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye except ye abide in me: I am the Vine; ye are the branches; he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me
ye can do nothing.

4 Give up your selves to the conduct of Christ's own Spirit. How often is it
said, He that has an ear, let him h^ar what the Spirit says unto the
Churches? The Spirit glorifies the Lord Jesus; represents his amiableness, and
anoints the eyes with eye salve, that it may be seen. And wherever the Image
of Christ is; it is this Spirit that has instampt it upon the Soul. Live in the
Spirit, and Walk in the Spirit; so your feet shall not decline from the Steps
of Christ; you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.16.25. He will
cause you to look unto Jesus; and enable you to follow him, without turning
aside, or drawing back: Till you come to be where he is, and behold his glory:
and then you will be satisfied with his likeness; and be for ever with the Lord.

The Case Proposed. Quest. How may a lukewarm Temper be effectually cured? I
add, in our selves, and in one another. The Resolution given. SERMON XIV.
Heb. x. 24, 25. (...).

And let us consider one another to provoke to love, and to good works; not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is: but
exhorting one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day (to be)
approaching.


THE inspired Author of this profound, sublime, nervous Epistle (whether St.
Luke, or Barnabas, or Clement, or Apollos, or the Apostle Paul, as I most
think, I here dispute not) is evidently walking in the searches of the great
Excellency of Christianity, as it was brought unto us by, and took its
denomination from, and serves the purposes, and speaks the Eminence, Unction,
and Prerogatives and Designs of Christ the Son of God. And this discourse he
here directs to the Hebrews, by whom we may understand those Christian Jews
that were in Syria, Judea, and principally at Jerusalem; for those that were
dispersed through the Provinces of the Roman Empire, were commonly called
Greeks. And those indeed who were Converted to the Christian Faith were
terribly persecuted by the Jews their Brethren, and assaulted by Seducers to
work them back again to their deserted Judaism; and much ado they had to stand
their ground. Whereupon this Author (mindful of what his Lord had said in Mat.
xxiv. 9-13.) attempts to show the Eminencies of their State, and that Judaism
was every way transcended by Christianity. The Author of it was a greater and
better Person than Moses, Aaron or Melchizedeck. The Doctrines were more
mysterious and sublime. The Laws more spiritual, and most accurately suited to
the completing and perpetuating of the Divine Life and Nature in them; and to
the advancing them unto all Conformities to God, imitations of him, and
intimacies with him: The Promises were more glorious, rich and full; and all
the Constitutions, Furniture, Services, Ministry and Advantages of the Gospel
Polity and Temple, carried more glorious signatures of God upon them; and were
more eminently attested, patronized and succeeded by God, than ever Judaism
was, or than it could pretend unto. Why therefore should it be deserted, or
coldly owned, or improved negligently or defectively?

This Author having therefore gained his point, and thoroughly proved the
dignity of the Christian state and calling, beyond all possibility of grounded
Cavils or competition; He next proceeds to show these Hebrews the genuine and
just improvement of what he had demonstrated, Heb. x. 19-39 xi, xii, xiii. 1-19.

The Casuistical consideration of the Text, best serves the stated purpose of
this hour. And that I may be evidently pertinent, clear, succinct, and
profitable, let me now lay the Case and Text together, and consider them in
their relative aspects each toward the other.

1. Luke-warmness is the remissness or defectiveness of heat (...) or (...), a
middle thing betwixt cold and heat. When there is not heat enough in subjecto
capaci, to serve the purposes, that such a thing under such circumstances
should subserve. Now God and Christ expect a fervent Spirit, burning and
flaming Love; and in the Text, Love is here represented as needing Provocation.
Heart-warmth is nothing else but love suiting and accommodating it self to
worthy objects, according to their apprehended dignity, usefulness, or
concerns. Love is the endearing to our selves of apprehended Excellence or
Goodness, and our letting out our selves, or the issuings forth of our pleased
wills in correspondent motions toward, reposes in, obsequiousness to, and
engagements for, what we admire and affect; for worth or excellence discerned,
makes us accommodate our selves unto the pleasure and concerns thereof*
according to its nature, place, and posture toward us, and our affairs
therewith. When therefore this Affection, Principle or Grace (or Passion, if
Love may properly be called so) is grown too weak to fix the will, and to
influence the life so as to please its God, and turns indifferent, and
unconcerned and variable as the winds and weather change; this languor of the
Heart and Will, and its easiness and proneness to be drawn off from God and
things Divine, we call Luke-warmness; which is nothing else, indeed, but the
sluggishness and dullness of the heart and will to such a degree, as that it is
not duly affected with, nor startled at, nor concerned intimately about what is
truly excellent, and of great consequence and importance to us. And hence our
Author phrases it by (...), in that Love may and ought to be smart and keen,
heating and urging all the powers of the Soul to excite all their vigours and
to perform all their Functions with strength and pleasure. Consider well, Cant.
viii. 6, 7. ii Cor. v. 14. i These. ii 8. Heart unaffectedness, unconcernedness
and inactivity, let Souls and their concerns, God's interest, and the Matters
of Christ's Kingdom, go and be as they will, Phil. ii. 20, 21. This is the
malady to be cured.

2. It is not so much a single instance of luke-warmness, as a temper that the
case speaks of. Nor does the Text intend an intermittent Fever in the heart;
it is not a transient Paroxysm, by fits and starts for hearts to burn; but it is
a stated frame that must be changed and fixed. The Malady is a lukewarm temper,
a frame and constitution of the inward man, too weakly bent and biased toward
God and heavenly things, to make them statedly its predominant ambition,
business and delight, Act. xi. 23. ii Cor. v. 9. A frame of Soul that sits too
loose toward God to do, to bear, to be, to hope, to wait much for him in the
stormy and dark day.

3. It is the effectual cure hereof that the case aims at; and in this Paroxysm
of Love and of Good Works the cure consists. Hence, Labor of love, Heb. vi.
10. i These. i. 3. Love abounding more and more, in knowledge and in all
judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offense, until the day of Christ; being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the Glory and Praise
of God, Phil. i. 9. -- 11. when Love is fervent, fixed, and genuinely fruitful,
then is this lukewarm temper cured indeed. Hence, zealous of good works. See
Tit. ii. 11. -- 14.

4. How this Cure of such a temper may be effectually wrought, is the next
thing to be enquired into; and the great import of the case before us; and a
great cluster of apt and pertinent Expedients does the Text here entertain us
with Such as, 1. Determining and designing to enterprise the thing; here called
Provocation to love and to good works, (...)^ This is the great concern to be
espoused, and the great scope of our intentions, resolutions, and endeavors.
Love, and good works, are the great Cure of this Distemper, to which we must
direct our thoughts, words, deeds, provokingly. Col iv. 5* 6 Such a Distemper
must not be ordinarily expected to be cured by accident; nor are their Labors
likely to be prosperous, who do not cordially design this Cure. 2 The mutual
Considerations of Persons. Consider one another to a Provocation. So the Greek.
We must take into serious, deep and frequent thoughts, the quality, capacity,
spirits, courses and concerns of one another, and see wherein they are
defective, or exemplary and proficient in these things; as also how to qualify
our selves, and how to manage our spirits, speeches and behavior, to the
procurement of this end; and how to provoke our selves to Love, and to Good
Works, by what we see in others, and hear from them or concerning them, Phil.
iv. 8, 9. Romans xv. 14. i These. v. 14, 15. for we are all of us obnoxious unto
very great decays in Christian Affections and Behavior (and who is free
throughout from guilt herein?) and equally concerned in this healthful exercise
and temper. 3. Actual Endeavors upon consideration to fix the temper and
behavior right; for thoughts and purposes are vain things till they be put in
execution. Such as Mutual Exhortation, attending on assembling of our selves
together, and our growthful progress in these things, under the reinforcements
and frequent representations of the approaching day. Hence then consider we, 1.
The Text. 2. The Case.

First, The Text.

And here we have, 1. The Objects to be considered; one another. 2. The Duty
here required as conversant about these Objects, Consider. 3. The End,
Provocation to love and to good works. 4. The means and manner of performing it
to purpose, and with good Success, not forsaking the Assembling of our selves
together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another. 5. The great
inducement hereunto, so much the more as ye see the day approaching. Improving
the thoughts, belief and expectations of this approaching solemn day, and
consequently, our concerns therein as the most awful motive and quickening
encouragement of our Preparatory State and Work.

And here I must premise, that the case here proposed to our present thoughts
may and must be resolved into two. 1. How a lukewarm temper may be cured by us
in our selves: 2. How to be cured in each other. Now seeing we are all related
to the same God, and under the same circumstances as to our capacity of
pleasing or displeasing God, of deserting or adhering to our Christian State
and work; and all of us, as Christians, under the same powerful and manifold
obligations to be found Right and Faithful in this day. And as all of us are
determined to solemn Judgment, and an Eternal State, according to the temper of
our Spirits, and tenor of our Lives, as found to be when that day comes. What
can we say to one another, to provoke each other to love and to good works,
that will not equally concern our selves? Whatever then we consider in each
other, is as considerable in our selves. Whatever we design hereby to provoke
others regularly to, is to be equally designed, and enterprized, and promoted
upon our selves. Whatever we speak to others, or plead with others, has the
same Errand to, and ought deservedly to be as cogent and prevailing with our
selves. We are all concerned in the helpfulness of present Assemblies, and in
the process and results of the last general Assembly; and what we propose or
press by way of Counsel, Request, Encouragement, etc. must be as spoken to our
selves. Taking it then for granted and concluded, and needless to be proved and
demonstrated, 1. That luke-warmness is an heart-distemper. 2. And that the
formal Nature of it lies in the remissness of due Affections unto their proper
worthy objects: and so in too mean resentments, and distastings of whatever is
contrary thereunto. 3. That the Cure of this Distemper formally consists in the
due fervor of provoked Love, invigorating and producing its congenial
Operations, and Effects (here called Good Works, which are but answerableness
of Practice and Behavior to this Principle, or Grace.) 4. And that all these
means and courses which genuinely and statedly relate hereto as divinely
instituted by him, whose Blessing is entailed hereon, to make them prosperous
and successful hereunto, are the most likely means to work this Cure. 5. And
that the purport of my Text amounts to this, and is it self of Divine
Inspiration; and so of God's appointment for this End. Taking, I say, these
things for granted, for brevities sake, I shall dispatch the Text and Case
together, in the close Consideration of these three General Heads or Topics of
Discourse.

1. The things to be provoked to, Love and Good Works; for herein the Cure
consists.

2. The things that are most likely, and prepared to provoke hereto; and so the
Remedy or Means will be directed to.

3. The Course and Method of improving these most regularly; and so the
skilful, faithful management thereof will be considered.

1. The things to be provoked to.

Love and Good works.] Fervor and Vigor in the heart, to and for its proper
Objects, productive of their right Effects, are the Soul's Health indeed; the
very esse formale of this Cure in hand; for Knowledge ministers to Faith in its
Production and Proficiency, and in all its Exercises and Designs. Hence,
established in the Faith, as ye have been taught, Col. ii. 7. and 1 John v. 9.
-- 14. for we must know whom to believe, in what, and why; The credibility of a
Witness, the trustiness of a Promiser and Undertaker, the valuableness and
certainty of things Promised, and the way of acquisition and attaining what is
promised, if Promises be attended with, and ordered to depend upon any thing
commanded by the Promiser to be done by us; these must be duly known ere Faith
can fasten on them. Faith is no blind, no inconsiderate, no rash, no groundless
act; I know whom I have believed, ii Tim. i. 12. And it is the evidence of
things not seen, Hebr. xi* 1. And Faith works by love, or it is inwrought (and
beco^^ ^^ergetical) by Love; (...), Gal. v. 6. Building your s^ (...) your most
holy Faith, keep your selves in the love of God, Jude ^^.21. Faiths proper work
and great design upon the Heart or Will (...) t^ kindle, feed and keep this
holy flame of Love within, and to direct and keep it to its due Expressions and
Employments. Thus Truths, and Hearts, are brought together, and fixed in their
reciprocal Endearments, ii Tim. i. 13. And then God, and the Image, Interest,
Saints and things of God; are like the King upon his Throne with all his lovely
train about him. And then this Faith makes Christ upon the Heart, and dwelling
there, like Manoahs Angel, working wonderously in these flames of love; for now
no faculty, sense, or member can be idle, languid or indifferent amidst such
glorious and lovely Objects, when urged and provoked by such powerful and busy
Principles, as Faith and Love to be employed for God, Truths, Duty, Souls, and
Glory. Let us then consider it in its, 1. Objects. 2. Actings. And 3. Effects.

I. The Objects of this Love, toward which it is to move, for which it is to
act, wherewith it must converse, and wherein at last it is to rest, and to
repose it self for ever; and these are the Name, the Things, the Children of
God, the good of Men; or rather God as in himself, the essential source and
abyss of perfection, bliss and glory. Of through, and to whom all things are;
who is God blessed for evermore. Here study well these following Texts as
shadowing forth that only holy One; of whom comparatively the Universe, (how
vast in it is Expansions, how gloriously rich in Furniture and Treasures, how
variously replenished with Inhabitants and how accurately framed and governed,
who knows?) is but as one small hint. See I say, Exodus xv. 11. xxxiv. 6.7. i
Chron. xxix. 10, -- 13. Job xi. 7, -- 9. Isa. vi. 3 i Tim. i. 17. and vi. 15,
16. i Joh. i. 5. To name no more, save only One that pertinently tells us, That
God is love, i Joh. iv. 16. Here, Love and Goodness are essentially in their
incomprehensible and immense perfection; from hence are all the Communications
of derived goodness, and all the issuings forth thereof, that all the Creatures
can any way receive; and of this boundless Ocean are they all swallowed up
Eternally at last. 2. God in the sallyings forth of his communicative and
endearing Name; and in all those Mirrours and Testimonies of himself, which he
affords us, Romans i. 20. Act. xvii. 24. -- 29. i Tim. iii. 16. Heb. i. 3. Ephesians.
iv. 6. -- 24. O what a Mirror of Divine perfection is the vast fabri^k of the
Universe! How far does it extend it self! How richly has it is Maker furnished
it with glorious Luminaries! vast in their bulk, beautiful in their orderly
Scituations, constant and regular in their courses, and highly useful, and as
liberal in their dispensings of those influences, which serve more glorious,
and various purposes than any man can reach at present; or perhaps in all the
proficiencies of Eternity, if such things may with modesty be supposed to be
there. O wonderful Power in its Production! Wonderful Wisdom in it is harmonious
contrivance, and compagination, and as great goodness in those stores and
Magazines, which are so generously provided for, and accommodated to all the
capacities and necessities, and concerns of the whole frame, and of every part
thereof. Is not Gods glorious Name here legible, and his kind Heart and Hand,
as fully, and even sensibly discernible herein? We are hereby both rendered and
constrained to be his Witnesses that he is God, and the best Object of our
Love. Here therefore must our Love both look and fix: Should I here speak of
God-Redeemer, in all the glorious appearances, performances and dispensations
of his Indwelling Deity in our Nature: Or of what the Spirit is and does; of
all the Scenes and Systems of common and special Providence; of all the
Constitutions and Administrations of the upper and lower World, and of the
Church Militant and Triumphant. Or should I show you Man in his natural State,
as the workmanship of the God of Nature: Or in his Christian State, as in his
Renovation by the God of Grace: Or in his Glorified State at last, as the
Eternal Temple of the Spirit of Grace. Should I show you the Angelical State,
or all the excellencies of the end, and of the orderly Means and Instruments
which relate thereto; the Name, Seed, Things of God. You would see with whom
and what, Love has to do. But to sum up all; 1. God is the Object of this
Love, as considered in his essential Perfections, Trinity of Persons. 2. In his
Creation of the Universe of Beings. 3. In his Relations consequent upon
Creation, and avouchedly assumed by him. 4. In those various Signatures and
Explications of his Name, that are upon the whole, and every part of his
Creation; according to the various Habitudes and States thereof. 5. And in his
relative deportments toward them, and Communications to them, as they are
capable of receiving them. 2. Jesus Christ in all his Mediatorial Excellencies,
Dignities and Prerogatives, in his Relations, Offices, Unction, Performances
and Acquests both for himself, as one exalted now to his Fathers right hand:
And for us, as our exalted and engaged Head in all his Sympathies and
Endearments. 3. The Holy Ghost, as God our Sanctifier in all those Counsels,
Quicknings, Comforts, which he provideth for us, offers to us, and succeeds
in us and upon us. And 4. Those that are near and dear to God, according to the
various measures of their Unction, Stations, and Serviceableness unto God; and
here comes in the main design both of my Text, and Case, viz. That we
Christians, be so considered each by other, as that Christian Excellencies be
observed to mutual Inflammations of Endearments where they are; that Christian
Principles and Affections may be awakened, invigorated and advanced, where they
are dormant, idle or decayed, and that accordingly those Gospel means and helps
be valued duly and pertinently applied and improved, which may reduce us to,
and keep us in the fervours and vigours of our Christian love, that so the love
of our espousals may fix and center in the God of Love, and have its orderly
and kindly Circulations and Diffusions through the whole Body, and every thing
abhorred, resisted, and rejected, that shall or would attempt a rape thereon.
For toward these glorious and lovely Objects, there should be no indifference,
nor cold affections, nor the least possibility of a divorce therefrom, that we
by any Diligence, Providence, or Resolution can prevent. Whatever as to Things
and Persons, is really and evidently of God and for him, be it in us, with us,
or about us, must not sit loosly on our Hearts, for it is the Christian
Religion, as it imprinciples Souls for God, and Christ, and forms them after
God, and Christ, and keeps them faithful and proficient in their practical
devotedness to the Divine design upon us, that fits us for, and keeps us in the
State and Spirit of endearment unto God, ii Pet. i. 2. -- 11. and that must
imprinciple, and actuate our reciprocal affections and endearments each toward
other. See i Cor. vii. 19. and Gal. vi. 15. and v. 6. ii Cor. v. 16. -- 18.
Parties and Persons, no nor ecentrical Opinions, nor Magisterial Impositions of
dividing terms of Concord, in pretense and show, nor multitudes of Proselytes
to our novel darling self-conceited Notions; such things as these cannot
commend us unto God: why should they then be thought lukewarm, whose fervours
draw not forth themselves upon such pitiful, mean, unworthy things? Romans xiv.
17. -- 19. The Kingdom of God, and Christ must be endeared to us, with all the
Subjects of that Kingdom, in all their universally holding Principles, and
Interests. And the great fervours, vigours and effects of Love must be directed
to, and settled upon these objects, proportionably to their excellencies and
postures toward us, and our concerns with them, and Relations to them. This
for the Objects.

2. The formal nature of this Love; and here I shall premise, that it is best
understood and known by its own exercised, and experienced vigor. Sensation
helps us to the clearest, and most lively apprehensions, the most accurate
Definitions and Descriptions, that can be given us by the most sagacious and
exact Persons can never tell you to such degrees of satisfaction in your
information; what Health or Sickness, Hunger or Thirst, Pain or Ease, Light or
Darkness, Sweetness or Bitterness, etc. are, as one hours experience of your
own will do. Men that are born blind, have not by all the advantages of reading
to them, or discoursing with them, such clear discerning of light, as a little
opening of their own Eyes will help them to; Beauty and Melody are and must be
seen and heard before they can be duly understood; but as far as I am able, I
shall adventure to describe it thus.

Love is the Pleasure of the Heart or Will in the discerned and valued
excellency of its object. So as delightfully to make it accommodate it self
unto the Nature, Pleasure, and concerns thereof. Or it is the endearment of
apprehended excellence, so as to sweeten all our contemplations, and esteem
thereof; our motions toward it, our reposes in it, our sufferings and
adventures for it, and our reposes and abode therein. Here we may briefly note
these things. 1. When its Object does evidently transcend our reach and pitch
in excellence, then the formal Act of Love is a delightful Admiration of
Perfection. Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness cast us upon the heighths and
depths of wonder and astonishment, and entertain us with the highest
satisfactions in our severest, and most awful Contemplations thereof; these
ravishing views or thoughts of the incomprehensible source and abyss of
Perfection, which is Essential Goodness, and the very height thereof, (for
what is Goodness, but the height of Excellency?) affect us with the most
reverend sense thereof. 2. Where excellency appears as capable of being
shadowed forth by imitations and resemblances, and challenges our Conformities
thereunto, the formal act of Love is a pleased attempering of it self unto its
much valued and endeared object; joyfully loving and endeavoring a
correspondency and agreement with all the communicable excellencies and
allurements of such a valuable and admired pattern and exemplar; thus love is
an ambitious imitation of admired worth, pleasing it self in all it is gradual
approaches to it is Object, in it is seize of what most resembles him,
whose mirrours we so much long and please our selves to be: Thus our Christian
love (our Love to God, and unto Christ his Image) in it is nature, it is
operations, and seize is but the impress of Divine Perfections upon our
selves, with all the solaces, which arise in and from our thus transformed
selves. 3. When excellency appears upon the Theater, showing it is luster in
exquisite performances and Productions, bearing the Signatures of that Name,
whose works they are, ( as the Invisible things of God are known, by the things
that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead, Romans i. 20.) Then the formal
Act of Love is Pleasure in our notices and observations of the eminencies of
the cause appearing in the effects thereof, and in our delightful searches
thereinto. 4. When excellency appears upon the Throne of Government, the formal
Act of Love is our delightful acquiescence and satisfaction in, and our
cheerful comporting with all the Laws and Interests of such Government: Thus I
delight to do thy will, O God, Psalm. xl. 8. And this is love that we keep his
Commandments, i Joh. v. 3. And this is my meat, to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work, Joh. iv. 34. Authority owned, Laws obeyed,
disposals rested in, and all with cheerfulness. And then, 5. When Goodness
appears communicative, designing and dispensing kindnesses, directed and
designed to the benefit, and welfare of the Recipients of it is Communications.
The formal Act of Love in the thus befriended Persons, is their thankful
acceptances, cheerful acknowledgements, and faithful improvement, of what they
thus receive in the service, according to the Pleasure and Order, and to the
praise of him that gives them; and as these favors are of several sorts and
sizes; Such as our beings, and their receptiveness of Divine kindnesses; and
the kindness showed us to make us good, to do us good, and to capacitate us to
do good to others, and to receive further good from God, according to our
different capacities, stations, relations, opportunities and advantages,
conditions, and other circumstances; so has our Love it is diversified actings,
expressions and effects, according to it is various objects, considered in their
own proper Excellencies, their several Relations to us, their postures toward
us, and their concerns with us, and ours with them, which I here cannot
mention, much less enlarge upon, even as they and we are related and concerned
with the essential source of all communicative Excellence or Goodness, and
therefore I leave it to the deeper thoughts and further searches of better
Heads and Hearts than mine. 6. When Excellence espouses evidently some great
Interests and Designs, such as the recovery of lost Souls, the reparation of
declined Holiness, the shaming and abandoning of all Sin, the utter extirpation
of Satan's Interest and Kingdom, the erecting of his Gospel, House and Kingdom,
the Exaltation of his Son, and the Edification of his Children in Christian
Knowledge, Holiness and Comfort; and in all things fit to make them acceptable
to himself, and approved of men; and to make them regular and easy in
themselves. When God designs and prosecutes the spreading of the Gospel, the
Sanctification of his Name in and before the eyes of all, and the completing
the Divine Life, and Nature in his own: What then can be the formal Act of
Love, hereto in us, but the endearment and espousal of these things to us, as
matters of the highest consequence and importance to the World, the Church and
us, and as things more valuable and delightful to us, in our contemplations and
pursuits thereof, than all our personal Interests and Pleasures in this World?
7. When Excellence communicates it self discernibly to others, then Love
rejoices in this Gift and Grace to them. 8. When Excellence appears
communicable to others, and that through one another as appointed means and
instruments for this end, then Love is so far thankful, and it covets,
enterprises, designs and prosecutes the thing, and so it grieves or joyfully
Triumphs, as it discerns the matter to succeed or to be defeated or delayed;
and it forms, and cherishes, and exerts it Sympathies accordingly. 9. When
Excellence is rivall'd, confronted, and opposed, then Love turns Jealous and
Enraged; and puts on fortitude, and resolution to stand by it is darling Object
and concerns, in all the Agonies of Contention for them, which they need; and
notwithstanding all the hazards, cost and difficulties which attend them. And
10. It accounts, and uses all as Friends or Enemies, as they appear against or
for it is Object.

3. The Genuine Practice and Productions of this love. Here they are called
Good Works; a correspondent practice with this Divine and Active, and diffusive
Principle. All Instances and Effects of this delightful conversation with God
and man, according to the Rules and Principles of Christianity, must savor of,
illustrate and subserve this Principle and Grace. Thus Love God, and keep his
Commandments; think and speak of him, address your selves in your Devotions to
him, serve him, and walk before him, trust him and depend upon him; all that
you are, and have, design and do, let it be suited to, and worthy of that
Glorious and fearful Name, the Lord Your God; whose eminent and perfect Name
you love so well, Hebr. xii. 28. i These. ii. 10-12. Romans xii. 1, 2. Mat. v.
16. Joh. xv. 8. i Pet. iv. 11. away with such mean Things and Actions, such
flat Devotions, and such tantum non offensive Conversations, and such lean and
stingy Offerings to God or actings for him, as must put Charity upon the Rack
to observers of you, for to conclude or think you love him, Mal. i. 13, 14. ii
Pet. iii. 11. i Cor. xv. 58. nothing below that cluster in Phil. iv. 8. and
that in Tit. ii. 10-14. can escape its Mean Tekel in this balance of the
Sanctuary; rich in Good Works, i Tim. vi. 18. and rich toward God, Luke xii.
21. and fruitful in every good work, Col. i. 10. actings continually toward
God and for him, facing the Eyes and Consciences of all Observers with such
illustrious and large Characters and Signatures of this Divine Principle of
Love, as to convince even the most critical Observers of you, and to extort
Confessions from them, that none could act and live as you do, did they not
love God dearly, and most entirely and constantly live to him, and upon him, as
their all, i Pet. ii. 12. and iv. 16* Hebr. xi. 13-16. for I take not (...)
here, to import what may be barely Good; but something generous and fit to
strike the Beholders Eye and Conscience with some astonishing Convictions, that
what you do for God looks too majestically great to come from any ordinary
Principle, yea, from any thing below your God enthroned in your best
affections. Love is the very Soul of Godliness, the very Heart of the new Man;
a Principle so impetuous and charming, as that it scorns where it is Regent, to
be confined to, or signalized by any thing mean or base; Such objects and
concerns in its most intimate and close embraces, and in its stated prospect,
and yet act sparingly, sordidly, or sneakingly for God! Love burns and blushes
at the thought. And Heaven it self ere long will irritate, exert and show the
Purity and generous Vigours of this Grace, in such a stated and inviolable
series of great and generous actions, so full of God, and every way so fully
for him, and so worthy of him, as that the life of God in glory shall evidence
the force and excellence of that spring and principle whence it proceeds; and
yet even here, even in this its Infant and Imperfect State, it groans and
labors to have God's Will done on Earth as it is in Heaven. Well, in a word,
such must your Actions and your Conversations be, as that (whatever you are
conversant about or with, the temper of your Spirits, and the fervours and
vigours of your love to God, his Image, Interest, Son, Spirit, Gospel, and all
that do profess and own respects hereto) every step you take, and every thing
you do ought to be great and exemplary, and impregnated with what may speak the
greatness, largeness, cheerfulness and energies of your enflamed, exalted, and
invigorated Souls, through love to God, Christ, Souls and Christianity. O to be
exemplary in all Conversation! to live each other into awakened Considerations
of Spiritual concerns, to dart forth all those glorious rays of Christian
Wisdom, of which we are told in Jam. iii. 17, 18. to make men feel, as well as
see, the force and flames of Christian Love; to charm Exasperated Passions down
by all the sweetnesses of true Wisdom, Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, and
every way endearing Conversation with them; to have the Law of Kindness always
in your Mouths, the notices of true Friendliness in your Looks, the gifts and
proofs of generous Charity in your Hands, in constant readiness to minister to
the Necessities of the Saints, as God shall prosper your Endeavors in your
lawful and regularly managed Occupations and Employments; to have your Dealings
and Commerces each with other accurately and severely just, and yet
sufficiently securing the credit and concerns of Christianity. And in a word,
to be blameless and harmless as the Sons of God without rebuke -- shining as
lights, and holding forth the Word of Life to Universal Satisfaction and
Advantage, wherever groundless prejudice and partiality do not prevail and
govern: and to fill up every relation, step, and station with the fruits of
Goodness, Righteousness and truth: these are the good and generous Works of
Love, whereto we are to be provoked; For thus we do not love in word and
tongue, but indeed and truth, i Joh. iii. 28.

4. The Intenseness of the principle and vigor of the practice, called here (as
the designed effect of the prescribed means) (...), a Provocation; the warmth
and vigor wherewith Love and Good Works are as it were to be inspired;
Zealously affected in a good thing, Gal. iv. 18. zealous of good works, Tit.
ii. 14. the Motive so effectually Cogent as to fix and fortify the Principle;
and the Principle so powerful as to go through with its great enterprise and
concern. Principles are the Springs of Action; and Love imports intimacy; it
is a Principle rooted in the heart, and it lays its beloved objects deep
therein; warmth it is essential to it; and where it is perfect or considerably
grown, it is serious and fervent: It is a commanding thing, and affects Regency
over all the Actions, Faculties and Passions; it is peremptory in its Precepts,
fixed in the Purposes and Concerns which it espouses; it is powerful in its
Influences, pressing in its Claims, diffusive of it self through all that is
performed by us; Impatient of Resistances, Denials or Delays, and moved to
Jealousies, Indignation and vigorous Contentions, when any Injury, Affront or
Rape, is threatened, attempted or pursued, that any way is prejudicial to its
object, and its concerns therewith; it claims and pleads, it urges and provokes
to diligence, and to all eager prosecutions of what it aims at, and endears
unto it self; and it entirely reconciles the whole Man to all the cost and
difficulties of its Divine pursuits. It Is never well but in its motions
toward, its actings for, its conversation with, and its reposes in its Pearl
of Price: and hence its actions are invigorated; it gives no faint blows in its
holy War, it runs not in its Race, it deals not triflingly in its Merchandise
for God and Heaven; it is all mettle, fortitude, patience, action, desire and
delight in every thing relating to its grand Affair and Scope; and it makes all
its actions and performances to bear their Testimony to its own fortitude and
fervours, and this is the Paroxysm of Love and Good Works.

2. The things provoking hereto.

And here behold a Troop, as it was said of Gad, Genesis xxx. 11. How do
inducements and incentments spring up in manifold and mighty clusters? What can
we mention or fix our thoughts upon, that may not kindle and increase this
flame of Love, and its Eruptions in Good Works? The things which we might
pertinently and copiously insist upon, might be reduced to these Heads.

1. The Objects of this Central Grace or Principle: 1. Things in Heaven; as
God, Christ, the Spirit, Angels, the Spirits of Just Men there made perfect;
the glorious Furniture, Laws and Orders; the Visions, Services, Ministrations
and Fruitions of that State; all the Perfections Prerogatives and Employments
of that blessed World above; with all the accomplishments and accommodations
which relate immediately thereto, and all the Satisfactions and Advantages that
result therefrom. 2. Things from Heaven; God manifest in the flesh, i Tim. iii.
16. the Spirit, Works, and Word of God, the great Provisions and Engagements of
Divine Providence for us, all that we are, or have, or meet with, express of
God's merciful regards to us, and his compassionate concernedness for our
universal welfare. 3. Things for Heaven; The Spirit of Grace, the Word of
Grace, all the Ministers and means of Grace, with all the Discipline and
Encouragements which Providence sensibly affords us: the Good and Evil things
of time, as ordered by God to fit us for, and help us to the Glory which we
look for. The very Sons of men themselves considered in the relations which
they bear to God, and their expressiveness of his indearing Name, and all those
marks and notices which they bear and give us in the frame, capacity and
management of humane Nature, of God's incomprehensible Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
etc. O who can think hereon, and yet be unprovoked to Love and to Good Works,
when as God is so eminently and endearingly discernible in all? for God by all
this courts our love. And should I speak of the Sons of God and Heirs of Glory,
that Divine Workmanship which is in them, and upon them; the Impressions,
Reflections and Refractions of the Divine Nature and Life; their capacity of
growing up to all the fullness of God, and to be eternally the beautiful and
delightsome Temple of the Holy Ghost; all their relations to the Holy Trinity,
with all their obligations to him, their interest in him, their business with
him and for him, and all their imitations and resemblances of him in their
actual and possible motions and advances toward him, and their Great
Expectations from him. Should I insist upon their membership, with all the
duties and advantages, and pleasures which arise there from; and pertinently
illustrate and apply (as I could easily and quickly do) what does so copiously
occur, in Ephesians. iv. 4. -- 6. as the Central articles and holding bonds of Union
and Endearments; would you and I consider all these things, and all the
loveliness that would then be communicable or observable, could our love want
its provocation!

2. The formal nature of this love; it is fit to be a provocation to itself, i
Joh. iv. 16-21.7-12. This is the beauty, health, strength, pleasure, safety and
renown of humane nature; love is the aim and scope Knowledge, the end of faith,
the Spirit of hope, the life of practice and devotion and the bond of
perfectness, and the true transformation of the Soul into the image of its God.
No pleasing thoughts of God, Christ, Heaven or heavenly things, no cheerful
motions toward eternity, no foretasts of the highest bliss, no warrantable
claims thereto, nor confident expectations of unseen realities. No true and
lasting bonds of friendliness in service and affections, without this Spirit
and state of love; this only faces God in his own beautiful and delightful
image; this only turns the notions of divinity into substantial realities; and
so exalts the man above the pageantries of mere formal, outside service and
devotions; and the truth is, all that we say and do for God, or with him, and
all our expectations from him are but the tricks and forgeries of deceitful and
deceived fools, and the most provoking Profanation of the tremendous, holy
name of God, and an abuse of holy things.

3. The services which love must do and the fruits it must produce to God, to
Christ* unto the Spirit, unto our selves and others. God himself must be
reverenced, addressed unto, served and entertained like himself, and walked with
in all required and fit imitations of himself. And all these cannot be without
just valuings of and complacency in his eminent perfections, near relations and
the admirable constitutions and administrations of his Kingdom. Christ must be
duly thought on, heartily entertained, gratefully acknowledged, and cheerfully
obeyed, submitted and improved unto the great and gracious purposes of his
appearances, performances and Kingdom, and minded most delightfully in all the
Grandeurs of his Grace and Throne; the Holy Spirit must possess his Temple to
his full Satisfaction, and have the pure incense of his graces in their
fragrant, liberal and continual ascents; ( Praying in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20.)
And be feasted with the growthful and constant productions of his graces, both
in their blossoms and full fruits; and we must be continually sowing to him, if
we hope to reap eternal life of him, in Gal. vi. 8. We must possess our selves
in God, and for him, in our full devotedness and resignations of our entire
selves to him* pleasing our selves in this, that we are not by far so much, and
so delightfully our own as his, and that we cannot love our selves so well as
when we find God infinitely dearer to us than we are to our selves. And as for
others, much must we cheerfully do, and bear, and be, to bring poor Renegadoes
back again to God, to testify our great respects unto, and pleasure in the
grace of God in our fellow Christians, to accommodate our selves to their
edification and concerns; and to make our best advantage of every thing
discernible in them: Helping our selves and them in spirit, speech and
practice. And can these things be brought to pass, or our selves reconciled and
suited to all our Christian duties and interests without provoked love? And for
the solemnities, transactions and results of the approaching day, what is that
day to those who have no love, or very great declensions of it? For all that
come with Christ from Heaven, come in the flames of love to God, to godliness
and Godly Ones: and a Cold Heart, will no way be endured there. And as to
fellow Christians the Duties and Counsels of the Text, consideration, adhering
to the Assembling of our selves together, mutual exhortations in the
encouraging and quickening Prospect of this day, can these things be without
love?

III. The management of these provoking things.

And here let us follow the method of the Text it self. Where we have these
Topics to insist upon. 1. Persons must be considered each other, and our
selves. 2. We are not to desert the Assemblings of our selves together, as the
manner of some is. 3. We must exhort each other. And so what one proposes the
other must Consider, Entertain Accommodate and Improve, to the great ends and
benefit of the exhortation given. 4. And the actuated knowledge of the
approaching day must quicken us to and in the more serious and intense
performance of these duties: Exhorting by so much the more, by how much the
more as ye see the day approaching. Let me but touch a little upon these things.

1. Let us consider one another for this provoking work, or in order to this
Provocation. (...). The word here in the Text imports strict observation of,
and great sollicitousness of thoughts about each other, as to great matters for
their Good. So that we have, 1. The Objects; each other. 2. The Act or Duty
toward them; Let us Consider. 3. The end and scope; To a provocation unto love
and to Good works.

1. The Objects. One another. 1. As to the great and Stated ends of our
Creation and Redemption. Such as the Divine nature, and Life, and Joy. Gods
image in us, service from us, and the delightful blissful (and that) eternal
presence with us, in the glorious discoveries and Communications of himself to
us in heaven. And as we are recovered and redeemed by Jesus Christ; So our
loyalty, gratitude and fruitfulness to him, in all acknowledgements and
improvements of his kind Conduct, Government, Providence and Grace, unto the
Fathers Glory through him. As we are related to the Holy Ghost it is our
correspondent Temper and Practice with, Improvement of, and our fit returns
unto, the Offered, Accepted and Professed relations of the Spirit and his
Communications to us, his Operations in us and his Effects upon our Spirits,
that he might thereby suit us to the Concerns and Privileges of our Christian
state, and that we might be built up, furnished and possessed as the Eternal
Temple of the living God. Linked and laid together; and so, related and obliged
to each other, dependant each on other, and consequently useful and delightful,
in being heartily and practically faithful each to other unto the Edification
of the whole in love; that so God (three in One) may be eternally and evidently
All to Universal Satisfaction. For we were made and bought, and are committed
to the care of Christ and of the Spirit; and we are accordingly entrusted with
Gospel helps and means, that we might hereby be the Mirrours of Divine
Communicable excellencies and perfections, the Monuments of prosperous and rich
Grace, and Instruments of special Service. For these ends God Created and
Redeemed us, and in respect hereto are we to be considered each by other. 2. As
to our capacity of serving and reaching such Great Ends and Purposes. The
powers of our Souls, the members of our Bodies, and all our natural
accommodations for these Ends. For we are men, and so have faculties and powers
naturally capable of, and formed to a propenseness and appetite to the Supreme
Good, and thereupon receptive of all the attractive influences of the first
cause; and were it not for our moral depravations, and Corruptions, and
alienations of heart herefrom which we have sinfully contracted, espoused and
indulged; considering Divine Discoveries, Assistances and Encouragements,
procured for us, and dispensed to us by Jesus Christ; what hinders our return
to God and unto those reciprocations of Endearments betwixt him and us, to
which by our rational Frame and Constitution we are so admirably suited? Are we
not capable of discerning what may excite, inflame, preserve and regulate our
love, and of the fixing and managing it accordingly? We are capable of
judgment, choice and motion, and reposes, right objects being set before us in
their apt illustrations and addresses. So that we cannot speak to bruits and
stones as we may do to men. For nothing but sinful ignorance, prejudice,
negligence and malignity, or sad delusions and mistakes, through
inconsiderateness, and unreasonable avocations and diversions, can prevent the
return of our first love; and all these things may be redrest by our judicious,
well advised and warm discourses about these things duly attended to,
impartially considered, and prudently and pertinently applied unto our selves.
Thus mistakes may be Rectified, known Truths and Notions actuated, Hearts
affected, Lives reformed, and Love restored to its regular Fervours and
Productions of Good works. He that is capable of knowing what he is to do, and
why, and of doing and being what most concerns and best becomes him, deserves
to be accordingly considered by us. 3. As to our obligations and advantages, as
we are Creatures, Subjects, Favorites. As we are redeemed to God by Christ, so
our obligations to the returns of Gratitude should be considered by us, ii Cor.
v. 14, 15. We are Christ's, and Gods by him, and so he must be glorified in the
whole man, i Cor. vi. 20. And all the vast advantages of our Gospel day, as
they are talents and encouraging advantages put into our hands, must be
considered by us too, and our selves and one another as Stewards entrusted and
accountable, ii Pet. i. 3, 4. i 4.11. So that we must regard each other as
under ties and bonds to God and Christ, and as greatly helped and furnished to
be provoked thus, if well considered, and managed accordingly. 4. As to our
Spirits and behavior according to our Christian Claims and Helps, Relations,
Obligations and Professions. Whether we foot it right or not, Gal. ii. 14.
Whether professors value their Souls to their just worth or not, in keeping
them intent upon their great concern, and whether their furniture, discipline,
temper and behavior bear evidently their fit and full proportion hereunto. How
Gospel transforming and reforming work goes on with them. Whether the Christian
name and interest, the Gospel and its Patron be credited and promoted, or
disgraced and hindered by us; and whether our proficiency and improvements be
answerable indeed to our advantages, obligations and professions. 5. Wherein
our helps and hopefulness, or our dangers mainly lie; their Gifts, and Graces,
and Encouragements and Advantages, on the one hand: Their Constitutions,
Customs, Callings, Company, Temptations and secular Concerns, and Hindrances on
the other hand are all to be considered.

2. The Act or Duty toward these Objects. (...). Let us Consider. 1. Bend your
minds to observation of one another, that ye may understand how matters are
with one another; concern your selves about the right knowledge of the
principles, tempers, actions, circumstances and concerns of persons, so far as
your duty toward them calls you to it. For this injunction does not
countenance what we find elsewhere forbidden, ii These. iii. 11, 12. i Tim. v.
13. i Pet. iv. 15. So far as you may do or get Good, prevent redress or allay
evil, under such circumstances, relations and advantages as may notify that God
then calls you to it, and so encourages your expectations and endeavors of
doing Good, or preventing the sin and mischief which God would have prevented
by you; So far may others be inspected, enquired after, and observed by you.
But when it is and evidently appears to be to no purpose, to ill purposes, or
to needless purpose, you must not do it. 2. And then seriously pause upon* and
duly weigh, what you discern by your enquiry or your more immediate
observation, and do not partially, passionately, rashly, and censoriously, form
and fix your measures* Give what you hear or see concerning one another, your
second, serious and Impartial thoughts, that so matters of fact being duly and
truly stated, measures of prudence may be advisedly and safely taken up and
fixed upon. So that when persons, matters of fact, your Christian rules and
work, and way of managing this great concern, are duly laid in the balance of
the Sanctuary and all this fixed in its just reference to this weighty end, you
may proceed accordingly in the Sincerity, Tenderness and Wisdom of the right
Christian Spirit. And then 3. Be well advised about the most taking way of
managing what you thus instruct your selves about; the humor of the person,
your ways and seasons of addressing your discourses to him, and the preserving
or managing of your interest in him, or at least your own abilities to prove
what you accuse him of, to demonstrate what arguments you advance and use, and
to enforce the motives that you would press him with. And study your selves
into a just measure of your own abilities, a through Mastery and Command of your
own Passions, and good and clear discerning of and insight into the fittest
seasons and occasions. And well observe as far as may be men's Tempers,
Interests, Ends, and Intimates, that you may hereby, charm them, win and govern
them. And if you would know men thoroughly, mind them strictly in their Trusts,
their Passions, Interests, Companions, Surprises and Necessities, and let each
other have serious thoughts herein. 4. And overlook no good in others to lessen
it, despise it, disgrace it, or neglect it, but think distinctly upon all you
see.

3. The End and Scope of all must be this provocation to love and to Good
works, Ephesians. iv. 29, 15, 16. i These. v. 11. the tongue of the wise, uses
knowledge aright, Prove. xv. 2. Therefore the mind and heart must be intent upon
right ends, Romans xiv. 19. Not to let others know the reaches of our thoughts,
the furniture of our minds, the nimbleness of our Tongues, the neatness of our
words or the briskness of our parts or fancies, nor to spy faults, or
weaknesses, for our discursive entertainments: As the manner of some is. Much
less to make them proselytes to our opinions, parties or persuasions in lower
matters, or votaries to our particular interests, or humors, Phil. i. 27. ii.
19-21. I wish Professors, Ministers and others, would read these Texts, and
well consider them. We must inspect, observe and well consider one another;
that where we observe warm hearts, and fruitful lives, we might by our
Commendations provoke them unto perseverance and proficiency therein; that
where we discern a mixture of things Commendable, and blameworthy, what is
divine may not be overlooked, because of what is culpable, nor what is faulty,
imitated and Commended, because of what is there praiseworthy. And that where
we find our brethren overtaken with their infirmities and defects, they may be
dealt with in the Spirit of meekness, and so recovered from their declensions
and defects: And so return to their first love. And that we our selves may be
provoked to and by their excellencies, and grow more effectually careful to
avoid all that did assuage their holy Warmth and Vigor. He that considers
others, to glory over their defections and neglects, to aggravate their slips
and falls, more to expose their persons to rage and scorn, does what the Devil
would advise him to, were he consulted with. The truths of God and Soul
concerns are fixed things, and fervent hearts, and fruitful lives, are the
Souls grand affair. And he that minds his brother in the neglect hereof, has a
corrupted and cold heart to purpose. To make each other all light about the
things of God and Christ, all fervor in our love thereto, and all regular and
cheerful vigor in the pursuit thereof, is what we must design, and direct our
personal considerations to.

II. Let us not forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of
some is: Here note, 1. The thing not here to be deserted is, the (...), Our
assembling. 2. The thing relating hereunto forbidden, is our forsaking it. 3.
The tempting instance hereof, proposed by way of warning to us, is, that the
manner of some is thus to do.

1. The thing not to be forsaken, imports either, 1. Our own Conventions for
public Worship; in the general, our open meeting together, as an Organized
Congregation: Or Assembly wherein Pastors and their Flocks assemble statedly
to speak to God, and to hear from him, and Sacramentally to eat and drink
before him; and so to recognize and represent our Christian state with all
solemnity in open view together. Or, 2. Doing this without dividing distances
and separations each from other, under the notion of Jew and Gentile, or of
persons differing each from other about difficult or trifling things. 3. Or our
gathering others unto the Church of Christ, by our orderly and alluring
Carriage, in this and other points of Christianity; and so the additions, which
hereafter God will make hereto. Or 4. The great Assembly of the completed, and
Triumphant Church of Christ in the great day of his Appearance and Kingdom, ii
These. ii. 1. The only place that I remember in the New Testament, besides my
Text, that this Noun occurs: And in that place the Word (as here it is) being a
decompound, it fitly may be rendered an after Synagogue, or gathering, and how
far thus rendering it in the Text is countenanced by the last clause; [that day]
I here determine not.

But I will here consider it in the first sense, wave or lightly touch upon the
other two, and transfer the last to the Consideration of the last clause of the
Text; where it will be freer from Exceptions than here perhaps it would be.

2. The thing here given in charge concerning it, is. That we forsake it not.
1. In Thought, as judging it to be no Help or Duty. 2. In Heart, as not
attempered, and reconciled to the solemnity, seriousness* and great concerns
thereof. 3. In Presence, as abandoning or neglecting our personal presence and
attendance there.

3. The Snare, that we are warned of here, is, Our being influenced into a
deserting such Assemblies, by the practical declensions and neglects of others.
Others do so, they use to do it; it is evidently their Custom and Practice,
it is possible for you to do the same, and to be drawn thereto by their Example:
But their Example cannot justify this practice, and therefore should not
influence you hereinto, and this Caution may prevent it, and therefore should
accordingly be considered and improved by you; as being of such manifest and
mighty consequence to your Love and Practice, both as to the warmth and
strength thereof.

4. The Usefulness of the worshipping Assemblies of Saints, and Christians, to
this great and needful provocation must quicken us unto, and keep us in these
Courts of God, Psalm..xcii. 13. -- 15. Exodus xx. 24. There God commands the
blessing, even Life for evermore, Psalm. cxxxiii. 3. There you have the openings
of the Gospel Teasury; there are these golden Candlesticks, which bear the
burning, shining Tapers, whose light and heat diffuse themselves through all
within their reach, who are receptive of them: The Gifts and Graces the
Affections and Experiences of Gospel Ministers are in their Communicative
Exercises; there God the Father sets and keeps his Heart and Eye; there the
Lord Redeemer walks by, and amongst his Commissionated Officers and
Representatives, dispensing warmth and vigor through their Ministry to Hearts
presented to him at his Altar: There does the Holy Spirit fill Heads with
Knowledge, Hearts with Grace, and all our Faculties and Christian Principles
with Vigor. There Mysteries are unfolded, Precepts explained and enforced,
Promises fulfilled, in Soul improvements; Incense is offered up in golden
Censers, and foederal concernments are solemnly transacted and confirmed in
open Court. And there through the Angel of the Covenant his moving upon the
Waters of the Sanctuary, are Soul distempers and Consumptions healed: And there
you are informed, acquainted with, and confirmed in, what may instruct you in,
and encourage you unto this Provocation to Love and to good works: And there
Prayer gets fuel, and gives vent to Love, drawing forth all the Energies of
Souls and Thoughts toward God. And thus fervent Prayers, and love quickening
returns thereto, are like the Angels of God ascending and descending from and
upon the Heart; while the deserters hereof grow cold thereto, and starve their
Love and practical Godliness thereby. All there is known, obtained and
exercised. There you may fill your Heads with Knowledge, your Hearts with
Grace, your Mouths with Arguments, your Lives with Fruitfulness, your
Consciences with Consolations; and your whole selves with those experiences of
Divine regards to Soul concerns, which may inflame your Hearts with Love to God
and Christ, to Holiness and Heaven, and fit you both to kindle and increase
this holy flame both in your selves and in each other. And indeed, what greater
advantages can be derived into our Souls, to make our Altars burn than what our
Christian Assemblies duly managed will entertain us with? What understanding do
the Inspirations of the Almighty here afford? Such curious Explications of the
Name and Counsels of your God? Such large and full accounts of all the
endearing Grace of Christ? Such Critical dissections and anatomizings of the
state of Souls? Such over-sh^dowings of the Spirit of God? Such clear and full
descriptions and accounts of the Divine Life and Nature in all their Strength
and Glory? How are desires invigorated and twisted to make them more effectual
to our selves and others! This Sanctuary Love is like the best wine, going down
sweetly, and causing the Lips even of those that are asleep to speak! Keep then
to these Assemblies, that you may duly know whom, what, how and why to Love:
and how to suit your selves in spirit, speech and practice toward God, your
selves, and toward each other unto this generous and noble Principle. Thus
will you grow exceedingly, both in the knowledge and savor of what is most
considerable, and most deservingly affecting, both as to Things and Persons;
for Christianity is contrived for Love and Godliness in all its Doctrines, Laws
and Ordinances, and in assemblies you have the Explications, and Enforcements
of those Truths; which will complete the Man of God, as to his Principles,
Disposition and Behavior. Here you may know your most holy Faith as to it is
matter, evidences, and designs upon you; and it is improvableness by you to it is
determined and declared ends and services; That Faith which is to illuminate
your Eyes; to exercise your thoughts, to fix your holy purposes, to form and
cherish expectations, to raise desires, to embolden prayer, to fire your
affections, and regulate them as to their Objects, Ends, and Measures, and
Expressions: And when you there attend, you are in the way of Blessings. How
often, and evidently, are Divine Truths, there sensibly sharpened and succeeded
by the God of Truth? Romans i. 16. Paul and Barnabas so spoke, as that a
Multitude believed of Jews and Gentiles, Act. xiv. 1. And thither must you and
I resort, and there attend for Doctrine, Exhortation, and Instruction, in
Righteousness. The Priests Lips must preserve Knowledge, how to speak of God,
with him and for him; there Gospel luminaries are to diffuse their Light; and
there must we receive it, and know what is considerable, eligible, practicable,
and encouraging to love, and to good Works. Why then should we forsake that?

3. But let us exhort, [each other;] ^or consideration and attendance on
Assemblies are for our own and others good; for personal and mutual
quickenings, to Love to good works. I know that, (...), and thence (...), is
sometimes used more largely, for any pleading of and pressing home a thing
pursuant to it is import and design, whether by Counsel, Comfort, or sometimes
it imports Consolation or Encouragement. This is too well seen, and known to
need its Scriptural Instances and Quotations. That which is here intended, I
offer in this Paraphrase. Draw forth all the Spirit and Strength, of what you
know, and have advisedly considered as to your selves and others; of what you
have seen and heard in your Assembling of your selves together, concerning your
obligations to attend them, their fitness to advantage you, and all the benefit
derived or deriveable therefrom: Draw forth the vigor of all your received
Discoveries, Directions, Assistances and Inducements to do, and be what is
required and expected from you, professed by you, and of eternal Consequence
and Concernment to you. Plead this thoroughly with your selves and one another,
that so your Christian love be not extinguished or abated, but wrought and kept
up to its genuine and just pitch of fervor and effectual Operations and
Eruptions in Good works. Drive home upon your selves (by deep and serious
thoughts, and pertinent applications of them to your selves, and warm debates
about them with your selves) the things which God has manifested and proposed
to you as credible, acceptable and practically Improveable. He that expects
this flame upon his heart must be a thoughtful man, severely contemplative and
sollicitous about the things of the Kingdom of God, and the Name and Interest,
and Servants of the Lord Redeemer. How can that man be warm and active, or
zealous of Good works, whose knowledge is not actuated by self-awakening
Meditations; and whose furniture, Principles and Spirit are commonly neglected
by himself? What! are divine Truths Laws, Promises and Institutions only to be
with us, or in us, as empty Speculations, or thin Notions? Have Divine
Revelations and Endearings no Errand to our Hearts and Consciences, and no
business there, and no practical Vigours to be exerted thence? That thoughtless
Idle Souls should be lukewarm is no such wonder or strange thing. The contrary
would be stranger even to a miracle. And being thus awakened and prepared your
selves, drive all things home upon each other, and plead the cause of every
Duty, Truth and Motive thoroughly, in free and frequent conversation each with
other, Mal. iii. 16. Luke xxiv. 32. i These. v. 11-15. Romans xv. 13-16. Col. iii.
16. ii These. iv. 18. Christian conference well managed makes and speaks warm
hearts, and leads, and helps to better lives. Men that rarely, transiently or
triflingly think upon or talk about the things of God must needs be cold
within, and when such pray that God should warm them, can they expect returns
to prayer when neither hearts nor pains are after them? And here: How many
heart warning Topics of discourse and edifying conference might I now
entertain you with? but let the text speak for it self, and though it here
offer but one, yet is that one impregnated with many. 1. It is the day; 2. It Is
an approaching day; and 3. They saw it thus approaching. 4. The sight ought
(because so fit) to quicken them to growthful care and diligence in this
heart-warning course and work. Whence,

4. Preserve, and practically answer and improve a quick, deep, constant sense
of the approaching day, i These. v. 1-11. ii Pet. iii. 1. -- 14. and Jude 20,
21. Col. iii. 2-5. Luke xxi. 34-36. xii. 35-40. Perhaps the Reader will not
lose his time and labor in perusing and pausing upon these cited Texts: Nor
find them impertinent nor inexpedient as to the case in hand. See also, ii Pet.
i. 5-13. How copiously and closly might all these passages be insisted on, did
not the Press stay for me, and the stated confines of a short discourse
restrain me, and the fruits and labors of abler heads, and better pens, and
hearts urge me severely because deservedly, to give place thereto? Well, Sirs,
Consider the Approaching day, and represent it to your thoughtful and concerned
selves in all its Grandeurs, and Solemnities of Process, and Results; and try
then if it do not warm your hearts, and urge you pungently, and severely to
Good works. As to the persons here most Immediately concerned, these Christian
Hebrews; There was a day of reckoning with their malignant Enemies by
Providential Controversies and Rebukes, which also was a day* of great
Redemption and Establishment to the persecuted faithful Christians. There was
to be a day of great Conversion and divine Attestations to the Christian Faith,
and to its Proselytes, and what was more congenial herewith than this
endeavored provocation to love and to good works? And they that are provoked
hereto are also fittest for a day of trial. But I shall here consider it as the
great day of Christ's appearance and his Kingdom, ii Tim. iv. 1.8. i 18. That
day of God, of Christ, of Judgment and Perdition of Ungodly Men. That day of
Revelation of God and Christ in their Majestic glory, that day of searches,
sentence, and full execution and adjustments in all the accuracies of governing
wisdom, holiness and grace. Who can contemplate this, and yet be Cold and
Barren? Then, in the glorious splendours, solemnities, and proceedings of that
day shall it be evident who, and whose Son Christ is. What cost and care he
has been at to bring men to this warm and active course and temper, and what
an estimate he and his Father set hereon, by what they then dispense and
testify by way of recompense of reward thereto. Christ in his threefold glory,
Luke ix. 26. God sending him forth and appearing in him, by him, and for him,
as his own dear Son, the Son of such a King, i Tim. vi. 3-16. Father and Son
making so vast a difference amongst the Sons of men by everlasting punishments
and rewards as they are differently found as to Christian love and practice,
Romans ii. 6-10. ii Cor. v. 9-11. Mat. xxv. 34-46. And all that vast Assembly and
Convention, applauding Gods proceedings and joyfully Congratulating the great
endeavors and rewards of our provoked and Successful love. Are not these
warming thoughts?

Secondly, The Case.

And of this I have given you this textual resolution. You have seen, 1. The
Seat of this distemper, of a Lukewarm Frame or Temper, that it is in the heart
or will. 2. The formal nature of it. It Is a defect or chilness of practical
love and zeal, to and for God, and their concerns with us, and ours with them.
The things which claim and merit the highest place in, and that should engage,
and exercise our best affections, and most active zeal, are, 1. Gods glory in
the Church and World. 2. The life and growth, and the vivid Exercises,
Profession and Effects of Godliness in our selves, Tit. ii. 11. -- 14. Romans
xiv. 17 -- 19. Jude 20, 21. ii Pet. i. 3. -- 11. For we must begin at home and
set our all in order there. 3. The Power, Peace, and Progress of the Gospel in
the World, Phil. i. 3. -- 11. ii. 19.21. That it may have its free course and
be glorified. 4. The Harmony and Prosperity of the Church of Christ wherever
this Gospel is accepted and professed. 5. The Case and Circumstances of
particular professors as they variously are, and are evidently considerable,
as to their Growth, Trials, Duties, Dangers, Decays, Wants, or Weaknesses, etc.
6. And the Sons of men as Strangers, Enemies, Persecutors, or any ways
Endeavoring to supplant the Gospel interest, or to obstruct it or discourage
it. And these it considered as reducible or incorrigible. Now heartlessness,
Neutrality or Sluggishness of our affectionate concernedness about these things
is what we call Luke-warmness. 3. The Cure hereof does formally consist in our
Enflamed love, Exercised and Expressed unto the life by constant activity
congenial with this principle. The practical accommodating of all the regency
and vigours of this principle of love to the concerns of Christian godliness;
and of those that are concerned therewith, pursuant to the growth and
prosperousness thereof. When we so value these concerns, and have such
Sympathizing with, and such genuine adherence to, resolutions and activity for,
and satisfaction in the prosperousness of the things of God, and Christ, and
Souls, and Christian Churches, as that nothing can stand before us, nor be
regarded or dreaded by us, that rivals or opposes them; then are we indeed
effectually cured. Here our thoughts naturally fix; and work, here our hearts
cleave and flame; and hereunto our vigors, time, interest and treasures, are
most entirely and cheerfully devoted. Where is there then the least remainder
of a Lukewarm Temper; When we are wrought up to this Frame and pitch? 4. The
way and means of working this great cure, are, 1. Persons considered. 2.
Assemblies attended on. 3. What there, and thence, and otherwise is, or may be
derived, improved by Mutual Exhortation. 4. And all this under the powerful
influences of, and in fit and full proportion to a quick and constant
apprehensiveness and apprehension of the approaching day.

Now seeing the Text is Hortatory, Directive and Encouraging hereto; and has
as such been treated on accordingly, I will wave all further application, and
only give you the Directions and Prescriptions for the curing of a lukewarm
temper.

1. Love-quenching and abating principles Interests and Practices are to be
exploded and avoided. If once you entertain hard thoughts of God, as if he were
morose and captious, a barren Wilderness, or Land of darkness; and only careful
to ruin and distress his creatures upon the mere accounts of Sovereignty, and
the Prerogative of Dominion, tho a poor penitent lie prostrate at his feet for
mercy, in tears and shame and self abhorrence: or in a readiness to do so, were
there but any hopes of merciful acceptance: If you shall represent him to your
selves, as if he were so tenacious of revengeful purposes and of advantages put
into his hands for the full executions of such deserved revenges, through
former crimes provoking thereunto; Alas how can you think upon him, or address
your selves to him with hope and pleasure! We find grace represented to us as
Gods Image in his creatures. we find that holiness in creatures makes them the
sweetest of all persons in their dispositions and deportments, and readiest to
be charitable and abundant in benign, and alluring, and obliging remissions,
constructions and dispensations. Such are most backward to make rigid
interpretations and constructions of men's miscarriages and neglects, when they
arise from rather infirmity than malignity; and from ignorance and surprise,
than from contrivance or perverse resolution. They hate above all men, every
thing that savours of stinginess and of a sordid Spirit, and they like not to
retain revengeful purposes to ruin or disturb those criminals who seriously and
pathetically implore their pardon, and beg admission to their now much valued
favor. And does grace make such persons better than their maker; and is that
Gods Image in them which has nothing in God correspondent herewith? Or can we
think that the Image can exceed its Grand Exemplar? Such black and dismal
thoughts of God can never kindle love in us to him. Did I not know and think
that God is love, how could I seek to him in hope, and love him? For my part, I
verily believe God sent his Son into the world, to convince us of his love and
goodness, and to invite us to himself, under the power of this alluring
principle of Truth, That God loves us dearly, and that he will reject no sinner
whose heart is touched with such love to him, as makes it restless and uneasy
in it self, till it obtain his pardon, image, fellowship and presence. See Heb.
xi. 6. And as for Jesus Christ, the liveliest Image, and the truest and most
glorious Mirror of the Invisible God, that ever any Eye beheld, or can behold.
How sweet, indulgent, humble, gracious, and endearing, was he unto all? and how
ready to receive all that come to God through him? O! do not then mistake his
grace, design, or temper. Love cannot live and do its work, where Christ is not
duly represented in his lovely Excellencies.

And yet on the other hand, represent not God below himself, as fond in his
respects, partial in his dealings, slack and easy in his proceedings, apt to
favor us, though neglected by us; as one ready to indulge us in our sins, and to
connive and wink at our miscarriages; or one that we may trifle with, and
fondly think that we can at any time procure his favor, and extinguish or
evade his anger and displeasure, by some trifling applications to him, or
flattering Elogies of his name upon the knee, or a copious, verbose declaiming
against our sins and selves in our stated or occasional addressings of our
selves to him, when pangs of Death, horrors of Conscience, or the tastes and
expectations of his Wrath make us uneasy to our selves: as if by complements,
and petty observances of God in lower matters, we could turn and toss a ductile
nature into any aspect, shape or posture that may serve our private turns, and
please our arrogant and presumptuous humors; and court God to strip himself of
all the glories of his Name and Throne, and prostitute his Interest and Honor,
Laws and Majesty unto the fond conceits of fools and sinners: for this is
blasphemy and presumption to the height, both fit and sure to be punished by the
Judge. Could God be Love, or lovely in the eyes of sober and discerning men,
were he thus facile, so as to be infuenced by the conceits and humors of
sinners in their dotages? He that would not signify one thought of mercy to
our revolted Parents, before he had represented himself most awful in his
Judiciary Process, and that so guarded both his Laws and Throne with awful
Majesty and Sanctions; and that exacted so severe a satisfaction from his Son;
he surely neither will, nor can debase himself, and tempt his creatures by
unfit relaxations of his Laws and Courses to think him despicable, even by such
unfit deportments of himself toward them. That fool which takes Gods mercies
and indulgencies to be at his commands, so as to sin and pray; and that makes
such easy pardons and redresses, the continual encouragements of sinful
practices and hopes; that fool, I say again, that is of this persuasion and
deportment, is no way likely to be cured of his lukewarm temper, Deuteronomy. xxix.
19, 20. For so easy pardons and redresses would evidently and effectually
mortify the Spirit, and defeat the glorious designs of Divine Government
amongst men. See Heb. xii. 25-28, 29. x. 26-31. Romans ii. 6-10. Gal. vi. 7-9. i
Sam. ii. 2, 3-29, 30 ii Chron. xv. 2.

And if you take your Christianity to be a state of drudgery and
disconsolateness; if you degenerate into worldliness, luxury or voluptuousness,
(as in John ii. 15-17. James iv. 4.) If you grow so tender of your selves as to
be swayed more by what affects the outward than the inward man: If you give way
to partiality, to jealousies, heats and ferments, to a censorious, jealous and
detracting Spirit; or to the Spirit of domination and division; or if you form
your principles, interests and actions according to the measures and concerns
of this vain transient world, and of the animal life: This malady will prove
incurable.

2. Heart-warming objects are to be contemplated. Such as the glories of Gods
name: The Grandeurs of his Majesty and Throne, the Accuracies of his Government
in all its Constitutions and administrations. The Stores and Treasures of his
Goodness with all their provident and yet generous distributions, unto all his
creatures: the riches of his grace in his kindness to us by Jesus Christ, the
exhibition of his Son and all the amiable excellencies and endearing aspects
and addresses made to us by him: the life that is in Christ, the grace and
promises that are given us by him, so great and precious: all the fellowship
and intimacies that we are hereby called and admitted to: Gospel Treasures and
Provisions to bring and keep our God and us together in order to all the
Solaces and Satisfactions of Steady, Full, Eternal Friendship: the eminent
importance of his Gospel, Interest and Kingdom in and to the world, the Church
and us; the loveliness and vigours of his Interest and Image in us, as formed
fixed and actuated, and possessed by his eternal Spirit, to his eternal praise
by Jesus Christ: the solid pleasures, peace and usefulness of regular zeal for
God, Christ, Christianity and all that are near and dear to God, with all the
comforts and renown which this well fixed and ordered zeal prepares us for. All
that we are saved from, by, to, through the effectual cure of this disease. All
the solemnities of Christ's approaching day; and our great concerns therein. All
the good that is in, that attends upon, and that issues from the prosperous
Successes of the Gospel, the holiness and and peace of the Church, and the
health, the usefulness, the possession, the Conflicts and Conquests of a well
cured Soul, and all the Honors, Ease and Blessings that attend our glorious
Gospel. All this, and much more deserves deep thoughts, and all the fervours
and acknowledgments and Services of love. And the plain truth is this: We are
both constituted of, and surrounded with enflaming objects of this love. And
the great object and attractive shines even most gloriously in all. Nature in
all its Harmonies, Stores and Beauties; Providence in all its illustrations of
its excellencies and exactness, suiting it self in all the Articles thereof to
every thing and being and concern in Heaven and Earth. The sacred Scriptures
every way entertaining us with what may exercise and enrich the mind of man,
heal and compose his Conscience, enthroning it as Gods vicegerent to inspect
the principles, designs and practices, and State of men, to make and keep them
orderly, safe and easy, and so to affect the heart and life, as that we may be
lovely in the sight of God, the blessings of our Stations in our generations
and a most comfortable entertainment to our selves. Our very selves are most
provoking objects unto love. So many faculties in our Souls! So many passions
and affections to be ordered and exercised aright! So many senses for
reception! So many Organs and Instruments for the commodious promoting and
securing of our own Good! So many Objects, Employments and Acquests to be
engaged vigorously about and orderly conversant with all continually! And God
in all this eminently beaming forth those perfections which are so fit and
worthy to take endearingly with us! How inexcuseable is cold heartedness whenas
it may so easily be cured by serious Contemplations of these objects! Light and
Colors, and beautiful proportions to the eye: Words and Melodies to the Ears:
Food to the taste, and all the objects, exercises and entertainments of every
sense, afford our very minds and hearts their delicacies to feed on, and urge
us to love God and Man.

And let me add this also, the beauties and delightfulness of holiness and
practical Religion as exemplified in holy persons, those excellent ones in whom
is my delight. says David, Psalm. xvi. 3. O to observe them in all their
curious imitations and resemblances of their God, in the Wisdom of their
Conduct, the fervours of their Spirits, the steadiness of their purposes, the
evenness of their tempers, the usefulness and blamelessness of their lives, the
loftiness of their aims, the placed gravity of their Looks, the savor and
obligingness of their Speeches, the generous largeness of their Hearts, the
openness of their Hands, the impartiality of their Thoughts, the tenderness of
their Bowels, and all the sweetnesses of their Deportments toward all. Such
things are really, where Christian Godliness obtains indeed. Tho mere
pretenders, or real Christians in their decays and swoons, may represent
Religion under its eclipses to it is great disadvantage and reproach. When
therefore we contemplate all these excellencies, (and many more not mentioned)
will not our Hearts take fire and burn with love of Complacency, where these
things are visible; and with the Love of benevolence, and beneficence to that
degree, toward those that are receptive of, but want them, which shall enrage
Desires, and Prayers, and quicken us to diligent endeavors after what by such
may be attained unto, were they but closely and warmly followed by us, and
brought to the diligent pursuits thereof. Thus you see, deep thoughts about
lovely Objects will get up love, and cure luke-warmness in us to the purpose.
Let this then be done.

3. Heart-awakening and Love-quickning Truths are to be duly and intimately
considered. And this is indeed in part, to truthifie in Love, if I may make an
English Word to express the valor of the Greek Word, (...), Ephesians. iv. 15. The
existence and excellence of the great Jehovah, the Trine-Vne Holy one, the care
which he has taken, and the expensive cost he has been at to cure this Malady
by the forementioned means and helps. The critical Inspections of his Eye into
the Heart of Man, and his making this the test and balance of the Sanctuary, to
try us by, counting and judging us more or less fit for Mercies, and Judgments,
Heaven, or Hell, Service or to be thrown aside as refuse, as our Hearts stand
affected. No exact soundness in our Spirits, no safety in our State, no real
ease and cheerfulness in our Souls, no evidence of our acceptance with our God,
no Duty well performed toward God or Man, no Sins subdued, no Trial bravely
managed and resulted, no Talents used fully to the Masters Satisfaction and
Advantage; nothing professed, performed, endured or obtained without this Love.
And according to it is Ebbs and Flows, it is Inflammations and Abatements, so
does it fare and go with all our Christianity and Concerns. The Truth is, all
the concerns of Souls and Persons, in Life, Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
are hereupon depending. These Articles of Truth considered well, will make us
serious, fervent, resolute and industrious in the things of God.

4. Heart-warming Duties are to be performed thoroughly, in Public, Private,
and in Secret, Eccl. ix. 10. Romans xii. 11, 12. Pray hard, read frequently and
seriously, hear diligently and impartially; meditate closely and concernedly
upon all you read or hear relating to the great concern. Be much in Christian
conference, in the due Spirit, and to the genuine design and purposes thereof;
be much in Praise, Thanks, Self-observation, Government and Discipline: Look up
to Heaven for help, and improve faithfully what you thence obtain. And I do
take the Supreme, Essentially, Infinite Good, to be dishonored and degraded by
us in our Thoughts and Walk; if any Creature Interests or Excellencies do
ultimately terminate our Affections and Intentions. For my part, I take
converses, Employments, Ingenious Recreations, and even sensitive
Entertainments to be most delicious and grateful; when they occasion or provoke
me to those Observations of God in all, which carry up my thoughts through, and
from them to him, with Thanks and holy Wonder. And when these thoughts do as it
were return again from Heaven, to set us more delightfully and strenuously to
our needful work on Earth; for Heaven and for the most generous and true
services, to the great benefit of the Church and World: O what a Sea of
Pleasures and Advantages, do Love and good Works cast us then into, and keep us
in! How often have the delicate composures of grave and sprightly Music well
managed by the sweet and skilful Voice or touch, provoked and urged my Soul to
admire the chief good, and the Eternal source of all communicated and
communicable ingenuity and expertness in that, and in all sorts of Arts and
Sciences! The delicate composure of the ear to render it receptive of melodious
sounds, the usefulness of the Air for the conveyance of them to the prepared
Ear: The pregnancies of humane Souls and Fancies for the endlessness of various
compositions! The command that the Soul has over the Animal Spirits, to order
and command the Voice or Fingers, the rules of harmony, and the particular
gracefulness, of relishes, and flourishings, and humourings of some particular
Notes and Touches. And the different tempers that God has made, whereto the
varieties of sounds have their as various degrees and ways of gratefulness;
these things with all the Mysteries of sounds and numbers. O what is their cry?
How lovely is the Eternal God, that gives us such Abilities and Entertainments!
How lovely are the Souls of Men, that are receptive of such things! How lovely
are those Labors and Designs, that are with Wisdom, Diligence and
Faithfulness, directed to the Cultivation, and Salvations of such Souls! O how
beautiful and lovely are the feet of those, and how deserving of our Prayers,
and universal helpfulness are they themselves, who lay out all their Time and
Strength, to get each other, and as many as they can, in readiness to bear
their parts, and take their share in the Melodies and Entertainments of that
Triumphant state of Love and Holiness in the Heavenly Glory* The cry of all is,
Love, Love. These are things and objects, that require and deserve our Love in
it is most urgent vehemencies, to promote their Interests; this noble flame is
desecrated and profaned by us, and used to it is own prejudice and reproach,
when it is not directed to, and diligently conversant about Objects and
Services truly worthy of it self, Gal. iv. 18. I should have thought my
Thoughts and Heart not only Faeculant, but in a sort profane; had I applied my
Studies, or this Sacred Directory in my Text, to the promoting of fervor,
noise and stir about things much below, or repugnant to the weightier things,
and matters of Christ's Gospel Kingdom, Judgment, Mercy and Love. Mat. xxiii.
23. The love of God, says Luk xi. 42. Woe worth, that Papal zeal and diligence,
that is for the promotion of an universal Visible Headship; wherein they
pretend that all the Church Militant must be united; into whose Arbitrary and
bold dictates it must resolve it is Faith, according to whose Edicts it must
form all it is practices, and to the supports whereof in all it is secular
Grandeurs, Pageantries, and usurped Prerogatives, it must devote and sacrifice
it is all. Is He lukewarm in Gods account, that will not Anathematize, traduce,
distress, destroy, Souls, Persons, Families, Churches, Kingdoms, and the
choicest and most useful Persons; who will not absolutely devote himself
hereto, and show his zeal in desolating flames and slaughters? Such Zeal, we
know by whom it was called Madness, Act. xxvi. 9. -- 11. Phil. iii. 6. Woe worth
Malignant and Censorious zeal, that overlooks much excellence in others, and
that envies or despises all deserving Services, Gifts and Graces, if not seated
in, and performed by themselves. Woe worth dividing zeal, that intimately
espouses particular opinions, modes, forms and humors, and then makes these
the main, or the only terms of Peace and Concord; that lays out all it is Time,
Strength, Interest and Fervours, to gain Proselytes and Votaries hereto; and to
defend their own Fictions, and quarrel with, and keep at sinful distances from
Persons better (perhaps) than themselves, because their Schibboleth is not
pronounced by them. Woe worth partial zeal, that measures things, and Persons,
by their discords and agreements, with our own Interests, Parties or
Persuasions. Every thing is Idolatry, Superstition, and rigorously to be dealt
withal, that falls not even with our sentiments and ways. Woe worth
self-conceited zeal, that lays it is quarrels upon this cause and bottom, that
others will not reverence and yield to us, as wiser and better than themselves.
And woe worth all zeal, that lays the Christian Interest, Peace and Welfare on
Covenants, Subscriptions, or any terms too mean and narrow to sustain them. I
shall never value, vindicate, practice, nor endure that zeal which bears not
all those Characters of God, mentioned in Jam. iii. 17, 18.

Postscript.
ANd now Reader, let me bespeak thy Candor. I am very sensible of very great
inaccuracies and defects in this Resolution of so great a Case: It became my
work under unusual disadvantages, not fit to be mentioned here. I have exposed
my first draught to an observant Generation. the Truths contained therein are
Gods, and the Directions offered, are for the substance of them according to
the Doctrine of the Scripture of Truth. May they but prosper to the c^re of
lukewarm hearts, I can the better spare the praise of men, and bear their
Censures and Contempt. It is the desire, endeavor, and design of my poor Soul
to think as meanly of my self as other's can. I have no time (and through the
infirmity of my Right hand, writing is the most tedious part of my work) to
correct my first Copy, which entertains me in the perusal thereof, with many
superfluous expressions to be retrenched, many inaccuracies of Phrase and
Method to be rectifyed; many defects to be made up, as to that matter which the
full Resolution of the Case requires: Many hints and heads which might more
copiously have been insisted on; yea and some passages in the Text it self, I
find upon review might have been more fully and nervously improved to the
exacter Resolution of the Case. Much more I could have said, and much more than
that, can a Multitude of my Brethren speak, were they to undertake the Subject;
and handle it, according to the Grace and Wisdom, which God has more copiously
given unto them, than unto me: Tho I will leave this Testimony to his Great and
Gracious Name upon record, that he has ever helped me, and had done more for
me had I not unworthily obstructed the Current of his kindnesses to me: My
Books and helps are nothing to me without him, it is ignorance of our selves,
and of God that makes us proud; but our sensible approaches to Eternity and to
himself will make us sneak, and lay us in the dust before him, we being hereby
made to see how little we know can signify, obtain, or do without him.

Some may perhaps Object my mistake, and misapplication of this Text, in that
men, our fellow Christians are the object of this Love and Service here to be
provoked unto. And I deny it not, but it is Gods Image, Interest and Service,
in and by them, in reference to the pleasing of his will, so good, so
acceptable, and so perfect, Romans xii. 1, 2. that is the great inducement to
this love. And as these things are discernable in them, communicable to them,
and followed or neglected by them, so are they related to, and all of us
concerned in this Love and good Works, either as Agents or Objects, or both*
and of this Love and Service is God the Original Dirigent, and Vltimate End.

Quest. What is the duty of Magistrates from the highest to the lowest, for the
suppressing of profaneness. SERMON XV.
Romans 13.3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
REligion, if right, does excel all other things in the world upon the account
of its universal usefulness, and the powerful influences it has upon them that
are true to it, for the promoting of their present, future, and everlasting
happiness. Of all other the Christian Religion, which we own and profess, is
the best and most worthy of our engaging in and immovable cleaving to, being
pure and undefiled before God and the Father, as the Apostle James speaks,
Chap. 1.27. v. Unspeakably profitable it is and advantageous to the Kingdoms
that receive it, and to the Persons who are sincere in it, and studious of
conforming themselves to its holy Precepts and Rules. The sacred Scriptures
drawn up and left by men divinely inspired and infallibly assisted, from which
alone we fetch it, (not from Fathers or Councils, whatever esteem and
Veneration we have for them,) do commend themselves unto the judgments and
consciences of men, who have not shaken hands with reason, and fetch so great a
compass as to contain and reveal, either in particular or general directions,
all that which is necessary for us to believe or do in order to our full
satisfaction and endless felicity in the next world, and our present safety,
peace and comfort in this foolish and troublesome one. David tells us, Psalm.
119.96. The Commandment is exceeding broad. It is long for its duration, being
aeternae veritatis, of everlasting truth, not any thing shall be diminished or
cut off from it, not any thing shall be changed or altered in it, and it is
broad for its usefulness, extending to and spreading it self over all the
occasions of men, for it has comforts Sovereign and proper in all distresses
though never so pinching, together with directions adapted to and fitted for
all conditions and affairs, though never so difficult and abstruse.

The blessed Word of God will teach you how to order and demean your selves in
your personal capacities, and in your relative too; how to walk alone, and how
to draw in the Yoke. It presents us with the best Ethics, Oeconomicks, and
Politics in the World: Aristotle's and Machiavels are fooleries if compared
with it. This precious word being well attended to and obeyed, will make
comfortable Families, flourishing Kingdoms and States. Oh that all those unto
whom the Lord has in his goodness vouchsafed these Oracles would be so wise as
to make them their delight and Counselors. Sure I am we should then be blessed
with better Husbands and Wives, better Parents and Children, better Masters and
Servants, better Friends and Neighbors, better Ministers and people, better
Magistrates and Subjects. The beauty of the Lord our God would be upon us, and
that would make our faces shine.

Of the last mentioned Relation, viz. That between Magistrates and Subjects,
the holy Apostle Paul treats at the beginning of this Chapter, and so on to the
8th verse. In the first verse he issues out his precept, from which it appears
that Christ is no enemy to Caesar, and the principles of Christian Religion not
inconsistent with those of Loyalty. The best Christians will be found (at long
run to be sure) the best Subjects. None so true to their Prince as those that
are most faithful to their God, for what says our Apostle? Let every Soul be
Subject to the higher powers. Every one, Man, Woman, and Child, that is capable
of understanding what subjection means, and of expressing it. Be he of what
rank and in what station he will, high or low, noble or base, rich or poor, of
the Clergy (by the Popes leave) or of the Laity, as some love to speak, let him
be Subject, not overtop, not exalt himself over that which is called God, but
be subject to the higher powers. Who are they? the Civil Magistrates.
Antichrist has put in his claim here, but he is justly nonsuited by
Protestants. It is the Civil Magistrate, whose interest and right our Apostle
here asserts and pleads: Kings, as he speaks in another Epistle, and all that
are in Authority. These we are to pray for, to these we ought to be Subject, to
these we must pay tribute, these we must honor, support and assist, these we
are bound to obey, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, and that
in all things in which obedience to them does not carry in the bowels of it
disobedience unto God, whom the greatest and highest of them are infinitely
below. This precept he backs and binds upon Christians with sundry arguments
drawn,

1. From the Institution. Of Magistracy of what kind soever the Government be,
whether Monarchical, or Aristocratical, etc. Still Government is of divine
Institution. It is Gods Ordinance and Appointment. There is no power but of
God, the powers that be are ordained of God. It is not of the Devil, who is an
enemy to order, and delights in confusion, nor is it only by the will of man,
whatsoever they may and do contribute toward it, nor is it any of those who
possess the Throne and sway the Scepter; but it is of God who in his infinite
wisdom and goodness to mankind, has determined and ordered it should be so,
who according to the pleasure of his will, without giving account of his
matters, puts down one, and sets up another, and who has infused such an
instinct and principle into men living together in a Community as powerfully
and effectually leads to the electing of one or more, and setting him or them
over them, arming and intrusting them with power and authority, for the
administration of justice and public affairs, that by them common safety and
good may be both secured and promoted, and from them as from the head, vital
and comfortable influences may be conveyed to the whole politic body, yea to
the meanest and lowest of its members who grind at the Mill and handle the
Diffaff.

2. From the sin of those who refuse this required Subjection, and oppose and
resist the Magistrate, v. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists
the ordinance of God. He does herein run counter and Cross to the all-wise God,
and his declared will. He does as it were, set his Wisdom and Will against
Gods. Bellum cum Deo suscipit, whatever he fancies to himself, he undertakes
and wages War with God. This man sins against God as well as against man, is
a Rebel against the Majesty of Heaven as well as his Prince upon earth refusing
the obedience he ows to his Ordinance and Command.

3. From the evil and fatal consequence or effect of Rebellion and Resistance,
of which in the same verse, they that resist shall receive unto themselves
damnation. They commit such a crime as shall most certainly and severely be
revenged, they had better never have done it, for punishment will surely follow
it, and it may be with a quick and speedy pace, either from the hand of the
Magistrate, to whom the Sword is committed, with which he is to animadvert upon
all disobedience, or by the hand of God who will plead the cause and vindicate
the honor of his Lieutenants and Vicegerents; so that such Delinquents are
never safe, but in danger of a Temporal punishment here, as Korah and his
accomplices experienced, and so did that unnatural wretch Absalom; or an
eternal one in Hell in case hearty repentance do not by an happy interposal
prevent it.

4. From the end of the Office, and the business incumbent upon persons called
to it, which is singularly good and greatly necessary, being designed for and
tending to the preventing of vice, and promoting of virtue, and this is the
argument used in my Text, for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil. (...), Princes, Magistrates, they into whose hand the Scepter is put,
or the Sword of Justice, whether they be Supreme or Subordinate, whatsoever
place they hold in the Political Body. These are not (...), a terror, a scare
a fright, they ought not to be, it does not become them to be; It is no part of
their Office and place to be: And so long as they act conscientiously, wisely,
so long as they observe the rules given them, and carry in their several
Stations as they should, they will not be a terror (...), to good works or to
them that do them, whom they ought to defend by their power, and encourage with
their smiles; but only (...), to those which are evil. It is the latter part of
these words which falls under my present consideration; My work is to take a
view of Magistrates, and to discourse about them as they ought to be terrors
unto evil works, all of them so far as they come to their knowledge and fall
under their cognizance. The Question, which I am desired to speak unto being
this:

Quest. What is the duty of Magistrates from the highest to the lowest, for the
suppressing of profaneness?

In the handling hereof I shall observe this method.

First, Enquire what is meant by profaneness.

Secondly, What is intended by the suppression of profaneness.

Thirdly, Prove it to be the duty of all Magistrates to employ their Authority
and power for that great and excellent end.

Fourthly, Propound and offer sundry means which they may and should make use
of in order thereunto.

Lastly, Shut up our whole discourse with application; and the great God assist
in the work, and bless that which shall be done. Amen.

Our first enquiry then will be, what are we to understand by profaneness. In
answer whereunto we will consider the word, which in Latin is prophanus, and as
some learned Critics observe, is as much as procul a Fano, far from the Temple
or holy place, far from God; that which is far from the mind and will of God,
that which God does not approve, will have nothing to do with, which speaks
those that love and practice it a company of persons at a distance from God.
The word in the Greek is (...). Now says Aretius, (...) signifies pure, such
a purity as is in the stars of Heaven, or a serene Sky, and the syllable Be
does change the signification and import of the word, and accordingly we do
well understand by it that which is unclean, impure, polluted, filthy. So that
profaneness is uncleanness, of which there are two sorts.

First, A Ceremonial uncleanness. Thus we read of defiled hands and common
meats. Of the former, Mark 7.2. There came together unto him certain of the
Pharisees and Scribes, and when they saw some of his Disciples, eat Bread with
defiled (that is to say, with unwashen hands) they found fault. (...), with
common hands, impure ones. That was counted by them a profane action, which
polluted the person that did it, and so you read of common meats, Acts 10.13,
14. Peter saw Heaven opened, and a certain Vessel descending unto him, as it
had been a great sheet, wherein were all manner of four-footed Beasts of the
Earth, and Wild Beasts, and Creeping things, and Fouls of the Air; and there
came a voice to him, Rise, Peter, Kill and Eat; but Peter said, Not so, Lord,
for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean, (...). There common
is opposed to holy; it was a thing not fit for that holy people whom God had
called out from the rest of the world and made his own peculiar. That was
common, unclean or profane, which was lawful to the Gentiles, but prohibited
the Jews by the Ceremonial Law; as to instance Swines flesh. That Law is now
abolished; with this sort of uncleanness we at present have nothing to do, as
not being intended in the question.

Secondly, There is a moral uncleanness, and that is it here meant. That is
said to be profane, which is impure, polluted, foul, loathsome and defiling;
and so it may be, and, as we find in Scripture, it is applied both to persons
and to things.

First, To persons. Thus in Ezekiel. 21.25. when the Lord by the Prophet spoke to
Zedekiah, it was in this language: Thou profane, wicked Prince of Israel. His
profaneness did arise from, or rather consist in his wickedness, for he had
grievously polluted himself with Idolatry and Perjury, with cursed persecutions
and the blood of the Innocents. He was both a stranger and enemy to all piety,
and purity, he ingulph'd himself in wickedness, and labored with all his might
to draw others of his Subjects, both noble and base into the same practices,
and to Plunge them as deep as himself. Esau has the same brand set upon him,
Heb. 12.16. Lest there be any fornicator or profane person, as Esau, who for
one morsel of meat sold his Birthright. A profane person, qui nihil habet
sacri, who has in him nothing Sacred, nothing of holiness, who violates,
neglects, tramples under foot holy things; who so pleases himself in
filthiness as to wallow in it; in whom the love of the world is so predominant,
and to pleasures, riches and honors he is so addicted, that he prefers them
before the grace of God, and the Kingdom of Christ in himself and in the world.
Such an one as valued carnal things above spiritual, earthly above heavenly and
a small fleshly enjoyment above so great and advantageous a privilege as the
Primogeniture.

Secondly, Profaneness is attributed to things. Thus in 1 Timothy 4.7. Refuse
profane and old Wives Fables, by which we are, according to learned men, to
understand, either the absurd Jewish stories, or some superstitious persons
forbidding to marry, and the use of sundry sorts of meats; or those idle and
foolish Doctrines which place the worship of God in such low and pitiful
things as external sapless Rites, and Ceremonies, Forms, Modes and Gestures.
But further those things are plainly and notoriously profane which are sinful
and wicked. Debauchery is profaneness in Grain; a wicked life is a profane
life. To Lie, and Swear, and Curse, and Whore are acts of profaneness; for
people to drive on their worldly Trades, to buy and sell, in Houses, Shops, or
Streets upon the Sabbath Day are acts of profaneness. This is a profaning of
that day which God has separated from the rest of the days, and sanctified and
set apart for holy use, his own worship and service, and the good of Souls. In
short, all that which is contrary to the Divine Law, those excellent and
blessed Rules which God has been pleased in his Word to give out unto us, for
the right management of our selves, and ordering of our Lives and Conversations
in the World; all that, I say, is profaneness, whether it be Impiety or
Immorality.

Our second work is to enquire what we are to understand by the suppressing of
profaneness.

To this I answer in general; the suppressing of it does signify the keeping of
it under. If profaneness be not carefully looked to, but let alone, it will
quickly grow to an head, and soon overspread and overtop all. It must
therefore be kept down, and if through the negligence of some, and the
impudence of others it be got to an height, it must be knocked down. Such tough
humors in the body Politic need and call for strong Purges, and Civil
Magistrates, who are the State-Physicians cannot be better employed than about
such works as that. More particularly, I shall mention two things, which the
suppression of profaneness does carry in it.

A prevention of 1. The acts of profaneness. 2. The growth of it.


First, There must be a prevention of the Acts of profaneness. Profane
principles in the heart of a man, lying still, and as it were, dormant, not
breaking forth, are out of the reach of others; Neither the Magistrates Sword,
be it never so long, nor the Ministers Word, if alone and unaccompanied with
the Divine Spirit, can reach it, or prevail against it. That is the mighty and
glorious work of the great Jehovah, who alone knows the Heart and searches
it, and can change, alter and mend it. None but he that made the heart at
first, can mould it anew: None but he can cast Salt into that Spring, none but
he can graft such holy principles as to make a corrupt tree good. But wicked
and profane practices in the lives, of men as are the wretched products,
fruits and issues of base and cursed principles, may be curbed, restrained and
prevented: So that though the wickedness of the wicked will not depart from
him, yet it shall not be committed with that frequency and boldness, and
openness as it has been, and to this very day is. With shame and sorrow be it
spoken. In the Heb: 12.15. Look diligently, lest any man fail of the Grace of
God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you. You may understand
it both of unsound doctrine and abominable practices, but I am now only to deal
with the latter. Sin, lust, corruption in the heart is a root of bitterness,
yielding that which is bitter to God; his Soul hates and abhors it: And it is
bitter to man in the sad direful consequences and effects of it, which when the
foolish self-humouring sinner comes to taste he will certainly find worse than
Gall. Sin is his dainties, he rolls it as a delicious morsel under his tongue,
but it will prove the poison of Aspes within him. Now it nearly concerns every
one to endeavor the pulling up of this root in his own heart, let him set both
his hands to the work, let him lay the axe to it, and call God in to his
assistance. It is ten thousand* thousand times more desirable to have in you
that root of the matter which holy Job spoke of, than to have this root of
bitterness in you. But then it ought to be the care of all, specially
Governors, both in Families, Churches, Kingdoms and Nations, they should look
diligently to it, that this root do not pullulare, spring up; if at any time it
begins to peep and show its head, oppose it with might and main, trample upon
it with the foot of just indignation, never suffer it to shoot up, bud and
bring forth. Though men will not be so good as they should, do not give them
leave to be as bad as they would: It is not in your power to dry up the
fountain, but it is a part of your duty to dam up the streams; and though you
cannot eradicate men's vicious habits yet you must restrain their outward acts,
1 Timothy 1.20. Of whom are Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto
Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. A strange way of cure, to prevent
sin by giving men up to the Devil, yet such as God prescribed and prosper'd.
After the same manner, let flagitious Persons be delivered up to punishment,
that so though they will not, virtutis amore, for the love of virtue, yet
formidine poenae, for fear of punishment they may learn to bridle themselves,
and not to do any more so wickedly as they have done. One great end of
punishment being the reclaiming and amending the offender if he be not past
hope.

Secondly, There must be a suppression of the growth and spreading of
profaneness. I shall hereafter show you a little more fully, how that sin is
like some unhappy weeds, that if once they get into a ground, and be not timely
dealt with, will in a little while run far and near, and overspread the whole,
they do not need any encouragement, it is enough for them to be let alone. Of
all Weeds this wickedness is the worst and most diffusive of itself; a profane
wretch is like one that has the plague, he is indeed a pest, or common plague
in the place where he is, his very breath and touch, his discourses, and
actions are infectious, he goes up and down tainting those with whom he does
converse, who are not of healthful constitutions of Souls, and well antidoted
with the fear and awe of God. And this was one reason that the Apostle Paul
gives in the forementioned, Heb. 12. why he would have such special care taken
to prevent the springing up of any root of bitterness, lest thereby many be
defiled, (...), polluted, bespattered, made as filthy and nasty as the beasts
themselves. If such a root of bitterness be suffered to spring up, many will be
troubled at it, and many will be defiled by it. It is the design and delight of
wicked men to make others as bad as themselves, and to draw both Acquaintance
and Strangers to cast in their lot among them, and to walk hand in-hand with
them in their crooked ways that lead down to the Chambers of Death. Oh that the
Saints and People of God were as desirous and industrious for the promoting of
true Piety, as the Emissaries of Hell are for the propagating of profaneness!
Oh that they would be as diligent to persuade men and women into the Faith and
Obedience of the Gospel, as these are to make devilish Proselytes! In a Word,
that they would take as much care and pains for the carrying others along with
them to Heaven, as these are to allure and hurry others to Hell. But to our
shame be it spoken, we are too dull, heavy and unactive, we are greatly
outdone by them; we are not a quarter so zealous for the rescuing of poor
Sinners out of the clutches of the destroyer, as they are for the bringing them
under his power.

But sure I am, it is the Duty of all, specially the concernment of those, who
are by God invested with Power, to reckon it, and accordingly to mind it as a
very considerable part of their work, to look to it, that this noisome Plague be
stayed. And to that purpose, I desire them to consider what was the Resolution
of David the man after Gods own Heart, Psalm 101.8. I will early destroy all
the wicked of the Land; it should be one of the first things he did, to destroy
them, not corporally by taking away their Lives, but civilly by a due and
strict Discipline, and so cut off all evil doers from the City of the Lord.
Where this is not attended to, sad and doleful experience has made it evident
to the World, that Hell will immediately break loose, the Floodgates of
Wickedness will be all drawn up, and an inundation of the blackest villainies
will follow and drown a Land, Judge. 17.6. In those days there was no King in
Israel. None that could Effectually hinder Idolatry or any thing else, none
that had a sufficient coercive Power, for the Judges did deal with the People
rather by Counsel and Persuasion than by Commands and Punishments; and then
says the Text, Every man did that which was right in his own Eyes, and you
need not doubt but a great deal of that was wrong and odious in Gods Eyes.

But Magistrates by their Diligence in their places, acting up to their trust,
and a due Execution of Justice may secure our Banks, and set up a standard
against wickedness even then when it comes in upon us swelling and roaring
like a Flood. God in Deuteronomy. 13.6. etc. made this Law, That if any one should
offer to tempt another to Idolatry, though the Person doing it were his
Brother, the Son of his Mother, or his Son or his Daughter, or the Wife of his
Bosom, or a Friend, that was as his own Soul, let him be never so near, and
never so dear, yet if He should say, Let us go and serve other Gods, His Friend
and most intimate Relation being thus tempted, should surely kill him, his hand
should be first upon him, and afterward the hand of all the people, and they
should stone him with stones till he died. And now observe what was the end and
design hereof. You have it set down in verse 11. All Israel shall hear and
fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. This will
be in terrorem, it will scare and fright the wretches, such an Act of Justice
will ring and grow famous, it will be talked of both in Town and Country, and
wheresoever the report comes it will strike an awe upon men, so that they shall
not add to do the like.

The third thing which, according to the Method I propounded, I have to do, is
to make it plain and evident, that it is the indispensible duty of Magistrates
from the highest to the lowest, to mind the Suppression of profaneness as
their business. For when I do in this case speak of Magistrates, we are to
understand it in the utmost extent, of Kings and all that are in Authority. All
of them, one and other, who have the Sword of Justice put into their hands,
must not drouze and loiter, nor suffer that Sword to lie rusting in the
Scabbard, but are obliged to draw it, and run it to the very hilts into the
Bowels of profaneness. This I shall endeavor to prove unto you by sundry
particulars. Though I have looked upon a Sermon of this Nature as more fit for
another Auditory, than this which consists of private Persons; only my thoughts
have been, that what in the preaching did not reach some men's ears, may in the
Print come to their view, and if there were, as peradventure there were, any
inferior Officers present, they might consider what was delivered, and carry
it home with them, and be thereby excited to their Duty, and do much toward
the filling up of their places. But we proceed.

First, Magistrates are Gods Vicegerents, his Representatives, they stand in
his place. As God teaches by Ministers, so he rules by Magistrates, not that
he needs either the one or the other, but it pleases him to make use of both.
He that at first, as the great Creator of the World, instamped upon man that
Image of his which consists in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness,
has since the fall, as the wise Governor of the World, impressed upon Princes
and Rulers that Image of his which consists in Honor, Authority and Power.
This is plain from the Names and Titles given them. They are called his
Ministers, Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God unto thee. A Minister of Gods
choosing, a Minister of Gods appointing and advancing; it was God that seated
him in the Throne, that committed to him the Trust, that gave him his Office,
and put the Power in his hand. And says Paul, He is a Minister of God for
good. That is, according to Pareus, 1. For natural good to preserve men's Lives,
Liberties and Properties. 2. For moral good, to keep men from vice and
flagitious self-ruining courses. 3. For civil good, to hold up Societies, and
to promote Righteousness and Honesty. 4. For spiritual good, to establish and
uphold the true Religion, and pure worship of God. So that they are appointed
for a great deal of good, all which you may comfortably expect, and with some
good confidence Promise to your selves, whenever you see good men in the
place of Magistracy. Brambles will rend and tear, fire will go out of them to
devour, but the fruit of the Vine is chearing, and with delight we may sit
under it is comfortable shadow.

Yea they are not only called the Ministers of God, but because they are in so
great place, and set about so good work, God has been pleased to put upon them
his own Name, as we find in sundry places of Scripture, Exodus 22.28. Thou shall
not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. Where the latter
Expression, the Ruler of thy People, Is Exegetical and Explanative of the
former, the Gods; and accordingly the Chaldee Translation renders it, the
Judges. So again, Psalm 82.1. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty,
and judges among the Gods. (...). By which some indeed understand the Angels,
as 1 Samuel 28.13. When the Witch had raised up the Devil, a fallen Angel, in the
shape of Samuel, she said to Saul, I saw Gods ascending out of the Earth. And
so Psalm 86.8. Among the Gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord. Though the
holy Angels are noble Creatures, excellent in Wisdom, and mighty in Strength,
yet among that innumerable company not one can be found like God. But others
better understand hereby, Princes, Judges, and civil Magistrates. And not only
David a good man, a King, called them by this Name, but Jehovah himself has
given it them, he has vouchsafed to honor them with this Name, Psalm 82.6. I
have said, Ye are Gods, and all of you are the Children of the most High. You
are my Commissioners, you do Locum tenere, hold my place with my leave, and by
my appointment. Your Throne is the Throne of God, and your Tribunal the
Tribunal of God. I have given you an inviolable Authority, take heed how you
use it. I have made it your work to do Justice, and to distribute Rewards and
Punishments, see that you do it. Now what shall we infer from hence? Certainly
thus much; That Magistrates being Gods Vicegerents, they ought to Act like him,
and according to his will. Having their Commission from him, they should study
it and conform to it; bearing his Name, they should be expressive of his
Nature. Being clothed with his Power, they ought to employ it for his Honor,
and the promoting of his Interest, and against his Enemies, of whom Sin is the
worst; for men are said to be Enemies in their Minds through wicked works. Are
they Children of the most High? And as such admitted to a part of his judiciary
Power? Then it becomes them to be followers of him as dear Children, and as
well as they can to imitate him in the discharge of that trust which they have
received from him, Who is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with him; the foolish shall not stand in his sight, for he
hates all the workers of Iniquity, Psalm 5.4, 5. But let us pursue this a
little further.

Secondly, We have seen what is the place of Magistrates, it is very high and
honorable, but not supreme, there is one in Heaven that is higher than they,
great men in Authority, are still, as the good Centurion said, under Authority.
Their place is a Vicegerency. Now let us, but specially let them consider and
remember what is the work and business of their place. For that they ought to
do, endeavoring to stand complete in all the Will of God, as Men, as
Christistians, and as Magistrates, or Men in Office. It will by no means be
found enough for men to hold such or such a place in Church or State, but it
ought to be their desire and endeavor to fill up the place they hold. Which if
men would seriously think upon, there would not be that seeking of and hunting
after places as there generally is. Places then would rather seek men than men
Places. And as Persons in Authority and Power do, and will, and justly may
expect and require that honor, revenue and salary which does of right belong
to them upon the account of their place: The Prince will not part with his
Crown, Scepter and Throne so long as He can hold them: Nor the Lord Mayor with
his Sword and Mace, no nor the Constable with his Staff which is the badge of
his Office: So they and all others ought to fill up, as I said, their places
with the performance of that Duty which is inseparably annexed to them. A man
had a great deal better never have been advanced to a place of trust, than to
be careless, negligent, and remiss in it. He that so advanced is not a public
good is no better than a common nuisance. Honos and Onus, go together, Honor
and Burden; and He does not deserve to meddle with the Honor, who is not
willing to take up the Burden. Well, these places carry great work along with
them, and that work must be done.

Now if the Question be, What is that work to the doing whereof Magistrates are
by their places obliged? I answer, To appear for God, and to act for God. As
God is the Author of their Power, so his Interest and Honor ought to be the
matter of their designs, and the end of their Government. This that good King
Jehoshaphat did full well understand, accordingly when he had set Judges in the
Land, through all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City, he spoke thus unto
them, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take heed what ye do, for ye rule not for men, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. An excellent speech it was, a charge fit
to be given to Judges, when to go their Circuits. Judges, yea and others too as
well as they, had need be very Cautious and Wary men, exceeding prudent and
circumspect, it concerns them to ponder and weigh actions, how they carry, what
Laws they make, how they execute them, what Judgments they give, and what
Sentences they pass. But what is the reason hereof? Because they Judge not for
men, but for the Lord, and so they rule not for men, but the Lord; and when
they meet in Parliament they should consult not for men, but for the Lord.
Though indeed they do manage all most prudently for men, when they act most
faithfully for the Lord. And it is certain, it is not Officers own advancement
and inrichment, not their own Honor and Grandeur at which they should level
and direct their Actions, none of these is the end of Government, or of their
being called to any part or share of it, but the Honor of God, and his Glory
as Supreme, and the good of men as subordinate. And let not that be forgotten
which Jehoshaphat added, The Lord is with you in the Judgment. When you do
well, and act according to the Law of Righteousness, God is with you to own
you, to justify you, to stand by you, to comfort and encourage you, to protect
and defend you, to reward and bless you, as Persons that have been faithful.
And you may be sure, He is at all times with you, in the Throne, and in the
Senate, and upon the Bench, and elsewhere, curiously to observe, and take
notice of that which you do, for by him actions are weighed. Magistrates and
Officers of all sorts have many eyes upon them, more see them than they
themselves see. There are upon them the eyes of good men and bad, of Friends
and Foes, of Subjects and Strangers: And they have upon them one eye more than,
as I fear, some of them think of so much as they should, and that is the Eye of
the great and most Holy God. He sees what is done upon the Throne, and at the
Council Board, what in the Parliament houses, and what in the Courts of
Judicature, what Bills are drawn, and what do obtain the Royal Assent, what
Laws are enacted, and how they are executed.

Now that the Punishment of Vice and Suppression of profaneness is a special
part of the work and duty of their place, is evident from this, Romans 13.4. He
is the Minister of God, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.
Let the man be what and who he will, let him be clothed with what
circumstances he will, let him make what Figure he will, if he will do evil he
must suffer for the evil that he does. If men will take a lawless Liberty, the
Ruler must take vengeance, if they will do the evil of Sin, He must see to it
that they suffer the evil of Punishment. This is the work of his Office, He is
the Minister of God for this purpose, being ultor irae divinae, and having a
vial of wrath put into his hand by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth,
which he is to open and pour out upon the Children of disobedience, who are,
for their being such, meritoriously filii irae, the Children of wrath.

Thirdly, Profaneness is of that cursed Nature and Tendency, that it is not to
be tolerated, being contrary to the Light and Law of Nature, and therefore has
been condemned and punished among Heathen Nations, specially such of them as
have been civilized, and made any improvement of those (...), common Notions,
and Principles that had been impressed upon their Souls, and took any care to
demean and carry themselves according to the ducture and guidance of them. How
much more contrary is it to the greater and more excellent Light of Scripture
and Gospel-revelation, which God has caused to so eminent a degree to shine
among us, and which does so expressly and abundantly condemn, and denounce the
Wrath of God against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men? Who can
sufficiently tell how odious it is to Persons who are moraliz'd, and yet more
to all them who have been savingly englightned, and had their blindness cured
by some of Christ's eye salve? And by consequence how greatly ought it to be
abhorred, and totally abandoned in all those Places, Countries and Nations,
unto whom God has sent the magnalia legis, the great things of his Law, and
also the precious things of the Everlasting Gospel; what Agreement is there,
what Concord between Light and Darkness, between Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, or what Communion has Christ with Belial? Without all
peradventure this is a Work of Darkness, and that is not a fit employment for
them that dwell in a Land of Light. In Ephesians. 4.18, 19. The giving of
themselves over unto lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness, is
spoken of by the Apostle, as the work of those who have their understandings
darkened, and are alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is
in them because of the blindness of their Hearts; and altogether indecorous and
unbecoming them who have learned Christ, and been trained up in the
Gospel-School. Shall then such things be winked at, allowed, or countenanced in
a Valley of Vision? No, no, say I, for as these are the sins, so they are the
ignominy and shame both of those that do them, and of those that suffer them.
As Gospel Truths and Ordinances and the ordering of a Conversation aright in
suitableness to them, are (as the dying Wife of Phineas said of the Ark) the
Glory of Israel, so Immorality is it is disgrace. Both these we are assured of
by Solomon in one verse, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin
is a reproach to any People. The common opinion of men is, that the Exaltation
of a Nation is from the prudence of it is Prince, the wisdom of it is
Counselors, the valor of it is Commanders and Soldiers, the success of it is
Armies, victory over it is Enemies, Foreign, Domestic, flourishing of Trade,
abundance of Riches, the stateliness of it is Palaces, and such like; and it
will easily be yielded, that every one of these does make it is Contribution;
but know that Righteousness alone does more toward it, than all them put
together. This, this was it that made the faithful City, Princess of the
Provinces, and the Land of Canaan in Isreal's Possession (so long as Israel
walked with God) a Land of desire, an heritage of Glory, Jer. 3.19. Plato, a
great and excellent Heathen could say, Nemo recte honorat animam suam, nisi qui
vitiis fugatis justitiam colit. None truly Honors his own Soul, but he that
bidding defiance to vice, Loves and embraces Virtue. The same may as truly be
said of a Nation. Righteousness, Religion is it is Glory and Defense. But,

Sin is a reproach to any People. Mark that, any People. Let a People be never
so low, abject, contemptible, Sin will make them lower yet. And let a people be
never so great, famous and renowned, Sin will be a blot in their Escutcheon. It
is a reproach to an Heathen People, to Turks, Pagans Indians, but much more so
to a Christian People, to a people that profess themselves Protestants and
reformed, that call themselves the People of God. O England! what cause then
have thou to blush? How great is thy shame, O London! who have had so many of
Christ's Ambassadors sent unto thee with the Counsels of his Will, so many
bright Stars of the first magnitude shining in thine Orb, such Plenty and
abundance of means and spiritual Mercies afforded to thee, as no Nation has
had more, if any so much? Thou have been exalted indeed, and lifted up to
Heaven (like Capernaum) by these precious and inestimable enjoyments, and yet,
I fear it may be said, no place has acted at an higher rate of contrariety and
desperate Opposition to the Gospel, no place has expressed a greater Enmity to
Reformation and the Power of Godliness, no place has so superabounded with
profaneness; in no place has profaneness been more impudent and daring than
in thee. Thy lewdness is in thy Skirts. Oh how great is thy reproach! Now it is
unquestionably the Duty of all among us to endeavor the Honor of the Nation,
and to roll away this it is reproach. And if there be any Magistrates, higher or
lower, that will not heartily set both their hands to that work, let them know
and think of it again and again, that; that very thing will be to their
reproach. Yea, fall out as much to their reproach, as it was to the Honor of
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to have such a Testimony given of him by
the faithful and true Witness who holds the seven Stars in his Right hand,
Rev. 2.2. That he could not bear them that were evil, i. e. Not with any
Patience, but reproved them, and did what belonged to his Office, either
reducing them from their extravagancies, and bringing them to Repentance and
amendment of Life, or otherwise if incurable cutting them off from the Body,
and casting them out of Communion.

Fourthly, Let men neglect or be remiss about the suppression of profaneness,
and they will soon see the increase of it, for ill weeds will grow apace, shoot
and spread incredibly. Men do not need to bestow time and pains, and care to
house them in Winter, and water them in Summer, for by a bare connivence and
permission they will flourish and abound. It is indeed a piece of great
difficulty, and requires skill and labor to make that take and thrive which is
good and excellent; such is the nature of the soil since the fall; the Sin of
man brought upon the very ground the curse of God, so that Thorns and Thistles
it will send up by wholesale, but if a man will eat bread; he must do it in
the sweat of his brows. So here the Heart of Man is so miserably corrupt and
depraved, that there is scarce any thing good that will prosper in it. That
goodness which sometimes seems to be in some, as to instance in Ephraim, is
like the Morning Cloud, and early Dew that passes away. That which is lasting
and abiding in Persons regenerate is for it is continuance beholden to the
mighty Power and special influences of the Divine Spirit.

We see it often and often, the experience of too many years, of some
Generations does sadly prove how difficult a thing it is to bring about a
Reformation* which, one would think, should commend it self to the Consciences
of men that understand any thing of the mind and Will of God, nay to do any
thing toward it, or to reconcile most Persons to the Naming thereof, to
persuade them to break off from unwarrantable Customs, to put off old Rags
which are rotten and defiling, and to throw away those things which have
neither Marrow in them nor Flesh upon them, but are mere Bones of Contention,
and to prevail with them to make a further remove from Rome, and advance toward
Sion; I mean a Gospel Worship and Gospel Order. How difficult a thing is it to
bring the debauched Person to a sober Life, or the sapless empty Formalist to
the power of Godliness, and a real, hearty, thorough closure with the Lord
Jesus Christ and his Laws?

But as for Sin and Wickedness, it needs not any endeavors to promote it in
the World, and commend it to the practice of men, it needs no encouragement,
not because it is so good, but because men are so bad. The Devil himself may
sit still and let his Servants alone, they will be sure to follow his work hard
without having his Eye upon them. He might forbear and give over his
Temptations, for they can and will go, yea run alone in those down-hill ways of
Folly: Their connate Principles of Enmity to God and Rebellion against him,
will of themselves break out into hostile Actions, as naturally as Hay stackt
or laid up when Green or Moist will fire of it is self, and proceed to rage more
and more. Sin is like to a fire in a Town or City, which, if it be not
extinguished, or at least kept down and stopped in it is furious Career, will
march from House to House, and step from one side of the Street to the other,
and never desist so long as there is any combustible matter for it to fasten
upon, and so till it set all on a flame, and bury the whole in it is own Ruin
and Ashes. Let but a profane wretch alone, and I dare confidently say, you
shall not find him long alone. He will, like a decoy, soon gather Company to
him, and multiply them too, Eccl. 9.18. One Sinner destroys much good. And
so, being of his Father the Devil, and doing the works of his Father, let him
enjoy his Name, call him, Abaddon, Apollyon, a Destroyer. He will call himself,
an hundred to one else, a good Subject, a good Churchman, but he is a
Destroyer, that is his right Name. If you would know how he does destroy much
good, I answer in these two things; 1. He does it impiae vitae meritis, By the
demerits and high provocations of his impious, ungodly Life. He draws
Iniquity with the Cords of Vanity, and so Judgment as with Cart ropes. He is as
a Jonah in the Ship, which raises the Storms that threaten us, and as an Achan
in the Camp that arms and succeeds the Enemies that come out against us. To
whom do we owe the Plague that has consumed our Inhabitants, and the Fires
that have devoured our Houses, Towns and Cities but to him and his Fraternity?
Ahab spoke very unhandsomely to one of the Lords Prophets when he said, Art
thou he that troubles Israel? But Elijah answered him truly and bravely, I
have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim, 1 Kings
18.17, 18. It is the Idolaters, Superstitious, and Profane that troubled
Israel, and that trouble England, and will trouble the whole world, for they
provoke God to trouble us, and to distribute sorrows in his anger. 2. They
destroy much good impiis consiliis and exemplis. By their wicked Counsels and
Examples, while they allure, entice and persuade, and by their practices draw
others into the same courses, the same excess of riot. These are like Samsons
Foxes with firebrarnds fastened to their tails, that spoil the harvest we hoped
for as the joyful reward of our Labors. How comes our youth to be tainted as
they are? Who fills the eyes of Parents with tears, and their hearts with
sorrow, who travailed in birth for them that Christ might be formed in them,
but now mourn and weep bitterly over them as lost, because vi^ious and
extravagant? Whence is it that our hopes as to the succeeding generation are so
exceedingly infeebled, but by means of many among us so notorious for
profaneness who make it both their work and sport to render others as bad as
themselves? And if timely care be not taken to prevent it, we can rationally
expect nothing else but the leaving this pleasant Land, the Land of our
Nativity to be possessed by Sons of Belial, who will make it mourn and groan, and
sick to the spewing of them out. I desire you to lay this to your hearts, if
you have any bowels of mercy and compassion. A little spark is to be narrowly
watched, where there is so much tinder ready to catch.

Fifthly, Let this be seriously considered, if Magistrates Superior and
Inferior do not put forth their power and endeavors for the suppressing of
profaneness, they will pull down upon their own heads the guilt of all that
profaneness which is committed. And this I dare say, there is no man that
lives in the World, no not the best and most holy, but he has sins enough of
his own, too too many, more than he is able to bear or to answer for. His own
follies and miscarriages, if bound upon him will be found sufficient to break
his back, and sink him into the bottomless pit of misery. So David tells us;
and he spoke no more than what his own sense and feeling did suggest and
dictate to him, Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over my head, as a
burden; they, (i. e.) His own iniquities, his own head, heart and life sins,
are too heavy for me. And as it was with him so it is with every one; and
therefore no man has need to add to the load by heaping upon himself the guilt
of other men's sins too. Though it must be confessed, that notwithstanding all
which the wisest and most circumspect person can do, notwithstanding all the
care he can take, he will hardly be found altogether innocent as to this. Holy
Austin, one of the best of the Fathers, saw sufficient, yea abundant reason for
the putting up this humble Petition, Lord, deliver me from my other men's sins,
and it may be feared that no small number of great men who have been yea and
are in place of power and authority, will, when the all-seeing God comes to
search them, be found deeply culpable and dreadfully chargeable upon this
account, and therefore others that do at this day possess the same or like
places, are very nearly concerned to look to themselves. Felix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum. Happy the man whom other men's sins and dangers, falls
and hurts make to beware.

That has gone for current as a certain truth, qui non prohibet cum potest
jubet. He that does not forbid and prevent the commission of sin when it is in
the power of his hand to do it, does interpretative, Command the doing of it.
He allows it who winks at it, he does encourage it who stops it not. He does so
in the account of God who is a righteous Judge. He had as good command it as
stand by and see it done, and say nothing. And if men will in this or any other
way contract guilt, they may expect to taste the bitter Effects of it. If Rulers
will spare offenders, let not them think that God will spare them. Ahab in a
foolish kindness and pity let Benhadad go, whom God had appointed to utter
destruction. Now observe what a thundering Message the Prophet brought him
thereupon, 1 Kings 20.42. Thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for
his people. So that this kindness of Ahab to Benhadad was desperate cruelty to
himself and Israel. And the case of Eli is very pertinent to this purpose, and
most worthy of observation. He was not only Priest, but Judge armed with both
Parental and Magistratical power; His Sons did not write after that Copy which
he had set them, but were Sons of Belial, wicked and profane to a Prodigy, for
they Sacrilegiously robbed God, and filthily abused the women that were
assembled at the door of the Tabernacle, and by these means made the offering
of the Lord to stink, turned it to an abomination. For this Eli their Father
reproved them, but it was with very soft and silken words, Why do ye such
things? For I hear of your evil doings by all this people; nay my Sons, for it
is no good report that I hear, ye make the Lords people to transgress. And here
was all he did, but, Oh, how angry was God hereupon! It made his fury come up
into his face. Though Eli was a good man, a Priest, one that God had caused to
draw near to him, though he had reproved his Sons, and given them good advice,
yet this was not enough, it would not serve his turn, God was greatly provoked
because he did proceed no further; and see how dreadfully he threatened him, 1 Samuel 2.31. etc. I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy Fathers house,
that there shall not be an old man in it, thou shall see an enemy in my
habitation, the man of thine that I shall not cut off from my altar shall be to
consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart. And the dream is doubled, the
resolution of God is fixed; this one threatening that carries sorrow and
anguish enough in the bowels of it is followed with another, 1 Samuel 3.11. I
will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that hears it
shall tingle. I will perform against Eli all that I have sworn concerning his
house, when I begin I will also make an end. God would go through with the work,
and not only be diligent in the beginning of it, but likewise constant in the
performance, and complete in the finishing of it. For I have told him that I
will judge his house for ever. Such a punishment shall be inflicted, such a
burden laid upon him as shall never be taken off, for the iniquity which he
knows, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. Set
a mark upon these last words, in which indeed the accent and emphasis lies,
there was the provocation, that was it that exposed him to the divine
displeasure, and brought him under so severe a judgment. His Sons made
themselves vile, they defiled, debased and dishonored themselves, by their
sins and abominable practices they had rendered themselves odious and loathsome
in the eyes of God, and in the eyes of the people. Eli was not ignorant of
this, but was told of it, it raised a great cry, many complaints thereof were
brought to him, but he RESTRAINED THEM NOT. He did not curb them. He was too
mild, and tender, and gentle, he carried the matter as one that was not zealous
for his God, but afraid to offend them, and unwilling to grieve them. He did
not affright and ferret them out of their profaneness, they still continued
what they were, and held on their former course, and yet he did not draw the
Sword of justice, he did not inflict upon them grievous punishments, though
they persever'd in the Commission of grievous sins, he forgot to act up to the
Authority of a Father, an High Priest, a Judge, and therefore God will severely
punish him. Eli's Sons run deep in Score, and because, he thus let them alone,
God would make Eli himself to pay the reckoning. Consider of this and tremble,
you indulgent, fond Parents, that hear and see your Childrens Lying, Swearing,
Looseness and Debaucheries, but let them alone, and you timorous Slothful
Magistrates, that will not make profane persons smart, know and be assured
that your selves shall. You let them go, but Vengeance will hold you. But I
proceed, for though Rulers own concerns should awaken and rouse them up, yet
that is not all; therefore,

Sixthly, If Rulers will not take due, that is, utmost care to suppress
profaneness in a Nation where their power lies, they take a direct course to
pull down the wrath of God upon that whole Nation as well as upon themselves.
Solomon has these passages, Prove. 9.12. If thou be wise thou shall be wise for
thy self, but if thou scornest thou alone shall bear it. But we cannot say, if
a Magistrate will not discharge his duty, but suffer wickedness to pass without
control, he alone shall bear it; no, no, the burden may light, and lie heavy
upon more shouldiers than his own. His remissness and neglect may turn to the
smart of the Land, and people over whom he is set; the not shutting the
floud-gates of sin which let in a deluge of wickedness below, is no other than
the opening of the Windows of Heaven above for the letting down Showers and
Storms of wrath that shall drown and swallow up all. For want of this, as you
heard under the last particular, God did not only with great severity judge the
house of Eli, but also threatened to do a thing in Israel, or unto Israel, as
some read it, at which both the ears of every one that heard it should tingle,
1 Samuel 3.11. If any enquire what that terrible thing was, I answer, it was no
less than the delivering of the Army of Israel into the hands of the accursed
Philistines, so that three thousand of them fell in battle before those their
Enemies, and which was yet worse, the Ark of God was taken, before which they
worshipped, and which was the special and delightful Symbol of the Divine
presence with them. When the Sword of Magistracy lies still and dormant in the
midst of crying abominations, then God thinks it fit and high time to awake
himself to the Judgment which he commanded and man neglected, and to draw his
own, and how does he then lay about him, what blows does he give, what
stupendous work does he make! When one Jonah (that had been disobedient to his
God, and being sent by him upon a Message to Nineveh, took him to his heels and
run another way, when he I say) was in the Ship, and lay in peace, and at ease,
the whole was in danger, nor did the storm cease, though the Heathen Mariners
called every one to his God, till the guilty Criminal received his deserved
punishment in being cast into the Sea. That is a notable saying of Solomon,
Prove. 29.4. The King by Judgment stablisheth the Land. When it shakes and
totters he shores it up, he settles and confirms it again, and makes all sure.
But he that receives gifts overthrows it. These do blind the eyes of men in
place, and bind or tie their hands, so that they shall not do the things they
should. And he that receives them, that will take bribes to stop the course of
Justice, does overthrow the Land, he turns it upside down, he destroys the
very foundations of it, and when he has once done that, where is the wise man
that can tell me, what he will do himself; I can expect no other but his own
being buried in its ruins, yea probably, he shall go first, and not live long
enough to be a mourner at its Funeral. Whereas on the other side,

Seventhly, Magistrates by a vigorous suppression of profaneness may most
happily both prevent the coming of those Judgments which are impending over a
Nation, and remove those which are incumbent and heavy upon it. They may stay
the hand of revenging justice, when it is lifted up, as Abraham's was, and ready
to give the fatal stroke, and also they may take off the hand of God when it
lies heavy upon a people, and presses them sore, or, to use David's expression*
they may remove the stroke away from it, and hold his hand when it is about
repeating of the blow. I shall speak to both these under this head. They may
prevent a Judgment, and dispel that Cloud which threatens a storm. Hence it was
that when the people had most grievously offended and provoked God by making a
Golden Calf, and then worshipping it after the manner of Egypt, Moses said unto
the Sons of Levi who had gathered themselves together unto him as Persons
resolved to be on the Lords side, Exodus 32.27. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, put every man his Sword by his side, and go in and out from Gate to
Gate throughout the Camp, and slay every man his Brother, and every man his
Companion, and every man his Neighbor. And the Children of Levi did according
to the word of Moses, and there fell of the People that day about three
thousand men. Observe his temper; He was the meekest Man in the Earth, of a
most sweet and loving Disposition, knowing how to bear and forbear, but now he
was all on a flame, the Lamb was turned into a Lion, He was nearly and greatly
concerned for the Name and Honor of his God, and He accordingly set upon the
doing of Justice, and therefore made many a Sacrifice; and when that was done
he said unto the People upon the Morrow, ver. 30. Ye have sinned a great Sin,
and now I will go up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall make an Atonement for
your Sin. Now that I have done the Duty of my place, now that I have vindicated
the Honor of God, now that there has been this due Execution of Justice, Now
I will go up unto the Lord, and I will go up in hope, now I have a peradventure
to encourage me to think, that I shall make an Atonement for you. And let us
not pass over in silence, that which you have in ver. 29. of the same Chapter.
Moses had said, Consecrate your selves to day to the Lord, even every Man upon
his Son, and upon his Brother, that he may bestow upon you a Blessing this day.
The shedding of Blood, of the Blood of Man, the Blood of an Israelite by the
hand of Justice, in a cause deserving Death, did not defile them, but
consecrate them. Acts of Justice are as acceptable to God as Sacrifice, the
Blood of Sinners as the fat of Rams, and abundantly more; and says Moses, upon
your doing this, the Lord may bestow a Blessing* upon you. Levi therefore by
using a Sword of Injustice and Cruelty against the Shechemites, lost the
Blessing. When their Father Jacob called all his Sons together, speaking of
Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.5. He speaks of their instruments of Cruelty, calls to
mind their Sin, cursed their Anger and Wrath, divided them in Jacob, scattered
them in Israel, but not a word of Blessing. That they had lost. Now, says
Moses, do you quit your selves in this great piece of Justice, and you may get
a Blessing, and so they did, for God chose the Tribe of Levi, for himself above
all the Tribes of Israel, and appointed and employed them about his Sanctuary
and Service, Numb. 3.6, etc. Bring the Tribe of Levi near, and present them
before Aaron the Priest, that they may Minister unto him. And ver. 41. Thou
shall take the Levites for me, I am the Lord, instead of all the firstborn
among the Children of Israel.

And as this is the way to prevent Judgments when upon their way, so to remove
them when they are already come. For the proof hereof you have a famous
instance, in Numb. 25. The Case was this: The People did double their
Transgression, in committing Idolatry and Whoredom at once. It is indeed no
cause of wonder to see Spiritual and Corporal Uncleanness going together in
Company. This kindled the Wrath of God against them, which rose to that height
that it brake out into a Plague. The Plague did not stop the Sin; wicked men
will harden themselves against God, and run upon the mouth of the Cannon, on
the bosses of his Buckler. Notwithstanding the Judgment Zimri, one of the
Children of Israel, a Prince too that should have set a better Example,
impudently and daringly brought a Midianitish Woman in the sight of Moses, and
of all the Congregation of Israel, while they were weeping before the door of
the Tabernacle. While the Congregation was drowned in Tears these two Wretches
burned in Lust. Phinehas was an eyewitness of it, and his Heart was hot within
him, upon the sight thereof he took a Javelin in his hand, entered their Tent,
and ran both of them through. With this remarkable Act of Justice and holy
revenge God was exceedingly pleased. As appeared by the happy consequences,
which were two, healing Mercy upon Israel, with a Blessing upon himself and his
Posterity. You may read what God himself said upon this occasion, Numb. 25.10,
11, 12. The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Phinehas the Son of Eleazer, the Son
of Aaron the Priest has turned away my wrath from the Children of Israel,
while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the Children
of Israel in my Jealousy. Wherefore say, Behold I give unto him my Covenant of
Peace, and he shall have it, and his Seed after him, even the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God, and made an
atonement for the Children of Israel. Do you stem the Tide of profaneness, and
in so doing you will stop the Bottles of Divine Wrath. And then hereupon it
follows,

Eighthly, The Suppression of profaneness is an excellent way for the making
Rulers an eminent and choice Blessing unto the People; over whom the Providence
of God has set them. By this means they will indeed prove, as our holy Apostle
speaks in the verse immediately following our Text, (...). Ministers of God to
them for good. For it is a great deal of good that is ministered and conveyed by
them, golden Oil that is communicated by and through these golden Pipes; the
whole Land is the better for them, every Mothers Child has reason to rise up
and call them blessed. Briefly thus.

By this means they confirm and establish it. They are strong supporters, while
others are wicked and cursed underminers, Psalm 75.2, 3. When I shall receive
the Congregation, i. e. The Government of it, when I shall be once seated upon
the Throne, I will judge uprightly, or Righteousness, a vein of Righteousness
shall run through every one of my Actions, they shall be done according to the
Rule of Equity. The Earth and all the Inhabitants of it are dissolved. The
Reins are now let loose, there is a visible, apparent disorder both in Church
and State, all things are for the present in Confusion, and therefore running
apace to Ruin and Dissolution. I bear up the Pillars thereof. Some do look
upon Religion and Righteousness as the Jachin and Boaz, those great and mighty
Pillars which uphold a Nation, and Magistrates are the Persons appointed to
bear up those Pillars; if those be the Pillars, these are the Basis upon which
they stand, and these bear up them by judging uprightly. In this way it is they
bear up the Fabric, and keep it from crumbling into pieces, and falling to
nothing.

And further, as by this means they bring unto a Nation, the Blessing of
Stability, so they also yield that other lovely and very desirable Blessing of
Peace. So that all good men shall sit under their own Vines and Fig Trees,
without others making them afraid, they shall have a quiet and comfortable
enjoyment of themselves, and the good things which God has graciously
vouchsafed to them. Unto this, I say, Magistrates both supreme and subordinate,
the higher and inferior Officers in a Kingdom do very much contribute by the
Diligent and Faithful discharge of the Work and Duty of their several places.
This is evident from that, Psalm 72.3. The Mountains shall bring Peace to the
People, and the little hills by Righteousness. That Word Peace is very
comprehensive, carrying in it not only a freedom from War, Commotions, Quarrels
and Disturbances, but Prosperity too and Happiness, Plenty and Abundance of all
good things, so that there shall be no complaining in our Streets. This is to
be brought to a People, and sure when it is they will bid it welcome; but who
shall bring it? The Mountains and little Hills. i. e. The Metaphorical Ones,
the Magistrates, the King and all that are in Authority under him, but it will
come only in a way of Righteousness: Gods Peace always keeps Gods Way. This you
learn from that of the Prophet, Psalm 85.10. Righteousness and Peace kiss each
other. They meet and embrace, and so go hand in hand; Righteousness in the
Throne, in the Senate, and Courts of Judicature is accompanied with Peace in
the City, yea and all the Country over.

Lastly, A Conscientious care for the Suppression of profaneness in a Land, is
the way to engage the great and Holy God on the behalf, and for the good of
those Rulers in whom that care is found. And this Argument will, I am sure,
signify much with all those, with whom God signifies any thing. As the place
of Rulers is high, so the work of their place is hard: It carries a great deal
of difficulty and of danger along with it: As wicked men are very filthy, so
the Psalmist tells us, they are always grievous. They are like the raging Sea
which is continually casting up Mire and Dirt, specially when there is a Storm
upon it. Let there be endeavors used to put a stop to them in their sinful
course, by a vigorous Execution of Righteous Laws, their Hearts do presently
swell against those that restrain and punish them, and they break out into a
rage, whereupon they often study to avenge the quarrel of their sordid and
impetuous Lusts upon those Worthies, who would promote the cleanness of their
Lives. and the welfare of their Souls.

Upon this account it is no more than necessary for the Omnipotent God to stand
at their right hand, for the encouragement of their Hearts and the preservation
of their Persons. Now see Psalm 7.10. My defense is of God, who saves the
upright in Heart. When men are upright in their Hearts and also in their Way
they may be confident. Solomon says, The Righteous is as bold as a Lion. And
well he may, for though he may be faced and environed by many dangers from men,
yet his defense is of God. And that may well be reckoned enough to secure him
from sinkings and discomposures of mind. What is the matter, though poisoned
Arrows and fiery Darts fly thick? So long as God is a man's shield, He will
quench them all.

And as God will defend them, so he will put a Glory upon them, and maintain
their Glory, 1 Samuel 3.30. Them that Honor me I will Honor. He is resolved
upon it. Those Persons that Honor him by the Holiness of their walking. Those
Professors that Honor him by owning him and his Truths and ways in times of
furious Opposition and Persecution, and those Rulers that Honor him by a
faithful Execution of Justice, punishing those that dishonor him, them God
will Honor, and He will make them great and honorable in the eyes of others.
Their Government shall be highly commended, their Persons shall be greatly
esteemed, and their Memory shall be blessed, whereas in the same place He tell
us, they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed, not only by himself but by
all.

Yea and God will see to it, that things shall go well with them, as he said,
when speaking to Jehojachin that wicked Son of famous Josiah, Jer. 22.15. Did
not thy Father eat and drink, and do Judgment and Justice, and then it was well
with him? He began to Reign betimes, when he was very young. But he began and
went on well, He was a Religious, Gracious and Righteous Prince, in his days
Religion was in it is Beauty, and the Righteous did flourish, and it was well
with him, good for him, he tasted the sweetness of it, and reaped the
advantage. He did eat and drink, not to gluttony and drunkenness, as is the
fashion of too many, but he did Reign in Peace and Plenty. God furnished his
Table and filled his Cup. The Lord blessed him, so that there was nothing wanting
to the Comfort of his Life, or the supporting of his Royal State. He was not
negligent in his duty, nor God sparing of his Mercy and Kindness to him. Thus I
have given many Reasons why Magistrates should be careful to suppress
profaneness.

I proceed to the last thing propounded, viz. To show what means ought to be
used in order hereunto. In general I would say this, those that go about it,
will certainly find that a little matter will not do. Wickedness is so natural
to fallen man, and his Heart is so set in him to do evil, and oftentimes Sin is
grown to such a prodigious height in a Land, and so exceedingly overspread the
face of it, and those who take pleasure in committing it are arrived at that
pitch of resolution and daring boldness, that it is no easy thing to give an
effectual check. As the doing of it will be greatly acceptable to God, and
issue in the everlasting Honor of Rulers, so to set upon it and go through with
it, does necessarily require height of courage, fixedness of Resolution,
strength of Zeal* utmost industry and constant care. And when they set Heart
and Hand to it, they will find both Heart and Hands full. But for the answering
of this Question, I shall humbly propound and offer to the serious
Consideration and due Practice of all those that are in Authority, from our
Dread and Dear Sovereigns the King and Queen who sit upon the Throne, to the
petty Constables and Head-burroughs who walk up and down the Streets, these
following particulars, which I desire may be minded and done by all according
to their several places, and those various parts of Power and Government with
which they are entrusted.

First, It will be highly conducing hereunto, if they all would in their own
Persons and Conversations make it their business to set good Examples. For that
old saying does carry a great deal of Truth in it, Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur Orbis. The manners of the People are much squared by and conformed
to those of the Prince. The experiences of most, if not all Ages and Countries,
do afford abundant proofs of this. Though you need go no further than the
sacred History of the Kings of Israel and Judah. We see it to be thus in
smaller Societies, Children will not question the doing of that which they have
known done by their Parents before them, and usually Servants will conclude
that lawful which they have seen practiced by their Masters; and so the
generality of Subjects will not stick at what they observe in the Life and
Carriage of their Sovereign, so that it be not too high for them, and out of
their reach, as perhaps some have found in these Cities to their cost and
ruin. All examples have certainly in them a very attractive Power (exempla
cogunt) specially those that are bad. The worst have the strongest influence,
because they meet in others that see or hear of them with a wretched principle
of Corruption that likes and approves of them, a vile Nature which delights
(sequi deteriorem partem) to follow the worst part But of all bad Examples
those that are set by great Persons are the most prevalent; and therefore it
becomes them to walk circumspectly, and be very curious.

The Lord Jesus was without controversy the greatest Person that ever the
World had, for he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, which thought was
no error or mistake, and St. John in Rev. 1.5. calls him the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth. Now his whole Life was no other than the setting of a most
exact and excellent Copy, for the Children of Men to write after, more
particularly all those that are called by his Name, and profess themselves to
be in the number of his Disciples. And surely the great men of the Earth,
chiefly those that are and would be counted Christians, are obliged as in other
his imitable Actions, so in this to resemble him; that they may be able without
any stinging Reflection to say to others in a lower Sphere, Do as you see me
do, and live as you see I live. Why will you profane the Name of God by your
Oaths and Curses, or the Day of God by your Pastimes and Sports, or abuse the
Mercies and good Creatures of God to Gluttony and Drunkenness? do you see any
such thing in me? It was a brave and noble Resolution that holy David took up
betimes when he was ready to ascend the Royal Throne, or newly seated in it,
Psalm 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will walk within
mine House with a perfect Heart. Observe how extensive his care was, reaching
both to his Heart and Way. To his Heart, as one that had to do with God, who
searched it: And to his Way, as one that had to do with Men who observed it. He
would do this, that, if it were possible, He might allure and draw others to
walk in the same way of Wisdom and Holiness as Himself had chosen; but however
he would do this, that none of them might have his pattern to justify and
embolden any of them in their ways of wickedness. Of all Persons, Parents in a
Family, Ministers in the Church, and Magistrates in a Kingdom ought to be very
careful and curious, they should (...), take heed to their way, and foot it
right. For those that do not, prove public pests and mischiefs, going up and
down to the infecting of many.

Secondly, As such should make it their business to Live profaneness down, so
it will be an excellent thing for them to Frown it down. Let them not bestow
their smiles upon those that Practice it, for those smiles are misplaced.
Princes will do well not to admit them into their Courts, nor to make them the
objects of their special Favor. We find the Lord speaking thus, Hos. 7.1. When
I would have healed Israel, the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the Sin
of Samaria. I find some Expositors do by Ephraim there understand the Court,
for certain after the revolt of the ten Tribes from the House of David in the
days of Rehoboam, Samaria was the Metropolis or Capital City of the Kingdom of
Israel. This being so, we may by warrant of that Text lay down this position:
If there be Iniquity in Ephraim, no man has any reason to wonder that he finds
Wickedness in Samaria. Sins in the Court will diffuse themselves, and not be
kept out of the City, no nor the Country neither. Therefore holy David did not
only resolve to take special care of himself, though it was his Wisdom to begin
there, that was beginning at the right end, but he did not shut up his care
within so narrow bounds: He did not limit it to himself, but would look about
him, and have an Eye upon his Domestics, all those that should live with him,
Psalm. 101.3. A froward Heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked
Person. As Soon as I have discovered such an one, and found him to be of an evil
Temper and Life, He shall away, he must depart from me if he be a worker of
iniquity. I will cast him and turn him out of doors, my Palace shall be no
place for such vermin. I will not know him. He shall be none of my acquaintance
or retinue. And indeed there is very good reason, why they should be out of
credit at Court who are a discredit to the God they own, and the Religion they
profess. Marks of special favor are at all times and in all places very
unhappily bestowed upon such as do by their Leudness and Debauchery deserve the
blackest brands of infamy. And whatever other abilities and accomplishments
they may have, I think it is very hard and hazardous to trust them who do not
fear God. None are before the throne of God in Heaven but holy Angels, and the
Saints who have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb, Rev. 7.14. Evil shall not dwell with him, nor shall the workers of
iniquity stand in his sight. And then will things be well indeed, when none but
such are suffered to stand before the Thrones of earthly Princes his
Substitutes and Vicegerents. The way of profaneness would not be so beaten a
road as it has been, but have far fewer Travelers, when all shall see that it
does not lead to preferment. To be severe against the wicked is a convincing
argument of a Princes wisdom, Prove. 20.26. A wise King scatters the wicked,
and brings the Wheel over them. And in this way he does provide for his own
security, Prove. 25.5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne
shall be established in righteousness. When Cardinal Julian was commended to
Sigismund, he answered, Tamen Romanus est. Let such or such a man be commended
for never so much, if it may be said, Tamen profanus est, that should be enough
for a bar in his way.

Thirdly, Another excellent way for the suppressing of profaneness is an
opposition made to it by severe Laws; yea to every sin that falls within the
cognizance of the Civil Magistrate, and runs upon the point of his Sword. And
by those Laws let punishment be provided for it according to its nature and
demerit. For all sins are not equal in themselves, and therefore there ought to
be a diversity in the punishment. Let Rulers thunder most terribly against
those abominations that have the loudest cry in the Ears of Heaven; make the
strongest fence against that sin, which above all others threatens the Land
with an inundation, and be sure to spend the most angry and formidable frowns
upon the boldest and most daring outrages. Let Laws, Kingdoms and
Commonwealths be sure to look those sins out of Countenance, which are of all
other most impudent, and look men in the face without a blush, and walk up and
down in our Streets at noonday. This to do is one part of the work belonging
to our King and Parliament, with whom alone is lodged the Legislative power,
whose meetings are to be for the public good, with which they are entrusted,
and for the promoting whereof they were chosen and sent. And as they will
answer for it to the Holy; Righteous, and Eternal God, who is a Consuming Fire,
they are strictly obliged, and that at their peril, to take care that those
Laws which they make be not grievous, but righteous, have not a malignant, but
benign influence, and that by them every man's Property may be secured, that
Religion which is warranted by Scripture, and so pure and undefiled before God
and the Father be not Discouraged, Punished, and first driven into corners, and
then ferreted out of them, but countenanced and promoted; and that all that,
whatsoever it be, that is contrary to Godliness and sound Doctrine, as well as
that which disturbs the public peace, and creates uncivil disorders may be
kept down, and as far as is possible, banished out of a Land. We read, Psalm.
94.20. of a throne of iniquity that frames mischief by a Law. If there never
had been such Thrones in the World, there would not have been that mention made
of them in the Scripture. But such there have been: That of Jeroboam was one,
who would not suffer the people according to the divine Command to go up to
Jerusalem to worship God, who had there placed his name, but spread for them
that went, nets upon Mi^pah^ and set snares upon Mount Tabor, and such Thrones
there have been since, too many of them. Well, Says the Psalmist, shall they
have fellowship with thee? No, no, God keeps his distance from them, those that
we call stinking dunghils are not offensive to God as Thrones of iniquity are,
which shall neither be approved by him nor secured. Stay a while, Christians,
and in patience possess your Souls, for the World shall see that in due time he
will overturn them all. That, yea that throne shall have fellowship with God,
which does punish mischief by a Law.

We have had for some considerable time a great deal of discourse about Penal
Laws, and men have been much divided in their sentiments and apprehensions
concerning them; for my part, I think that Nation is extremely deficient which
is altogether without them, the Hedge of it is taken away, the Wall of it is
broken, and it will easily be trodden down. But I heartily wish and pray that
all Penal Laws may be framed according to the mind of the Supreme Lawgiver;
Let the ax be whetted as sharp as it should be, so that its edge be once turned
and always kept the right way. Spare neither odious Idolatry, nor unsociable
Popery, nor damnable Heresy, nor destructive profaneness, but under your
shadow let Religion, Truth and the Power of godliness live, and a Scriptural
Reformation grow and be carried on toward its perfection.

Fourthly, Let righteous and good Laws, that are made, have their free course,
and the Sword of Justice be drawn, and not suffered to lie rusting in the
Scabbard, as it will certainly do when put into the hand of a careless Gallio,
or of persons that allow themselves in the Commission of those sins which the
Law condemns, or in the hand of those that have not something of courage and a
greatness of Spirit* Justice at all times is not to be expected from a wicked
and debauched, Person or a Coward. A fearful Magistrate or Civil Officer in a
City, Town or Country is as bad and as great an absurdity as a timorous and
white-liver'd Soldier in the Field; for as the one will fly before a Bullet,
so will the other fall before a frown, and so while his heart fails him, the
hand of justice grows feeble. His fear will sometimes keep him from doing of
that which is right, and at other times it will put him upon the doing of that
which is wrong. This was the cause of Pilates miscarriage* and made way for the
unjust condemnation and Crucifixion of the best and holiest, the greatest and
most glorious person in the World, our dear Lord Jesus. The Jews indeed were
madly set for his death, but Pilates wife sent him this message, Have thou
nothing to do with that just man. He himself said that he found no fault in
him, which he thrice repeated, and when he saw the Jews were resolved, he took
water, and washed his hands before the multitude: (if that would have done)
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just Man. But when the people cried
out, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's Friend, he was afraid, and
delivered him up to sufferings. But I am guilty of digressing. That which we
were speaking of is the execution of righteous Laws. For to what purpose are
they made? Surely not only to be read, or talked of, and lie by, or be set up
as mere scare-crows in Trees to keep Birds from Cherries, but to be made use of
as occasion requires. There must be not only speaking against sin, but striking
at it, else it will not down. In Romans 13.4. The Apostle tells us that Rulers
bear not the Sword in vain. By the Sword, he means that of Authority and Power,
good Laws, together with all the means and instruments of punishment, and they
are not to bear this Sword in vain. It must be brandished, wielded and sheathed
in the bowels of sin. What are the best Laws but a Company of dead things,
unless Magistrates put life into them by a vigorous Execution? And it is very
sad at any time when there is cause given of saying there is a Law against
profaning of the Lords day, a Law against Swearing, a Law against Drunkenness
and Whoredom, but where is the man that does put these Laws in Execution? There
are many wretches that break the Laws, but where are those that will make them
feel the Penalty? This is the honor of a City and the comfort of a People,
when it may be said, here is a good Law against such a vice, and such a vice,
and here is a good Mayor, a good Justice of Peace, a good Constable that will
execute it. Good Laws without good Magistrates and Officers will never make a
people happy.

But further, As there must be an execution of righteous Laws, so an
impartiality in that execution. Judgment should run down as Water, and
righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos 5.24. In a constant current, without
interruption bearing down all before it, all private and little considerations
that would break it off. As to those Justice ought to be blind, not seeing nor
taking notice of them. And Laws ought not to be cobwebs that catch the little
flies, and let the great ones make their way thorough. The greater the person
is that offends, the greater and more heinous upon that very account, is the
offense which he commits. His greatness is an aggravation, and renders his sin
of a much deeper dye. The nearer the offender is to the Magistrate, the greater
is the Magistrates honor in punishing him. It was the honor of Levi and as
such it is set and left upon record, Deuteronomy. 33.9. That he said unto his Father
and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his
Brethren, nor knew his own Children, for they have observed thy word, and kept
thy Covenant. This refers to that Execution which had been by them done upon
those who had worshipped the Golden Calf. And as this is a great honor to the
Magistrate, so will it strike a great terror upon bystanders. Whereas that
Officer who is known to pardon a Malefactor upon this or that or the other
by-respect, will not himself know how to punish it in another. The very
remembrance of that remissness and neglect would make his hand tremble when he
draws his Warrant or makes his Mittimus, Psalm. 106.3. Blessed are they that
keep Judgment, and he that does righteousness at all times. Non abreptus
affectibus, periculis, spe lucri, etc. Not byast, nor diverted by affections,
fear of danger, hope of gain, or any thing of like nature. Fiat justitia, ruat
coelum. Let who will be displeased, and what will follow, justice ought to be
done. For want of this, profaneness and all manner of abominations will
greatly increase and abound, according to that in Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence
against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the heart of the Sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil. They grow audacious and desperate, they
are resolved upon their way, they go on with a full sail to the Commission of
sin. And if the mere deferring of judgment will produce so bad an effect, what
will not the total neglect of it, or partiality in it do?

Fifthly, An excellent way therefore for the attainment of this excellent end,
the suppression of profaneness, is the putting of the Sword of Justice into
the hands of good and faithful men. I do not go about to make parties in the
Nation: God forbid! it is contrary to my principles, there has been too much
of it in the Nation, and in the world, and oh that there may be no more. Oh
that God would in the greatness of his goodness heal all our breaches and
compose all our unbrotherly d^fferences, and grant that we may all serve him in
the beauties of holiness with one shoulder and one consent. Oh that I might see
it done. In the mean time I am verily persuaded, that among every one of the
different parties in the Land, who hold the head, and are sound in the vitals
of Christianity, the main Fundamental points of our Religion, there are to be
found persons fearing God. And if I may have leave humbly to speak my thoughts,
I count it a great pity that any of them should be laid aside as Vessels in
which there is no pleasure, as persons altogether useless and unfit to be
trusted and employed, merely because they dissent from others of their Brethren
in those things which are acknowledged to be indifferent, but cannot be by them
complied with, lest they should sin against God, and wound their own
Consciences, so long as they are sound in the faith, set for the glory of God,
and for the honor of the King, and for the public good. Why, Oh! Why may not
such men be owned and encouraged, and employed in those things of which they
are capable? Are they fit for nothing because there is something that they
cannot do? I know and all men must yield it, that there have been and will be
as well as are, diversity of Judgments, and by consequence of practice. No man
has his Judgment, Faith and Reason at his Command, and it is as possible to
make all men of a Stature as of a mind. But I must and do humbly submit this to
our Superiors, withal leaving particular persons to their several Sentiments,
and to walk accordingly to that light which they have received, and begging of
God the hastening of that day prophesied of in Zech. 14.9. Wherein the Lord
shall be King over all the Earth; and wherein there shall be one Lord, and his
name one. Vna fides, and una Deum colendiratio. One Faith and one Worship.

This I take for certain, That ungodliness is very unlikely to be suppressed in
a Nation, when the ungodly and wicked men of that Nation are the men entrusted
with and employed about the supression thereof. It is not probable that a
Swearing and Cursing Magistrate will punish another for his Oaths, or a Drunken
Magistrate will inflict the Legal penalty upon another for the like
brutishness. Or an unclean Officer make another smart for his Whoredom. While
he is going about it an hundred to one there will be a bitter Reflection, the
man will find a sting within himself, his own Conscience, if it be not feared
or in a profound sleep, cannot forbear flying in his face, and asking him in
his ear this pinching question, How can thou punish that in this person which
thou know to be thine own practice, Romans 2.22, 23. Thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the Law,
through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? Upon this account it was that
holy David resolved, his eye should be upon the faithful of the Land, Psalm.
101.6. He would express his special favor upon those that were of known
integrity, that would faithfully mind and perform the duty of their place, and
be true to their God and to their trust, and says he, He that walks in a
perfect way, he shall serve me, viz. in governing the Nation, and in seeing to
it, that good orders be kept. And I look upon that as a good saying of one,
Melior est Respublica and tutior, etc. That Commonwealth or Kingdom is safer
and in a much better condition, in which there is a bad Prince, than that which
has in it bad Magistrates, Officers and Ministers of State.

Sixthly, In order to the effectual suppression of profaneness it cannot but
be owned as absolutely necessary, to watch diligently and deal severely with
the Nurseries of it. For as our Lord Jesus, who is the King of Sion and Saints,
has his Schools and Nurseries for the instructing and training up of persons
in sound knowledge and true holiness. Such are the assemblies and
congregrations of his people, Isa. 2.3. Come ye, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways. So Satan, the Prince of the power of
the air, the Spirit that works in the Children of disobedience, has his
Nurseries, which he fills with cursed Temptations, and his Instruments with
Venomous examples, in order to the alluring of men to flagitious courses, and
rendering them expert, ready and complete Artists in sin. And do not all men
see how our youths are tainted and corrupted there, and how many of those that
once were hopeful and thought to be plants of righteousness have been there
blasted, and turned into the degenerate plants of a strange Vine, bringing
forth the Grapes of Sodom and the Clusters of Gommorrah? All that read these
lines may easily understand my meaning, what houses they are at which I now
point. And I would ask, Are Stews and Brothel-houses fit to be suffered among
us? I have not at all wondered, when I have read and heard, how many of them
are allowed in Rome, that Mother of Harlots, who holds in her hand a Cup of
fornication; we must expect the great Whore will not fall out with the little
Ones, specially when they are profitable to her. Bonus odor lucri ex re
qualibet. In her Nostrils the money smells well, come it from whence it will.
But it is an arrant shame that any of them should be found in a Land of Light,
in a Nation of Protestants, in a City of righteousness, in a place where that
Religion is professed and established* that condemns all such filthy practices.
And as for Alehouses and Victualling houses, though some of them, possibly*
are useful, yea and necessary, yet is there need of such multitudes, in which
so many sit many hours together fuddling, and drinking away their money, their
wits, their health and their Souls, while their poor Wives sit at home
mourning, and their Children crying, and perhaps all of them wanting and ready
to starve? I am sure, none ought to have Licenses for the keeping such houses
who will suffer them to be places of licentiousness, and not be careful to
observe good hours and orders.

Seventhly* Let all inferior Officers be very careful and diligent in their
places. For their places are not dormitories, places to idle and sleep in, but
to watch and work in. Churchwardens, Constables and others have a very
considerable power, and without doubt they have it not for nothing. And as it
is given them for good ends, so for those ends they ought to employ it. That
power is in vain which is not reduced into Act. The Staff which you Constables
carry up and down with you is for something more than a bare and empty sign,
and to tell people what you are, and though you do frequently leave your Staff
at home, yet I pray, be sure to carry your eyes and ears along with you to the
farthest bounds of your jurisdiction. What a great deal of good may be done,
and what abundance of wickedness may be prevented by one active person. And I
think I am not mistaken when I reckon upon a curious inquisition as one part of
the work of your Office. Surely it is not for you to sit still at home till you
are alarmed and called forth by riots and uproars in the Streets, or have men
come with their complaints rapping at your doors, but you should take your
walks, and make enquiry after evildoers, find out their nests, and haunts; See
what Companies meet in public houses, for entertainment, and what they do, how
they behave themselves when they are together, and be sure to dissolve their
wicked Clubs, and debauched meetings and carry the Persons whom you find so
transgressing before those Superior Magistrates whom you know most hearty and
active in their places. For, verily, when there are good and excellent Laws in
a Land for the regulating of things, and correcting that which is amiss, and
yet sin grows because of a Maladministration, much, very much of the guilt
will be chargeable upon and lie at the doors of inferior Officers, more than
they will be able to answer for.

Eighthly, Let those Officers which are faithful in their places have their due
and full encouragement, and not be snibb'd, and brow-beaten and taken up short,
and treated with abusive Language and frowns as they have been in the late
times, when practices of Religion were hated and punished as the worst of
Crimes, and a Company of wretched Informers that neither had a dram of
honesty, nor were worth a Groat, were hugged and entertained with welcome and
applause, besides their part in the fines which they gaped for as the wages of
their unrighteousness. Honest, vigilant and active Officers who are in the
discharge of their duty, and proceed no farther than the Law impowers them,
ought to be commended, they that do well deserve to hear well, and not be
counted or called busy fellows so long as they are employed about their own
business. Yea and they ought to be assisted too. Where the Constables Staff
will not do the work, let the Justice of Peace draw his Sword. And when they
have brought the matter as far as they can, let them that have higher power set
their hands to it and carry it on further. It cannot but be a great
discouragement to honest men, when they have found out and seized upon Ranting,
Roaring Debauchees, and brought them notwithstanding their Cursing and
Storming, their heats and huffs, before their Superior, and then he shall
receive them with one Complement, and after the speaking a few words of course
dismiss them with another. Such men as these may be assaulted by a Temptation
to grow cold and remiss, but I do advise and desire them not to yield to that
Temptation, for still this may be their comfort, that they have not been
wanting unto their duty, and the other must and shall answer for his neglect,
possibly to the higher powers below, or if not to them, yet for certain at last
to that God who is higher than the highest, and sits in the Throne judging
right, and from whom every one shall receive according as his work has been.

Ninthly, An Orthodox and Godly Ministry is a very choice and excellent means
for the suppression of profaneness. Surely this ill-favored Monster, though
grown up to a gigantick Stature and bigness, is most like to fall, when it is
opposed and set upon by the Magistrate who bears the Sword of Civil power, and
by the Minister too who bears and draws against it the Sword of the Spirit,
which has been by God committed to him, and those other weapons with which he
is furnished out of the divine armory, and which, according to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.6. He has or ought to have in a readiness for the revenging
of all disobedience. And therefore I heartily wish, that as a learned (and so
much the better by how much the more learned) Ministry may be kept up in the
Land, both in Cities and Countries, and in order to that, sufficient liberal
provision made for them; So such and only such may be employed in that high and
sacred Function, as in the Judgment of rational Charity may be looked upon as
being indeed the Ministers of Christ. And the two (...), Marks or Characters by
which such may be known, are the preaching of Christ and his Doctrine, their
living of Christ and according to his Rules, and their doing of both these will
conduce and contribute very much to this great end. This will be singularly
promoted by their preaching of Christ, not Ceremonies, but Christ, not imposed
forms of prayer, but the power of Godliness, not only Morality but true Piety,
not the Cross in Baptism, but crucifying the flesh with the affections and
lusts, not bowing to the name of Jesus, but to the Authority and Government and
Law of Jesus, not a white Garment, but the linen of Saints, righteousness and
holiness. I do not at all deny but Civility and Morality are duties, very
Goodly Pearls, necessary and becoming. Oh that there were more of them to be
found among us! It is beyond all question that they who would be Saints must
not be beasts: I cannot think any fit matter for a visible Church, who are
Devils incarnate. Nor do I deny but that many useful Sayings, good Precepts and
Rules may be fetched from Heathen Authors, Plato, Seneca, Tully, Plutarch, etc.
But we need not borrow Jewels of Egyptians, blessed be God, nor go down to the
Philistines for the sharpening of our Mattocks. It is the Gospel of Christ
which is the power of God to Salvation. There is no need of quoting a
Philosopher when we have a Paul. What examples can we produce and propound so
exact and curious as is that of Christ, who did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth? He spoke so* as never man spoke, and he walked so as never man
walked. What arguments can we find more convincing than those of the Scripture
which are mighty for casting down the (...), Imaginations, Conceits, Reasonings
of a carnal, vain and proud mind? What motives more persuasive and alluring
than those of the Gospel, which are indeed the cords of a man? What
Thunderclaps can be thought of more terrible, or what Terrors more amazing
and affrighting than the Terrors of the Lord? What Promises more inviting and
encouraging than those he has given us, which are exceeding great and
precious? Where, if any one can, let him tell us where we shall see Sin so
clearly and fully in its deformity and ugliness, in order to a real and through
aversation from it, or Religion, Godliness and a Conversation ordered aright,
more in it is loveliness and enamouring beauty, in order to our setting our
Hearts upon it, than we do, or at least, may see it in the Gospel? When all is
said and done that can be, it is the Grace of God, Tit. 2.14. The Doctrine, the
Gospel of Grace, which brings Salvation, and has appeared to all men. Jews
and Gentiles, men of all sorts and ranks, it is that, yea it is that which
teaches us, and all that sit under it, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Oh therefore
that this precious and everlasting Gospel of God our Savior may be the main
object of Ministers study, and the Principal Theme upon which they insist in
their several Congregations, therein imitating the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, who told the Corinthians, He determined to know nothing among them
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

But this is not all. Ministers ought not only to preach Christ, but likewise
to live him. What good are those pretended Ministers like to do, in whatever
Place, Country or Nation they are to be found, who are scandalous and
profane? Grant that some of them preach well, I would fain know whether that
be enough, either to save themselves or those that hear them. What such men
seem to build up by their Doctrine, they pull down by their Practice. Let any
rational man judge, whether they are like to convince and persuade others, who
do lead self-contradicting lives. How can they prevail with others to be sober,
who will sit and quaffe, and be drunk themselves? With what face can they
persuade others to possess their vessels in Sanctification and Honor, who are
unclean and filthy themselves? In short, how are they like to lead others in
the way everlasting, who do themselves turn aside to crooked paths with the
workers of Iniquity? Oh that therefore care might be taken by all those who are
invested with Power, and have the oversight of such things as these, that those
and none but those may be set as spiritual Guides and Leaders over the several
Flocks and Congregations in the Land, as may without blushing say to their
hearers, Walk so as ye have us for an Example, and be ye Followers of us even
as we are of Christ.

Tenthly and Lastly, In order to the effectual Suppression of profaneness, I
would and do heartily commend to all those that are in Authority over us
diligent, yea and utmost care for the strict observation of the first day of
the Week, which is in Rev. 1.10. Called (...), the Lords Day, and ought to be
kept as the Christian Sabbath to the end of time. A day sanctified and set
apart for the solemn public and private worship of God both in Churches,
Families and Retirements, and for a sweet, close, and intimate Communion with
him, while we are delivered and taken off from those secular affairs, that upon
the other days of the Week do necessarily engage us, and cannot but divert us.
A day not to be spent in any thing, no not any, the most minute part of it, but
the duties of Religion and works of Godliness, except those works of Necessity
and Mercy, which God out of his Goodness and Pity to man does allow; for he
will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice, so that when Acts of Mercy are of
absolute Necessity, Sacrifice shall give place to it. This is a day which God
has seen fit to usher in with a Memento in the fourth Commandment, Remember
that thou keep Holy the Sabbath day. As if the Lord should have said, I know
your frailty, that you have slippery and treacherous memories, and possibly
may, yea certainly will forget some, nay many other things, in which you are
concerned, but let this be fastened as a nail in a sure place, be sure to think
of this, to be mindful of this. I charge and command you to remember it.
Remember the Sabbath day before it comes, so as to rejoice in the thoughts of
it, to long for it, and to prepare for it, that upon the day of Praise you may
have on your Garments of Praise, Souls in a right frame, and remember to
sanctify and keep it Holy when it is come.

We find the Sabbath was given unto Israel for a sign between God and them. So
you have it in Ezekiel. 20.12. I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and
them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. By this they
were distinguished from all other Nations. These were a plain and evident proof
that they were the Lords People, and that Jehovah was their God. This did
loudly proclaim Gods choosing and calling them out from the rest of the World,
and gracious setting them apart for himself, as his peculiar Portion and
Inheritance. And indeed, where there is no care of sanctifying the Sabbath by
Nations, Families or Persons, it is a plain case, it amounts to a demonstration
that they are unsanctified Nations, Families and Persons. It is an evident sign
of a people estranged and alienated from the Life of God, of a wicked people
that savor not the things of God, but only those things that be of men; of a
People that have not the fear of God before their Eyes, that are not carried
out in desires of honoring him and lifting up his Name, or of enjoying
Communion with him in the World. To profane Sabbaths is a very great and
notorious piece of profaneness. Sins wilfully and out of choice committed
upon a Sabbath are Sins in grain, Scarlet and Crimson-sins. To mind worldly
Affairs, to sit brooding upon worldly Thoughts, to follow the Trades and
Callings of the World, to open Shops, and buy and sell upon a Sabbath Day are
God-provoking Sins, acts of profaneness. These are lawful upon other days, in
which God has given you leave, nay more, he has made it your Duty to labor
and do all that you have to do of this Nature, but they are very sinful upon
the Sabbath.

Let me propound Nehemiah to the Consideration of Magistrates and Inferior
Officers, and his care and activity in this point, as an example richly worth
their Imitation. Take the account of him as it is drawn up by himself, in Neh.
13.15, etc. He saw some treading Wine-presses upon the Sabbath Day, and
bringing in Sheaves, and lading Asses, as also Wine, Grapes and Figs, all
manner of burdens which they brought into Jerusalem upon the Sabbath Day; the
men of Tire also dwelt there who brought Fish and all manner of wares, and sold
on the Sabbath to the Children of Judah and in Jerusalem. This was exceeding
evil, and one would wonder it should be found among a people but a little
before come back to their own Country out of a sore and tedious Captivity. Yet
thus it was. But let us see what good Nehemiah that excellent Governor did
hereupon, and how he bestir'd himself. He testified against them in the day
whereon they sold Victuals, and he contended with the Elders of Judah, and said
unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do and profane the Sabbath Day? Did
not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon them? And
yet ye bring more evil upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. And after this,
He shut the Gates, and set his Servants to watch, and would not suffer the
Merchants and Sellers of wares to lodge about the Walls, but threatened to lay
hold upon them, and did not desist nor give over till He had prevented their
coming any more upon the Sabbath Day. Oh that there were many such Nehemiahs in
the World among Christian Nations! Shall I gather up what this Scripture
affords and show you what is to be learned from it? Briefly thus. 1. Trading
upon the Sabbath Day is a violation and profaning of it. 2. It is such a
profaning of it as is highly displeasing unto God, and will bring down his
wrath upon a People that are guilty. 3. It is the proper work of the Civil
Magistrate, not unbecoming the Supreme to punish and prevent it. 4. In order
thereunto He will find it necessary to be very vigilant and active. 5. It is
not enough to begin well and do something, but there must be a going on till
there be a through Reformation. And let not any say, such care as this would be
Judaizing, and the Gospel brings along with it a greater Liberty, for though we
have a blessed Liberty yet not a sinful one. We are delivered from the
Ceremonial Law, which was an heavy and oppressing yoke, but not from the
Observation and Obedience to the Moral Law as it is, and still it is, and to
the end of the World it will be a Rule of Life. And Gods abounding in his
goodness to us, whose lines are cast in New Testament-times is a very bad
argument for an abating in our care of Sanctifying his Name and his Day.

Time, my beloved, has been when England, as well as our Neighbor Nation of
Scotland, was famous for the sanctifying of the Sabbath, and truly for these
many years it has been, and to this day it is as infamous for the breaking of
it, and upon that account and by that means it has lost much of it is Pristine
Glory. Do you not see, I am sure with grief of Heart I do, how vile and
wretched Persons set forth their wares to sale upon that Holy Day in our Fields
and Streets? Do you not see how the Victualling and Alehouses are frequented
and filled upon that day? Do you not see, or at least hear of Plays and
Pastimes upon that day? As if the Book of Sports were revived, and allowed. How
many among us do make that their Gaming day, and their Fuddling day, which God
has made his Holy Day? What! Oh, What is the matter? Where does the fault lie?
We have something of Law against this, blessed be God, and what, have we no
Officers to put the Law that is into Execution? I earnestly beseech all those
who are concerned, as they fear God, and as they have any Affection, Good will,
and kindness for the Land of their Nativity, that they would put on strength,
and appear vigorously on this behalf. For if you will tolerate the profanation
of the Sabbath, you can rationally Promise to your selves no other but a
tremendous overflowing of wickedness all the Week after; it will be so through
the Corruption of man, and the most righteous Judgment of God, with whom it is
far from unusual to punish Sin with Sin. Do but read Histories, and if you have
minded things, consult your own Observations, and you will find that according
to a peoples Holy care, or Vile neglect of keeping Holy the Sabbath Day,
Religion does flourish, or Wickedness abounds and grows rank and rampant among
them. Having finished the Doctrinal part, I proceed to the Application, and
therein direct my speech to all sorts of Persons among us, and oh that it may
be acceptable to them, and come upon their Souls with Power, that so there may
be some stop put to these crying Abominations, and the wickedness of the Wicked
among us may come to an end, and they may come over, upon this call from God,
to a temperate, sober and Religious Life, or if not so, yet at least their
wickedness may not make such prodigious advances, nor rise up to that height as
it has done for so many years, to the dishonor and provoking of God, the
grief of all good men, and almost the ruin of the Nation; and the pleasing of
none but a cursed Company of the Antichristian brood, who made it their design
and business to introduce Popery at the door of Debauchery. Which indeed was
the most likely way, for when Persons and a People have cast off the fear of
God and run cross to the Principles of that Religion which they profess, and by
leading flagitious lives, offered violence to their Consciences, they are in a
frame ready for the basest impressions, and to follow that Devil who shall
first tempt them; and however it comes to pass through the all-ordering and
overruling Providence of a wise God, who, when he pleases, and as he
pleases, chains the Sea, and restrains the lusts of men, so that though they
go thus far they shall go no farther, I shall not at all wonder to see a
Practical Atheist become a Doctrinal Papist, that so his Religion it is self may
spread his wing over his profaneness. But I come to the

Application.
Use 1. Let me not by any be counted too bold, and going out of my place, while
I turn me to the great men of the Nation, and speak to them as Persons not too
high for the Counsels, Commands and Exhortations of the Word of God, I mean,
the King as Supreme, Nobles, Gentlemen, and all under him to whom any part of
the Government in this Nation is committed; and these, all these from the
highest to the lowest I do with all due Humility, as knowing my distance from
many of them, yet with utmost earnestness, I do beseech that they would awake
unto Righteousness, and see to it that they be found faithful in their place
and to their trust, filling up every one the Province which God has set them
in, and trading every one with their Talents, whether more or fewer, five or
two; nay let not him that has but one hide it in a Napkin, and bury it in
sloth, but be abounding in this work of the Lord, that through your care and
industry Justice may run down among us like a Flood, and Judgment like a mighty
Water, for the washing away that loathsome filth which is in our Streets.

All that know you, may it please your most excellent Majesty, know, that you
have a great deal of important and weighty work continually before you, which
must necessarily fill your Royal Head with Thoughts, and your Heart with Cares,
that keeps your eyes waking while others sleep without Interruption or
Disturbance. There is abundant reason for us all to pity your burdens, and to
pray that you may be counseled by the God of Wisdom, and supported by the God
of Power, and have the Arms of your Hands made strong by the Everlasting Arms
of the God of Jacob, but no reason for any Protestant among us to envy your
Honor and other Prae-eminences, which are just, though too small recompenses
for the hazzards you have run, and the Kindness you have shown, and the
Thoughts, Cares, and Pains you have taken for the saving of a People looked
upon as being within a very few steps of Ruin. None knows the weight of a
Crown but he that wears it. While it glisters it sits heavy; yet, Great Sir,
among those other Affairs which do incessantly engage you, let the promoting of
Morality and Piety, the beating down of Ungodliness and Profaneness put in for
and obtain a principal share, for they do deserve it.

And oh that other Magistra^^s would contribute what in them is to the
promoting of the true Religion, the Power of Godliness and a Scriptural
Reformation, together with an hearty and vigorous Suppression of Profaneness,
remembering that it is the great and Holy God who has by the hand of his
Providence put into your hand the Sword of Justice, which ought not to rust
there, you must not bear it in vain, but draw it when, and use it as need
requires. And if the making of good Laws, and denouncing of Judgments in the
penalties contained in them be not sufficient to curb vice, and to keep men
within compass, lift up your selves as those that know it is your part, As the
Ministers of God to execute wrath upon them that do evil. If menaces will not
do, there must be a proceeding to Execution, and if shaking the Rod over the
Head does not reach the end* there must be a laying of it upon the back, only
be sure that it is indeed upon the back of them that do evil. And unto such it
does concern you to be a terror, for that is the Will of God as my Text tells
you. It must and will be readily granted that a pleasant and smiling aspect is
very grateful, because lovely, and an affable, obliging carriage does
exceedingly become and adorn great Ones, but sometimes it is needful for them
to cloth themselves with terror, that they might make the most stout-hearted
Sinners to tremble. Magistrates should not be like Jupiters blocks for Vermin
to skip upon and play with. An undue and foolish lenity will render them
contemptible, and the wicked more audacious, so as to lift up their horn on
high, and declare their Sin as Sodom. When Justice and Mercy are mingled with a
judicious and skilful hand, they will constitute a Government of a most
excellent temper.

Use 2. I shall also be free to speak a few words to my Reverend Fathers and
Brethren in the Ministry, of what Judgment and Persuasion soever they are,
about those things which have been and are matters of difference and
controversy among us. You would, all of you be received, honored and attended
unto as the Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ. My request unto you is that you
would approve your selves and convince all that you are such, by your preaching
Christ up and Sin down, all manner of Sin, all sorts of Filthiness, both of the
Flesh and of the Spirit. Spare none, neither small nor great. Be sure that what
offends you does offend God as well as you, and then bend your Bow and level
your Arrows at it: But as for the overgrown profaneness of the Age, which you
cannot but know does so greatly abound in the midst of us, set your selves with
all your might, not only to lop off it is luxuriant branches, but, if possible
to pull it up by the very roots. Do not, in the bowels of love I beseech you,
do not rend and tare one another, do not waste and spend your precious and
swiftly flying time, your heat and strength about those things which your
Consciences tell you are Adiaphorous, or Indifferent, and some of you have by
Word of Mouth and in your writings owned and acknowledged to be so; and a
zealous contending for them and stiff upholding of them will break the Peace
both of Church and State, as it has done ever since the beginning of the
Reformation, but will never afford you solid Comfort and a well-grounded Peace,
when you come to lie upon a Deathbed, and the King of Terrors with his grim
and ghastly countenance shall look you in the face. But labor with might and
main against that root of bitterness, profaneness, which, if you know any
thing as you ought to know, you cannot but know is of a damnable Nature, and
will, if not prevented and heartily repented of, cast and sink particular
Persons into the bottomless pit of Eternal Perdition, and also bring ruin upon
an whole Nation, so that though Noah, Samuel and Job should stand before God
and plead for them, yet his mind could not be toward them.

Do not you admit to the Table of your Lord filthy Swine that wallow in the
Mire of all profaneness. Swearers, Drunkards, and others of that black guard
do not look like guests meet for such a Solemnity, not like such as the Holy
Jesus will bid welcome. Do not you seal to them an Interest in all the
Blessings of that Covenant which they wickedly violate, nor in the saving
benefits of that most precious Blood, which was indeed shed for Sinners, but is
by them trampled under foot as if it were an unholy thing, and had purchased
for them a lawless Liberty or License to be Unholy. Do not you receive them to
a distinguishing Ordinance, who run with the herd, and are not by their lives
and actions distinguished from the worst and vilest. Remember that old saying,
and very good one, Sancta Sanctis, Holy things for holy Persons. And consider
what our Lord said to the Prophet, Jer. 15.19. If thou take forth the precious
from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. He will have his Servants sever the
good and the bad, giving his Promises and Seals to the former, denying them to
the latter. He will have his Stewards to be faithful, feasting his Children
with the dainties of his House, but not throwing them away to Dogs, and those
that do so He will own. Thus do ye, and by so doing you will come forth to the
help of the civil Magistrate against those mighty abominations which Domineer
and Reign among us. Considering the place you are in, and that solemn work you
have engaged in, one would expect that all of you should be holy, not only by
Dedication, but by a real inward Sanctification, at least of unblameable
Conversations, free from scandal, being without offense though not before God,
yet before men. A profane wicked Minister is a gross Solecism, and deserves to
be counted a monster, and to be driven from among men as Nebuchadnezzar was
when brutified, Dan. 4.25.

But while you do shine with the bright beams of Holiness, and walk according
to the blessed Rules of the everlasting Gospel, which you ought to preach, you
may boldly and comfortably without any severe gripes within and without any
reproaches cast upon you from without bend your utmost force against those
extravagants who walk contrary to them. Therefore, my Brethren, let us all
study the Gospel we preach, and live it as well as know it, for knowledge will
not be saving until it influence Heart and Life, and be reduced into practice:
Let us I say think with our selves, and repeat the thought often and often,
what manner of Persons we ought to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness,
and then may we lift up our voices like Trumpets, and decry all the wickedness
we know to be acted. Herein will you do singularly good service both to the
great God in Heaven, and to our King and Magistrates upon Earth, and to the
whole Land. We read that in the fight with Amalek, while Israel was in the
valley, Moses was in the mount with the Rod of God in his hand, which he lifted
up. And when his hands were weary, and ready to flag, Aaron and Hur were by to
sustain and uphold them. Aaron was the Priest of the Lord, and Hur was a Prince
of the Tribe of Judah. Let this example teach all their duty, and excite and
quicken them to the performance of it. When the hand of Moses, the Supreme
Magistrate I mean, is lifted up with the rod of God against the Sins of the
times, let both Aaron and Hur, Magistrates and Ministers come in cheerfully and
strenuously to his assistance. For it is a thousand pities that the Magistrate
should work alone, when set about so great and good a work as this. Do you back
him, and afford unto him all the Assistance that you can.

Use 3. I shall now in the last place direct my discourse unto those who are
placed in a lower Sphere, for the present, not put into any Office, nor clothed
with any thing of Magistratical Power and Authority, but altogether in a
private capacity. I would have you to consider what you have to do. For there
is a Duty incumbent upon every one. Though you are not to reach out your hands
to works or acts of Office neither in the State nor in the Church, yet you are
not to lay aside nor neglect any part of that work which belongs to you as
members of both. And as there is not the least and meanest Person in a Kingdom
but may do a great deal of mischief, so there is not the meanest but if he have
an Heart may do some good. Solomon tells us, Eccl. 9.14, 15. of a little City
that had but few men, and was besieged by a great King. And there was found in
it a Poor man, who by his Wisdom delivered the City. And in 2 Samuel 20. When
Sheba rose up in Rebellion against David, and being pursued went to Abel, Joab
with his Host, cast up a bank against it, and battered the wall, but a Woman
saved it from ruin. Every one may be instrumental for good. Since it is, then,
the Duty of Magistrates from the highest to the lowest to act what they can
toward the suppression of profaneness, there are these two things unto which I
would exhort you who are in private stations.

First, Set an high value and esteem upon every one of those Magistrates whom
you know or hear to be herein true to their trust, and careful to perform their
duty. You may be sure of this that they will find discouragement enough and
opposition from the ranting crew. The wicked themselves, at whose lusts they
strike, will hate them with an implacable hatred, and curse them, and drink to
their confusion, and with longing desire to be rid of them, and do whatever
they can in order thereunto. I do not wonder to hear of the plottings and
combinations both of Atheists and Papists in such a case. There is nothing that
they hate more than Reformation and Religion, nothing they will be more
impatient under than a restraint laid upon their lusts. Therefore those that
are pious and sober, that fear God, and are friends to the Nation should be
exceeding dear over them, and prize them at an high rate, and love them with
their hearts, and honor them, and willingly pay Tribute, and bless God for
them. We are less than the least of mercies and ought to own them, much more
greater Mercies. A good Servant in a Family is a blessing to it. Laban confessed
it to Jacob, Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience that the Lord has
blessed me for thy sake. How great a Blessing then is a good King upon the
Throne, a good Lord Mayor in the Chair, good Justices upon the Bench! Certainly
these are Blessings with all thankfulness to be owned, they are mercies, among
temporal ones, of the first Magnitude, they do make an happy Nation and an
happy People, unless that People will be so vile and froward as to stand in the
way of their own happiness. Those that are Protestants in their Hearts, who
while they verbally profess that Religion are sincere in that Profession,
cannot but with delight look upon it as a choice and singular Mercy for our
gracious God (in a day wherein there were great searchings and sinkings of
heart) to set over us our King and Queen, a Protestant King and Queen, whose
hearts, we persuade our selves, are set for the Maintenance of the true
Reformed Religion, and we hope for the pulling down whatsoever is contrary and
bids defiance thereunto in its Principles and Precepts. Love them for this, let
them be our dear as well as our dread Sovereigns. and let us be sure to be
subject to them, not only for wrath, but likewise for Conscience sake, yea, and
out of choice. And let us pray for them, and plead for them, and strive both
together and apart with God for them, and bring down upon them from Heaven all
the Blessings we can. This was done by the Jewish Church, Psalm. 20. The Lord
hear thee in the day of trouble. The name of the God of Jacob defend thee, send
thee help from the Sanctuary and strengthen thee out of Zion. Remember all thy
offerings, and accept thy burnt offerings, Grant thee according to thine own
heart, and fulfill all thy counsels, and hear thee from his Holy Heaven with the
saving strength of his right hand. Thus they did bless their King in his
Exploits, and thus let us bless our King in his. Yea, let the blessing of
Joseph come upon him, Genesis 49.25, 26. Let the Almighty bless him with the
blessings of Heaven above, and blessings of the deep that lies under,
blessings of the Breasts and of the Womb, let his blessings prevail above the
blessings of all his Progenitors, unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting
hills, let them be upon his head, and the head of his dearest Consort. For I
hope, time will make it further evident that He is a singular Instrument raised
up by God for the effecting of great and glorious things in the world, and for
the Church of Christ, which has been in so many Places for so many Years
afflicted, tossed with tempests, and not comforted. Yea, that he is designed
for an Avenger to execute wrath upon him and them, who have been the Plague of
the Christian World, and have made it their work and delight to destroy the
Earth, and their design to erect to themselves a Monument of Glory out of the
Ruins of Kingdoms, and the Protestant Religion.

Secondly, Let me desire you to facilitate the work of Magistrates, and make it
as easy to them as you can. You that are Masters of Families, having Children
and Servants under you, and understand your work, and desire to go through with
it, find, that you have enough to do in your narrow and little spheres, your
small Cock-boats call for much care and pains. We that are Pastors of Churches,
have a great deal more, even so much as makes our Heads and Hearts to ache, and
we cry out with holy Paul, (...), who is sufficient for these things? People do
little think those many thoughts which gracious and faithful Ministers have
both day and night, the multitude of those cares which they take the burdens
which often lie upon their Spirits, and the many bitter sighs and groans which
upon various accounts they do utter in their private recesses when they are
alone with God. But yet, what is this, all this, to that load which lies upon
the shoulders of our Sovereign, who sits as Pilot at the Helm of so great a
Ship, and upon whom comes daily, not only the care of Three Kingdoms, but, as
doubtless I may safely add, of the whole Protestant Interest, which has been
so desperately struck at; yea, and of all the Churches who have felt the fury
of Oppressors, that have put yokes of iron upon their necks. And not only the
King, whose Place is highest, and Province hardest; but others also who are
employed by and under him, do find they have enough to do. The Lord Mayor, the
Justices of Peace, the Petty Constables, Beadles, Watchmen have enough to do.
How many avocations have they from their own Callings and particular Affairs,
which for their own and Families good must be attended to, and how many
Troubles and Vexations have they in the management of their Places? I would
therefore prevail with you to pity them and to help them, and to take off from
their burden all that you can. This will be an argument of your being acted by
a Spirit truly Christian, and it does very well become all good Subjects.

When Jethro, the Father-in-Law of Moses, came to the Camp of Israel in the
Wilderness, and saw all that Moses did to the People, He spoke thus to him,
Exodus 18.8. Thou will surely wear away, etc. for the thing is too heavy for
thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self alone. So I say, Our King will
wear away, He is but a Man, His Strength is not the strength of Stones, nor is
his Flesh of Brass. He is made of flesh and blood as well as others, and is
subject to the same infirmities, decays and strokes that others are, and truly
his life deserves to be exceeding precious in our eyes, He is the breath of our
Nostrils, and our Life and Peace, our Comfort and Happiness is very much bound
up in him. And therefore we have, and I hope we shall more and more see that we
have a great deal of reason to contribute all that we can to the lengthening
out of his days, and making his life comfortable. But the weight of Government
is too heavy for him, I mean, as good old Jethro did, He is not able to perform
it himself alone. To deal with England's enraged Enemies abroad, and with
England's daring Sins at home is too much for him alone; nay, may I not go
farther? It is too much for his Privy Council and Parliament too; yea, and for
all inferior Magistrates and Officers too. Take them altogether, and it is too
much for them alone.

I do therefore earnestly beseech you all to put your helping hand to the work,
and yield them all the assistance that you can. We have, as my Experience and
constant Observation tells me, a Spirit of discontent and complaining very
busy and active, though indeed often times not without too much cause: And the
Lord grant, those who are now our Rulers may have such a Spirit of Wisdom and
Government plentifully poured out from Heaven upon them that they may never
give good Men any, that those who have an Interest in God, and will certainly
be heard at the Throne of Grace, may never be constrained to go with their just
Complaints. But how many are there that do without cause fill their mouths with
Complaints, and call those faults which are not, and throw dirt in the faces of
Persons in place? But I will ask this one question, what do these Complainers
do in order to the amending of that which is amiss? Our Streets would be
clearer than they are, if every one would sweep before his own Door. And
Reformation would happily become Universal, if every one would be a
Self-Reformer. And oh that you would be so! Oh that others would be so! Oh that
all would say what Elihu does in Job tell us is meet to be said unto God, What
I know not, teach thou me, and if I have done iniquity I will do so no more. I
shall yet divide this my Exhortation into two branches.

First, I shall speak unto those who are Governors of Families, and have
Children and Servants under their inspection, apply to your Duty there. Would
you gladly see all things well abroad, as far as you can, every one of you take
care that they be so at home. You that are Parents, must know and consider that
that God who gave you Children, has committed to you the care and charge of
their Souls. And you that have Apprentices, ought likewise to know and
consider, that the Souls as well as the Bodies of your Apprentices are
committed to your care by their Parents or Friends, and are your charge
likewise. And the same is true as to your other menial Servants, so long as
they shall continue under your Roof as such: and accordingly you are under a
strict Obligation for looking after them. That is not a thing which you may do
or leave undone, as you please; but you are bound to it. You ought to be their
keepers, for you are responsible for them. And if thorough your neglect and
carelessness any of them do eternally miscarry, they will die in their Sins,
but their blood will be required at your hands.

Whereas your holy care as to them will be very pleasing and acceptable unto
God, as is clear from his former dealings in this very case. He took this so
kindly at the hand of Abraham, that upon the account thereof he would reveal
unto him his purpose, Genesis 18.17. The Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham the
thing which I do? Shall I not communicate my Secrets to Abraham; shall I do
such a Work as I am now resolved upon, and not let Abraham know it? But why did
the Lord ask such a question? why might he not hide that, or any thing else
from him or another, if he pleased, being Agens liberrimum, a most free Agent,
and giving no account of his Matters? But what was the reason of this his so
great condescension? Or, what was Abraham, that God's Cabinet-Council should be
as to any one particular unlocked and opened unto him? God himself gives two
reasons of it, one in the 18th Verse, Seeing Abraham shall surely become a
great and mighty Nation, and all the Nations in the Earth shall be blessed in
him. I have promised him great Mercies and Blessings, such as I have not
promised to any man besides in the whole world, and shall I after that conceal
this from him which is a great deal less? but the other reason to which I now
refer you, follows in the 19th Verse, for I know him, that he will command
his Children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord. I know him, I am sure he is my Friend, He loves me dearly, His heart is
set for my honor and interest, He will commend me and my way to all that are
under his charge, and He will lay his Command upon them to love, fear and serve
me, and keep my way. God will manifest himself unto, and set a special mark of
favor upon those that are studious of promoting and posteritizing Religion and
the Worship of God in their Families. These are Men and Women according to his
Heart.

Will you then study and heartily apply to your Duty to this purpose? will you
teach your Children and Servants the good knowledge and fear of the Lord?
Labor to instill betimes into them right Principles, and be dropping as they
are capable of receiving. Will you be provoking and spurring them on to their
Duty by your warm Counsels and Exhortations? will you lay your strict Commands
upon them to do it as they would have your love and avoid your displeasure.
Allure them by your own example, that is a strong silken Cord which draws
sweetly. The way to have them write well, is for you to set them good Copies.
Oh let them not see Irreligion in you, and Profaneness in you, for an hundred to
one but if they do, that will do them more mischief than all your Precepts and
Counsels will do them good. Are you in good earnest when you tell them you
would have them good? then take care that you be good your selves. Be sure to
set up and keep up in your Families the Worship of God. There were indeed
Saints in Nero's House, and an Ahijah in Jeroboam's, in whom there was some
good thing toward the Lord God of Hosts, who can make Flowers grow in Dunghils
and Wildernesses, as well as Springs of Water in Deserts, but these are
Rarities, there is no great reason to expect them, such soils do not usually
afford them. Therefore do you worship God, and Pray with your Families Morning
and Evening, a Duty I fear too much neglected by some who know better; follow
you the pattern of good Joshua in that excellent resolution, that He and his
house would serve the Lord, not He alone, nor they alone, but all in a
Conjunction. Company is comfortable and desirable in that which is good. Keep a
watchful eye upon them, do not trust them with themselves, for the Scripture
tells you that Childhood and Youth are Vanity, and that Folly is bound up in
the hearts of young ones; there is an whole pack of folly in them, and if you
do not look to them, they will both add to the pack and open it. They bring
into the world with them a great deal of corruption, and that is just like
Tinder and Touchwood, that will quickly catch and be fired by those sparks of
Temptation which fly up and down thick in the World. Give unto them all the
encouragement that is fit for them. Children should have ingenuous and liberal
Education, and Servants not be used like slaves, not dispirited and
discouraged, chid and beaten into Mopes. Command mingled with kindness and love
will be found to do best and go furthest; but never let loose the Reins of
Government, hold them strait, for where too much liberty is given, a great deal
more will be taken, by which means, if there be not care taken to prevent it,
that liberty will soon degenerate into licentiousness, for it borders upon it
already. I beseech you therefore, Fathers and Masters, Mothers and Mistresses,
study you to be good in your places: And since you are to govern other, be sure
rightly to govern your selves. National Reformation will easily follow when
Family-Reformation leads the way.

Secondly, I shall direct my Exhortation to particular persons, every one of
you to whom I now speak, and every one of those to whom this discourse shall
come, from the highest to the lowest, of what rank and quality soever they are,
and in what place and station soever the hand of Divine Providence has set
them. It is not so much matter what you are for greatness, as what you are for
goodness; not so much in what Orb you are fixed (if we may speak of such a
thing as a fixation in a tumbling and rolling world) as with what beams you
shine. I beseech you all, one and other to look to your selves, and be very
circumspect and careful of your selves, what you are, what you do, and how you
carry in the world. Every man is charged with himself; though not only with
himself, yet with himself; every man is to give an account of himself to God.
None of you are so high as to be unaccountable. It is your unquestionable Duty
to keep your hearts with all diligence, and to ponder the Path of your feet.
You ought to be considerate men, and curious and exact, and to weigh things
propounded to you before you close with them, and actions before you do them.

Will you be persuaded to apply to this Duty? will you do it? will you walk
circumspectly, accurately, not as Fools, but as Wise, not as Beasts but as Men,
not as Heathen-men, but as Christians, as those that have been under Gospel
Divine teachings? will you endeavor to lead such a conversation as becomes
those who do really believe there is a God, another Life and State after this,
a Resurrection from the Dead, a Judgment, an Heaven and an Hell, unspeakable
Glory and Happiness for them that obey the Gospel, and conform themselves to
the Law and Rule of the new Creature, an everlasting shame, contempt and
torment for those that are workers of iniquity. Know such a life has admirable
delights to sweeten it in the way, and inconceivable rewards to Crown it in the
end. I earnestly beseech you to propound such serious and weighty Questions as
these to your selves, when you do either feel the stirrings and motions of Sin,
or are assaulted by temptations to it from without. Does such an action become
me? whether will it contribute to or detract from my honor, interest or
comfort? Is a life of Debauchery and Profaneness worthy of a man that has an
immortal Soul, and do expect when I die and leave this World to launch into the
Ocean of Eternity? would I have my Lord, when he comes, find me so doing? Is
not this that I am now enticed and inclined to contrary to the Law and end of
my Creation, to the Gospel-Law, and to the dictates of right reason? will this
be for my advantage either now or hereafter? if this be the Seed I sow, what
will be the Harvest that I shall reap? will Sin ever pay me for the cost I am
at upon it, and for the pains that I take about it? the Scripture tells us the
wages it gives its Servants are Death, and what Wise Man will do hard Work for
no better Wages? Suppose that it does afford present pleasure that tickles a
vain carnal mind, will that pleasure last? Is there not a Sting to follow that
honey, will it not be bitterness in the latter end? Certainly it will issue in
shame and sorrow. And who will choose to walk in that way, though it be a
Carpet one, that will go down to and lodge the Traveller at last in the
Chambers of Death, and the Bed of Flames?

As for those of you who have hitherto been vain and loose and wicked, and God
knows there are too many of you, do not stop your Ears to the Voice of the
Charmers, do not, oh, do not hate to be reformed. It is better for you to break
off your Sins by a timely and speedy repentance, than to go on, because none of
you can tell but the very next step that you take you may tumble into Hell,
since every step in Sins way takes hold of it. What Daniel therefore said to
that proud and haughty Monarch Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel 4.27. I will say to you,
Let my counsel be acceptable to you, break off your sins by righteousness, and
your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of
your tranquilli^y; or, as you have it in the Margin of your Bibles, an healing
of your error. If every one would mend one, how soon should we see a lovely
face and excellent beauty upon the whole! nay, if the generality or major part
of the Inhabitants of England and London would be prevailed with to come over
to a Sober and Religious Life, if Princes, Nobles and Gentlemen will be
exemplary therein, Sin and Debauchery would learn to abate something of its
Impudence, and grow more modest than it is. In stead of walking up and down
with a brazen face at Noonday in our Streets, as it has done, it would seek
Corners, and hide it self under the covert of darkness, as in the Ap^stles
times, when they that were drunk were drunk in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. Now
that I might promote in all Persons, according to their several Spheres and
Capacities, a conscientious care and endeavor to suppress Profaneness, I
shall close this Discourse with these few following Directions.

First, Pray for some of Christ's Eye salve, that your Eyes being thereby
opened, you may see the ugliness and deformity of Profaneness. Do not give
credit to that report which Sin makes of it self, no, nor to theirs neither who
are its sworn Slaves and Vassals. For what true Information can you expect to
receive from them, who are under the power of strong delusions, who are
self-deceived and have their minds blinded by the God of this World, and run
away with a lie in their right hand? But do you sit down and take the Word of
God for your guide and counselor, and from thence your measures, and seriously
consider, what beauty can there be in that which has defaced the whole
creation, that was at first a most exquisite and curious piece, and every thing
in it very good? What excellency can there be after the most diligent enquiry
found in that, which is in itself contrary to the best and Supreme good, and
makes every thing else so that is so? What desirableness can there be in that
from whence have come all those stings with which man is tormented, and all the
poisons by which he is endangered?

Oh! That you could look upon it with such an eye as the infinitely wise and
holy God does, and then I am sure you would see it to be out of measure sinful,
and so hate it with a perfect hatred, and flee from it more than from the
Devil, for it made him what he is, and is worse than He, who had it not been
for sin, would still have continued a glorious Angel. Oh that you would take a
view of it as it is represented to you in the Glass of Scripture precepts,
which do expressly forbid it, and in the glass of Scripture-threatnings which
are most dreadfully thundered out against it, and in the Glass of those many
tremendous and amazing Judgments which have been executed up and down in the
world, by which God has revealed his wrath from Heaven against all the
ungodliness, unrighteousness and wickedness of men, sparing neither People nor
Princes, but hanging up some of both sorts, as it were in Chains, that they
might be for the admonition and warning of them that do survive. Once more,
look upon it in the Glass of our Saviors blood, which had never been shed, no
not a drop of it, had it not been for sin, but that caused the shedding of it
all, even his Heart, Life Blood. And it was absolutely necessary, according to
the divine determination in order to man's Salvation, that it should be so, for
without the shedding of blood there would have been no remission, Heb. 9.22.
Had not the blood of Jesus, God-man been shed, and made Satisfaction, as a
propitiatory Sacrifice to Divine justice infinitely provoked by the Sin of man,
the offense and displeasure caused by sin would have to all everlasting
remained without any hope or, as far as we know, any possibility of a
Reconciliation. The least sin is such an anomy or transgression of the divine
Law, such an affront to the Divine Majesty, gives such a blow at the
Sovereignty and Government of God, and carries in it so much of malignity and
provocation that there needs no more than it to sink the guilty person into the
bottomless pit of endless misery; I leave it then to you to consider, what
there is in that profaneness, and numberless number of God-daring abominations
which are to be found in the midst of us. In short, this is that which I
propound and desire of you, judge of sin by its utter contrariety to the great
holy and ever blessed God, and by the sufferings of Christ who was his peoples
surety, and died a Sacrifice, the iniquities of them all being laid upon him,
and by the fatal consequences of sin upon men and Devils, yea upon the whole
world, upon the face whereof it has thrown dirt and deformity, and in the
bowels whereof it has caused Afflictive, Painful Agonies and Convulsions.

Secondly, Be sure that all of you get your hearts filled and awed with the
true fear of God. In which you ought and are commanded to be all the day, Prove.
23.17. Lie down at night in it, awake and rise in the morning in it, and so
walk up and down in all Places and Companies, and about all your businesses and
affairs. No persons in the world are so audaciously and impudently vile as
those who have their hearts hardened from this fear. That passage is very
observable which you find in Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says
within my heart, there is no fear of God before his Eyes. Sin has a voice, it
cries aloud in the Ears of God, and it speaks loud to men, to the hearts of
good men. It speaks that which grieves and saddens them, it speaks that which
informs them. So here. The transgression of the wicked, his visible and open
transgression, the life he leads, which is flagitious, the course he takes
which is Lewd, the Villainies he commits, these speak within my heart, says
David, they speak to my mind and understanding; but what do they say? Enough,
so much as amounts to a plain and full evidence, so much as is to me a
sufficient and firm foundation to build this conclusion upon, that there is no
fear of God before his Eyes. Either he does not believe that there is a God, or
else he believes that he is not a terrible God, a Consuming Fire, and
Everlasting Burnings, but such an one as himself, Psalm. 50.21. A God not to be
trembled before, but to be trifled and played with. One that did not mind what
is done here below, or that has pleasure in wickedness, as he has himself.

What was the reason that Abraham, though a good man, eminently good and strong
in faith, yet, was not willing to have it publicly known that Sarah was his
Wife when he sojourned in Gerar? You have the account thereof given in Genesis
20.12. I thought surely, the fear of God is not in this place. Here is not the
worship of God, therefore here is not the fear of God; but what did he gather
from thence? What if there be not the fear of God? Then there is the fear of
nothing they will stick at nothing, they will have their will, they will stay
me for my Wifes sake. This is indeed a sweet Place, a lovely and pleasant
Country, it wants for no earthly accommodations, but, as I Conjecture, and
that not without reason, the best and principal thing is wanting, here is none
of the fear of God, and where there is not that curb to restrain men, they will
certainly run wild, and their impetuous lusts will hurry them into the vilest
and most monstrous practices, Vbi non est timor Dei, ibi regnant omnia vitia.
All vices reign and rage in those places where the fear of God has not a
commanding power. Whereas on the other side, no persons do hate and oppose sin
so much as those who do fear God most, for this is that which does teach men,
and that effectually, to depart from evil. Former Governors did so and so, but
said good Nehemiah, so did not I, because of the fear of God. There was none
like Job in all earth, and it is said of him by the Lord himself that he feared
God and eschewed evil. He avoided and resisted it. This fear will set the heart
of a man against sin, and constrain him to lift up his hand against it, or his
voice at least, when there is not any power in his hand. Wheresoever there is
the fear of God as the greatest and best good, there will inseparably accompany
it the fear of sin as the basest and worst of evils, and that person will be
sure to make an universal opposition to it wheresoever it is to be found, both
in himself and in others, at home and abroad, in enemies and in Friends too,
yea in them most. As a man that has a natural antipathy to a Viper cannot
endure it lying in his bosom, nor lurking in his Chamber, no, nor creeping in
the highway.

Thirdly, Pray that your Souls may be filled and fixed with an holy zeal for
God. A zeal for his name, and honor, for his Law and Interest. Cold, Lukewarm
and basely indifferent persons will never be famous and renowned upon the
account of any vigorous appearings for God or against sin. A sordid Spirit of
indifferency (greatly unworthy of every one that is honored with the Christian
name) does evermore carry along with it a Spirit of Slothfulness and
Inactivity, let the matter be never so important, the concern never so great.
In Acts 18. you read that the blind and hardened Jews with one accord made
insurrection against Paul, and the Greeks took Sosthenes the Apostles Friend
and Companion, and beat him before the Judgment Seat, but Gallio appeared
neither against the one nor the other. He cared for none of those things. He
thought, what were those things to him? I believe this wretched Spirit
influenceth, and acts many, a great many among us. God is greatly dishonored,
his name is taken in vain, his precious Sabbaths are openly and wickedly
profaned, Religion suffers in its honor and interest, the Nation is
endangered and exposed to the dismal effects of divine indignation, young ones
are corrupted, perverted, and drawn aside to their destruction, and wrath is
pulling down apace; and who can tell how soon a holy, jealous, provoked God may
unstop his vials, and distribute sorrows in his anger? But what is all this to
them so long as they can follow their callings, and enjoy themselves, and
gratify their proud, vain, wanton humors, and go fine and fare well, and lay
up money, and live in quiet, and mirth and plenty? But let me be believed by
you whilst I tell you, that if there were in you a zeal for the honor and
interest of God, you would judge and conclude that this is something to you,
and this concerns you, and accordingly it would go to your very hearts, and be
as a Sword in your bones, as it was in the holy Prophet's, which extorted from
him that passionate exclamation; Is it not enough for you to weary men, but you
will weary my God also? It was this holy zeal that put Eleazar upon that
Heroic act of taking such speedy revenge as he did upon Zimri and Cosbi. God
himself took notice of it, and imputed it to his zeal, and was highly pleased
with it, and mentioned it twice, Numb. 25.11. He was zealous for my sake among
them. And again, v. 13. He was zealous for his God. His heart did burn within
him, he was all in a flame, and could not with any patience endure to see his
God so unworthily dealt with and dishonored. While I am writing of this I am
informed of that excellent precept against the profaning of the Lords day,
sent out by the Right Honorable, Sir Thomas Pilkington, our present Lord
Mayor, which being of a more than ordinary strain I look not upon as a matter
of custom, but an effect of his zeal, and let it be for his honor to
succeeding generations, and an embalming of his name, and let God himself
remember it for good to him both in time and to eternity. One thing more.

Lastly, Frequently and seriously call to mind that account which you are at
the last and great day to give of your selves, and your power, and all your
actions to a better, greater and higher than any of you, even to God himself.
He will, for certain, he will call you all to a strict account, therefore awe
and quicken your Souls with the thoughts of it. It is but a little, very little
time that the youngest and strongest of you have to spend in the World; Death
will certainly come and summon you hence. And when it comes it will not stay
for you, till you have mended faults, and supplied defects, possibly it will
not allow you time enough to say, Lord have mercy upon me. And then your places
will know you no more, and your power will know you no more, and your comforts
and enjoyments will know you no more. You that now sit upon thrones and in
Parliament-houses and Courts of Judicature must then stand before the divine
Tribunal upon an equal level with the meanest of the people, and everyone of
you give an account of himself to God, and of his trust and power, and how he
did carry himself, and manage and improve his power. And therefore if you have
any kindness for your selves, make it appear by your care so to live now, so to
act and rule, as that you may give up a good account with boldness and comfort,
and hear the Judge say, Well done, good and faithful Servants, you have been
faithful in your little, you have done your duty, and filled up your places,
now enter into the joy of your Lord. I shall conclude this Sermon with that of
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or evil; knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord we persuade men, so to live in the World, so to order their
Conversations, so to trade with those talents of interest and estates, of parts
and power for the present, that then they may be found faultless and presented
with exceeding joy.

Quest. How may we enquire after News not as Athenians but as Christians; for
the better management of our Prayers and Praises for the Church of God? SERMON
XVI.
ACTS 17.21. For all the Athenians, and strangers that were there, spent their
time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.
IN the Text chosen for me to speak of, and for you to hear, I do observe, and
would have you also consider, we meet with a Concourse of people who pretended
to be the Virtuosi of that Age; and for ought I do discern, may as well deserve
the Character, as they do in our Age who spend their time in enquiring into
useless Novelties.

If our Learned Men equal the Learning of these Athenians. If Students from
Foreign parts flock to us to perfect their course of Studies, as to Athens? If
Merchants in equal Numbers, but with unequal Riches, attend the Custom-houses,
and fill the Exchanges with us as with them? If there were some Travelers who
came only to see, and talk, who were the ((...)) Strangers there? If each sort
had business of greater Importance to mind than to spend their time in hearing
what others could tell, or telling what others would be pleased with hearing;
which was the Folly, and Distemper of those Athenians and Strangers; the same
is the Epidemical Folly and Disease of our Age, and of all sorts of the
Beaux-Esprits, refineder Spirits with us. The Cure of this Disease is the
design of this Discourse in this Case: How may we Enquire after News, not as
Athenians but as Christians; for the better management of our Prayers and
Praises for the Church of God?

He that Enquires to satisfy his Curiosity, or his sinful Prejudices, or
malicious Wishes, and to boast and triumph in the Sorrows of the Church of God;
and He that Enquires not at all, nor concerns himself with these Works of
God, do both highly offend.

The one rejoice in the Destruction of Sion, as it is Obad. 12. v. The other is
at Ease in Sion, Amos 6.1. and are not grieved at the Affliction of Joseph,
Amos 6.6. and each do provoke the displeasure of the Lord against themselves.
Amos pronounces a Woe against the one, Chap. 6.1. and an utter Extirpation is
threatened against the other, Obad. 18. v. Such careless ones as neither fear
the Evil, nor hope for the Good of Sion; neither pray for its Deliverance, nor
do praise God for his Salvation to Sion, greatly Sin and are likely to be
deeply Punished, Isa. 32.9, 10, 11, 12. That we may Escape both, the Case warns
us Not to Enquire Athenian-like, but to Enquire as becomes Christians, and
suitably Pray for a Distressed, or Praise God for a Delivered Church.

In stating this unusual Case, it will I think be best to draw it out into some
previous Propositions, which shall make way for the clearer Resolution of it.

1. The Casuist does grant that in some Cases we may Enquire what is the News
that is abroad. Whosoever asks Direction how to do an Action is first
persuaded of the lawfulness of the thing he would do. How shall I come before
God? implies that I may, yea ought to come before him, Mich. 7.6. So here the
Casuist is of opinion we may Enquire, but is solicitous lest you should with
the most enquire amiss, and therefore would direct you the best way of doing
what is lawful to be done. If there were a doubt, the Case should be first, May
it be done? not, How is it to be done?

2. News which spreads abroad in the World is of very different Nature.

1. Some Trifling Reports, below the gravity and prudence of a Man to receive
from a Reporter, or to communicate to any Hearer.

2. Others of a very particular, private, personal Concern; and among such as
are of mean and abject state, which as they rise among them so it is fit they
should die amongst them; or if reported are of no more concern to a Judge or
Magistrate or the Public, than a Counter-scuffle of Boys in their Sports to a
General and his Army.

3. There are other News of a Public Nature, and which concern the State or
Church; which import some threatening danger, or some smiling Providence; the
approaches of somewhat more than ordinary for the Good of Mankind or the Church
of Christ. Such was the News of Joseph, that he was alive, Lord of Egypt, and
that he had sent to fetch Jacob and his Family (the Church of God in that day)
to preserve a Seed alive. Such was the News of Cyrus's coming to the Throne,
favoring the Jews, and issuing out the Edict of their Return, which made the
Jews (Dreamers like) think 'twas too Good to be true. Or when sad News alarms
the World, as when Rumors of Wars come one upon another, and threaten the World
with an universal Deluge of Blood.

In such Cases, it is yet considerable,

How certain, or how dubious the reports are which we hear.

How near at hand, or how far off the Effects are which attend the Good or bad
News we hear.

How likely it is the evil may be diverted, less^^^ or removed, or whether
inevitable and growing great.

How probable, or sure the hoped Good accompanying the Providence of God in
such Cases is, etc.

Of such like News this Case speaks; Tidings which do import great Good or
great Evil to the Church of God, call upon every Member of the Church to
Enquire into.

3. In such Cases the Persons are of very different Capacity, who (as they
ought) do Enquire, and according to the different Capacity each is in, so each
ought to Enquire what may be done by himself to prevent, lessen, or remove
afflicting Evils, or what may be done to hasten, increase, and secure hoped or
enjoyed Good; this by such persons ought to be seasonably and effectually done.

The Divine Providence does advance some to places of the highest Power, and
Authority; and entrusteth them with advantages of being Shields of the Earth,
Nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to his Church, Psalm. 47.9. Isa. 49.22.
Obad. 21. v.
Saviors upon mount Sion. They that are Defenders of the Faith, They should
Enquire what Tidings for or against the Church, that they may know what they
are to do in repelling Violence and Injustice, or in promoting the Welfare and
Safety of the Public. The Enquiry such make, is, and ought to be much more
Exact, Constant, and Solicitous; these should not only receive Intelligence,
but seek it; maintain such as from abroad are fit to give account what is
framing against the Public Good of the Civil State, or against the Good of the
Church of God: Neither of which will be long in Safety, Peace, or Prosper if
those who are Watchmen, Ezekiel. 34.2.
and like Shepherds should neglect to Enquire what ravening Beasts usually
haunt the adjoining Woods, or Wildernesses. Now because it would be too tedious
to mention the several ranks of Men concerned to Enquire into News of a Public
Nature, as Counselors and Lawgivers, Judges and inferior Magistrates, Martial
and Fighting-men, who are to turn the Battle in the Gate.

Ministers of the Word, and Spiritual Guides of the Church, yea and all the
Members of the Church, are to Enquire into what God is doing for or against his
Church, as they have in their present Station opportunity to do; as Nehemiah
did, who Enquired of them that came from Jerusalem, what Condition that City
and People of God were in.

They who have any ability and power in their hand to do good, to help the
Church of God, or any part of it under distress; proportionably every one of
them are to awaken their Enquiries after the state of the Church, and set
themselves with diligence to relieve it: And since we may, (as it is our duty)
Praise God for his Mercy showed to the Church, and pray for Mercy when wanted,
we should know by Enquiry what is our Duty herein. So then by this we may see
it is the particular Office of some to Enquire, and ought to be the Care of all
in their places to know, what the Church needs, and they ought to do for it.

But none may Enquire like the Athenians. Into which we must Enquire now, and
pray the Liberty of making discovery of this, by what helps we can meet with,
both from Human and Sacred Testimony, what they were, Incepit regnum
Atheniensium A. M. 2496. ante C. N. 1553. Hottom. Lexic. univers. ad voc.
Athenae.
etc.

1. These Athenians began to be a people about the year of the World 2496.
about 1558 An. before Christ's Birth; and when this was written it was the 51st.
year of Christ. It was at that time a City 1609 years old under various
changes, and grew up to great Trade for Merchants, and as great Learning, for
it was through a long course of years the University of the World. And a place
that wandering Wits delighted to visit. Now among such Capricio's, so many
curious, and inquisitive Humors, succeeding one another, and inventing New
things, and glorying in the invention; no wonder that their Inquiries were
Vain, or Ridiculous, or Mischievous to others. If sad threatening News were
reported, they inquired into it; they betook themselves to their Antiquity,
their Power, Wisdom, and their Idols, etc. So did Niniveh of old, so did a City
more Ancient than Nineveh, Nah. 2.8, 9, 10. etc. If Tidings affrighted Rome,
the Palladium, the duration of the City, Roma aeternum duratura, and such like
are enquired after as the security they trust in. Jerusalem, though better
taught yet became so brutish as to Enquire after vain and helpless Refuges
against bad News: The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4. or
else they contenm the Rod, and him that uses it. Can the Ancient City, the
Glory of the World be destroyed? Or shall the Course of its Prosperity after
many hundred years be changed into Misery? This were Athenian like to enquire
into the Effects of New Causes. If new Judgments threaten us for our old Sins,
and we hear that they approach, a Christian Enquiry should be, How we may
prevent the Execution by a speedy return unto God.

2. Secondly, The temper the Athenians are represented to us in, will help us
to ghess what Enquiries they would make upon New Emergencies. And our own
Reason will tell us that all such Enquiries unbeseem a Christian. Let us view
the Athenians in their temper, as Plutarch, Varro, Polybius, Aristophanes and
Aristotle, etc. give it us.

1. Very Suspicious and Jealous. Now whatever other Abilities a man may have to
make right Enquiries of New Occurrences, this one Vice or Distemper is enough
to disturb all; Jealousy will take amiss all that is Good, and suspect it is
Evil; it will aggravate evil and make it worse than it is: No right judgment is
made, or if a man of such temper stumble upon the right nature, tendency, and
importance of unusual things reported, yet he cannot fix, or be constant in it.

2. The Athenians were naturally prone to Anger, soon took Fire upon what they
heard, or saw, and thought to be worthy of their Anger, and this was a
perpetual Anger. (...)
Now Jealousy like a dark Cloud darkens our thoughts and Judgment; Anger like
the Lightning that breaks out of that Cloud, is of more destructive Fire, than
of directing Light, and too quick and impetuous to allow us time of thinking
aright, or Enquiring aright: if the News then displease this Passion, the man
cannot judge aright till he has mastered his Anger, and can debate the whole
calmly with himself. Where this double Rage prevailed, none could enquire into
new Occurrences in right manner, nor be an Example for us to imitate.

3. They were close Dissemblers, very Deceitful. (...) subdoli, fallaces
perfidi. Plato. Plutarch. Zech. Bogan. Archaiol. Attic.
Like Wounds healed outwardly but festering; in whose Mind, seemingly healed of
their Anger and Disgusts, there is undiscerned Enmity, and Resolutions to
Revenge. Italianated men can smile when they intend to cut your throat. Affable
to Enemies, and disguise their Hatred in their Commendations of you to your
Face; Salute with Mortal Embraces, and clasp you with the Arms they
unexpectedly will imbrew in your Blood. Now what Enquiry will such tempered Men
entertain you with, upon any News they meet with? They Enquire into particulars
which may facilitate their revenges, that may satisfy their malice, and
endanger an innocent, which an honest plain-hearted reporter never dreamt of.
Like Joab enquiring the News at Court, How Abner was entertained, how long
since, and which way he went, what Company with him, etc. Which Enquiries an
honest heart would never have mistrusted came from a bloody Heart, if Joab's
bloody hand had not at last appeared.

4. They were generally a People of an unblushing Countenance; seldom dashed out
of Countenance, or discovered by a change of it. Men of a great Confidence,
which in our plainer Dialect we should be apt to call Impudence; that dare ask
any question, and attempt to pry into Closets and Cabinet Counsels; that fear
no rebuke for any saucy Carriage, or for any false lies they spread; that could
either disguise, lessen or deny any good news they heard, or could add to, and
increase the bad; (...). A^i^^p^. Nubibus. i. e. (...) as the Schol. (...).
Budae. in verb.
could perversely Discourse and Comment on all Occurrences. It was grown up into
a Proverb and so used by the Ingenious Poet when he would express a shameless
and bold fellow ready to contrive and execute any Mischief. Such a tempered
People were the Jews, Jer. 6.15. Who rightly interpreted nothing the Prophet
told them, who Enquired indeed what News, but never enquired with an Humbled,
Repenting, Reforming Mind.

5. They were very great Lovers of Praise, Proud, and Contemners of others;
They accounted all other people unjust intruders into other Men's Proprieties.
They boasted themselves to be the only Nation against which no Lease of
Ejectment might be sealed. All other were Barbarians to them, as if they only
were the Men of Wisdom, Humanity, and Arts, and all others were Fools,
ill-natured and as ill bred. The rank smell of this you have in the
Philosopher, who gave thanks to the Gods that he was a Man, not a Woman; a
Grecian, not a Barbarian; and among Grecians that he was a Philosopher, i. e.
bred at Athens and born there: Of such proud ones we may say (as David said of
them of his time) God is not in all their thoughts, as for his Enemies he
puffs at them, Psalm. 10.4, 5, 6. All new Occurrences of Providence are
slighted or perverted by these Men. They cannot enquire aright into the Works
of God nor into the Works of Men. All with such men is turned into an advancing
of their own Praise and disdain of others. In the Athenians answer to Gelon,
offering them Assistance against Xerxes provided he might command either by Sea
or Land; a modest proposal for a King to make; who offered 200 Ships,
Athenienies non assentientur -- ut pote qui semper aliis Graecis navali
apparatu ante celluerunt. Pezelii Me^lifie. Histor. (...)
28000 Armed Men, and Provision for his own and all the Grecian Soldiers
during the Wars. But the Athenians will not yield, who were ever esteemed best
at Sea, and for this praised by Homer. Thus the Pride of these self-conceited
ones lost the benefit of a good offer, and turned away the News of such help
from themselves, assailed with an Army, reckoned up to be 2641610, besides
Victuallers, Eunuchs, and loose Women that followed the Camp.

6. They were such as were full of Enmity, and very prone to speak
contemptuously one of another; scurrilous and abusive Discoursers of Persons or
Things. Bellandi, Capidiores quam sat esset.
Hence many quarrels within themselves, and Wars with their Neighbors. These
Athenians took a liberty in this abusive way of speaking against any, but more
particularly against the Chief, the Optimates or Nobles among them, and took
this Liberty at the Eleusinian Feasts kept in Honor to Ceres, Plutarch in
Scyllo. Hesychies.
when with a Vail cast over their faces these lewd Scoffers did bespatter all
that passed by them, and reproached them with all they had by chance or enquiry
heard of their Betters.

Vid. Sigon. de Republ. Atoeni. l. 1. c. 1.
7. They were unruly and terrible to their Governors, which may easily find
credit with you if you consult the various changes of Governments among them.
And Aristotle when he mentions some of their Rights as extorted, forced from
their Kings, sufficiently intimates this fierceness of the People and their
Terribleness to the Rulers, but when Kings were turned into Rulers for ten
years, referendis rati^nibus o^ noxium. Pa^a^. rerum Attic.
and made accountable, and this Decennial Rule after Seventy years dwindled
into an Annual Rule, the People grew more unruly in their deportment, and more
terrible in their Discontents; and in their Rage many times punished their best
Governors with the Ostracism, -- Non impro^itatis castipatio sed vulgaribus
animis ins^^ae invidi^e plucatio Er^sm. C^^^^.
that is, with Ten years Banishment; which Exile was not a punishment for
Crimes, but an appeasing of the Envy of the Common People. When the Athenian
Discontents employed them in discovering News of the Government, and
Governors, you will not need to be told how they Enquired, or why; to be sure
so as neither you or I may Enquire.

8. They were (as is observed) Malicious Observers of the deportment of the
Strangers who sojourned among them. So that Strangers were never secure in
their Persons, Name or Affairs. Quick-sighted Malice prying into the Temper,
Designs and Actions of Students, Merchants and Travelers Sojourning among
them, either did mis-represent all to others, or received all misrepresented
by others; and if Malice attained it is Ends herein, it ended either in the
Ruin, or great danger of the Innocent, who were as far from Fear, as they were
far from giving Cause of Fear to any. To sum up all in brief, since we are from
good Testimony assured that the Athenians were Suspicious, Angry, Dissemblers,
boldly Impudent, Lovers of their own Praise, and as much Vilifyers of others,
Quarrelsom and Contentious, Unruly, Terrible to their Governors, and
disingenious to the height of Malice against Strangers sojourning with them,
(though some were better among them) we may not fetch our Copy from such Persons,
nor Enquire as the most of such kind of men would Enquire. Such cannot but
offend in the Matter, Rules, Ends and Manner of Enquiring after New Things.

Hitherto we have consulted Men in their Reports of the Athenian temper: Let us
now see what the Text and Context will afford us, for these will be a most sure
Rule, by which we may know how News-Mongers there did pump one another: These
inquired,

1. With strong prejudices against Truth, and with as inveterate Opinion and
Inclination to their own Errors: so here Citizens and Philosophers entertain
the Gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa hold this Polytheism, and will not see
into the Truth the Apostle preached, one God, and their own Altar fully owned
by its Inscription, To the unknown God: In this they might have seen St. Paul's
Orthodoxy, and their own Error in a matter of great concern to all Mankind.

2. With curiosity more to know what other men believe and do in Religion, than
serious purpose to know what they themselves should believe, and do. Had these
Athenians inquired with sober and considerate Resolutions to receive Truth, it
might have been an happy opportunity of conversion from dumb Idols, to the
Living and True God. These Enquiries came with (...), ver. 18. (...); What
would this Babbler have? And, May we know? Here Is not one word of Enquiry that
they might be saved. Their foolish Hearts were darkened, while they enquire
after Knowledge; as Romans 1.21.

3. They enquire with Pride and Contempt of the Persons of whom they enquire,
so did these Philosophers, before they thoroughly considered what the Apostle
preached, and how he confirmed his Assertions; they do censure him as an empty
Fellow, who talked much, nimbly, and smoothly, but that was all with them, as if
there were no weight in his Arguments, nor any thing of moment in his
Doctrines: They despise him, and give him, ver. 18. the most contemptable name
of a Babbler.

4. With unreasonable partiality, they confess their own Ignorance. There is a
God unknown to them, to whom they had erected an Altar, and offered Sacrifices:
Now here comes a Man of a sober Deportment, of quick and ready Parts, clear
Judgment, and a close Disputer, who offers to instruct them, and tell them who
this unknown God is, and how he ought to be Worshipped; but Bruits as they
were, they will rather be Ignorant still, than learn by the Apostle: And though a
patient, and attentive hearing of the Apostle would have filled Athens with
greater and better News than ever was brought to their Ears; yet they who made
it their business to hear all News, make it their Sin and Folly to refuse this
News.

5. With Resolutions not to be persuaded, though they were silenced, or
convinced: This appears partly from their contempt of his Person, before they
heard his Doctrine, and the reasons of it; partly from their obstinate
adhearing to Idols, and Worship of them, though the Apostle had by clearest
reason discovered the absurdity thereof in his Excellent Discourse of the
Nature of God, and his Worship, etc.

And partly by the effect his Reasoning had upon Dionysius the Areopagyte, who
believed, ver. 34. Now Dionysius was of the number of those whose Fame was
great at Athens for Wisdom, Integrity, and Justice: For want of these
Qualities, these Philosophhers reject the Apostle, and the new Doctrine which
he preached.

6. These Athenians did with Tumult and Violence make their Enquiry after the
new things St. Paul preached. So the word in the Original seems to signify,
and is so used, Luke 23.26. Simon of Cyrene compelled to bear the Cross of
Christ, and when the Captain of the Castle took Paul out of the Jews hands,
Acts 21.30, and 33. in which places the same word is used. They apprehended
him: Non sint manuum injectione tanquam in reum. Lorin. in Loc.
Or, laid hands on him, as on a guilty Person. They enquire not as became
Learners, or sober Disputers. But,

7. They hurry him before the Areopagites Court, to answer it with his Life,
for either denying the Athenians Gods, or endeavoring to bring it new Gods
without the approbation of the Areopagites, Quia ingerit nova Daemonia. Lorin.
in loc.
both which were Capital by the Law, and had endangered many Heads, cost some
their Life; as Socrates condemned to Death by this Court, in which Two Hundred
Eighty and One Votes concurred in the Sentence against him.

All these particulars last mentioned are evident in this Context from the 17
ver. to the 32 ver. and I leave it you to judge, whether this way of Enquiry
becomes a Christian. Many Christians begin their Enquiry into new things with
Prejudices, carry them on in Curiosity, Pride and Partiality, and close them
with obstinate adhering to old Errors, and refusing Truth new discovered; and
in the tumultuousness of a Rabble bring the Publishers of Truth and Godliness
into apparent Danger of their Lives? This the whole progress of the Athenian
dispute with the Apostle, If you remember these things, you will know what you
ought not to do, and I have hopes you will forbear doing that which you know
too evil in a Heathen, and more evil in a Christian, and would be most evil in
us who have seen bloody Effects of News raised, abetted, witnessed, and sworn
by profligate, perjured Persons, not before Areopagites, but before Judges;
raised to take away the Life of Innocents, and to condemn such, whose Love, and
Care, whose Power and Resolution qualified them to be Patriots to their Country
and the Church.

8. The Athenians spent too much time in telling and hearing News of any sort,
whether important or a triflle, certain or doubtful, So be, its News, it is that
pleases them: They ever have leisure to hear it, nothing comes more
acceptably to them: This Disease has descended from Age to Age, and been most
pernicious to the Great, Rich, Voluptuous, and Proud Ports, Cities and
Academies of the World: A Disease the Wisest and most Serious have complained
of, but the vain and foolish would not be sensible of, or cured. The waste of
time never to be recalled, Neglect of our necessary Affairs, loss in Trades and
Employments, spreading of false Stories of others, provoking displeasure
against others and our selves on such occasions, endangering our selves and
others by engaging in Parties and Quarrels, increasing Discontents amongst
those we should endeavor to unite, giving occasions to Enemies, and false
Accusers to lay to our charge things we know not, falling under suspicion of
Plotters and Conspirators against the Public Weal.

All these and much more might be Arguments against an Immoderate attendance on
public places of News amongst us, where Wise Men come and stay whilst their
necessary business calls and requires; and Prating Fools continue till they
fall. Pest of the Nation, and bane of Tradesmen, common Nuisances, and public
Mischiefs in the Opinion of some Wise and Good Men: But when the places are
blamed, they that come there too often, and stay there too long, are in the
fault, and should (I think) be punished. I could wish there were a Redress of
all the Inconveniences and Vices that spring up in Coffee-Houses; but I believe
that every Man who frequents them, must mend his own faults herein, and not
expect Directions from a Pulpit, how often or seldom, how long or short a time,
what business with Friends and Chapmen to wait for, or meet there: Go not
thither but on business thou can best do there, stay but till it is done, and
though many complain of the Coffee-Houses, they cannot condemn thee.

But I pass on, to tell you how (in these places which seem to be Athenae
Redevivae; and the Company we meet there like Athenian News-Mongers, all
enquiring what is Newest) you may as Christians ought, enquire what News of
Church Affairs, that you may the better manage your Prayers for the Church in
trouble, or praise God for good wrought for it, which is the Second Part, and
Positive Part of the Case before us.

First, Then a Christian ought to make Enquiry into News that concerns the
Church, according to the Advantage and Capacity he has more fully to know both
the Good and Welfare of the People of God, or to know the Sorrows and Dangers
that lie upon the Church: Some lie under an Incapacity of knowing much of the
Affairs of their own Country, and the Church in it, who never heard any thing,
so much as the Name of some of the Churches of Christ, nor are they any way
likely to know much of them; yet these ought to enquire what they can, that
their Prayers and Praises for the Church may be suitable to what they know of
the Church. Jerusalem must not be forgotten, she must be prayed for.

Such who know few but their Christian Relations, or Neighbors, may know the
Sorrows, Dangers, Wants of these, and ought to pray for them, as they are
Members of the Church, and consider the like State other Christians are in, and
must be prayed for, etc. We are to mourn with those that mourn, and rejoice
with those that rejoice: That we may the better do this, we should enquire the
most we can into the present State of the Church. But more especially,

1. Christian Kings, Princes, and Supreme Magistrates, as Nursing Fathers,
Defenders, and Promoters of Christ's Kingdom and People, ought to Enquire, and
maintain Intelligences; whereby they may understand what is the State of all
the Churches of God, with which they and their Subjects hold a Commerce, that
so either Public Prayers or Praises may be made for the Church. Moses has
given us Example of this kind, Acts 7.23, 24. who did deliberately conclude
with himself, that he would visit his Brethren, the Children of Israel; and
with his own Eyes survey their Condition, that he might suitably address
himself to help them, supposing they would know God would deliver Israel by
Moses. Some few we meet in History, who have concerned themselves for the
Church of Christ abroad, without their own Dominions now and then. A
Constantine appears to defend the Church, and to mind a Licinius to forbear
persecuting the Church: Or, an Elizabeth to support a Neighbour-Church: Or, a
Gustavus Adolphus to rescue oppressed Churches: Or, such as we have in our day
seen raised to be a Father and a Mother to his People in this Kingdom: It was
well for us that God awakened them to Enquire what State the Church was in
here, and how it might be rescued.

Secondly, Nobles and Counselors about Christian Princes and Kings, who have
opportunity to know public Concerns of Churches abroad above other Men, ought
to Enquire more particularly and fully, That they may the better advise
Inferior ones to pray for the Church, or praise God as the Seasons require;
and that they may employ their Interest at home with their own King, or abroad
in Foreign Courts for the good of the Church: Which way soever Mordecai first
scented Haman's Plot, He acquitted himself in this point, gave not over the
Enquiry, till he had done his best to rescue the Jews. Much of the same temper
was Nehemiah, who at Court in fullness of Honor, Riches, and Ease, could not
forget Jerusalem; Neh. 1.2, 3.
nor let slip an opportunity of acquainting himself with the Condition of the
Jews there, and addresseth himself to rebuild and repair it. Had not King James
I. and his Nobles about him inquired into the Plot, the Church and Kingdom had
been ruined, though the Lord Mounteagle discovered what he knew of it.

Thirdly, Ambassadors in the Courts of Princes that are Enemies to the Truth
and Church, and ready to extirpate both, have advantage of Enquiring what
Dangers threaten the Churches under such Princes Dominions, and in such case,
they are fittest to acquaint the Prince who sent them that loves the Church,
and is foster Father to it; that by his Mediation, and Interest, the Design of
Enemy-Princes, and Persecutors may be stopped; and endangered Subjects and
Christians may be secured. The French Tyrant had been at his Dragooning
Conversions some years sooner (as I have heard) if on the News of his Design
(communicated by Ambassador to his Master, a Neighboring Conqueror,) express
Orders had not been sent to the Ambassador to require present and peremptory
Orders to recall the Marching Troops. So much the safety of the Church may
sometimes depend upon the Vigilance and Zeal of such Public Ministers of
State: Wise Ambassadors of our Neighbors I doubt not informed their Masters
and our Friends what dangerous Plots were laid against us and them, and all the
Churches of Christ: So that now the Snare is brok^n, and we are escaped, Psalm.
124.7. For the one many prayed, for the other more gave praise to God.

F^urthly, Chief Commanders in Martial Affairs who are Christians, are
concerned to enquire what State the Church is in among those on whom they are
commanded to make War; sometimes Multitude of Christians may be within the
Quarters, under the Power of the Enemy; sometimes Christians of an eminent
Character, and highly valued by all that know the Truth, and love it, may be
threatened to be destroyed by the Enemy: In such case a plain, brave, and
peremptory Message, that the Enemies Violence shall be retaliated, may save
many Lives: So many Christians have been preserved from Turkish Fury, many
Protestants from Popish Rage, both in days past and of late. So Jeremiah's case
was weighed by the Chief Captain of the Assyrian Army.

Fifthly, Merchants, who travel into far remote parts for their Trade, and
Gentlemen who travel for their pleasure, and to satisfy themselves by an
occular survey of Countries, and Cities (of which they often heard Reports
scarce to be believed on hearsay:) These have some greater advantages to see
and hear the low and sinking State, or the rising and flourishing Condition of
those Churches which are planted in such Countries; and as Christians they are
bound to observe, inform themselves, and tell others how it is with the Churches
that Prayers and Praises may be offered unto God for them: But this is very
little minded by Merchants when abroad, and less minded by them, when returned
home with Wealth (greater than ever they hoped.) Though Religion decay, and
Churches lessen in Number, Knowledge, Faith and Holiness; yet who of them out
of their abundance settle a tribute of Thankfulness to God, making Provision
for the sending and maintaining Preachers and Schoolmasters among them? Would
the enriched Merchants remember their Duty to God, and what Thanks they owe to
the People who were kind to them in Travels and Trading, there would be some
settlements made to encourage such as are fit and willing to employ themselves
in promoting the Welfare of the Churches, but Poverty and Low Condition in the
World forbids them to do it on their own Estate, and no due provision is made
by others to support them in such a work. Some few of this traveling
disposition (though poor) do go abroad Tutors to some young raw Gentlemen, who
being so unexperienced, and imprudent among Strangers, and ever endangering
themselves, if the Tutor be absent; he can do little but attend them in every
place, and spend his time in viewing things that please young fancies, and
profit none but those that are Door-keepers, or Officers about the places: One
short Tour of a Learned Man (now a great Prelate among us) gives us assurance
that Travels might give us good Intelligence of the State of the Church, were
there due care taken in this, Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Sarem
by Persons who could bear the Expenses of Prudent, Experienced, and Diligent
Persons, Lovers of the Truth and Church, as well as Lovers of Knowledge, we
might in a short time have a good account of the true state of all, or most of
the Churches of Christ, and our Praises would be more seasonable and suitable.

Sixthly, There are the whole Tribe of Levi, Ecclesiastical Persons, who live
upon the Emoluments of the Church; These above others should concern themselves
for the Church. These are to manage Public Prayers and Praises for the Church;
these are to be Examples to others, to kindle the Affections of their people to
pray and praise as occasions require. They are or should be able to take
account of the Church Affairs written and published to the World in several
Languages: They should be diligent Readers of such Books: They more than others
should understand the Times and Seasons of the Prophecies; and how the
Wilderness State ends, or the State of Return out of the Wilderness begins;
especially, under such Revolutions as we now are, as whither the Witnesses are
rising, or whether any Vials, or how many are poured forth; whether we are to
encourage the People of God to hope for a speedy Deliverance, or to advise them
to expect and prepare for sorer and longer Troubles: These and such like
Enquiries the Learned Clergy are much more fit to make then the Layety, and I
think they are bound to it more than others: But in a more particular manner,
those of the Clergy who have preferments which will bear the Charges of,

1. All sorts of Books that concern this.

2. All sorts of Ammanuenses and Helps to read and give account to them.

3. All sorts of Intelligencies and Correspondencies with Bishops and Pastors
of the Churches abroad.

4. Entertaining and Conversing with all Exiles, Refugees, and Travelers that
come from Foreign Churches.

5. Sending (if need be) particular Messengers to know the Truth or falsehood of
what is reported to them. Rich Archbishops, Bishops, and Deans might and ought
to do thus or more for the Church of Christ. I do not know how much of this
Work is set on foot, or whether none. I can hardly think among so many and
Learned Men, as have Great and Rich Preferments in the Church of England, it is
wholly omitted: They do, I believe, receive Intelligences from abroad; and if
these be as true as those that some of them have sent abroad concerning the
State of God's Church here in England, no wonder they all grow worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived, as the Apostle said of some other Men, 2 Timothy
3.13. In giving all Intelligences to others, let us keep; and in receiving all
from them, let us desire them to keep to the Apostles Direction: Inform (...),
speaking the Truth in Love. It is an inexcusable Crime to be malicious
Slanderers one of another: And since the Doctrine of the Church of England in
points of Faith and good Manners, the Renunciation of Popery as fully as is
required, are both subscribed, and Allegiance to the Government assured by Oath
or Subscription, let none such be any more misrepresented as of no Principles
in Religion, Friends to Popery, and Enemies to Monarchy and Government.
Ingenuity and Truth is much wanting both in Words and Writings of Men, that
should describe their Brethren to Foreigners; instead of which, they decipher a
Monster of their own making, and set it up to be abhorred by all that see or
hear it. A Famous Professor of Divinity in a University and City (with which
the whole Dissenting Party are often upbraided) knew not our State or Cause for
many years; who when he was informed aright, wondered extremely at our ill usage
at home, and worse representation abroad. I am I confess tempted to suspect
very great partiality and falsehood in Ecclesiastical Historians, both Ancient
and Modern; who have wrote with the Prejudice, Enmity, and Partiality of sworn
Vassals to a Party.

Were there a College of judicious, impartial, diligent, and able Historians
employed and encouraged to search out the truth of all mis-reported parties and
tell the world their best, as well as their worst has been told by others, it
would (I think) be an Ecclesiastical History far more desirable than any I yet
have seen. Quis dabit Thuanum Ecclesiasticum! After so long a Discourse on the
first Direction, Enquire as fully as your capacity and opportunity can enable
you.

II. If you would Enquire as Christians ought, to affect your hearts in order
to pray or praise God for the Church, Let your Thoughts be much upon the
Importance of what is reported to you. Weigh well what influence the New things
are likely to have on the good or evil, to the comfort or the discomfort of the
Church-Catholick, or any particular Churches near to or far from you. Nehemiah
no doubt weighed the importance of the News brought to him from Jerusalem; and
it was thought reasonable that Israel in Egypt on the first appearance of
Moses, should have considered what Importance it was to see such a Man as Moses
was, how likely he might be to bring them out. When the Edict for Israel's
return out of Captivity was first spread as good News to the Jews, none of them
resented it aright who considered only his personal advantage by it. They
prayed and praised God aright who looked into the Import of it to the whole
Church.

The News of the death of Ahaz, and Succession of Hezekiah is not enquired
after till the certainty of the Reformation of Religion, and the great change
for the better in the Church is looked into.

Julian's death was great and good news to the Church, and called for praise
to God; but those that considered not the influence it would have upon the
Church for good if God raised up a Christian Successor, must needs fall very
far short in their prayer and praise. When the News of the death of Edward the
Sixth afflicted the hearts of Gods children in England, and they mourned and
prayed as apprehensive of the consequences of the death of a pious Prince, a
Zealous Reformer, a Hearty Lover of Truth and professor of it; whilst he lay
sick these considerations quickken'd them of that Age to beg his life. So when
the sickness of Queen Mary was the News on the Stage, and her death would be
the safety of the Church; no wise Protestant enquired after the News without a
thought how much it would benefit the Church to lose her.

III. Who Enquires as a Christian in order to manage Prayer and Praise, should
I think Enquire of those who can, and will inform him the best, most truly and
sincerely of any News he knows. There ever have been, and now are persons who
abuse the world with false Reports: to amuse the more simple-hearted, they dare
coin Lies, and cry out Woe! Woe! or Peace! Peace! very unagreeably to the nature
and aspect of Affairs. If you have a Friend who dares not wittingly spread a
Lie, nor deny a Truth, and knows much of public Occurrences; thou may rely
somewhat on his word, thou may with greater confidence pray for the Church
in deep Distress, and Praise God for bringing it out of its Distress. When we
know the Church needs our Prayers, it is most agreeable to God that we do pray.
If when we praise God for the Church, in any particular, if afterward it
appear we were deceived by false Reports the Enemy scoffs at us, we should to
the best of our knowledge pray and praise suitably to the real state of the
Church. It was a common practice in our late Civil Wars upon a fight that both
Parties kept Thanksgiving Days, when 'twas not possible both should have the
Victory; this was highly Scandalous, and each upbraided others with Hypocrisy
Let us as much as in us lies prevent such a reproof; what we cannot be
Eyewitness of but must take on Hearsay, let us endeavor to be truly
informed, that both prayer and praises may be grounded on the Truth of things
as they proceed from Truth of Heart. Tragical Stories of Catholics prosecuted
in England when Garnet and some few others were executed for their unparalled
Hellish Powder Plot and Treason, set many a deceived Papist into Tears and
Prayers, who had they known the Truth of things would have praised God for
preserving their King and Country, condemned the Traitors and owned the Hand
of God in the Discovery of the Plot and punishment of Plotters. On the other
side, when bloody Men imbrued their Hands in blood of many Thousand Innocents
in the Parisian Massacre, and the Irish Rebellion, destroyed Innocent
Protestants, by Hundreds of Thousands, it is palliated with false Rumors to
lessen the Horror of the Fact, the Barbarous Cruelty of the Actors; as if a
few turbulent persons had been prevented, and fallen by the hands of
Self-Defenders. Which had it been a Truth, who could have found in their hearts
to pray for such? But with respect to all such bloody usage of the Innocent
Church in all Ages past, and in this of ours we will pray with the Psalmist,
Let God be known by the avenging the blood of his Saints, Psalm. 70.10.

IV. Who Enquires as a Christian, must Enquire with a Compassionate Affection
to the suffering Churches of Christ; or feeling their Wounds as living Members
feel the griefs and wounds of the Body in what part soever, preparing to help
the whole and bear his own part; as one who prefers Jerusalem above his chief
^oy, and can heartily rejoice in her prosperity; as one whose heart is wounded
with the same sword that wounds Jerusalem, and therefore bitterly bemoaneth,
and heartily prays for the bleeding Church. Give us an Nehemiah, who chap. 1.
ver. 4. sat down, and wept when he heard sad tidings, great distress, and long
desolations of Jerusalem. When you Enquire with Jeremiah's wish, Oh that my
head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears, Jer. 9.1. To weep for the
slain of the daughter of my people. Such an heart does as naturally pour out it
self in prayers, as it does into tears, and does as naturally rejoice with the
rejoicing Church, as it either wept or prayed before. When Christ foresaw and
foretold the doleful state that Jerusalem should fall into, he wept over her,
and so must every Christian weep over desolate and disconsolate Jerus^lem when
he hears her Sorrows, and prays for her Relief. Among Natural Relations few
there are who are not affected with grief for the Sorrows, and troubles of a
Brother, there should not be one among Spiritual Relations, but should with
hearty grief entertain the News of Sorrows and distress upon the Church, and
give God no rest till he make her a quiet Habitation, till he turn her Mourning
into Joy, till he take away the garments of her Widowhood, and cloth her with
the garments of his Salvation. When we hear the sad Tidings with such a Heart
as Josiah heard the Threats of the Law read in his presence; 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
ver. then we are like to do as he did to seek the Lord, to return to him and
make a Covenant with him to serve him that he may turn away his displeasure and
spare his people, Josiah heard the news, with a tender heart, a melting heart,
and sent to Enquire of the Lord, that he might know what was to be done by him
and his People, to prevent, or defer, or lessen, the threatened Evil.

V. When you Enquire into the present News that concerns the Church, that you
may the better pray for the Church, or praise God on behalf of the Church,
Enquire into the sins of the Church with an humble, mourning, and repenting
Heart: So did Josiah in reading the Law, and comparing Judah's former
behavior, how that people had sinned against the Law of God, and by this he
discovered what Sins.

1. Brought them into the danger of Captivity and utter Desolation.

2. Which were likely to increase their danger or continue it.

3. Were likely to lessen the deliverance expected and prayed for.

4. Which God has long born with, and at last pardoned that he might deliver a
sinful and unworthy people, though his own. This will in all probability bring
the Enquirers on their knees, to confess their own and their fathers Sins; to
be thoroughly apprehensive what need of earnest prayers that the Lord would
purge, pardon, deliver, and fully save his Churches. This will make them admire
the Lords long-suffering, justify his Righteous Judgments, and give him praise
due to him for leaving us a remnant that at last shall see his full Salvation.

VI. Would you as Christians Enquire into the News of the present times, the
better to manage prayer and praises for the Church? Enquire then what are the
effects of either Good and Welcome, or of Sad and Mournful News upon such as
are nearest concerned in both. Do Judgments awaken and frighten Sinners in Sion
from their Sins? Do the punishments of their Sins work them to deep
Humiliation, to public Repenting and Reforming? Do they return to the Lord
that smites them? Or are they as sinful, secure, and as fearless as ever? What
effect have Gods Mercies upon his Churches; Do his Mercies prevail with them
not to Conform to the present evil world but to be transformed by the renewing
of their minds. Does prosperity make them now (as it did between 47. Romans 12.1,
2.
and 60, make professors) worldly proud quarrelsom, unjust, persecuting one
another, irreconcileably divided one from another, enraged one against another
with that mad, unreasonable fury as to venture the ruining of the whole Church
to satisfy the revenges of a Party? When I think on these and such like sad
miscarriages I can see little cause given by the Church to Rejoice, but much to
Mourn. Here Is need of prayer, little matter of Thanksgiving in the deportment
of the Church. Indeed we ever ought to praise the Lord for his Mercies to his
people, but we still want that proper subject of praise to God which a
Reformed, United, Holy, and Heavenly Church would be to us. When unexpected and
stupendous revolutions make the generality of Christians to leave their sins
and return to God, and live more suitable to their Heavenly Calling, and love
one another as Christ commands: Then we have abundant cause to bless and
praise our God and continue our prayers for a people near to a full Salvation.

VII. Would you as Christians better manage your Prayers and Praises for the
Church on any New Occurrences? Then Enquire what is the Temper and Deportment
of the Churches Enemies. Are the Enemies of the Church,

1. Atheistical and Blasphemous, as he was who spakes as contemptuously of the
Lord of Hosts, as of the Idols of the Nations whom his Father had destroyed Are
they grown up to Sennacherib's height of Atheism and Blasphemy? Do then as
Hezekiah, Isaiah, and the people of Judah did. It is probable the Enemy is near
his fall, you near to the Answer of your Prayers, and the Church near to the
days of Thanksgiving and praise to God. Read the Story in 2 King. 18.1. and 2 Chronicles. 32. and Isaiah 36. and 37. chap. Atheism and Blasphemy are the Temper
and Deportment of the Antichrist, which we expect shall be destroyed; Rev.
13.1, 5. ver.

2. Combined and Confederate against the Church? So was Moab, Ammon, and
Amalek, Psalm. 83.6. to cut off the name of Israel: So did Gog and Magog, Ezekiel.
38. if that refer to Antiochus Epiphanes, or to any other already past. So will
the Gog and Magog mentioned in the Rev. 20. So has the Antichristian Papal
Kingdom done against the Church and its probable such a confederacy may be
again made against the Church, of God. Now when rooting out of Israel is the
end of the confederacy, the Church is furnished with many prevailing Arguments
to use in prayer for the Church.

3. Confident and proud, promising themselves an assured Success, answerable to
their preparations and resolutions. So Sennacherib; as I have done, so I will
do etc. and Gog and Magog, I will go to the unwalled Villages, and I will take
the spoil, etc. Ezekiel. 38.11, 12.

So will the pride and confidence of Babylon the Enemy of the Church; Babylon,
that will say, I sit a queen, I shall not be a widow, etc. Rev. 18.7. How
seasonably may the Church plead with the Lord to execute his just Threats upon
her, and bring her Sorrows on her in a moment?

4. Cruel and merciless, so was Babylon of old, so is Babylon at this day; this
ministered occasion to the captive Jew to pray, and move the God of Mercy to
remember their low and sad condition, and rescue them from those cruel hands
which delight in Blood. In the temper of those who have for many Ages wasted
the Church of Christ, and in these last three or four years have labored to
destroy it in France, most unparalled cruelty has been practiced upon the
members of Christ. How long holy and true? Rev. 11.

VIII. And lastly, Would you as Christians Enquire, in order to the better
management of your prayers and praises? then whatever News of Moment you hear
concerning the State of the Churches of Christ, be sure to your best knowledge
compare those News with these things that are signs of approaching deliverance,
and fuller Salvation from its own sins and self-created troubles, and from the
furious rage of Enemies.

1. Compare the state of the Church and your News of it, with the Divine
Providence over the Church in the like Circumstances in times past. Find out
some instance parallel to your present case in the Scriptures, and in prayer
plead it with God for the like, nay for greater help. The various cases of the
Church recorded in Scripture, are glasses in which we may see what troubles we
must expect; and Gods Providence to his people are exemplaries for us to
conform our Hope and Confidence unto. We may read his Deliverances, and in like
cases say, This God is our God, as theirs; he will lead us, preserve, and
deliver us, as them: Hence it is you do so often find the people of God
concluding and expecting Relief, because he did in like case hear prayer, and
give his people matter of praise in times past.

2. Compare the News you hear with the expectations of the Generality of the
observant, praying, meditating, Scripture-wise Christians. Consider well what
the body of these look for, whether good or evil. A single Man, or a few of
them, may easily mistake in their Conjecture; but it is seldom that the whole
body of them mis-time their Expectation. Deliverance out of Egypt was expected
by the best and wisest, by those who knew the promise to Abraham much about the
time that God sent Moses; and therefore it is observed of Moses that when he
vindicated the injured Hebrew and slew the Egyptian, that he supposed they
would have known him to be the person God had sent to deliver them. Near the
time of the return from the Babylonish Captivity, many of the Jews expected
their Deliverance; some that were very Aged could reckon the number of years by
their own Age. And Daniel searched into the nearness of it by Books, Dan. 9.2.
and we may now hope some great (perhaps the last and full) deliverance from
Antichristianism is near at hand, the generality of Gods people do expect, as
well as pray for it. Pray ye as they do.

3. Compare your great News abroad, when Kingdoms and States are shaken, with
the Threats that are denounced against the Enemies of the Church. Consult the
Word of God in this thing You may discover much of the Approaches of Mercy in
deliverance of the Church by the Executions of Threats against the Enemy. When
Moses and Aaron began to Execute Judgments upon Egypt, Israel might well
conclude their deliverance was near at hand, when the Rivers were turned into
blood, Israel might hope their God was coming to avenge their blood. The Jews
had good ground to conclude, when the Medes and Persians began the War against
Babylon, that their Captivity drew on to an end; and when they read the Man's
name who was the great Commander in that Expedition, Cyrus, by name foretold
the Deliverer of Gods Captives, and builder of the Temple, if then they did not
pray earnestly, and praise God heartily, they were inexcusably stupid, and
wanting to their own Release. It will much help you in prayer at this day if
you will look into the several Menaces pronounced in the Book of the
Revelations against Babylon, and observe which of them are in part Executed,
which are now Executing; which of the Trumpets we are under, and which of the
three woes are now Executing, etc. By this we might conclude the sounding of
the Seventh Trumpet near, and the Kingdoms of the World e're long are like to
be the Kingdoms of Christ.

4. Look to Promises made to the Church for her Deliverance, when you hear of,
or Enquire after any great News among the States and Kingdoms of the World,
among which the Churches of Christ sojourn, and among which the Saints of God
have and still do suffer. It needs not a particular proof that there are many
express Promises that the Church shall be delivered, that there is a fixed time
for the beginning, progress and full accomplishment of these Promises, that
their accomplishments shall be gradual, and such as will clear it self, and
though we cannot say when the full accomplishment to a Day or Month or Year,
yet by comparing Transactions and Occurrences with Promises, we may without
doubt discover somewhat of the Promise made good to the Church for which we
ought to praise the Lord, and all the rest of the Promises shall be fulfilled,
and for this we should earnestly pray to the Lord.

5. Compare the great News in the present Revolutions, with the Times God has
been pleased to make known to us in his Word. By this you may discern what
Encouragement, and awakening Considerations are given to us to pray and praise
our God for what is already done, and for what is doing, and what e're long is
to be finished. Here is work for learned Men, for Ministers, for Understanding
Saints. There are in the Revelations two distinct Numbers mentioned, which were
they clearly unfolded would enable us as very wise Christians to receive, seek,
and improve the great News that is abroad in the World.

The first Period is that Rev. 9.15. They, i. e. the four Angels bound at
Euphrates, i. e. the Turkish power were prepared for an Hour, and a Day, and a
Month, and a Year; i. e. for Three Hundred Ninety Six Years, and a very little
more. Now from One Thousand Three Hundred, in which Osman or Ottoman was
Elected King of the Turks, they have been the destruction of the Christians,
and were to be until Three Hundred Ninety Six Years were expired, i. e. till
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, which will in likelihood end their Empire,
and how great Hope of this now? This calls us to pray for their Ruin.

The second great Period is of the Forty Two Months, i. e. One Thousand Two
Hundred and Sixty Years; the time the Beast was to persecute the Church, and
then the Beast was to perish, i. e. the Papal Kingdom shall be destroyed. Now
these One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Years in likelihood began about Four
Hundred Seventy Five or somewhat sooner, and by this Account you may suppose
the News you still hear of both Turk and Papacy, will encourage you to hope for
a speedy deliverance of the Church from both.

It will be worth your while to read those Excellent pieces of Mr. Joseph Mede,
who wrote his Key of the Revelation above Threescore Years ago in Latin, I
cannot say whether it be Translated into English, having always kept my self
to the Latin Copy; but it is a Thousand pitties it should be confined to Latin;
a Book fit to be published in all Languages.

Of Mr. Jurien, Accomplishment of Prophesies, Translated out of French into
English.

Of a Nameless Author newly written in French, and translated into English,
Printed lately under the Title of A New System of the Apocalypse, etc.

I commend to you who would know the Importance of public News, How to pray
and praise God; on hearing it, How to wait for Deliverances, to read diligently
those Books in which are greater and better News than any Pacquets, then all
Gazzetts or Coffee-houses can yet afford to you, when you have read these Books
then Long for One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, or One Thousand Seven
Hundred; and hope if you live to that day to hear Mahometanism in the Turkish
Empire destroyed with that Empire. Wish for One Thousand Seven Hundred Thirty
Five, or One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty; and remember I do not pretend to
Prophecy, but I do dismiss with a conjecture that between this time and that
you will see great Deliverances to the Churches of Christ, and as great Distresses
and Judgments executed on the Antichristian Kingdom, it may be the total Ruin
of that Kingdom which was to last but One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Years,
and I think will have out-lasted that Period before One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Forty.

Quest. Wherein may we more hopefully attempt the Conversion of Younger People,
than of others? SERMON XVII.
OMnipotence can suffer no Difficulty, and that which is Immense, can admit no
Limits. Unto the Divine Power, all things are as perfectly Easy, as they are
certainly Possible. And the Heavenly Grace is fruitful equally, of all things
consistent with its spotless Purity. God Creator did strain no harder to make
this great World, than to make the smallest Atome of it: And God Redeemer
saves Mary Magdalens, as well as Virgin Mary: Very Sampson we are sure, is in
Heaven; Heb. 11.32.

But, In respect of Things themselves, and of their Appearances unto us, all
Effects be not of equal Facility, nor all Events to be alike hoped for. Much
easier is the bending of a Green Twig, than of an Old Oak: More hopeful the
cure of a Green Wound, than of an Old putrifi'd Sore. There is more to be done
to Convert a Man of Belial, than a Child of Belial; and to Convert an Old Man,
than any other Man: And we may justly expect better Success, when we call unto
God the Boys and Girls playing in the Streets, than when we call Old Men and
Women that can scarcely walk in them.

This I am desired to show: And I shall endeavor it in the best way, unto the
best end; to wit, the promoting of Early Piety. I have fair and full occasion
given me, if I can take it, from the Text which I therefore commend to your
Observation.

ECCLES. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth: Or, as some
read it, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy Choice. THE Words are a
Stricture of an Excellent Sermon. It was preached (as mine is to be) unto
Childhood and Youth. It begins at the Ninth Verse of the former Chapter, and
ends at the Eighth Verse of this. The Spirit of God preached it by the Wisest
of Men, and not the least of Kings. And has thereby taught a pair of Truths,
that I must wish better learnt.

I. The God of Heaven takes great care of our Children; and sends the Holy
Ghost unto Young Schoolboys, as well as Old Church Members.

We have him here in his Sacred Oracles, preaching unto Boys and Girls. Yea,
and Blessed Bishop Usher was neither the first or the last that was Converted
by him at Ten years of Age; or earlier.

II. The greatest Doctors need not think scorn in Christ's School to be Vshers;
and to teach Children the A B C of Religion.

Solomon thought not himself undervalued by it. And he that will look on it as
a Work below him, he ought to prove, that a greater than Solomon is he.
Immortal Luther preferred his Catechism above all his Works. But I return

This Sermon forepraised, consists of Two Parts.

(1.) A Dehortation from sinful Passions and Pleasures: Which is edged with a
most emphatick Irony, or Derision Pressed with a Threat of God's damnatorie
Judgment. And shut up with a cooling consideration of both the feathery
Lightness, and the winged Transitoriness of Youthful Enjoyments, Eccles. 11.9,
10.

(2.) An Exhortation unto the Choice and Prosecution of saving Religion. This
is in my Text: Wherein it is guarded with an admirable Prolepsis, preventive of
all shifts and procrastinations. And in the next Words and Verses, is
reinforced with numerous Arguments: Arguments, as many as Old Age has
Maladies, and as Unprepared Death has Terrors. And these all clothed with
Language, hardly to be matched in all the Sacred Writings. But I must confine
me to my Text, Wherein are obvious, 1. The Duty commanded to be done. 2. The
Parties commanded to do it. 3. The Time whe^ein they are commanded to do it.


The Duty is Conversion unto God. Inchoative and Progressive Conversing.
Entrance into, Continuance and Progress in, the State of Holiness. The State of
Reconciliation unto, and Communion with God. With God the Father, Son, and
Spirit; all jointly as One God; and each distinctly as Three Persons. Learned
Men do judge this latter to be here designed, by the Plural Number of the
Hebrew Word. All Interpreters acknowledge, that the required Remembrance
imports no less than the foresaid Conversion: And it will be evident, if these
things be considered Words of Knowledge, Affection, and Practice, do ever
connote one the other. Because the Faculties of our Souls, be like the Links of
a Chain; so united, that they go all together: Draw one, all come. Wherefore
when the Holy Ghost summons all, he uses to name but one of them. He never
commands us to Know, Remember, Love, or Serve God, but he commands us to do
them all. Now to do all these, is to Convert unto God: And to do less, is not
to Remember our Creator as he does require. Besides, The Connection of End and
Means is indispensable. Where any Means are required, it is certain the End of
these Means is also required. And it is very plain that the mere Historical
Remembrance of God, is but a Mean; Conversion foresaid, is the end of it: That
End, without which, the Remembrance of God, could only make us the more like
unto the Devil: Who indeed does never Forget, but does still Hate his Creator.
And no mind can bear the thought of Gods requiring such a Remembrance. It must
therefore be one, efficacious unto its End, that is here meant: Nor is it
unworthy of our Notice, That the word [Creator] here is big with Argument: And
such as carries Obligation unto the very utmost of the foresaid Conversion: For
it speaks God's Interest in us. Were we made by him? Then were we also made for
him, and are his; and not our own. It expresses also his speciality of
Interest in us; being (as we are elsewhere told,) he made us in his own Image:
If so, he made us unquestionably for his especial Service. It no less sets
forth his Preservation of us too; for who but he who made us, should have Power
or Will to maintain us? Briefly, it manifests his Power to destroy us; and his
very good Reason so to do, if we do less, after our Apostasy and his Provision
for our Recovery, than thus Convert unto him.

The Parties here Commanded to Convert, are the same as are nominated, Eccl.
11.9. Possessors of Childhood and Youth. Learned Mercer says all in a word;
Totam aetatem storeatem compliciitur.
By Childhood and Youth the Holy Ghost intends the whole flourishing Age of
Life. The same Hebrew word signifying Youth and Choice, we take them all to be
comprehended, who are yet in the best and most desirable forepart of their
days. All, from them, whose Morning does but yet dawn, to those whose Clock
has struck Twelve, and with whom its Noon. The little Creatures, whose
Twilight does but just serve them to read the first Principles of Religion. The
bigger Children, whose Sun is risen higher; and who can see, and are set to
learn secular Arts and Trades; and are capable of learning farther the Art of
Living unto God. The Youth eminently so called, whose Day is come on, and their
Light, Heat, and Activity much exceed Childhood. Nor exclude I them, whose Sun
is at hi^hest; and who are (as Men will speak) in their Prime; upon whom the
Afternoon begins to draw apace, though they yet retain Morning Vigor; and
preserve the Name of Young. The Original words of Age, are of so large
signification. And, as, on the other hand, all the Periods of breaking,
declining Old Age must be judged to come under the name of Evil Days: No
reason appears, why all the periods of the contrary Age should not be put under
the name of Youthful, or Choice Days. All young Gamesters are here called to
God. Children, from their playing for Pins: Boys from their playing for Pence.
Young Men from their playing for Money and Land: All from their several Games of
equal folly. The Games, in which invaluable Souls be lost; and the best that is
got, is but Yellow Dust. These Spritful, Sportive People are all, called to
play wiser parts; and lay out their various degrees of Strength, for the good
that in weak Old Age, (in the last and worst Childhood,) they will be as
unable, as now they are unwilling to seek.

The Time, wherein these Tribes are, all of them, commanded to Convert, is the
present. Remember has its Now expressly added. Forbidding, both your Delay
until the Afternoon of your Life-day; and your Delay unto any other Day, Hour,
or Minute of your Forenoon: Requiring that God's Tribute be paid as the Kings
Tax is, upon sight: And that not the least distance of time be admitted,
between your discerning, and your doing your Duty.

The Doctrine thus offers now it self:

Present Conversion, is the Duty of Youths and Children; even the very Youngest
that are come to Understanding. Or thus,

It is not for Young Men and Maidens, for School-Boyes and Girls, or very
Children in Hanging-sleeves, to put off their Conversion to God so much as a
Minute of an Hour.

This I shall competently demonstrate, if I make good these two Assertions, viz.

1. That these Young Folk are really bound to Convert presently.

2. That they are singularly engaged and encouraged by God so to do; and are
advantaged more for it than Older People are; and than they themselves can be
when they are Older.

And this I essay by these following very Intelligible and Invincible Reasons.
Hear them as for your Lives, O you Young ones, to whom I direct them? If you
hear aright, you live; and Joy will be in Heaven by and by for your new Birth.
If not, we despised Preachers shall shortly hear you accursing your closed
Ears: Exclaiming much like unto Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 42.21. We are verily
guilty concerning our Ministers; in that we saw the anguish of their Souls,
when they besought us to convert presently, and we would not hear; therefore is
distress, (and it may be remediless Damnation) come upon us. However in Duty
unto all, and in hope of gaining some, in God's fear I tell you:

R. 1 You are Commanded as truly as the Oldest People Living, to turn unto God
presently: Therefore it is your Duty. The King of Babylon would have Young Men
stand before him: So would the King of Heaven. He calls you, the Youngest of
you: And as expressly, and frequently, and more frequently, than he calls Old
People: For he calls you conjunctly with them, in most, or all Texts in the
Bible; and he calls you apart here, and in other Portions of Scripture by your
selves: Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye: It Is not turn ye, O ye Old decrepit
Folk: But Turn ye Indefinitely, that is, Universally, O ye of all Ages that
hear the Word. Psalm. 148.12, 13. Young Men and Maidens, and (as Old Men,)
Children, are called to Praise the Lord. [Nagnarim] little Children; the word
indeed is put for Joseph in Egypt, Genesis 41.12. and Gideons Son, Judge. 8.20. But
(as the Etymology carries it) it is most frequently used, to signify Newborn
Children, just shaken out of the Womb: And is very often put to signify
Children, just able to speak, and run up and down, 2 Kings 2.23.

You the Children of Believing Parents, have an Holiness of Covenant Relation
before you are born, 1 Cor. 7.14. You have an Holiness of Solemn Dedication by
and by after you are born, in Holy Baptism; Col. 2.11, 12. And, God requires
your Parents and Ministers to be dealing with you as soon as you come to
Understanding, for Holiness of Inhesion and Qualification. He says there is a
way of Holiness, in which every (Nagnar) little Child should go, and commands
us to Catechize and Train you up in it, Prove. 22.6. Ephesians. 6.4. Nor does he
allow you to delay the little that you can do for your Souls, any more than he
allows the Oldest People to delay any thing, that is in their Power to do. Now,
now, is his Word unto all Sinners, 2 Cor. 6.2. And Now, now, is his Word unto
you. His Command for Duty, and for Have of Duty, equally binds Children of
tender Years, and people of Fourscore. Remember it Young People; if you be not
commanded to come unto God, and to abide with him, there is no Sinner in the
World commanded to Convert, nor any Saint in the Church commanded to Persevere.

Need I tell you what an Authority his is, who does so command? And how
infinitely obliging? It Is such an one as cannot be told you by Man or Angel.
Should God command you to cut off your Right hands, or to run into the Fire, it
would be infinitely your Duty and Interest presently to do it For so Supreme
and Absolute is his Authority, that he cannot Command beyond his Right. And
it is an Authority so constantly governed by Infinite Goodness* that he cannot
command us against our Interest: So that it is as perfectly impossible for us,
to Obey him, and not benefit our selves; as to disobey him, and not hurt our
selves. In a word: Could you see this Sovereign Commander, but as Moses saw
him, Exodus 34 Or, as Isaiah, Isa. 6. or, as Job, Job. 42. Or, as St. Paul, Act.
9. Or, as St. John, Rev. 1. It would be no Question with you, Whether he were
to be obeyed or no? Or to be obeyed presently, or no. You would then think no
Obedience great enough; no Have swift enough; no Grief for Converting no
sooner, heavy enough. O how late did I love thee, St. Austin exclaimed. Twenty
years was I a bondslave to the Devil, cried Mr. Jo. Machin; who was Converted
in his Twentieth year. Remember not the sins of my Youth, says the Man, who
knew God's Heart better than to imagine that Youth was Lawless, Psalm. 25. But,

R. 2. You are threatened just as Old People be, if you turn not unto God
presently. Therefore it is your Duty. Sirs, as you are not Lawless, so neither
are you less under the Menaces and Threats of the Lawgiver than other Folk be:
Psalm. 9.17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell. It Is not said, Old Sinners
shall into the place of Devils: No, it is unlimitedly the Wicked, all of them.
Wicked Parents, and wicked Children; wicked Masters, and wicked Scholars, or
Apprentices: Every thing wicked, every Minute that you delay your Conversion,
that Threat stands ready charged against your Breasts. And who knows but God
will shoot it off this very moment, if you Convert not this very moment? Romans
1.18. The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Sin. It Is not said
against all Old Folks Sin. No, but without any restriction, against all peoples
Sin. And alas! for you; did you never with your own Eyes see God's Wrath cut
off Young Sinners? Did you never hear that in the Flood of Old, Children and
Young People were drowned with the Old? And in Sodom the Young and Old Folk
burned together. And that Bears tore in pieces Two and Forty little Bodies, for
mocking an Holy Prophet, 2 King. 23, 24. The Spirit of Christ in the Old
Testament says expressly, that for all your (unrepented) follies ^od will bring
you Young ones into Judgment of Condemnation, Eccles. 11.9. And in the New
Testament he does not tell you, that except an Old Body be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. No, but that, except a Man, any Man be born
again, he cannot. Now in Scripture Language, whatever is born of a Woman, is a
Man, though he be but a Span long. Vengeance must be taken on all that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel; all such must be punished with Everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: Nor
has Childhood or Youth any exemption; 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Come read ye then the terrible hand-Writings of God against you; so shall your
malepert Countenances fall; your Marble H^^rts break; the Joints of your Loins
be loosed; your Knees smite one against another; and your doubt be fully
resolved, whether present Conversion be your Duty or not. The Threat of a fiery
Furnace made by Nebuchadnezzar, made all the Country, save Three Children of
God, to bow to an Idol.

What would God's Threat of such a Furnace as Hell is, do, if it were but duly
considered? A Furnace of worse Fire; Fire of Extremity and Eternity. A Threat
of it by a Mightier Power, and more unchangeable Resolution. Were these in your
Eye, you would have much to do to hold your backs turned on God. Your
Conversion must be hastened, or your Unregeneracy imbittered. You must be
grievously tormented till changed. You would soon, for your ease, crave
Annihilation; or a contrary posture to that your Souls now stand in toward God.
You are fain to wink hard, and make your selves blind, to be so bold as to put
off your Conversion. Divine Threats would bore through your Hearts, if your
Lusts did not first bore out your Eyes.

Rises now any thought within you, that God is very hard thus to press upon
you? And to deny you the pleasures of Sin, for such a moment as is your
Childhood, and Youth it self? Besides what will follow to shame it, I tell you
here right. I have heard of a Devout Soul, that used to thank God for Hell. The
thoughts of it had done him so much good. So much good Service against Sin;
'twas to him a Wall of Fire against Sin; a worse Evil than Hell, the worst
thing in Hell. No sooner shall your Eyes be opened, to see what Sin is; and
what need you have of being by Fear driven from Sin; and what need of God's
Threats to make you fear it; but you shall straightway think God infinitely
kind in the earliness of his Calls, and in the terribleness of his Threats. I,
and your Hearts shall tell you, that the worst, and all that God threatens,
Omnis peccator citra condignum plectitur. Sch.
is vastly less than a minutes delay of Conversion does deserve from him.

R. 3. You have the Promises of as good things, as the Oldest People have, if
you do Convert presently: Therefore it is your Duty. The very Command of God,
without a Threat, would have made it your Duty. And so would his Threats, if no
one Promise had been superadded. But what think you that all do make it?
Consider ye here, God promises you Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Blessings:
And the very same that he promises to Converts of the fullest Age. And also
with as well confirmed Promises; as well confirmed by his Oath, and by outward
visible Signs and Seals; or Holy Sacraments, as the Church has long called
them. A Consideration, enough to make the least Intelligent Babies sing
Hosanna's! With Reverence to the Father of Mercies, I will say it; He has no
better or grea^er Blessings to give, than he does this Morning offer to bestow,
on all that will Convert this Morning. And on the very least of you all:
Neither will he think Eternity too long for your Reward, if you will not think
your Lifetime too long for his Service. A single Minutes aversion from it,
deserves Hell: But, such is his Grace through our Redeemer, that in the very
Minute of your sincere Conversion, he gives you a Title to Heaven. Young
People; whatever is done by Old Adders, pray do not you stop your Ears. I would
fain have this day to be your Coronation-day; so it will be, if it be your
Conversion-day. In Scripture dialect you are Kings and Queens, the first Minute
that ye be Converts: Yea, and more Glorious ones, than any Unsanctified Heads
that bear those Names. If the greatest Earthly Kings and Queens, knew the
Vanity of their Thrones, they would gladly part with them for one Evidence of
Interest at the Heavenly one. But, wot it: If any Convert upon the Earthly
Globe, did but know his Interest in Heaven, he must presently live by Miracle,
or die for Joy. So weighty is the Crown of Grace it self: So overwhelming a
Glory, unto us in the Body. You are ready to think, this is too good to be
true. But hear ye then the most sure word of Prophecy. Act. 2.39. The
self-same Promise is to Fathers and Children. The Covenant of Grace is but one
for both. Of the same Promises to them, as of the same Demands from them. And
ask ye, what in this Covenant is Promised? I tell you, 2 Cor. 6.16. God
promises to be the God of every Convert, 1 Cor. 3.21. That all things
(desirable) shall be theirs. Luke 15.31. It is his own Word; and as large an
one as Infinite Bounty it self can speak, All that I have is thine. Pardoning
Grace and Purifying is promised, Heb. 8.10, 12. An Inheritance Incorruptible,
reserved in Heaven, is promised, 1 Pet. 1.4. The Necessaries of the Life that
now is, are promised, enough to bear your Charge to Heaven. 1 Timothy 4.8. An
entail of Blessing on your dearest ones, is promised Exodus 20.6. Romans 11.28.

The Promises of all these are by God confirmed unto you in your Baptism. You
have them Signed and Sealed by God's hand before you know your right hand from
your left. So very early God encourages you to Hope in him, and Convert unto
him. By Signed, Sealed Promise, David, says, God did make him to hope when he
was on his Mothers Breasts: And was his God from his Mothers Belly. I can
understand him no otherwise, Psalm. 22.9, 10. God forestalled the World and
Devil; bound David so to him before they could come at him to entice him away.
Laid in that superabundant ground of Hope and Engagement unto all Duty,
beforehand, that as soon as he came to Capacity of Understanding, he should not
want for Attractives of his Affection to Convert and Cleave to God. And no
otherwise does God deal with you. You that know what your Baptism means, do
know so much. Now, no sooner do you Understand, Consent unto, and Profess the
Imports of your Baptism, but God calls you to his Holy Table. There to confirm
again and again with great frequency, all the foresaid Promises. O ye height,
length, breadth and depth of the Divine Munificence and Kindness! The Blessing
of Abraham, and every Iota of it, comes on every sincere Convert, Gal. 3.13, 14.

Speak Sirs; is God so ill a Master, that no offer can persuade you to return
unto him? Or, What is there more than God has offered, that you desire? Or what
further Confirmation and Ratification of his Promises than he gives, do you
crave? Or, (which is that I listen after;) will you now straitway turn unto
him? And here right, take on the Spiritual Robe, the Ring, and the Shoes! And
make Joy in Heaven and in this Congregation! I do hope, the Sun shall not go
down, before some of you are reconciled to God.

I have heard of a sinful Boy that offered to Convert presently, if a Friend of
his could make it out to him, that he should fare the better for it in his Body
and things of this Life. Which being done, he did Convert, and lived and dyed
an eminent Saint. I am aware there is much of that Boys Spirit in all young
People. And it likes me to try whether I may so draw you with the
Considerations that drew him. Hear then what I say to evince, that Conversion
is a very Friend unto good Health, Estate, Mirth, and Name; that the state of
Grace, is, in respect of these like the City Triocala; one of Water-springs
sweetest, Vineyards choicest, and Rocks most impregnable. That when you once
enter into Covenant with God, your wants will be of nothing but things worse
than nothing; and wherever you are lodged, the worst of your Wounds will be but
Flea bites: Or however ye are wounded, ye can never be hurt.

Health, is the Salt and sweetest Sauce of Life. It Is Sin, (Peoples own, or
their Ancestors, or both) that ordinarily is the working cause, as well as
deserving cause of sickness. The Spirit, and Grace, and Service of God, every
way make for Health. Particularly, Temperance and good Conscience are the most
ben^gn of all things unto your Blood and Spirits: And Converting Grace is not
it self without them. Go ask Physicians, they will tell you; Luxury and Lechery
do make them an hundred Patients, for every one that is made them by Fasting
and Prayer. No Precept of Christ is for any Duty, (Fasting it self,) unto
Sickness; if his precepts were observed, they would prevent more, than ever his
Miracles healed. If a good Man be at any time so weak, as to hate his own
Flesh; he is not led to it by God's Spirit. He ought indeed to beat it down,
and keep it in subjection to Gods Law; and from the Usurpation of sinful Lusts.
But withal, it is those Lusts he is to mortify, and not his Body. A Convert's
Body, is the Holy Ghost's Temple. And if so, be sure God will be kind unto it,
and his Servants ought to be duly careful of it.

An Estate, is a very useful Hedge about you; to keep off those many Proud,
that will be trampling upon all that is Poor. And nothing raises or keeps up
this Hedge, like the Grace of God. For it spirits you with Diligence which gets
Riches; with Humility, which hates superfluity, and saves what is got; with
Charity, which puts out all to Use; and unto that Lord who never pays less than
an hundred Fold in this Life it self. Sin is this Hedge-breaker. Rags are
mostly Sins Livery. When it is otherwise; and Sin makes you a Hedge, it will be
full of Snakes and Snares. In the fullness of sinful sufficience, you will be
in straits. And it is odds, but the Straits will be long, and the Fullness a
very little while. On the other hand, when a Converts Duty to God makes him
poor, it makes him rather a Martyr than a Beggar. For he thereby testifies
God's Truth; and through the Truth of God to his Covenant, he abounds in the
middle of his wants. For God does but prune his Vines; he burns up none but
Thorns. By Poverty he may undo Sinners, but he still enricheth Saints. Do but
Convert, you can never want what is truly good for you, while God has it. The
first Minute that a great Estate begins to be good for you, you shall have it.
And if you never have a Great one, you shall still have a Good one. Whereas
Unconverts can have but one of these two; a vexing Adversity, or (what is
worse,) a slaying Prosperity. One made of thick Clay, and deeper Cares.

Mirth and Comfort are the Honey and Sweetness of your Beings. Now Conversion
makes exchange, but no Robbery of these. There is in Africa an Honey lusciously
sweet, but the Bees gather it from poisonous Weeds, and it affects with madness
and Frenzy all that eat of it. He were no Thief that should take that sort of
Honey from you, and give the most wholesome to you. Conversion deals no otherwise
by you. Only what it gives, is more sweet as more wholesome. And the quantity
greater, as well as the quality better. For, observe ye, God forbids not any
one Kind or Degree of pleasures, but what is injurious. And what your very
Nature, Reason, and Interest do forbid you. I deny it not; Converts have
Valleys of Troubles; but then they have doors of Hope. They are in
Wildernesses; but God prepares them Tables therein. Dryest Rocks yield them
Water; and in darkest Dungeons they have shining Lights: They receive here
their Evil things, and have their Hell upon Earth; but then it is a Heaven upon
Earth, to think this is all the Hell they shall ever endure. And as for the
Ways he commands Converts to walk in, they are all of Pleasantness.
Mysteriously, yet most certainly, Godly sorrow is made a sweet thing. Every
Week almost have I People crying for more of it, than I think God allows them.
O Youth, scies cum fies; when thou art a Convert, thou shall feel what I tell
thee: No such Manna falls in Calabria; none falls from Heaven, like that which
feasteth the Camps of sincere Converts. The Convert state has of the Joy as
well as of the Purity of Heaven; Unthought of Delights: Such as don't Dye in
the Enjoyment. No, but be stronger than Death, as well as sweeter than Life.
Such as none of the Busybodies of this World ever found in the Mills of their
Business, or the Circles of their pleasure. Gilboa's Mountains had not Rain or
Dew. Unconvert Youths, have not Joy or Peace. Madness is theirs; Mirth they
know not. The three Hebrew Martyrs were merrier in the fiery Furnace, than
their Persecutor was in his Palace.

Good Name and Honor be your precious Ointments. The things that make you
cheerful in your selves, grateful and useful unto others. True, I would rather
my own Heart should commend me than all the World's Mouth beside. Next to Gods
own praise of us, the praise of a well informed Conscience, is the most
desirable. Nevertheless men's good esteem, good men's especially, is useful to
the foresaid purposes. And your Conversion is requisite thereto. For it is the
King of Heaven is the true Fountain of Honor; and he makes Converts, and no
others, Vessels of Honor. Honor, both below and above! Hypocrites know this;
and therefore for the praise of men they make an outside Conversion to God.
Converts do know this; and therefore by all the Reproaches of Men will not be
beaten off from the way of God. Plato could say, a wicked man was the Earths
vilest Dunghill; and a Religious one, its most sacred Temple. Under the Law, we
know that God would have those that touched a dead Man, to be held unclean
seven times as long as those that touched a dead Beast. So teaching, how
debased and defiled a thing an ill man is, more than a brute Creature. What
need words? who be those that you see earthly Potentates advance to Honors,
but their true, zealous, and active Friends? Turn you truly, zealously,
actively to the King immortal; he shall forthwith love you more than any of his
Angels can love him! And that love it self shall be a crown of Honor enough to
make all the Devils in Hell envy you; many of the worlds Hypocrites wish
themselves in your state; and all the Saints of God with holy Angels to prize
you beyond expression, and without Flattery. Every convert, whether he consider
it or no, has a name greater than of Earls and Dukes. God writes them that
give up their names unto him, Princes in all Lands and Kings and Priests unto
him for ever. Psalm 45. Rev. 1. Indeed the world counts them and tramples on
them as dirt: but God calls them and will make them up as Jewels. See 1 Cor.
4.13. with Mat. 3.17. The world's Dusts, be God's Diamonds. If then the best
things of both worlds can oblige, you see your selves obliged to Turn presently
unto God.

R. 4. You are convinced by your own Consciences, as truly as other people be,
that you ought presently to turn unto God. Therefore it is Duty Young people;
God's Commands, Threats, and Promises do oblige, whether you learn, and know,
and mind them, or not. Your Negligence and Unbelief cannot make them of no
effect; though to your selves, they may easily make them of very ill effect.
But when the kindness of God brings them unto your Knowledge and Thoughts; when
he sets Conscience which is his Viceroy, and Deputy in your Souls, to the
work; and makes it in your very Heart and Reins to Command his Commands, to
Promise his Promises, and to Threaten his Threats: what think you then? Believe
it, then he accounts your Engagement to be heighthened with your Advantage. And
he stands up for the Honor and Reverence of Conscience; the Honor of which he
takes for your utmost Honor of himself, and Contempt of which he takes for
your utmost Contempt of him. And, if now it appear that his Vicegerent,
Conscience, has been contemned; and you have sinned against the Edicts and
Commands thereof; your sin then is exceeding sinful in his Eyes. Then have you
broken many, yea all his Bonds; and must be beaten with many, yea the worst of
his stripes. The Conscience then which you would not have to be your Ruler,
shall be your Tormentor. Sooner or later, it shall.

What plead you therefore? Which of you all can look me in the Face, and say
that your Consciences are convinced of no such thing? And therefore whatever
Witnesses I do bring, your Consciences are none, unto the Truth of my Doctrine.
You are Men, and not Brutes. You are English people too. You live where the
Gospel shines. And I must tell you, I nothing doubt but the Holy Ghost beams in
Light very early into English Children. Light, convincing them of the Necessity
of Conversion, and of the Malignity of Procrastination. I would be understood
especially of the Children of Religious Parents; and such as are carried to
hear Ministers, that do understand and preach Christianity, and not scoff at
all Regeneration beside Baptismal; and do not dispense Stones for Bread, and
Serpents for Fish. But do give Babes sincere Milk; designing to Edify, not to
Amuse them.

All such as are like to Hear or Read my Labors, I would ask these Questions.
1. Think you not, that your Minds, Wills, and practick Powers, were given to
you to Know, Love, and Serve your God? 2. That you are bound from your first
Capacity, to exercise them thereunto? 3. That in order to your so Exercising
them, it is incumbent on you, to go learn the Gospel Covenant; and Accept it is
gracious offers; and Rely on its Promises; and Purpose, Promise and Vow, by the
Grace of Jesus Christ, from this time for ever to be the Lords? 4. That Haste
hereto is your Duty, and Delay is Sin, very manifold Sin? 5. That present
Conversion, will be unto the present Pardon and Mortification of all Sin; but
the Delay of it, will keep every sin Unpardoned; Mortify no sin, but give a
growing strength unto all? 6. That present Conversion is most Honor to God,
benefit unto your selves, joy to your pious Friends, etc. I am so far from
suspecting the more grown of you, that I have satisfactory grounds to believe,
that most of five six and seven years old, do, in their hearts, believe all.
Yea, and have their Consciences oft-times telling them these things, as Parents
and Ministers are inculking of them. As St. Austin said of Seneca, I dare say
of most of you, youngest ones. You make much of what you think nothing worth;
and declaim against that which you do above all prefer in your heart.

However can you choose but see, that you all who are convinced, are all
extraordinarily obliged to convert presently? It Is infinitely the Duty of all;
but yours it would be, if possible, more than infinitely. No man must tell me
Regeneration is a great Mystery, above Childrens reach; and therefore, for all
my Confidence, I do mistake them. Well I know, Regeneration is a Mystery, of
the greatest; but I deny, that the Necessity of it is a Mystery. That is of the
plainest principles. And I utterly deny, that so young Children as I have
named, are incapable of Understanding as much of Conversion, as God will accept
of from them. Know it, O little ones; Give God your All, he will not reject it
as little; give him your Best, he will accept it as little good as is in it.

But oh greater and lesser of you, hear and fear! Hell gapes for all delaying
Unconverts. And, of any, is likest to swallow up those, whose delays are
against Convictions. Peter Martyr says, St. Paul dealt more severely with the
Galatians than the Romans for the same fault. Because the Galatians had been
fore-instructed, and sinned against more Light. In all the Bible, though it be
an History of more then Four Thousand Years, we read of but one that converted
just before his Death. And we do believe that he also did convert at his first
convincing-call. Rarely do any savingly Convert, who do not upon their first
convictions Convert. St. Austin's stifled Convictions cost him dear. You that
will make so bold with Conscience as Spira did, should expect to roar for it
here as he did; or hereafter to fare worse than many hope him to do. They are
considerable Divines, who are not hopeless of his Salvation.

R. 5. You dye and go to Judgment, as ordinarily in your young days, as others
in their older. Therefore it is your Duty to convert presently. Come stand forth
the liveliest Spark of you all, and tell us if you can, that no body was ever
known to dye at your Years. Or, if there did, your Life is no such Vapor, your
Flesh no such grass as theirs. You know our Weekly Bills of Mortality would
shame you. And the great multitudes of Graves of all sorts every where. You do
know your own vanity in putting far from your Minds, the fatal day that cannot
be thrust off one Minute from your Persons.

It is an undeniable Truth; the day of Life and of Grace be not always of a
Length. And that if they were, that could be no warrant for delaying the work
of your Salvation. But one would think your Life's uncertainty it self, if
considered, should be of weight enough to press you unto have. And make your
wilful delay as impossible unto you, as it is Impious. For, you are not Papists.
And if you were; Prayers for you after death, you could not think regularly to
obtain. They do not hold it lawful to pray for any after their death, that do
not Repent and Convert in their Life. If you dye unconverted, your Fathers and
Mothers are taught to consent to your being damned. And the best Friends you
have, be forbid to pray for your being took out of Hell, or your being cooled
in it. You do not imagine, I hope, that a cold drying, God be merciful to you,
just before death, is a saving Conversion. If it were, we might say Heaven is
the receptacle of the most and worst of men And a great part of the Scripture
is took up in requiring our needless Labor. But, we are well sure of the
contrary. Though you ought to be told also; that if it were really so, yet were
your delay still a prodigious Folly. Being of your ability to utter those words
at your death, you are as uncertain, as of any thing. And you have little
reason to think, that your present Obstinacy shall not then be punished with
(at least) Impotency. Oh Death, of Judgment! come look you in the Faces of
these secure young Folks! Show your selves unto them; ask them, whether upon
sight of you, they can think two or three broken words preparation enough for
your Terrors? And that it can be time enough to think of peace with God, when
Pain will not let men be able to think three thoughts together of him. I knew
an excellent Person that used to Exclaim, O Lord, Pain will not let one think
upon thee.

R. 6. You, as much as elder people, are absurd in your promises to Convert
hereafter. Therefore it is your Duty to Convert presently. It is no easy thing
to ascend to the height of Atheism; in which alone you can dare say, There is
no God; or, None that you are bound penitently to convert unto: or, You will
not, whatever follows, ever Turn to him. Wherefore, you must be dumb or find
somewhat else to say. Very many I suspect to Harbor in them a dumb Devil; and
to say little to themselves about matters between God and their Souls. But many
there are, in whom Conscience will not be so easily muzzled. But will have
somewhat said, or else give no quiet. For want of all things beside, this is
said, Hereafter I will convert.

But who has bewitched hearers of the Gospel? Neither Law nor Gospel it self,
knows any way to Heaven by a delayed Conversion. The Law requires continuing,
the Gospel requires Beginning and Persevering; neither admit of Delaying. Gal.
3.10. Cursed be every one, (young and old) that continues not in all things
that are written in the book of the law to do them. Did you not only Intend,
but Begin; and that this present minute; not only to wish but to do; not only
some but all things of the Law? The Law for all this, would damn you without
Mercy, for having ever ceased to do all. Glory be to God in the highest, for
the blessed Gospel! And what says that? Why, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Thou art a sinner; a sinner grievous against
Law, Gospel, and Conscience. But what then? Believe now on the Lord Jesus; Turn
to God by him dutifully, God will draw nigh to thee graciously: But neither
there or any where is it said, If thou art not minded to believe presently, do
but promise hereafter to do it, thou shall be saved. And for your lives, young
People, consider (after Law, and Gospel) but Example and Presidents. When
Christ called his Disciples, all followed him presently. When the Three
Thousand were preached to, and were convinced, they were converted presently.
So the Jailor, Act. 16. converted straitway.

But look we a little into these your words, you will convert hereafter. Fall
they not into these two parts? 1. We will not Convert now. 2. We will hereafter.

First, You will not Convert now. That is, You will abide Rebels to God, Devils
to your self, Vassals to the Devil, Idolizers of this vain World, etc. This
you will do; though you know it Unjust, Unsafe, Unprofitable; Ungrateful, and
all that is worst. And though you would think it hard, if God should hold you
in such a state, against your Wills. Or suffer Satan to keep you in it by
force. This you will do, though you know if God should now use you like your
selves, (that is, like unreconcilable Enemies, even against his very
entreaties;) you must be sent quick to Hell. Though you know too, that every
sin you commit, makes Conversion harder, if ever it be made; and Hell hotter
for you, if it be not made. This ye will do; of Choice you will. And because
you will; without any Reasons that you dare to produce, or let mortal Men hear
you speak.

Secondly, You will Convert hereafter. Thy Power, Foolish Creature, thy Power!
Where is thy Power, thy Will, or thy Reason! Thy Power Man! Can thou live as
long as thou will? Or, can thou keep what ability God has now given thee for
Conversion, and make it more when thou will? Can thou save thy self from
Distraction? Delusions of Satan, etc. Art thou able thy self to supply thy self
with necessaries Natural and Supernatural, now and hereafter? Well: if thou
could, say plainly what is thy Will? It Is a Will, not moved by Gods Threats
or Promises to Fear or Love him. If it were so, thou would Convert now. And
if it be not so, what is thy Purpose, for all thy fair Promise? Do intend
hereafter to turn unto a God neither Feared nor Loved? Surely thou do not.
Think thou that thou shall hereafter Fear and Love him? I ask what should
make thee so think? He will for ever be the same God that now he is. Lay to thy
Heart, what I tell thee, If God be not just now worthy of Fear and Love, then
he never was or will be so; for he Changes not. In a word: What if thou had
both power to Convert when thou would, and had a real will to Convert
hereafter to God; where is the Reason, for staying without and against God all
the while? Thou art Servant, he is Lord; thou the Child, he the Father. When
Servants run away and will not return to their Masters: and very Children run
away, and will not come back to their Fathers! No, though the Masters and
Fathers call and send and promise; and do not need them, while they all the
while need their Masters and Fathers. All people conclude there is a cause of
this: and a fault must lie somewhere in one of the Parties. Either the Fathers
Unnatural, and the Master Cruel; or else the Child is a Viper, and the Servant
a Monster. Speak, Man, and say now: where is the fault, what is the cause that
thou can not yet be prevailed with to return to thy Lord and Father? Thou
must charge Him or thy self with most black and bloody faults. If thou lay'st
it on God, thou make him worse than the Devil; and proclaimest Satan the
better Master and Father of the two. If thou take the blame on thy self; I
ask thee, how thou can endure to see, hear, or think of thy self? A Creature
hating it is God, that is all Love and all Loveliness! No words, I think: no
words of mine I am sure, can express how Blasphemous, or how Self-condemned
they are, all, that put off Conversion to another time.

Alas, here is Life and all in the case. Conversion, is the Life of thy Soul,
Man. It Is Dying, till it Convert. It Is in Hell, till thou Convert. And is this
a fit word, I will then Convert hereafter? Thy darling Child drops into the
Fire, and thou promisest to come help it out to morrow. A very Kind creature
thou will be thought, and as Wise an one. Upon every account I may say of these
Promises of Turning hereafter, as was said of Judas, It had been better they
had never been born. And they be Judasses indeed; for though they Flatter and
Kiss, they Betray and Kill poor Souls.

R. 7. You, as plainly as elder people do dare God to damn you, all the while
you delay your Conversion. Therefore it is your duty to convert presently. I
have heard of a Man much accustomed to cursing in his health, that could not
utter any word but a curse in his sickness. Could not pronounce Yes or No; but
as often as he spoke, in several Months time, he bid God to damn him. A most
frightful thing, you will say! And yet, young people, I take you to be in very
like condition, all that delay your Conversion.

For the Language of Practice is, with God and Men, as significant as any! if
not more. If you practically bid God damn you, you are of the same spirit with
them who verbally bid him so do. And, if I know any thing, Delayers do bid him
in deeds, as certainly as any sinners do in their words. I appeal to your very
own thoughts in the case;

You are corrupted with sin and condemned for it. The grace of God calls you to
come take your Pardon and your Cure. But tells you, Now is your Time. Promises
you no Breath of Life, but what is in your Nostrils; nor any offer of Cure or
Pardon, after the first. In every Precept, requires present coming. Your
Delaying, therefore, is running the Venture. And that adventuring is plain
saying, Lord, if now, just now, be the time, I shall not take hold of it.
Though I Burn, I will not yet Turn. Thou do not promise to stay longer for
me; but, if thou will not, Damn and do thy worst with me. I would rather thou
would change thy Word. Blot [now in the days of thy Youth] out of the Bible:
Write [Remember thy Creator when thou art old and bedridden.] But, if this thou will not do, I will live under thy Threatening Wrath. And let its Vials fall on
me, if they must; I am set against present Conversion for thy Peace.

Let me add but this, Sirs! There is but one way possible to Hell; which is by
Sin. For nothing else can incense God against You. He cannot be in the least
displeased for ought beside. But, sin is that which he cannot but Hate and
Punish. Now to go on wilfully, delightfully, and resolutely in sin, is in
effect as if you should kneel down on your knees, and beg, and pray, with tears
in your eyes, that you may never be saved. But may be assured of a place in the
lowest Hell. The former, is interpretatively the latter. O madness beyond
compare! though not Admired, because so much Practiced.

R. 8. You, as well as Elder people, do hate and rob God, and imitate and obey
Satan, till you do Convert. Therefore it is your duty presently to Convert.
Young people, it may be you know not what you do; but knowingly or ignorantly,
these things you do do, till you Convert. You hate God; Interpretatively, you
hate him. By your actions, no other can be judged of you. If you desired to
express hatred of him, you could not take a more direct way for it, then that
you are in. For you walk contrary unto him. Comparatively, you hate him. If you
have any love to him, sure it is nothing, and less than nothing, in comparison
of that which you bear unto your idolized things and persons. Yea, Absolutely
you hate him, as an holy and just Ruler and Judge. In his Government you hate
him; and wish you could dethrone him. Deny it, if you dare. In his Children and
Friends you hate him. Their Company is an Eyesore and Burden unto you; his
Image on them you cannot bear. If it were otherwise, you could not but Convert
unto him. You Rob him, yea, and all his. You rob him of a Child, Christ of a
Member, the Holy Ghost of a Temple, the Heavenly Host of a Joy, the Church of a
Star, the World of a Pillar. And in the mean time, what do you? Why Satan in
the God of every unconvert Creature. Him in your Spiritual impurities, you
Imitate; in your bodily, you Obey; in both, you Serve and Gratify. Horrid
Servitude! Unendurable by Souls and jod less senseless than Plants, or less
wild than Brutes!

R. 9. You, as elder People, do out-sin Satan himself till you do Convert.
Therefore it must needs be your Duty to Convert presently. Sirs, muse on it.
It Is Sin, and the highest, to slight the richest offers of Divine Grace. You
that Convert not, do slight such offers as be the kindest God ever made to men.
And such as he never did offer unto fallen Angels. Ye do not believe, that the
Devils and damned ghosts in Hell would slight them so, if God should make the
same offer unto them. I mean, provided they were not under irrevocable
damnatory Sentence, and also final Obduration, and implacable Malice; the which
you are not under. You would then think, that, if the Gospel were preached unto
them, they would not say as you do virtually say, every day of the week: sc.
Lord we cannot hearken at present to thy proposals. We will, at some more
convenient season. Or, if thou will not wait that leisure of ours, then will we
go without thy offered Kindness. No, I suppose you would think, that they would
rather answer thus, which you have not yet done. Lord, our astonished Minds
never heard so ravishing News. Our enflamed Hearts cannot contain their Praise
or Thanks. We are not able to utter fast enough our Acceptance of thy Offers,
or our Consent unto thy Demands. We would celebrate the Grace of both; but who
can express things Infinite? The Eloquence of Heaven is exceeded by it is Kings
Mercy; etc.

Sirs; I must have you Convert presently, or must have leave to say, You are of
your Father the Devil, and the works of your Father you will do; and worse, if
worse can be. But though I thus speak, I would by no means have you think any
good to be in the Devil. Only I would have you know, there is much more evil in
your selves, than you are aware of. And that you can never know your Sin too
much, if you do not know your Savior too little. Wherefore I add,

R. 10. You, Young People, do sin beyond the measure of all Old ones that
Convert not, if you put off your Conversion. Therefore it is your Duty, and you
are singularly obliged to Convert presently.

This Reason gives me opportunity, to slide into the very heart of the case
propounded unto me. I do consider with whom I have to do, and shall thus
plainly and even rudely make my way.

The measure of their sins is far greatest, who do then sin, when the Lions in
the way of their Duty, be fewest, and their Helps be most, and their
Encouragements greatest. But,

Young People, not Converting unto God, have this to be said concerning their
sin: That it is committed then, when fewest Lions, be in the way of their Duty,
when their Helps to it be the most of any Men's, and their Encouragements
greatest. Therefore,

The Sin of Young People not Converting is far greatest. And so far from being
to be extenuated and thought less of than Old Peoples, that it ought to be
held, of the two the greater.

I shall suppose my Work here requisite to be only this, viz to show that Young
People have ordinarily fewer Discouragements from going about to Convert, than
Old ones have. And have most Helps than they; and greater Encouragements than
Old People now have; and then they themselves can have when they become Old. I
say, Ordinarily. For which Service, I advance these Seven Considerations.
Directing them unto your selves, my Young Folk.

C. 1. Your God is not so angry with you, as he is with Older People, and will
be with you, if you Convert not before you are Older. He is indeed angry with
you; for Sin Original and Actual. Go roll you in the Dust before him. Yet, know
for your Comfort, he is less angry, as I have said. For, these two Assertions
are most true. Sc. (1.) Every day continued in refusal of Subjection to his
Authority, and every wilful refusal of Obedience unto his Gospel Precepts, do
increase the Fire of God's Indignation. (2.) Every last day of Vnsubjection,
and every last Act of Disobedience, do increase that Fire of God's Indignation
more than the former. As for the first, though it be Self-evident, and granted
of all Men, let me add this. A Command, supposes Authority in the Commander,
and Subjection in the Commanded. Obedience unto a Command supposes
Acknowledgment of Authority in him that gives, and Subjection in him that
receive it. God is Sovereign, we are Subjects. He first publishes his
Authority, and requires our Subjection: Then enacts Laws, and requires our
Obedience. Our Orderly Duty is, to submit us first to his Authority, and own
him for our God and King; and then to perform his Commands, for expressing that
Submission. The Sin of the World that incenses God, is denial of this
Submission to him, and of this Expression of it. Of this Denial, the first rise
and beginning kindles his Wrath; but the continuance, against his means of
reducing us unto Subjection and Obedience, does more than continue it. Even
greatly increase it. Nor is it wonder, being that the sinful Denial, continued
under such constant means aforesaid, daily increases. And accordingly, barren
Trees have it counted to them, how many years they have cumbred the ground. But
then, as to the second particular: Therefore does every last days Unsubmission
and Disobedience more exasperate then the former, because they are against more
Means used, and Patience exercised, then the former. And they are as it were a
Justifying, and an Approving of all former Sin also. A virtual Acting over of
all again.

There can therefore be no doubt but the degree of God's Displeasure is less
against you, than against those who have many more years Disowned and Disobeyed
him. And you have less reason to fear the making of your Peace with him, if you
go seek it, then they have. And more ground of hope to get it made now, then
you can have hereafter if you delay. For you to say, I will not seek my Peace
till I am Older, is as if a Condemned Man should say, I will not go try to get
my Pardon, till the King is a hundredfold more angry with me than yet he is.
Matchless Frenzy!

C. 2. Your Enemy Satan, has not so much Power over you, as he has over Older
People; and will have over you, if you Convert not before you are Older. Sirs,
Satan is an Enemy that you must Conquer, or be Destroyed by. His Power to
Deceive, is very great. It was so from the beginning; and shown in Paradise to
be so, when he slew all Mankind in their first Parents. Besides, it is now much
greater. In more than Five Thousand Years, he has learned much. And being now
an Old, he is a more Subtle Serpent. But it is not his Natural and Acquired
Power, without that which is Judicial, that is the matter of our just Fear. The
Lion in Chains scareth no Child: It Is the Lion let loose that frightens the
Town, and does the Mischief. All Satan's Power, is no Power as to us, if God
does not judiciously let him loose on us. God, as he is more or less angry with
Men, holds up Satan in a longer or shorter Chain. Being less Angry with you,
Young People; he suffers him not to fall upon you with such strength of Fraud
or Force, as upon Old Transgressors. So much reach at you God does allow him,
as makes needful your Watching and Prayer, and Wariness of his Devices. But
God allows him so very much less at you, than at others, that he may be
repelled more easily by you, than others: And you have less reason to doubt of
Victory when you fight against him, than others have. And may be certain, that
if you abide Unconvert in your sins, and go on to incense God more against you,
you shall then have a much more powerful Enemy of him than now you have. Now,

Would any General of an Army delay to Fight with his Enemy, till he himself
were Weaker, and his Enemies stronger? O do not any of you say practically, I
will not yet fight for my Translation out of the Kingdom of Darkness; I will
have the Prince of Darkness get an Hundred times more forces against me, and
more advantageous ground, before I will encounter him How kind to Satan, are
Delaying Children?

C. 3. Your Hearts, which are your Rulers under God, be not yet so bad within
you, as Old Peoples be; and as they will themselves be sure to be if you now
Convert not. Your Hearts, the Lord show it you, are they that do most under
God, for your Conquering, or your being Conquered by Sin, Death, and Hell.
These Hearts of yours be blind and foolish, proud and perverse enough; they be
sufficiently Unteachable, Untractable, Unfaithful. The Lord humble you deeply
in the deepest sense of it. But still, they be not near so bad as Old Sinners
Hearts be. Believe it, there is a sense, in which Nicodemus his words be smart:
How can a Man be born when he is Old? God has in his Offense, departed farther
from Old Men than you. Satan in his long stay in them, has hammered them into a
greater hardness than he has yet brought you into. Actual Sins, have put more
strength into their Habitual, than into Yours. And they have more Milstones
about the neck of their Souls, than yet are about yours. Insomuch, that you
have as much the better of them, as those who have in War a less unqualified
Commanded, have of them whose Leader is most blind, most Lame, and most
Lunatic it self. Your Work is more easy, and your Encouragement to expect
Victory is more ample, than Old Sinners. And both such, as they will not
continue unto you, unless you now Convert unto God.

Which if you do not, you do like Soldiers that should say, We will have no
Battle with our Enemy as yet: The Leader, whose Conduct and Action are our Life
or Death, will shortly be Stone-blind, and under the Dead Palsy. And we will
stay till he be so, before we employ him. O plotted Self-Destruction! O Chosen
Ruin! If this Consideration go for nothing with you, ye are Blind against
Sunshine, and Deaf unto Thunder.

C. 4. Your Bodies, the Instruments of your Souls Action, be not yet so sorry
as Old Peoples be; and as yours will be most certainly, if you Convert not
presently. Sirs, An Unsanctified Body is a Souls Unknown Enemy.

A Trojan Horse, a Pandora's Box, a Forge of Mischiefs. Your Young ones are
such, that (almost proverbially) the Blood of Youth is Satan's Tinder and
Match. It Is seen, you have warm Bosom for all Snakes. Legions of Devils are a
less formidable Army, than your own five Senses unhallowed. Beware of the
Flesh. But withal, know ye, an Unruly Horse is more desirable than a Dead one:
He may be Bridled, and made serviceable. It Is better with you, than Old Folk;
if you will but well use, that whereof they want the use. Health, and Strength
in general; reading Eyes, and hearing Ears, and walking Feet in particular. Old
Age is it self, say some, a Disease; a very Hospital of all. Many, are deprived
of the means of Grace by Blindness and Deafness. Most, do use them with much
pain and great disadvantage. None have so few Clogs about them as you. So that
great is your advantage for working out your Salvation. Your Labor is less to
read or hear an Hundred Sermons, than theirs to hear or read one. And to go
Twenty Miles for Advice, than theirs to go Twenty Steps. Being that Sin, and so
Death, came in at the Eye and Ear; and it is God's Will to drive them out at
the same; and to transmit the Wisdom that saves our Souls, through those Bodily
Senses; these are not inconsiderable things.

O that you had heard, but what I have done, of poor Old Creatures Outcryes!
Cursing the Courses and Companies that devoured their strength. Wailing with
sighs and tears, their disability to Read; difficulty of hearing; and utterly
lost faculty of Remembering. The Memory ought to cut my Heart; may the Notice
sway yours! If you will yet put off your Conversion, this is the Language which
that Delay utters; I have a work given me to do that is for my Life Eternal. I
have yet Eyes, and Ears, and Hands and Feet. I have Ease, and Strength. But
these all have Wings, and will shortly fly and be gone as others be. When gone,
I cannot work, or, if I do, it must be in the Fire as it were. Nevertheless, I
will not set to my Work till my Sun and Moon and Stars be darkened. I will not
stir one Foot for Heaven, till my other Foot is in the Grave. If my Peace be
ever made with God, it shall be even at the Graves brink. When I am just come
to the Mouth of Hell, and can scarce open my own Mouth to deprecate it, I will
bestow a wish for Heaven, if that may possess me of it. Senseless Creature, that
want nothing of a Bruit, but Hair, and two Feet more!

C. 5. The World, another back friend of yours, has not yet lain so many Loads
on your backs, as upon Old Peoples; and as it will lay on yours, if you live
longer, and live under its Power and Vnsubjected and Vnconvert unto God. This I
speak to you especially of the Younger sort, Children, and next to Children. I
hope you have heard what an Enemy the World and the things of it do make, to
Conversion and Sanctification. Read the Texts in the Margent. Read
Ecclesiastes; 1 Jo. 2.15, 16. Jam. 4.4. Matthew. 6.24.
a whole Book of Sacred Scripture took up in warning us against this said
Enemy. More or less Woe is to every Dweller in it, because of the Avocations,
the Distractions and Interruptions of this Old Adam's World. But here also you
have the better, ordinarily of Old People. For themselves, or (their more
Beloved Selfs,) their Children, they are swallowed up of Designs, Bargains,
etc. Gains and Losses make their Souls a Sea of tempestuous Cares, knowing
little calm or quietness. You are yet free, comparatively; and Unladen. You may
Contemplate and Act for next World, without the weights of this depressing you.
And go to Jesus Christ, without Farms, and Oxen, and Wives haling you back.
Haling you, as they do hale away multitudes before your Eyes; and as they will
ere long be haling your selves.

If now ye will not come unto him, that ye may have Life; if you will not now
begin running your Race toward the Redeemer, what do you do? Truly just as a
Man, that is to run for his Life; but cannot be persuaded to stir a foot, till
he has gotten many more Sheets of Lead upon his back, and many more Fetters
upon his feet. Rise Sinner, rise? If not, these Words shall be thy Souls
Eternal Loads.

R. 6. The Providence of God lends you more Physicians and kinder ones, than
it does lend Old Diseased Sinners; and then it will lend you, if you live much
longer. Especially, if you live Vnconvert. True it is, Gods Love and Mercy unto
all, is wonderful. God sends abundance of Helpers unto all poor sinful
Creatures. Every Baptized Professor, is obliged to be his Brothers Keeper. All
Believers, are bound to be Charitative Ministers unto each other, Ministers of
Reproof, Counsel, Comfort. In Christ's Body, no Member should be all for
himself; or for less than the good of all. But a double Portion of Spiritual
help, is ordinarily vouchsafed unto you Young People. Of Soul-Physicians, you
have more than two for Old Peoples one. They have Ministers; so have you, or
may have if you please. They have Religious Friends, so have you I hope. But
then you have Parents which they have not: You have Masters and Tutors, which
they have not. And be it considered, the Aged People have few or none that will
deal so boldly with them, as almost all deal with you. Ministers and Friends,
do mostly either fear to offend, or despair and think impossible to benefit old
Sinners, with any Counsels. They think it the same thing to give Advice to an
Old Body, and Physic to a dead one. And if they give any, it is as cold as
Elie's rebukes. But both come more courageously upon you. They less fear your
Displeasure, and more hope your Reformation. And therefore with more frequency
and acrimonie deal with you. Besides, your Parents Love, and your Masters and
Tutors Interest, and the Comfort and Credit of both, do engage them to follow
you close. And to do more than Ministers and Friends are ordinarily capable of
doing, for the Conversion of your Souls. Upon all hands, it is best with you.
You have the help of most Physicians, in number; and of all the number, you
have most of their help. Incomparably more than Old Folk have; and then you
must look to have in your evil days approaching.

But you will still delay, will you not? I doubt many will. And will, as 'twere
in so many words, show us this is their mind. Sick they think themselves;
Sinners, they confess it, they are. A store of Spiritual Physicians now they
have, they own it; But of these Physicians and Helpers, some will by and by
die; others decay; and none be so helpful hereafter as now. Nevertheless, Live
Soul or Dye, they will not till hereafter engage in any serious care of their
Spiritual Cure and Recovery. They will stay till they have Helpers fewer in
Number, more Chill in their Affection and Care, and less capable of taking
pains for their Salvation. Sad Infatuation! A wondrous Will to get out of
Probability, unto bare Possibility of Life; if so much!

C. 7. You have special Encouragements to Convert now, from all general
Observation and Experience; such as Old People are past, and you will e're long
be past. I must remember my bounds; and therefore will name but three. One
would think they should be enough to move any thing not twice dead. And to pull
out your Folly, unless it be extraordinarily bound up in you. Young People,

1. God Regenerates the most of his chosen in Early Years. If that Early Risers
were mostly the Men that grew Rich, and lived long in the World, who of you
would not leave lying late in Bed? Truly, They that rise in the Morning of
their Days, and turn unto God, be mostly the Men that ever overcome the Devil.
They that continue in the Bed of their security late, are in danger of having
their Bed in Hell for ever. A Young Saint, and an Old Devil, is a Proverb,
which was certainly hatched in Hell. God and Men, break Colts when they are
Young.

2. God does Regenerate most easily, those Souls whom he turns early. Know
it, Sirs; Pain is necessary, thank Sin for it. Had not Sin entered, never had we
known Pain, Grief, Fear, or Shame. But now there is a very natural necessity
for it. Sin is a painful, grievous, fearful, shameful thing: Nor can I see, how
the Honor of God's Justice could possibly have excused Repentance Spiritually,
as well as Naturally, we are born in Sorrow. Both sorts of Children cry before
they laugh. All New Creatures, be first Mourners. But, all are not in the same
degree so. Nor are all equally long sowing in Tears, before they do reap in
Joy. Some Sinners are Launced more deeply than others; and God keeps open the
Wounds of some of his Children longer than others; as he pleases. But
ordinarily we see young Timothies be not struck down like Saul's: Or if they be,
they be not kept so many days in frightful darkness.

And is this a small thing? Think of it, and say, If my Body had a Sore, of
easy and speedy cure if the Surgeon were applied quickly unto; I should not
suffer a little matter to hold me from him. My Soul, and Body, is all Spiritual
Wounds. God alone can heal them. Those he does heal easiest and soonest they be
of first Comers, most commonly. Tardie and late Comers are healed rarely, and
so as by Fire when they be. What should ail me? Why should I not presently
arise and go to my Father? Why should I buy dearly God's hardest blows.

3. God does honor Singularly, and Reward with Grace extraordinary his Early
Converts. If any, they be those that have two Heavens; Great Service, and Sweet
Assurance on Earth, and greater degrees of Glory also than others above. Most
Divines think so. Late Converts too much imitate the Indians; that eat the Honey
themselves, and offer but the Wax unto their Deities. They give God but the
Bran of their Life when Satan has had the Flower, as some have expressed
themselves. None so much honor God, and none are so honored by him, as those
who give Honor to him, and accept it from him in your early days. Infer you
then, my Young Folk?

You must Convert presently, or delay with Loss: Even with certain danger of
Hell, and certain loss of much of Heaven. And may I not now suppose the
Objections of your minds against my Doctrine, in good measure removed? O that
the Oppositions of your Wills were but as much overpowred! I conclude that your
own Hearts do tell you by this time, (unless they be unpenetrable as the
Leviathan's Skin,) Conversion is your Duty and Wisdom;
Conversion this very Minute made, is so;
Conversion now made, is most Easy, most Hopeful, most Honorable;
Conversion therefore is, of all People, most unexcusably neglected, and most
encouragedly attempted by you.


Yet before I make Application, I would prevent or remove a pestilent Exception.

Too many may be ready to say, I talk as if Conversion were a Man's own Work:
yea, every Child's it self. And so Grace and Glory were ve y cheap things. Not
the Peculiarities of the Elect; but every Bodies that will but lift up their
hands, and take them!

I humbly desire to speak agreeably unto the Holy Scripture. Thence I learn
Conversion to be both God's Work, and ours, and our Childrens too. Isa. 27.12.
Thou have wrought all our Works. It Is God's Work, and he promises it, Jer. 31.
It Is ours, and he commands it, Ezekiel. 33.11. It Is his, we say, as to its Rise;
he gives to Will and to Do: It Is Ours as to the Act it self, we do it; and
move, by him moved. The Holy Word, is the Ministration of the Holy Spirit.
Gospel Light, is accompanied always with some Spiritual Strength, and Ability
to turn toward God. It is true that only special Light and Strength from the
Spirit, avails to through and effectual Conversion. But the lesser and common,
are Talents given to profit with, and may be put to use. And when they are so,
(though God be not bound to give the special,) yet the goodness of his Nature
and the Usage of his Grace make it expectable. Especially considered conjunctly
with the general Promise of it unto some Seekers. All I add is this: Act you up
to the Light and Power you have received, not daring to dream that Conversion
is not the Duty of Children because it is the Work of God. And let not Satan
make you think God a Tyrant in's Laws, or a Niggard of his Aids; until you have
diligently used all his Means prescribed, and implored his Blessing requisite,
and failed of his Grace when you have done.

We are indeed certified from the Divine Oracles that God has his Segullahs.
His peculiar chosen ones. We ascribe to himself and no other, the Grace that
makes us to differ. But it is also made as certain, that God is not wanting to
the happiness of any Souls. Unblemished goodness governs his absolute
Soveraigntie it self. His Decrees be as firm, as though no man had a Liberty of
Will: Yet we are all at our Choice as truly as if there were no
fore-determining Decree. Vult Deus nos libere velle. God suffers Men to make a
free Choice. And gives all Men that which they do supremely and finally choose.
He gives not to his Elect either Grace or Glory, without their Knowledge, and
against their Consent: And he does not utterly desert or destroy others, till
they harden their Hearts, and choose Darkness rather than Life. Till they hate
their Savior, and Love Death. Prove. 8. ult. The culpable cause of Men's
Damnation, is certainly stark wilful Unconversion. The outcryes of every Sinner
in Hell, are of his own Will. I offer Grace and Glory but at Christ's own
Rates, to my best Understanding.

I am bold to call Young People thus to think. How justifiable would God be in
their Destruction, if in their Childhood he had took them up to Heaven, and
down to Hell. Had shown them both, and offered them their choice. Advising them
to choose Heaven and Conversion the way to it. Assuring them, that Hell and
Unconversion should never be theirs against their Wills. And they should never
here or hereafter be able to cry out, O Lord, fain would I have Grace, rather
than all the World. I cry, pray, wait, do all, and the utmost I can, and yet
thou will not give me my Longing! Grace and Heaven are my Choice, but thou
denyest them to me. The Truth is, and one day will appear: God does all this in
effect. In his Word he sets Heaven and hell before you, shows you what they
are. Bids you choose whether you please. Advises you to choose the best. Points
out the ways that lead unto both. Assures you that the worst home and way unto
it shall never be yours against your Wills. And if you long for the best home
and way, you shall not loose your Longing. In a word; assures you that his
Arbitrary Will shall never be your Ruin, if your own sinful Obstinate Will be
not. Charging you of all Enemies to beware of your selves, and of all in your
selves to beware of your Wills.

These your Wills are inaccessable and unmovable, but through your Minds. Unto
which I therefore proceed to commend some of the Truths, which result from our
preceding Discourse. Young People, you are those to whom I continue speaking;
and whose regards I call for unto these Ten Inferences. Even present regards,
now while Time has Opportunity, and you have Ability. Delay never knew Weal;
and have unto God never knew Woe. Never did the Youngest Saint lament his being
one so soon. But every true Convert, all his days lamenteth his Converting so
late. And, if they have any trouble in Heaven, it is this, that they did not
come sooner into the way of Heaven. If nothing can make you know what Delays
Poison is, but the Draughts of it; and what the Swords be, but the Stabs of
them; you must take your way, and God will take his. And, Ministers and Parents
must be for God's Glory in your Damnation, if you will not be for it in your
Conversion. But come, I have an Hope, and very Confidence I shall prevail with
some of you. Yea, all: Save such as say in their hearts, God is not; God cares
not; God cannot destroy Vnconverts. Yea, and I would hope to prevail with such
too, if I could make them but look upon the Frame of the World, look into the
Holy Bible, and look what is become of the most daring Atheists of former Ages.
This would loosen the Cords of Death and Hell; and make even such Spirits less
furious downward, and more tractable upward. However I declare it, I cast the
Net, in a sweet hope of a good Draught. I do not believe my Prayers and Pains
will be all lost this time. Some of you will so suck the Pipes, of Knowledge
now, that they will draw the Breasts of Mercy for ever. Some will drink in
these following Truths, and drink therein their Souls Everlasting Health.

Inference 1. Your Vnconvert State is a miserable One. It Is not requisite to
ones being a Miserable Creature, that one should be an Old one. Young ones that
Forget, or Unconversively remember God, are truly miserable as the Devil: Yea,
and are much liker to the Devil, than wicked Old People. For Satan is not a
cold, dull, feeble, decrepit, unactive Enemy of God. No, he is as Youthful
Sinners be, spriteful, quick, strong, full of activity, and unwearied: A Young
Sinner is the Devils most lively Picture. You see in my Text, your State is one
that God judges an ill one, and calls you out of it, and charges you to make
all possible speed out of. Many wish themselves in a State of God's Wrath, when
they say, Oh that I were in but so good a Condition as this or that Child! They
know less than many Catechized little Children, who know not this: Such is an
Vnconvert State, that Christ himself cannot save a Soul in it. The Lord makes
you all to feel, the words that I can make you but hear. My Father in all his
Letters to me used to write, O Child, better never born, than not New Born.

Infer. 2. Your Miserable State, is one Alterable. Would God call you out of
your damning forgetfulness, if there were no return possible? Would he call you
to a saving Remembrance, if there were a fixed gulf, and unpassable between you
and Blessedness? It Is sin and madness for the worst of Sinners to say they are
Reprobates. No Man alive can know himself to be so. And the worst Man Living
must make himself still worser, by concluding so. Young People, your
Unconversion hitherto, has kept you unreconciled to God but hitherto. You are
not now Unreconcilable, if now ye be not Obstinate and Vnperswadable. I praise
him, who when Satan tempted him to despair of Salvation, thus answered: For
shame Satan, say not there is no hope of me; thou might be saved thy self if
thou could Repent!

Infer. 3. God is willing your miserable State should be altered, and that
speedily too. Would he otherwise call you, and so call you, as you have heard?
Or, can you tell what should make him unwilling? True, he needs you not: But
you need him, and he delights in Mercy, if you will believe him. Forget not
this, of God and his Son. God swears by his Life, he desires not a Sinners
Death. Consequently, he must desire their Conversion. And as for his Son, your
Blessed Redeemer; as he shed his Blood to save Sinners, so he sheds Tears over
them when they refuse his Salvation. It Is Satan, not God, that is the Herod
desirous to slay you, Children! And be confident of this; if he now moves you
to Duty, he surely means you Mercy.

Infer. 4. You your selves can do more toward your Conversion, and perfective
Alteration, than all the World can do. This is hence gathered; from God's
setting his Ministers, and your Parents, and Friends all, upon your selves. He
bids us not go to any others, and tell them they must go new form your hearts.
No, but charges us to apply unto you, and call on you to make you new Hearts,
and new Spirits, and Convert unto him, and Remember him to right purpose. It Is
therefore certainly most in the power of your own hand, next to Gods. God has
committed you more to your own keeping, than unto any mere Creatures. And given
you more power over your selves, than any other Creature has. Wherefore,
neither can best Angels benefit you, or worst Devils injure you, as you can
benefit or injure your selves. And it less concerns you daily to enquire, what
all the World has done for you, or against you: Then what you your selves have
done for or against your selves. Would you know what is the just extent of this
Power; what it is you can do, and what it is you cannot do toward your
Conversion? Others have answered more largely; I say this briefly, Try and you
shall know. Do all the good you can, and you shall know what good you can do.
To lie idle, and do nothing, because you know not how much you can do, were a
folly, like Ezekiels Infant wallowing in its own Blood.

Infer. 5. Your Tempters from present Conversion, are Hells black Legion. I
infer it thus. It is only Hell that opposes Heaven. Devils, that fight against
the Command of God. Black Devils, that withstand his express Commands. But it is
his Command, and most express one, that you now presently do Convert. Wherefore
as often as any man disswades you from it, tell him, you find by his Lip, he has
a Cloven Foot. And you see Satan is grown idle and impudent, and leaves off the
trouble of transforming himself into an Angel of Light! Tempting Company, is
the openest Mouth of Hell in all this World!

Infer. 6. Your way unto Salvation, is one and the self-same with other folks.
If not, why should it be prescribed in the self-same words, that the way of all
others is prescribed in. Sc. Remembering God. Deuteronomy. 8.18. Jer. 51.50. There be
many about you, that will show you young people a shorter cut to Heaven. And
there is much within you, that will catch at it greedily enough. But the Lord
give you to receive your sight; you will then as easily believe there is one
God for you, and another for old people, as that there is one Religion for you,
and another for them. Verily there is but one narrow Gate for the Entrance, and
one strait Way for the Progress of both of you. Blessed are both that find it,
Miserable both that miss it! I know not how he himself shall be saved, that
prompts young people that they may be so, without Understanding, Owning, and
Living sincerely according unto their Baptismal Engagement! May the weight of
Mat. 5.19. never lie upon my Soul dear unto me?

Infer. 7. Your greatest Danger, is of delaying to Convert. Why else, are you
twice warned thereof in the Text? Why required to Convert in your Youth before
you are Old? and just Now, before you are a minute Older. Death stands before
Old Men's Faces; and one would think they should not venture to put it off. It
is somewhat farther out of your sight indeed; but so swiftly it often comes, that
it is of wonder you your selves should be so daring as to do it. But, alas,
both of you are daily seen full of your Delays. Full often in my Pulpit I
think, what a number should I Convert this time, but that my old Folk think
they may as well Convert next Week; and my young ones think they may Convert
next Year; both think they may Convert another time. And what sa^^s my
trembling Heart? Plainly thus, Oh Delay, Delay! thou bond of Iniquity, thou
bane of Piety, thou bar of Conversion, Satan's great Barge into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone, be gone and destroy not this Congregation! Sirs, Remember
it; downright denial of Conversion, is nothing near so like to ruin you, as
dallying Delay of it. It Is Delay, is the Element of Unregeneracy, as
Unregeneracy is the Element of Hell.

Infer. 8. Youthful Vnconverts are the worst of Demoniacks, and break most
bonds of God. For, as you have heard, you have special Obligations on you.
Though God makes your days choice and good, yet cleave you will unto the worst
evil. Though you have on you, the Restraints which old sinners have long ago
had took off from them, you sin as they. The Spirit of God that has done
striving with many of them, strives still with you. Conscience, that is feared
in them, is yet of some sense in you. Parents and other Reprovers that have
done long ago with them, are still plying you. And yet, as they, you say unto
God, Depart from us, we desire no Communion with thee. With more violence than
they, you take the Kingdom of Hell by force? The path to Hell, is harder unto
your Feet than theirs.

Infer. 9. It is your Duty to shame your Vnconvert Fathers and Mothers. For,
observe you; you shame them, if you remember, and they forget God. If you come
to Christ, and they either come not, or come behind after you. God, Angels and
Men, will pronounce you Wise and them Fools. But what then? Would God have you
stay for them, and not Convert until they do? By no means. He commands you to
Convert just now; and consequently to shame them; if they have not, and do not.
By so shaming them, some Children have been the blessed Instruments of
Converting their Parents. Of Spiritually Begetting their Natural Fathers. The
only way this seems, wherein a Child can requite a Parent. For if a Beggars
Child win a Kingdom and give it his Father, his debt to him is too big to be so
paid: But if he Converts him, he pays him in broad Gold, methinks. Parents,
think ye of this. And Children, this know ye; it is therefore I do not caution
you against all sinful ways of shaming your Parents, because well I know,
Becoming dutiful to God, you cannot but honor and love your Parents next unto
God himself. That which I see of many Parents in City and Country has
extorted this Inference from me.

Infer. 10. Your Present days are your precious and best. So the Word in the
Text, and words following speak plainly. Sirs, your young Days, be but Days;
and of Short Continuance, yea and dubious. Some are Old, as we speak, sooner
then others. Their Flowers sooner fade, and their Grass more quickly withers.
But when ever your Evening falls, you shall wish it again Morning with you. If
nothing else will do it, Old Age will convince you of the Excellence of Youth.
It was wittily, that by some Time was thus pictured of old: Time to come, had
the head of a fawning Dog; Time present, the head of a stirring Lion; Time
past, the head of a biting Wolf. So teaching, that though silly Souls fancy
still that their best days are t^ ^ome; yet, if they bestir not well themselves
in their present ones, they will be very miserably bitten and torn in their
future. I sadly remember sometimes, the Tears, and Words of a very ancient
Gentleman to my self and my School-fellows, in our Childhood. Children, said
he, Your Age is good for every thing that you can desire to get; mine is good
for nothing but to spend whatever one has got. A thousand Worlds I would give
for a few of your learning, getting days again. Of all things prize your time,
and of all time your young, which is your Sowing-time. It Is upon Eternities
account, that any thing can be judged Excellent. Nor does ought make for our
blessed Eternity, but vital Piety. And surely, for that, there is no season
like to Life's Morning. Poets say, it is a friend to the Muses; Divines must
proclaim it the Friend of Graces.

For why? as incongruous as Atheistic Vermin do conceit Youth and Religion,
it is plain as Noonday Light, that Religion is specially framed for Youth, and
Youth for Religion. Let Shame be their Portion who are ready to drop the
Italian Proverb upon every Religious young head; Tanto buon -- This Puritan
Youth is so good, that he is good for nothing. Young people remember the seven
Stars in your Firmament; and tell me how fit they are for Religion, and
Religion for them?

Quick Wit and Fruitful Invention. What are these for, but Religion, and what
appearance makes Religion without these? Age will make you Lame and Barren, in
Mind as in Body.

Tenacious and Prompt Memory. What is this Treasury for, but Religion? and how
Poor must Religion live (if Live) without it. Age will dry your Brains, and
make Sieves of your Memories.

Lively and Stirring Affections. What are these Horses for, but the Chariot of
Religion? and how heavily must the wheels move (if move,) without them? Age
keeps no such Horses; nor Travel old Souls but upon Crutches, and the pace of
Snails.

Flexibleness and Self-denial. What are these Spiritual Joints for, but
Religious bowings? And how little can the most profoundly Religious Soul stoop
to its Maker without them? Old Age, has stiff joints, of Soul as well as Body.

Amatoriousness, and Love of Love. What is this Soul of the Soul for, but
Religion? And how is Religion her self, if her Soul has lost it self? Love, is
all the Religion that I know of. But Old Age lays your Souls in Frost and Snow.

Alacrity and Cheerfulness. What is this Godlike quality for, but Religion
toward God? and what likeness has Religion to it self without it? For God
takes all things, not cheerfully given, as forced Spoils rather than free
Gifts. Now Old Age's Clouds do so return after the Rain, that it admit's little
of this Sunshine. Rarely it is, that old Sanahs bear Isaac's.

Vigor and Strength of Body. What is this for, but Religious Service to him,
whose the Body is as well as the Soul? And how little can the Soul while it is
in this Body do without it? But where is the Old Body that can let the Wind blow
on it? at least where is the Head of Gray Hairs, that has a Body of Brass for a
Soul of Gold? Sirs, in a word; The Truth I beg deepest engravement of upon your
Hearts, is this of the Matchless Excellence of your present days. Verily, so
fit is Youth, the best of Life, for Religion, the best of Employment; and so
Useless, yea Harmful, are the endowments of Youth, without Religion; and so
poor and unlovely an aspect has Religion without the use of Youths Endowments;
that it is a pity but Youth and Religion should Marry, and Unite. All time, is
too good for Satan: but if he must have any, let him not have the best, which
is your Youth. But, Cynthius aurem.

I was minded to wave all part^^ular Exhortation, and remit you unto my Call
unto Sinners; in which I have said the things which you do most of all need;
and with more Plainess and Brevity, then I have discerned any where else. But
second thoughts bid me give you these Directions to improve my Doctrine. And
the rather, because they are of experienced Usefulness.

Direction 1. Choose each of you a Spiritual Guide in the affairs of your Souls.
There are Men ordained by God to be Eyes unto the Blind, and Feet to the Lame,
and Fathers to all that would be Gods Children. Refuse not Eyes and Feet for
your Souls; nor live you Orphans, when you may have Fathers. Go unto some one
or another of them; tell him, you hear that Christ's Ministers are his
Representatives. And, that Christ's Word without his appointed Ministry of it,
may not be expected to cleanse a Young Man's way; nor any others. Get a Promise
from him, to lend you his best Direction to thorough Conversion. A Youth
without a Pastor, is a Child without a Nurse.

Direct. 2. Use him whom you choose your Guide for your Soul; and follow him as
far as he follows Jesus Christ. Hear him ordinarily; a Child's own Parents Milk
is commonly best for it. Write after him; the Heads of his Sermon, I mean, and
his Chief Notes. Incomparable King Edward the Sixth, used to write Sermon
Notes. Go often to his House, and always to ask things worth his time and your
own. Little rest give him, till Grace has blessed his labors to fit you for the
Lords Table. Plainly tell him; you shall count small good gotten by the Word,
till you are qualified for the Sacrament. And that it is to you a dolorous
thing, to have but a Place in Gods House, and no Room at his Table. It looks as
if you were but a Dog, and not a Child.

Direct. 3. Look always and adhere closely unto God's Son and Spirit. Without
these, the Holy Bible can no more make you wise unto Salvation, than the Fables
of Aesop; that Papists dare compare it to. The Word of Life, is a Word of Death
to you, without these to make it beneficial. These, without whom you can expect
no more Edification from the best Minister, than from a blind Harper. In all
things, ye want Jesus Christ for Acceptance; in all, you want the Holy Ghost
for Assistance; in all things, and at all times. Without right use of them, no
Soul can fetch a Breath of Divine Life, or take a Step of Holy Walk. Nature
indeed shows you an Heavenly Father, and ties all of you unto him. But, it is
only special Revelation, Jupiter, q. Juvani Pater.
reveals a Redeeming Son of God, and an Holy Sanctifying Spirit of God. And
it is much Grace, and that much used too, that can keep you close unto these.
Without which, you may be great Socinians, but no Christians.

Direct. 4. Beware of setting against each other, Gods Mercy, Christ's Merits,
Holy Faith, and Good Works. We cannot say to either of them, we have no need
of thee. All are truly necessary, and unspeakably. But, in the Country I saw
it, and in this City I see it; most people do fix on some one of them, and cry
it up to the Exclusion of the rest. To the virtual Exclusion. Of so Epidemical
and fatal a hindrance of Conversion, beware you.

The Mercy of God! All the Rhetoric of Heaven cannot praise enough: but woe be
to you, if you expect the Pardon of the least Sin by it, otherwise than through
Christ's Merits.

The Merits of Christ! These, without question are infinite. But you are
undone, if you dream you shall have the saving benefit of them, Living and
Dying without Marriage unto him by Faith.

Holy Faith! Is a Grace most Precious; by God most highly honored; and, of
all, most honoring God; Honoring him in some respects, more than Adam's
personal Obedience did before the Fall. But mortally you err, if you look to
put off God with it, without Obedience. And slight good Works, as
Supererogations.

Good Works! Are the blessed Fruit of God's indwelling Spirit, and the very end
of our Election, Redemption, and Conversion. But what then? they be neither
acceptable to God nor profitable to us, but through the Gift of the Mercy, the
Purchase of the Merits, and the Means of the Faith aforesaid. If you rest on
Works, and imagine them otherwise good, your Eternal Lodging will be among
Evil-workers.

Young people, make your Pastor set you well at rights about these things. And
let the Excellency, Connection, Order, and Necessity of them, be judged worthy
of your frequent and serious thoughts.

Direct. 5. Be very Critical in the Choice of your Company. Be sour and unkind
unto none, Affable to all, but pleased with Few; to wit the Best, Which are
those that will either best teach you, or best learn from you. Companions of
Fools are doomed to destruction. But where ere you are walking with wise Men,
you are on your way to Heaven; Prove. 13.20. Souls the most thoughtful of
Eternity, are still the most careful of their Company. And it is certain, the
Company of your Choice in this World, is both that which you would have, and
shall have in the next.

Direct. 6. Besides the Holy Scriptures, read ye such good Books as shall be
commended to you by your Pastors. It Is not every good Book, that is for you
good. Nor every one that will hereafter be good for you, that is good Now. Your
Pastors can judge best which are most suitable.

I think it Soul-Felony for you to be without the Westminster Assemblies
Catechisms. And I should think it as little needful to commend Mr. Baxter's
Call, or Mr. Alleyn's, or Mr. How Is (very Jewel) of Yielding unto God; or Mr.
F. Fuller's Words to give Wisdom, with his piece of Repentance and Faith; or
Mr. Lawson's Magna Charta. England is blessed with the best in this World; and I
do not light upon any that excel, or equal them in England. You must search
farther than I have done, young people, if you find things better worth your
most careful reading. Books be dead things; but God makes them oftentimes
Lively Preachers. These several last years, many have acknowledged to me, that
they have been blessed Stars to lead them unto Christ. Yet do not, for your
Lives, ever neglect reading the Scriptures. Take some portion of God's Word, as
daily as you eat of his Bread. It Is very honorably that I do remember a poor
Soul who sometimes burned the Thatch of her House to read her Bible by the
Light of it. And no less a Saint than Mr. Richard Fairclough, told me, she died
a glorious one. It was Luther's saying, The reading of the Scriptures is the
terror of Devils.

Direct. 7. Examine often the state of your Souls. Scrupulousness it self, is
as much more safe, as it is less sweet than Audaciousness. But humble and
careful Inquisitiveness is (sine naevo Venus;) as unspotted a Virtue, as the
state of Grace is adorned with. Humility, one calls, the Violet of Graces; of
sweetest scent, though lowest place. And Care, is the commanded Fear of falling
short of Gods rest, Heb. 4.1. The Exertion of humble Care in heart-searches
does answer many Gospel-precepts. And when it is much and often, it is not the
least Evidence of truest grace. For Bankrupts can no more endure much looking
into their Count-books, than sore Eyes can bear long beholding of Sunshine.
And as impatient be Hypocrites of very much conning the Scriptures, and their
Hearts!

But I conclude. Young people; Mahomet gat the Turkish Empire, by making
extraordinary have. And Alexander Conquered the World, by the same Policy;
Never Delaying. Go you and outdo them: Conquer World, Flesh, and Devil; And
take by violence the Kingdom of Heaven; by your hasting to Remember, and
Convert just now. With great Reason our Law makes it Death to conceal High
Treason, so much as four and twenty hours. I am sure God's Law requires you to
Confess and Forsake your higher Treason against Christ's Crown, without so much
as a Minutes delay. And with much more Reason and Equity.

I thought I had done. But I am sensible how little I have done. And therefore
before I make an end, I must try to set two sorts of People a doing more for
poor Unconvert young ones. Two very concerned ones in the case. Two, that my
Text has surely somewhat to do with. I mean Parents, and Ministers. Surely
Natural and Ecclesiastical Fathers are all bound to join me in preaching of
this portion of Scripture.

To you Natural Parents, I first Address. Beseeching you, that you go study
what you have to do, and do all that you shall know, for your Childrens early
Conversion. I am of the mind, that gallant Language never did Gods Work. And do
find it what you call Wild Note, rather than set Music, that I can ever move
you by. Wherefore plainly I tell you, we may thank you for Earth's becoming
thus unlike Heaven, and like to Hell. We may thank your Negligence, and worse,
for the ruin of more Children than ever Herod slew; or the Liar and Murderer of
France himself. We may thank you, that Children be so generally Beasts before
they are Young Men; and young Devils before they are Old Men. We may thank you
for vitiating the most numerous, the most ductile, and the most hopeful part of
the World. For robbing God of his First Fruits in the World.

I beseech you by Gods tender Mercies, repent of your Cruelties. And I charge
you before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, reform ye straitway; and do as
aforesaid. The Light of Nature that guides you to help your Children to go, and
to speak, and to do what is necessary for this Life; guides you also to help
them for the Divine Life. Nor can you doubt but Gods Ordinance in the old
Church for the appearanee of the Male-children before him thrice in the Year,
was to bring them to an early Acquaintance with himself. And, there is still
both need and obligation to keep the substance of that precept now under the
Gospel. O let it not be said any longer, that your care is more for your
Childrens Clothes, than their Souls. For shame, Sirs, for shame, let them not
be wicked without your pity, nor Converted without your pains! Think ye daily
of both the Advantages and Engagements to do it.

Your Advantages. You do Love your Children best; do you not: And you are best
Beloved by them. You are Nearest unto them; and have most Authority over them.
You do know their Capacities, and their Tempers. Who can suit them as you?

Your Engagements. Their sore Needs do engage you. And so do the sore Evils
that (however undesignedly) you have done them. Who brought Adam's Sin upon
them and into them, but you? And who dares say, that your own personal Sins
have done them no wrong?

Dying Dr. Harris said, He had made his Peace with God: A Minister of the
Church of England told me, he had refused to Baptize some of his Parishioners
Children, because, as he saw, they would not afterward breed them up to
Christianity.
And told his Children, that his Sins should not hurt them therefore, unless
they made them their own. Can you say so, if you were now to dye? Well; very
Nature also engages you. Ay, and Equity binds you. For your Children are God's,
more than yours; and sure it is to him, and for him, that you should educate
his Children. Truth also engages you. For you promised you would so educate
them, when you had them Baptized; did you not?

The Fear and Love of God, if any be in you, do engage you. And so does your
own Interest also. Yea lastly, Shame engages you. For it is a shame, is it not?
To teach Children to honor and serve you, and not to honor and serve their
God and yours. I have bid many Children ask you, whether if they were too young
to be bound to keep Gods Commands, they were not also too young to be bound to
keep yours? Listen not to the White Devils that will suggest. If your Children
take not to Religion of themselves without your ado, your pains will do but
little good. Do Horses or Camels tame themselves? Do Men tame Beasts of the
Wilderness, and you not tame the Children of your own Bodies and Families? But
all in a Word? Does God set you a work, and promise you Success, and you dream
it to no purpose to set about it? Read you Prove. 22.6. and 23.13, 14. and
29.17, and 15.

As for you, Church-Fathers, may I humbly assume to stir up your Minds but in
way of Remembrance? You know, if the Lambs be lost, the Lord of the Flock will
with great anger ask, Where were the Shepherds all the while? What were they
doing? Nor will our highest feeding of the Sheep, compound for the loss of his
Lambs. And I doubt it will not suffice to say, Lord, we were the while digging
for profound Notions, or Disputing Nice Questions, or studying polite Sermons;
for people, whose Peace and whose Praise we could not have cheaper.

Brethren, for the Lords Sake let us all do somewhat weekly, and set the
Parents of our Congregations doing somewhat daily, for young people's Souls.
And let both set to it Hopefully, for the Reasons foresaid. The Difficulty and
Impossibility, as to our Endeavors, be left but to drive us to Diligence, and
Dependence on him to whom nothing is Difficult or Impossible. The more we do
look for success, the more it will come. Let not Catechizing, that is praised
by all, be Unpractised by any. And in Preaching, let none of us make need where
we find none, to shoot over young folks heads; and use a Language, we must
needs know they understand not. Love of God and of them would make us willing,
rather to be trampled under Scorners feet for our Faithfulness, then to ride
over their heads in Figures of Vainglorious impertinence. The which, wise
Hearers do no more commend, than weak Hearers do Understand. Neither be it any
more grievous to us than it was to St. Austin, to have now and then an Ad vos
Juvenes. To call and tell them, Young people this is for you! I would be glad
to see wanton Wits have less Sauce, and weak Souls have more Meat in all our
Sermons. And to discern that our pains in making Converts, did exceed the
Papists in making Proselytes? For it must be owned; it is an uncolourable
Profaneness, to Baptize Infancy, and not teach Youth; or but slightly. Because
otherwise, we shall starve the Nursery; and then what becomes of Jesus Christ's
Family?

The good Lord awaken us all! And set Ministers, Parents, Young people
themselves, all, a doing, and well doing. Our Churches then shall be
Beautified, and Joyed, and Strengthened with abundance of young Meditating
Isaac's; Young Jacob's, seeking the Blessing; Young Solomon's, choosing Wisdom;
Young Obadiah's, fearing the Lord; Young John's, lying in Christ's Bosom; Yea,
Young Children, crying Hosannah; stilling or shaming at least, and baulking
God's Enemies, and ours. Origen's Father Leonides, would sometimes uncover his
Breast as he lay asleep; and solemnly Kiss it, blessing God that had given him
to be a Father to so Excellent a Child. And so shall many of us have warrant to
do. Upon our Houses, Schools, and Churches, it shall be writ and read of all,
Jehova Shamma, the Lord is there. Amen and Amen.

Quest. What Repentance of National Sins does God require, as ever we expect
National Mercies? SERMON XVIII.
HOSEA 10.12. Sow to your selves in Righteousness, reap in Mercy: breaks up
your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come, and rain
Righteousness upon you.
THE Prophet joyneth Counsel with Threatenings; Amendment is that he calls
them to, as a means to save them. That he might induce them to this, he
represents their aggravated Sins, and the dangers to which they were exposed by
their Provocations: Yet least this Call should still be uneffectual through an
opinion, that Repentance could avail little to a People so guilty; he adds,
that if they returned to God, their Sins, though great, should not prevent Mercy;
and the threatened Judgments, though near, might be diverted.

By this Text God proclaims, not only to particular Persons, but to Nations,
how desirable it is to him to execute his Goodness, and his extreme
backwardness to avenge himself on the most provoking Kingdoms; unless they add
Impenitency under solemn Warnings unto their Rebellion.

God seems to address himself to Ephraim, to this purpose; Thou are a very
guilty People, yet turn, that I may forgive. Thou art on the very brink of
ruin; thy obstinateness is so notorious, that it will not consist with the
Rules or Credit of my Government, to spare thee longer. Oh yet be persuaded to
render thy self a Subject capable of my kindness. I have long pleaded, and thou
seem even unperswadable: Yet I Will make one further essay; I Will try thee once
more. Sow to your selves in Righteousness.

First, The words contains some of the Essentials of Repentance, and suppose
the rest. Under a Metaphor from Tillage, God applies himself in the
description of this Duty: q. d. 1. He that will repent must deal with his
indisposed Heart: Break up the fallow ground; whatever pain or difficulty
attends so barren, or obstinate a frame of Soul, you must strive with your
selves; pluck up those Weeds, strike at the root of your Lusts, which render
the Fruits of Righteousness impossible. This sense of that clause is more
evident from those words of another Prophet; Break up the fallow ground; Jer.
4.3.
sow not among Thorns. 2. When the Heart is thus prepared, we must proceed to
proper acts of Reformation. Sow to your selves in Righteousness. (...) ad
justitiam. Isa. 61.3.
Let the Rule of Righteousness be observed in your hearts and ways; be just to
God and Men; return to God in sincerity; be and do what may argue you to be
Trees of Righteousness. Do thus to your selves; i. e. leave it not to others:
Or, you shall reap the advantage of it your selves, if you repent. 3. You must
also seek the Lord; i. e. Worship God, and not Idols, as has been your way:
Follow after him, who is departed from you; call upon him; crave his Grace to
help you; but be not satisfied with faint and short attempts, persist in this
work till you find his favor in the blessed effects of it; even, till he come
and rain, etc. These heads of Repentance this Text affords.

Secondly, This Repentance is urged from variety of Arguments, but principally
from this; That National Mercies would certainly follow this National
Repentance.

Reap at the face of Mercy, or immediately. (...)
Reap in Mercy. It Is promised more strongly, then if it had been said
Indicatively; you shall reap in the Future Tense. Being put thus Imperatively,
the import of it is this, you have no more to do, but possess your Mercies upon
your Repentance: Mercy will of it self grow from that Root. God has provided
all antecedent Causes; he has ordained the connection; and it lies on him to
make a Repenting People happy. You may be assured of this; for that which was
mere Mercy in making the Promise, is become an Act of Righteousness by the
Promise. You may now expect it from God as just; in which sense I take that
clause, till he come, and rain Righteousness upon you. That which was Mercy in
the first part of the Verse, is Righteousness in the last part. I know it is
true Doctrine to say, till God bestow on you holy inclinations, and ability to
perform; but that is not the most designed Sense. He further argues, Ezekiel. 34.26.
from the plenty of those Blessings which God would afford on their Repentance.
Till he come, and rain Righteousness. The returns of God to a Repenting People
are in a fullness of Blessing, and there shall be showers of Blessings.

There Is one Motive more, viz. The seasonableness. It Is time to seek the Lord.
It Is high time, and but barely so; you cannot say there is no hope; though you
must repent soon or not at all. The consideration of this Paraphrase must lead
any one to the case that I am to handle: Can any serious Spirit think it vain
to ask? What is that National Repentance, which may give a sinful people hope
of Mercy? Which is the same with the Case as it is given me.

What Repentance of National Sins does God require, as ever we may expect
National Mercies?

I have led you to it by this Text, that it may not seem a melancholy fancy; a
mystery not to be handled, or a needless inquiry.

It Is an awful case. It Is not put to satisfy your Curiosity, but to guide your
Fears and Hopes. It Is not only to direct your Minds to a right judgment of the
matter, but to excite your Hearts to that Repentance which may afford us hope
in the midst of our dangers and guiltiness. It Is the happiness or misery of
Nations are concerned in it. It Is the only remedy that a sinful Nation can use
or turn to. God is peremptory; Luke 13.5. (...), utterly be destroyed.
except you repent you shall all likewise perish.

My work is, 1. To resolve the case in general. 2. To apply the case resolved
to our own Nation. I shall use this method. As to the first: 1. Show you what
is supposed in the case as stated. 2. Explain the terms; National Sins and
Mercies. 3. State the Case it self. 4. Propose the difficulties that attend the
resolution of it. 5. Resolve the Case, which the forementioned particulars will
much conduce to. I shall as proof to this resolution of the Case;


1. Evidence that the Repentance expressed in the fifth head, does ordinarily
afford ground of our expectation of National Mercies, notwithstanding National
Sins.

2. That when this Repentance is not in a Nation, we cannot ordinarily expect
National Mercies.

First, These things are supposed in the Case as stated. Where there is Sin,
there ought to be Repentance. There are National sins as well as Personal sins,
that a Nation as such, becomes guilty by National sins. There are Mercies which
attend a people as a Community. Our National Sins have removed National
Mercies, or at least prevent and suspend the bestowing of these Mercies. God
requires a Repentance for National Sins, and that as a means of National
Mercies. There may be a Repentance which may be defective to this end, and from
which we cannot groundedly expect such Mercies. That there is a Repentance for
National Sins, which if we arrive at, may warrant our expectation of National
Mercies. These and such like are supposed as the Case is stated, and therefore
I pass them by.

Secondly, I shall enquire what National Sins are, and what National Mercies
are: The rest of the terms in the Case will be handled under other heads.

Quest. What are National Sins in the Question?

Answ. Such gross sins as render a Nation guilty, Ezekiel. 14.13. (...) Wilfully
and repeatedly against Gods Covenant.
and expose it to National Judgments, and forfeit National Mercies. When the
Land sins against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out my
hand. Whatsoever sins God has threatened to destroy a body of people for, are
in the Question.

The Answer directs us to consider these several parts of it.

First, These sins are gross in their nature: They are not sins of infirmity,
Ezekiel. 7.23.
or sins which ordinary care, labor and watchfulness, could not prevent. They
are called bloody crimes. You may find them ennumerated, when God arraigns
Nations in the Testimony of his Prophets, when calling them to Repentance; and
when God justifies the severity of his Judgments against a People. I shall
name some of them which defile a Land: Hos. 10.4. Jer. 23.10. Psalm. 78.50. Isa.
3.15. Ez. 21.23, 24. Isa. 1.21, 23. Luke 10.10.11, 13. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Rev. 2.3.
Hos. 11.7. Isa. 59.13. etc. Ezekiel. 35.15. Amos 8.9.
Idolatry, Perjury, Breaking of Covenant, Blood, Uncleanness, Apostasy,
Oppression, Profaneness; I need not bring Proof hereof, the Scriptures are
full. Yea, among such provocations are reckoned Men's refusal of the Gospel,
silencing and obstructing the Ministry, malignity against good Men, Divisions
and Enmity, Lying, Pride, abuse of Mercies, gross Formality, Hypocrisy, great
Decays among Saints, and gross Backslidings.

Secondly, These sins must be National, such as denominate a Kingdom sinful. We
consider them not as the sins of particular Persons, but as they affect a
Community, as United among themselves, and distinguished from others, by some
special Bonds.

We will enquire for the clearing of this,

Quest. How Sins become National?

Answ. 1. By all, or the generality of a People, being personally
Transgressors, as to those Crimes: The whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint, Isa. 1.5.
from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there is no soundness.
Thus Sodom could not afford Ten innocent persons. The Infection is often
propagated to the whole Body, though begun in a few; as, Jer. 23.15.
from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is profaneness gone forth into all the Land:
This does not mean, that every individual is corrupted, but the generality of
all sorts: Jer. 32.32. Mal. 3.9.
Magistrates, Priests and People were profane; Ye have robbed me, even this
whole Nation.

2. When the Governors, Representatives, and influencing Persons, are
Transgressors: Hos. 9.15.
I will love them no more, all their Princes are revolters. Israel is become
vile by the sins of Jeroboam; wrath against Judah remained, 2 Kin. 23.26.
because of the provocations that Manassah had provoked God withal. Provoking
abominations by the Rulers of a People, and cursed Laws, 2 Samuel 21.1.
defile a Land and expose it. Saul brings a Famine on Israel by violating the
Covenant with the Gibeonites. What Governors do may be said to be done by a
Nation: Though I think, when Judgments take their express rise from the sins of
Rulers, there is some other guilt among the People, Hab. 3.8.
ripening them for Judgment, or a compliance with their Rulers sins.

3. By the generality of a Nation making it self partaker of other Men's sins
though it do not actually commit them. Some that do not personally commit the
sins, 1 Samuel 3.13. Zeph. 3.13. Isa. 22.12. Hos. 7.5.
may become guilty of them, by not hindering those sins according to their
power; by rejoicing in those iniquities or Pleading for them; by not mourning
for them; by contributing to those Enormities. These ways a Land may be
guilty, though a few Chief Men act the sin.

Thirdly, These sins are such as expose to Judgments, and forfeit National
Mercies: These are here intended, and reference to both the former heads must
be had; but besides the grosness of the sins as to the nature of them, and
their extent as National; on both which accounts they become National
Provocations.

The Case requires our observing further.

1. That more refined Sins may expose one Nation to Judgments, which may not
expose another Land. This depends on the variety of advantages some people are
under above others. A Nation that has Gospel helps, and professes Holiness,
and Worshipeth the true God, may be exposed to Judgments by Formality,
Backsliding, and more Spiritual Evils than other Lands not so circumstantiated.
Sins below gross Immoralities may as truly forfeit their Mercies, as Injustice,
Blood, or Idolatry, amongst ignorant Paganish Countries.

2. The provoking Sins of one and the same Nation may be made up by various
kinds of offenses, according to the different condition of the offenders.

Sometimes a Land is polluted by the same sort of Sins propogated through the
Body of the People.

But it is not always so, the offenses vary, and the National Guilt results
from the several offenses.

The sins of Magistrates are of one kind, and the sins of the Subjects another,
according to their different Talents and Station.

The Profane part of a Nation transgress by enormous Crimes, and the Professing
part are polluted with more Spiritual wickedness, as Barrenness, Deadness,
Censoriousness. Am. 64.6. Jer. 23.11. Isa. 56.10, 11. Jer. 28. and 5.31. Mic.
6.11, 12. Mi. 7.4, 6.
The offenses of the Gentry and Commonalty may be several. Ministers and People
may fill up the measure of iniquity in a different manner.

Hence you see, that a Nation may be guilty, though some remarkable Villainy may
not be Universal: It Is enough if the different sorts of Inhabitants grossly
offend in their several kinds.

3. Usually the sins of a Nation do not bring Judgments, or forfeit Mercies, by
the simple Commission of them; but as attended with some additional
aggravations.

A Land rarely is destroyed, unless sins are committed after warnings. Utter
Destruction comes not before lesser Judgments have been tried, Am. 4.
and prove unsuccessful.

Security and Impenitency is added to Rebellion before God proceeds against a
People.

The Lords Goodness displays it self in his Calls, and Patience waits an
Answer, ere he takes the advantage against a Land. Isa. 3.9.
Often besides the grosness of sins, there is boldness and shamefulness; they
declare their sin as Sodom.

I shall not mention antecedent aggravations, as Light, Convictions, Covenant
bonds, etc. which add a weight to sin whiles committing.

You see what National Sins are in the Question, and when they become such as
hazard the ruin of a People.

Quest. What are National Mercies in the Case before us?

Answ. Such Blessings as truly and considerably affect the good of a Community.

They must be Blessings in their nature, and National in their extent; they
must have an aptitude to the Common Weal, the more they conduce to make a Land
happy, the greater the Mercy is. Neither is the gracious design of God to bless
a Land thereby, to be disregarded; for sometimes he rains Snares, Psalm. 78.29,
31.
and gives Quails in judgment.

These Mercies regard our Souls, or our Bodies, or both: I shall ennumerate
some of them: By pardon I mean an exemption from Temp^ral Puni^hments for those
sins.
The pardon of past sins, and help against the like offenses; the pretense of
God as effective of Spiritual and Temporal good; Gospel Ordinances; a Holy,
Judicious, Faithful Ministry; a pure Worship; the Spirits energie in the
Gospel, to the Conversion of many Sinners, and real Edification of Saints;
whereby the estate of Believers may be flourishing; a Godly Discipline, and
Communion of Saints founded on plain Gospel Terms; Love and Peace among
Churches, grounded on essential not disputable Notions, and expressed in all
the fruits of Christian Love; freedom from Persecution and Malignity; a Godly
Magistracy, using its Power to restrain Sin, and promote Godliness; Peace in
our Borders; Justice in our Courts; Learning in the Schools; Wisdom and sincere
designs for public good among Counselors; Plenty, by a Blessing on ou^
Trades and Labors; Health in our Streets; Credit and Influence among
Neighboring Countries; freedom from such Judgments as waste and debate a Land.
These and the like, constitute a happy Nation: They are Mercies which National
Sins forfeit, and without which the aspect of a Land is mournful. Greater or
less degrees of all or any of these are within the Question, as the object of
our expectations, and the sorts and degrees are often proportioned to a Nations
Repentance, and determined by it.

Thirdly, The Case stated and distinguished from what seems like it: It is not
what Repentance God requires of particular persons in order to Eternal Life,
nor what Repentance God requires of a sinful Nation as its duty; nor what is
that Repentance without which a Nation shall never enjoy National Mercies; nor
what Repentance is that on which every Nation, in all cases, shall partake of
National Mercies; nor what shall limit our Prayers, nor yet altogether our
Hopes, as to the state of a Land; much less what is that Repentance which will
best secure National Mercies? But the Question connects our Repentance and
warrantable expectations: The scope of it is; What is the lowest sort or degree
of Repentance for National Sins which is requisite to warrant, and ordi^arily
direct our expectations of National Mercies?

The Reason why I add ordinarily will appear after; the indefiniteness of the
term National Mercies, whether of this kind or of that, to this or that degree,
I insist not upon. Supposing that it imports at least so much and many Mercies,
as render a Nation tolerably happy, and exempted from what it esteems
calamitous.

Fourthly, The Difficulties of the Case.

Its not only hard to determine it, as the minimum quod sic in any
qualification for Mercy, nor yet as a thing depending on Multitudes, and
relating to the Providence of God as to what is future, but there are these
other things that make it difficult.

1. Other Nations are not under such express Rules, with respect to Gods
outward dealings, as the Jewish Nation was.

That people was under a Theocracy, God was their King; 1 Samuel 12.12.
on this account the Lord charge them, when they were for a King; 1 Samuel 8.7.
that they rejected me that I should not reign over them. Idolatry also was
High Treason in that State, they were Gods peculiar Nation, and thereby to live
in a more immediate dependence on him even in Civil respects, Isa. 51.4.
than other People.

The Rules of their External Privileges (both Church and National) were
express in that Covenant of peculiarity, whereinto they were admitted. This
Covenant easily determined men's Expectations of Gods dealings with them. But I
think, we cannot always conclude from Gods Methods toward them, how he will
deal with other Nations, that are not under the same Law.

2. There have been always great displays of Sovereignty, in Gods Dispensation
of Judgments, and Mercy, toward Nations. He waits longer on some people than
on others, though no more guilty. Sometimes he grants favor to a Nation,
though its Sins be many; and punishes it when its provocations appear less.
Josh. 7.1.
The Sins of multitudes are connived at sometimes, and at other times he
afflicts for the Offenses of a few; as in the case of Achan.

He has diverted Judgments at the Prayer of one Moses; Exo. 32.11, 14. Ez.
14.14. Jer. 7.16.
but sometimes though Noah, Daniel, and Job be there they shall deliver no more
than themselves. Yea he has forbid his Servants to pray for a people, as a
thing to no purpose. God has sorely rebuked small Sins in particular Persons,
as Moses, Vzzah, etc. to let men see, its Patience in God, not Innocence in
Men, that he still destroys not.

There is exact Wisdom and Righteousness in all this variety, which the light
of a higher State will discover; though now by reason of darkness, his ways
seem perplexed to us. However this Sovereign unaccountableness must abate our
positiveness in judging, what will be the way of God toward a people; though
it hinders not the determining our ordinary Expectations.

3. There are prophetic periods wherein National Mercies shall not be
obstructed by impenitence, but Repentance shall follow them. Israel was not
remarkably penitent, when the time of Redemption from Egypt was come; yet God
keeps his day. Ezekiel. 16.62. Hag. 2.14, 16, 17, 18. Rev. 19 1, 7, 8.
Their Release from Babylon found them in the like unfit posture, yet God is
pacified, and brings them to Repentance by their return. This people is
unclean, and what they offer is unclean; yet he makes them prosper, and build
the Temple, even though they had not turned to him. And it seems to be not much
otherwise with the Church, when it sings the Praises of God for the
consummating stroke against Antichrist; Rev. 19.1, 7, 8.
she is not ready nor clothed with eminent Holiness.

4. The Desolation of a Land is sometimes absolutely determined.

When its thus, a blessing is withheld from means that tend to make a people
penitent; and what of Repentance there is, becomes uneffectual to divert the
Misery. Manasseh repented, Josiah and the People with some solemnity humble
themselves: 2 King. 23.25, 26, 27.
But notwithstanding this, the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his
wrath, etc. because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked him
withal, etc. When the utmost limits of the time of Gods Patience is over, ruin
is unavoidable. God bemoaneth a Land in this condition; Luke 19.42. The figure
Apostop^si^ is twice used in this verse; thou had been happy had thou known
in thy day; thou art now undone because they are hid from thy eyes. Deuteronomy.
32.26, 27 Josh. 7.9. Isa. 48.8, 9. Ezekiel. 36.2, 8.22, 23.
as our Savior in his Tears over Jerusalem; If thou had known at least in
this thy day the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thy
eyes.

5. God sometimes moderateth and refrains his Judgments, from other
Considerations besides Repentance.

If executing Judgments upon his People, will occasion Blasphemy and reproach
to his Name; he often forbeareth his People though impenitent. I would scatter
them into corners, etc. were it not, that I feared the wrath of the Enemy, and
they should say, Our hand is high; the Lord has not done all this. Joshuah and
others knew it was a strong Plea, What will thou do for thy great Name? Again,
when his People have been so obstinate under Judgments, that if he preceded in
his Wrath, they must be utterly destroyed; rather than do so, he has eased his
hand. If the sins of his Enemies be full, he conniveth at his Church, whiles he
avengeth himself on his Adversaries; especially if his Servants are to be
Executioners of his Wrath. Sometimes God has had respect to some Ancestor, or
some particular action of a People, that has been pleasing to him; and on that
account, has been favorable, though they have been otherwise obnoxious to
judgments.

6. Its not very easy at all times, to judge of National Judgments or Mercies.
God may afflict in order to Mercy; he may take away lesser Mercies, to make way
for greater Blessings: He often lays a foundation of lasting good, by delays and
astonishing struggles. On the other hand, he may forbear Judgments, and bestow
good things; whereby a Nation is ripened for sorer Plagues. He may destroy the
Gentry to save the Vulgar, or level his stroke against evil Magistrates or
Ministers and so shake the State, to make the Body of a People, or his own
people (at least) prosperous. Many such ways are with him. Each of these
affect a community, and yet the aspect of them are so intricate and clouded,
that deep thoughts are needful to determine, when we see the Mercy we expect,
or the Judgment which we fear.

You may perceive that the Case before me, though it seems so popular is not
so easily decided. But the greatest Difficulty is to adjust the Nature of
Repentance, as accommodated to our expectation of National Mercies: Which will
fall under the next Head.

Fifthly, The Case resolved; and somewhat concerning the Rule by which it is
resolved.

The Rule by which we must determine this is hinted in the Case it self, The
Rule to decide the Case by.
under those Words; what Repentance does God require? Some Expression of the
Divine Will must guide us, we must not judge by Second Causes, or by vain
Fancy, as we are too apt to do. Neither too rigid nor yet too compassionate
Inclinations must decide the Matter, or lead our Expectations. The Directions
of the Sovereign Ruler of Kingdoms must alone take place; what Notices he has
vouchsafed, must be regarded with Reverence; natural Principles, due Inferences
from his Essential Perfections; the Nature, Order, Ends, and Methods of his
Government well considered; and an Observation of his Dealings with our selves
in past times, and also with other Countries, do all contribute some light in
the Matter before us.

But our chiefest regard must be to the Scriptures: especially to such parts of
them, as urge Repentance on a people with Promises of good, in case of
compliance; and Threatenings of Ruin upon their Obstinacy. Also such parts
should be observed as contain instances of National Repentance, which have been
succeeded or accompanied with National Mercies. By this rule we must determine
what that Repentance for National Sins is, whereupon we may expect National
Mercies. Here we must consider Repentance modified as a means to this proper
end, viz. National Mercies: And its to be considered as to that lowest degree,
which will support our expectations of those Mercies.

Having premised this. I think it may thus be determined.

1. A Repentance short of that, which is enjoined in order to Eternal
Salvation, will suffice to warrant our expectations of National Mercies.
Eternal Issues are not determined by the same Rules, as Temporal Blessings.
Unregenerate persons may repent, so as to divert present Judgments, and secure
Mercies. This is evident in Ahab and Nineveh. 1 King. 21.29. Jonah 3.


If it were not so, we could not expect National Mercies before the generality
of a Land became true Converts, yea active Converts: For Regenerate Persons
that shall possess Heaven, may come short in that Repentance, which secures
Blessings to a Nation.

Saving Repentance is the Grace, we calls sinners to by our Ministry; the more
of this prevails in a Land, the more sure are the Mercies of that people.
Without it, a Nation will soon run into new forfeitures; and bring plagues on
it self at last; as Niniveh did. Nah. chapter 2. and 3.


This saving Repentance is a change of Heart, as well as Practice; it strikes
at the root, and excludes the Dominion of all Sin; as well as National
Provocations. It has a mixture of Divine Love reigning in the Heart, as well
as Fear: Its excited by a sense of pardoning Mercy through the Blood of Christ,
as well as Gods Wrathful displeasure: its an effect of the Spirit in-dwelling,
and not only of its common Operations: its the fruit of the Divine Life, and
not merely of Natural Principles excited by Foreign impressions.

In these and the like, saving Repentance exceeds that Repentance of a Land,
which yet may afford expectations of National Mercies.

2. The Repentance which yields us ground to expect National Mercies, I shall
describe in these following particulars.

1. It has several things wherein it partakes of the nature and sincerity of a
true Repentance. 2. It must be for National Sins. 3. The Repentance must
usually be National. 4. It must be suited to the different condition and
circumstances of such as make up a Nation.

1. It must have so much of the nature and sincerity of a true Repentance as is
included in these following heads.

(1.) Clear Convictions of the guilt and offenses of a Nation.

We must believe those things to be sins, which God charge us with, and truly
own, that we are chargeable with the faults for which God reproves us. Jer.
3.13.
This God enjoyneth; Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God. They cannot be said to Repent, who plead
guiltless. This Plea God reproves Israel for; yet thou say because I am
innocent, Jer. 2.35.
etc. Whiles Men plead for sin as no sin, or acquit themselves when they are
Criminals; sins bind on them the wrath of God, and stand in the way of a
peoples good. But there is hope of a Land, Jer. 14.^0.
when it pours out its Confessions with them; We acknowledge O Lord our
wickedness, and the iniquity of our Fathers, for we have sinned against thee.

(2.) Shame, fear, and deep humblings of Soul under the sense of the wrath of
God, as provoked by our sins. Ahab humbled himself: Turn to me with fasting and
with mourning, Joel 2.13, 14.
rent your hearts and not your garments, for he is gracious, etc. and repents
him of the evil; who knows if he will return, 1 Samuel 7.6.
and leave a Blessing behind him? God will embitter sin to us, or avenge it.
Provocations shall prevent Mercy, when they are easy and pleasing; but this
remorse must reach to the Heart, though it do not savingly change it. The Heart
must tremble at the threatened Wrath: God will have his anger awful to Men, and
their abominations shall cause a blush, at least in a sense of what miseries
they expose to.

Therefore while people make a mock of sin, as harmless; while they sport with
the wrath kindled thereby, as a scarecrow; God will go on to strip a Kingdom
of its Blessings, and load it with Judgments: They were not at all ashamed,
Jer. 6.15.
neither could they blush; therefore at the time that I visit them, they shall
be cast down.

But this Humiliation, Fear and Shame, must be from an affected Soul, not bare
Bodily appearances in a day of Humiliation, or hanging down the Head like a
bulrush for a day; Isa. 58.5.
these the Lord despises, for such things he will not turn away his anger.

Jer. 3.25.
Whereas there is hope, when a people lie down in their shame, and confusion
covers them, because they have sinned against the Lord. It bodes well, Ezra 9.4.
when men tremble at the words of the God of Israel because of transgression.

(3.) Such a compliance with Gods warnings and rebukes, as to put Men on
seeking Gods savor, and resolving to forsake the National pollutions.

There must be supplications, as well as weeping: Jer. 3.21.
A voice was heard on the high places weeping and supplications of the Children
of Israel, for they have perverted their way. This is Gods advice to a Land,
and its the constant way of a Repenting people: Jon. 3.8.
Thus Niniveh cried mightily to God: Herein the dominion of God is owned, and
so far Men acknowledge a dependence upon him: But this must not be only with
the Mouth, no, it must be with the Heart as to this act, and occasion. Hos.
7.14. Neh. 9.33.
A sleighty cry will not prevail: It Is a brand on a people, that they cried not
unto me with the heart. With our Prayers there should be a justification of
Gods Threats and Punishments. How hopeless then is the condition of a people,
when that is true of them, we made not our Prayer to God; Dan. 9.13. Ez. 18.29,
30.
and as sad, whilst they arraign his ways as unequal.

But good resolves must attend Prayer; a full purpose under present
Convictions, though it may not always prove effectual, through want of a
Principle in Sinners, and remains of Corruption in Saints. We are led to this
by that place; Take away all iniquity, Ashur shall not save us, Hos. 14.2, 3.
what have I to do any more with idols? Ezra 10.3. Neh. 9.38. and 10.29.
Expressive hereof was Ezra's and Nehemiah's entering the people into a
Covenant with God, against National Sins.

Now what hopes can there be of a Land, if it neglect the Lord, as if he had
nothing to do with them; yea, continues resolute in its sins: Thus did they who
said, after our Idols will we go, Jer. 44.17.
we will worship the Queen of Heaven, etc. Alas! Such a people may lie down in
fear, and look at the Mercies they want, as impossible; yea, consider the
Blessings they yet enjoy, as soon to be removed.

I added, that Prayer and Resolves should be in compliance with Gods warnings:
God will have a regard to his Threatenings, and some tribute of Obedience
rendered to him, by them whom he spares.

Thus Ahab yielded to Elijahs Message, and Niniveh regarded the Threatenings of
the Lord by Jonah.

Therefore its an awful sign, when Nations refuse to hearken, Zech. 7.11, 12.
draw away the shoulder, and make their heart as an adamant, least they should
hear the law, and the words of God by the Prophets. When this is the frame and
carriage of a people toward God, what effects follow, the following words
acquaint you: Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts.

Whether the warnings are sent by the Word in the mouth of his Servants, or by
his Wonders, or by lesser Afflictions; the disregard of them makes the bands of
a people strong; whereas attentiveness and compliance therewith affords
encouragement.

(4.) There must be a Reformation.

All the former without this, are too insufficient to be a prognostic of good;
the other things tend to this, and must terminate therein, or Repentance wants
its aptitude to the designed end: I have sent my Prophets, Jer. 35.15.
saying, return ye now every man from the evil of his way, and amend your
doings, etc. and ye shall dwell in the Land; a gracious offer, but behold the
obstacle to their benefit thereby; you have not inclined your ear, nor
hearkened unto me: In the same manner God leaves it on this issue; Learn to do
well, Is. 1.17, 18, 19.
etc. If you be willing and obedient, yon shall eat the good of the Land, but
if ye refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it.

It Is no Repentance while gross evils are continued in, if our sins be sins of
Commission: Zech. 14.19.
It Is no Repentance while an express Duty be not complied with, when the
offense is a sin of Omission: This shall be the punishment of all Egypt, and of
all Nations that come not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles. Let there be
never so much mourning, though it rise to the covering the Altar with tears,
Is. 58.6.7, 8.
it yields but vain hopes, when Men continue unreformed.

But amendment carries with it a happy presage; it restrains the bitter
effects of past provocations, and God in Mercy encourages it in a people,
though on the brink of ruin. We see an instance in Judge. 10. the people having
confessed their sin, ver. 10. accepted of their punishment, and called upon
God; ver. 15. They put away their strange gods, and served the Lord; then the
Soul of God was grieved for their misery, and he delivered them, ver. 16. A
parallel you have in Niniveh, the charge given by the King, Jon. ^.8, 9.
(which was complied with) was, Let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in his hand; then they conclude a possibility of
escape, according to the tacit reserve in the Prophets message: Who can tell if
God will turn away from his fierce anger, and we perish not.

2. But yet further. The Repentance in these acts must be for National Sins: If
it be for other Sins, and not for the Sins of the Land, it will not warrant our
expectations of National Mercies. God will have Men direct their Repentance to
that, which his Wrath is kindled for, and which his Testimony is against. It Is
not enough that you bewail your own personal private sins, but these public
faults. People are loathest to own, bewail, and leave these National Offenses.
Custom fixes them, they are commonly, reputable, and by the generality of
Transgressors thought innocent; they are supported by lnterest and Power;
there is danger by Repenting thereof: If you reform as to these, there is often a
loss of Places; Men are subject to shame by leaving faults in fashion, or the
reproach of having long offended in those things; and how backward are our
proud Hearts to acknowledge we have been in an error.

But let it be never so hard, the Arrow of God is levelled against these very
sins, and even these shall be bewailed and forsaken, or he will proceed to
embitter them.

People may think to commute with God, and amend in other matters; but this is
a vain attempt, Mic. 6.15, 16.
to their own delusion and ruin: Thou shall sow, but shall not reap; for the
statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab; and ye walk
in their counsels, that I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants
thereof an hissing: Therefore you shall bear the reproach of my people. This
leads me to answer one Objection.

Object. How may we know which be the National Sins?

Answ. If the same particular Sins be universal. Consider the carriage of a
people in general, and compare it with the Word: National Sins are too gross
not to be seen, when the rule of a Peoples walking is set before us. But if you
would know, which are more eminently the National Sins; observe what Sins have
the greatest influence in Corrupting the Land; which cleaves fastest to a
people, and most (especially leading persons) are guilty of; which have been
longest continued in, and in their Nature and Consequences are most grievous;
which seem the Judgments of God most directed against; what sins do the best
Ministers and People witness most against. By these Rules you may discern, what
are those National Sins, which the Nation agree in the commission of, or
connivance at. But if the National Sins be by accumulation of several sorts of
sins, according to the different state of people, who constitute that
Community: You then must distinguish a Nation into its constituent, or
remarkably differing parties; as Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and
People, Rich and Poor, Infidels and Believers, etc. Compare the frame and
carriage of each of these, with that which God has made their peculiar Duty;
and adding the former helps, those National Sins will appear, which are made up
by complication, though the same individual Crimes are not entertained by the
several parties in a Nation.

3. The Repentance must usually be National: I do not mean that every
individual must repent, but the generality; or at least some very considerable
number, and those of such Men, that most represent, and influence the Body.

A small number of private Penitents may save themselves, but seldom secure a
Nation. I confess here I must be wary, considering how graciously God is
pleased to admit sometimes a few to personate a Body, and give in Blessings for
many on their mediation. Phineas his Zeal turns away Wrath from all his people.
Number. 25.11. Ezekiel. 22.30.
God seems to conclude the unavoidableness of Isreal's woe, from the want of one
man to divert it: I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge,
and stand in the gap before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but
I found none. This the desolate Church complains of; Isa. 64.7.
There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

But though Sovereignty admits a very few Penitents to profit many
Transgressors; yet we are not usually to expect this, what ever in extremity we
may hope, for want of better grounds; usually a few are called none as to this
effect: No man repented him of his wickedness; Jer. 8.6. Isa. 66.4. and 59.16.
I called and none did answer; he wondered there was no intercessor.

There were the Prophets themselves, and some others that Repented, yet so few
were as good as none to secure the good, which multitudes concurred to remove.
His Call is to the generality to return, and on that he promises favor. Hear
ye the word of the Lord all ye of Judah; Jer. 7.2, 3.
Thus says the Lord: Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to
dwell in this place: And the failure by the refusal he affixeth to the body of
them, ver. 28. Thou shall say, This is a Nation, that obeys not the voice of
the Lord, nor receives correction, etc.

We can hardly look for good to a Land, unless the repenting persons be
numerous enough to vindicate the Glory of God, and influence the Land to
Reformation: Joel 1.14, 15. Jon. 3.5, 6.
The assembly of Penitents must be solemn. How general was the Repentance of
Niniveh, from the greatest to the least; from the King and Nobles to the most
abject.

Some farther light may arise from the next head.

4. The Repentance should be suited to the different Condition and
Circumstances of those that make up a Nation. Each must repent of the sins
common to all, yea, the gross trespasses of each sort must be bewailed by every
sort.

But yet there is a Repentance peculiar to each, which ought eminently to
appear, or at least really to be; and this exerted according to their
respective abilities. Magistrates ought to mourn for the sins of the People,
and also to repent of their own ill Examples, bad Laws, etc. And they must
express their Repentance by exerting that Power which they have above others:
They should enact good Laws, restrain and punish Sin, command days of
Humiliation, appoint good Ministers, etc. So Ezra did: Ezra 10.8, 9. Neh. 13.
The same did Nehemiah. Magistrates do not repent if they do not so, and a Land
may perish for their neglect.

Suppose a Land divideable into Unbelievers and Believers: These Believers must
repent of their own sins, as well as the sins of Unbelievers: They must be
humbled for their own decays; Contentions, Worldlyness, Barrenness, Vanity,
Pride, though less gross then others; as well as for the Idolatry and
Profaneness of the Irreligious. The Reason is, that these sins of theirs
contribute to the bringing down Judgments, and obstructing of Mercies; as well
as the grosser sins of Unbelievers; nay, in some sense more; because they ought
to be Witnesses for God in a degenerate Land. Their Examples encourage the
grosser Villainies of others; they have more Light and Strength to keep
themselves pure; yea, if the number of good Men be considerable in a Land, the
lot of a Nation is mostly determined by them, and Gods regards is much more to
them than others.

If you take the Epistles to the seven Churches to be so particular, as most
do; you may see how God reproves and threatens them, though small portions of
those States, of which they were Members in Civil Respects.

I think I may say that the Repentance of Believers for their sins, must exceed
the Repentance of Unbelievers in some proportion to that Life, Grace and Aids
which they have above those Unbelievers; their Humiliation must be deeper, and
more ingenuous; their resolves stronger; their return more universal; their
Prayers more fervent; their Reformation more extensive, spiritual and vigorous
than other men: In this its true as a man is so to his strength. If their
Repentance be no greater than others, they may expose a Nation, and prove its
ruin

I might proceed to Gentry and Commonalty, to Ministers and People, but time
prevents me, and the same Rules may guide you in these as in the instances
before described: I shall only add, that supposing a part of the Land,
Persecutors, and the other Persecuted for Truths sake; these latter must be
humbled for the sins of Persecutors, and repent of their own sins; and that
according to the advantage which their Afflictions give for their Humiliation
and Amendment.

While men throw repenting work off of themselves to others, as if they could
acquit themselves of Gods Challenge; are there not also sins among you, are you
no way guilty? The Land is like to suffer, and the common condition to be
deplorable.

It Is true, if the design of God be to single out any one sort of a Nation to
suffer by themselves; the impenitents of that sort may not damage the body of
the Nation, further than their struggles with, or their loss of that part may
affect the residue.

As if God resolve to punish Professors of Religion only; their impenitence may
affect the whole no further than the distress of such Professors amounts to,
except as it is an awful omen; because Judgment seldom begins at Gods House,
but it reaches in woeful issues to others afterward.

Or, if God has a Controversy with the Gentry of a Land, their impenitency
may not fatally reach the ordinary people, if penitent. For if God resolves to
punish ravenous domineering Pastors, or Persecutors; their neglect of
Repentance shall not hurt the whole that repents; nay, it will be their
advantage to have them blasted if they remain impenitent, as the Kingdoms
plagues: It Is much more so as to particular Families; whether the highest or
less influencing the corruption of a Commonwealth.

But where God designs not a distinct respect in his Judgments, the
stubbornness of any one sort does threaten the Nation; their not repenting in a
way proper to them, may plunge the whole into a loss of Mercies.

Thus I have, according to my small light, resolved the Case.

The decision of the Case proved.

1. The described Repentance does ordinarily afford a people National Mercies,
notwithstanding National Sins In the resolution of the Case there occurred some
Reasons, and many Scriptures, to evidence this; so that I shall need to say
little more for proof: There seems to be an express Rule in this matter; Jer.
18.7, 8.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to
pluck it up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them.

The Repentance which God has accepted, so as to prolong the welfare of
Nations, was of this sort; as you see in Niniveh and other places. 2 Chronicles.
12.7.
Should we examine the Repentance of any Land, it has rarely arrived to a
greater height: A defect of the Repentance injoined in the Covenant of Grace,
is obvious in that Repentance which has yet been effectual as to National
Mercies. This Repentance answers the great methods and ends of Gods general
Government, as to the Temporal Weal of Nations; and provides a Foundation to
proceed upon in those methods, whereby his Spiritual Kingdom is advanced, and
the Eternal Welfare of Souls is promoted; we may expect God will continue
National Mercies to a People who come up to that Repentance which has
preserved other Nations. 2 Chro. 7.14. And 30.8, 9. Jer. 26.3, 13.
We have great Encouragement to our Hopes from many Texts.

2. Where this Repentance obtains not, a People cannot justly expect National
Mercies. Isa. 8.9.


Let a Nation seem never so safe, its security is vain, and all its supports
shall be blasted by Impenitency. Jer. 15.7.
What though a People are related to God? I will destroy my people, since they
return not from their evil ways. May not their privileges, and pledges of Gods
Presence secure them? No; Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these; will ye steal, murder, commit Adultery,
and swear falsely, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations? Go to
Shiloh, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel; and
now because you have done all these works, and I spoke unto you, but you heard
not: I will do unto this house, Jer. 7.4, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15.
wherein you trust, as I have done to Shiloh, and I will cast you out of my
sight.

Mock shadows of your Repentance, and weak uneffectual Attempts for it, and
14.4.7, 12. and 44.1, 10, 11.
will leave men under disappointments.

When a People is given up to impenitency, and God withholds a Blessing from
the Methods, Isa. 6.9, 10, 11.
that tend to their Repentance; there is just cause of Fear, that Judgments are
determined against that Land. Hear you indeed, but understand not; make the
heart of the people fat, and shut their eyes, least they see with their eyes,
understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed. How long Lord? till
the cities be laidwaste.

God is so positive against a land refusing to return, that their Felicity is
impossible Wrath came upon Judah for this their trespass, 2 Chro. 24.18, 19, 20.
yet he sent Prophets to them to bring them back to the Lord, but they would
not give ear. Thus says God, Why transgress you the commandments of the Lord,
that ye cannot prosper?

Were it otherwise, Gods Name would not be Sanctified, no order in this lower
World would be kept. But further,

Impenitence is not only a Moral Obstacle to good, as it provokes God to
withold it; but its a Natural Obstacle, the wickedness of men is efficient of
Woe to a People, and is in many senses destructive of Mercies, and inconsistent
therewith. Many Enormities of a Nation are its Plagues; as bad Laws, wickedness
in Magistrates, a corrupt Ministry, Oppression, etc. Its Iniquity is even
materially its Ruin.

APPLICATION.
Many Inferences are obvious: As, How dreadful an Evil is Sin. How dangerous to
a Land are multitudes of Offenders. A Nation is foolish that discountenances
Piety, and destroys the godly Party, whereby it strikes at its own Refuge.
How good and long-suffering is God, that calls the vilest Nations to return,
waits long for their Answer, and destroys not till their Repentance be even
hopeless. What Enemies to themselves, Neighbors, and Posterity (bound up in
their doom) are an impenitent people? What sottish and Atheistical Men are
they, that guide their hopes, and fears of a Nations Welfare, by Fancies or
second Causes, but without regard to Gods Favor or Anger, or the influence
that Repentance or Impenitence have upon the ways of God toward a People.
What a dismal Prospect is a Wicked Nation, sporting with their Provocations,
and Warnings?

How uncertain a Tenure do most Nations hold their Mercies by?

But I have not time to insist on these.

I shall briefly apply the Resolution of the Case to our own Nation. We are a
Nation; we have National Sins; Repentance of these Sins is a presage of our
future State, as well as others: I know no exemption, or peculiar allowance, we
can expect at the hands of the righteous Governor of the World. Oh that our
Hearts were under the Power of this awful Truth, that our iniquity may not be
our ruin. Ezekiel. 18.30.


In order to this,

1. I shall insist on some things in order to our Repentance.

2. Enquire, Whether we may groundedly expect National Mercies from our present
Frame.

3. Conclude with an Use of Lamentation of our National Impenitency and Dangers.

In order to our Repentance. I shall

1. Represent to you the National Sins we ought to Repent of. Hereby you will know
what we should be humbled for, resolve against, and reform. What a Terror ought
it be but to mention our Provocations? Oh that a Land of Light should be
chargeable with such Enormities, and yet be secure, and hate to be reformed!

Where shall I begin the Charge? We and our Fathers for some Ages, have been
guilty of the same sins, yet unrepented of. Against whom shall I level the
Indictment? Alas! we have all sinned and done wickedly as we could.
Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and People, the Unbelievers and Believers.
To what sorts of Sins shall I confine my self to? Woe is us, what Sins did God
ever destroy a Land for, that are not National with us.

But that the sound may not appear uncertain, I account my self bound in
Conscience, to be more particular. My subject forces me, not any uncharitable
design. Oh that my own heart were more filled with Zeal for God, and deepest
sorrows for the Nations Sin, whiles I am recording what may offend the guilty,
though the Charge be too plain to admit a Denial? Let us Enquire:

Is England altogether innocent as to its Laws? Do not we see that some of the
terms of Conformity are far other than our blessed Lord has instituted? Are
they not remote from a tendency to advance real Piety, and exclusive of some
things that would much conduce thereto?

Is not a Diocesan Bishop set up? whose sole Jurisdiction bars all the other
Ministers from the Exercise of a great part of their Office, while the Bishop
is utterly unable to perform it, through the largeness of his Diocese?

Is there not more than an Umbrage of Lying and Perjury imposed on all
Ministers? when they must Assent, Subscribe and Swear to what is more than
suspicious, yea utterly false.

Are not a heap of Ceremonies and corrupt Usages reassumed, (though once cast
out) to the facilitating of the return of Popery, dividing of Protestants, and
the scandal of the weak; who are too apt to place Religion, yea all their
Religion, in those Vanities.

How many severe Laws were made against Dissenters, and severely executed to
the ruin of Thousands?

Was it no provocation to silence Two Thousand Faithful Ministers when their
Labors were so necessary, and their places were to be filled up with many
young Men, who have proved fatal to serious Religion? The Sacrament is made a
Politic Engine, to further the Damnation of unworthy Receivers; that all such
may be kept out, whom they suspect any way hazardous to excessive Pomp, and
Ecclesiastic Pageantry.

Can the Land be Innocent, where Atheism is so professed, the most Blasphemous
Oaths are fashionable, Perjury, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Malignity against
all credible Holiness; so common and consistent with Reputation. Was it not
among us, that the Covenant was burnt by the hands of a Common Hangman, and
horrid Murders committed as legal Executions?

Is not that Christian Nation guilty, where profanation of Sabbaths is so
notorious, yea pleaded for as warrantable? Most Families have nothing of Gods
Worship, the plainest Essentials of Religion by few understood; the Operations
of the Spirit turned into Ridicule, and Religion placed in things that bear not
a faint resemblance of the very form of it; while Sobriety its self is mere
matter of Scoff; and the Fountains of Learning send forth many more fitted to
Infect than Reform the Age?

Is it to be concealed, that Men enter on the Ministry, as Apprentices on a
Trade, and use it as a mere means for a Livelihood? How many are Pastors
without the peoples Consent? And too many preach, while unacquainted with the
Gospel as a Law of Faith, and Rule of the Recovery of Apostate Sinners: The
Labors of such have no tendency to Convert or Edify their Hearers; yea alas
Conversion is judged a Foolish thing to urge. All the most Debauched and
Profane are Regenerate, if they were Baptized, and come to Church. Many Souls
eternally perish by the influence of this one principle, and the Ministry is
diverted from its greatest end.

Have we not seen the Ministry too much laid out, to serve the late Governments
in designs of enslaving the Nations, and ruining the Life of the Protestant
Religion? Though amazing was the Providence which almost too late opened some
Men's Eyes by a close attempt against their own places, and so swayed their
Minds, that they contributed to save the Land from that Ruin, which a few more
Sermons of Non resistance (if believed by the Nation) had rendered unavoidable.
The good Lord continue that impulse, least our Miseries become greater by the
beginnings of our Deliverance.

I design not this Account of all our public Ministers, blessed be God there
are many to whom the Interests of Christ were more valuable, than to allow
their Labors to serve any base Design. But this of late was found the way of
Church Preferments, wherewith too many complied; and made the Pulpit a Stage
for a poor Oration, rather than a place to testify for God, or bring Souls
nigher to him.

Are Believers and serious Christians (whom I confine not to any Sect or Party)
free from contributing, to fill up the Measure of our Iniquity? Oh that they
were! then should my Soul rejoice in Hope; but its otherwise: Alas how much
have they made the vilest Abominations their own, by not Mourning for them, and
by their Carnal Liberty contributing to them: Our Gold is become dross. How
unedifying are their Discourses? Isa. 1.22.
How unexemplary is their Walking? Each one seeks himself, and none the things
of Christ: Circumspectness is laid by as unfashionable, The Virgins all slumber
and sleep. How few dare plead the Cause of God, Matthew. 25.5.
or do express his Image! What heartless Duties, froward Passions, notorious
Pride, and neglect of Education of Children? Fast-days are kept without
Humiliation; Sacraments and Sermons are become Lifeless; God is sensibly
withdrawn, and none bemoan it; Religion is dying, and none uphold it.

What a Chilness on the love of Saints to each others? What sordid Divisions
and Distances? A new Standard of Godliness is erected, viz. a Zeal for Parties,
and selfish Interests, under pretense of Christ's Interests: Whiles what is
essentially and undoubtedly his, recommends men little. How little do good men
relish that Life, Light, and Love, which is purely Divine?

Can I excuse Dissenters, as such? No: To say nothing of some of them immersed
in destructive Errors; alas the more Orthodox have a share in polluting and
exposing the Nation. A vain Itch has seized much of our Ministry; we study to
please, rather than profit: We envy one another, run into Extremes, because
others come not up to Divine Institutions. We overlook the Mercy of our Ease
and Liberty, because we abound not as others do.

Tremble! Oh my Soul! to think, how many even of them persecute, by Railing,
lying Reports, Non-communion, and censuring the state of Souls for
Noncompliance with doubtful Notions.

Too many set up uninstituted Terms of Communion, destroy the Pastoral Office,
promote little designs with base Tricks, and grossest Lying, under the covert
of Equivocation and Surmizes?

Were it not that some breath another Spirit, and more suitable to the Divine
Nature, and the Gospel of Christ; I should sit down with Horror, and give up
the Land for lost. The shadow has sensibly eaten up the Substance; we have
fancied, talked and disputed a Gospel Frame, and practical Holiness almost out
of the Land. A dead form is that which most are content with, and carnally
plead for, whiles they profess more purity and power than others.

Are these Evils in the Land or no? Are they Sins? Are they not General? Arise
O God! and Convince us; embitter them to us. Oh was there ever more need to
crave the powrings out of thy Spirit, now its recesses are so manifest. How
discernable will be its powrings out, if thou bless us therewith?

2. I do in the Name of God Call you to this true Repentance for these National
Sins.

We have nothing else left to relieve us, our begun Deliverance will be
Abortive, yea more destructive without Repentance. What Nation ever needed
Repentance more, whom has God oftener Called, and more expressly warned?

He has long waited to be Gracious, and must he destroy us at last, when weary
of Repenting? The Ruins of all our Neighbors cry to us, Repent; or you will be
more Miserable than we are: God seems to be on his way to you with the Dregs of
the Cup. Our Sins are of the grossest Nature, the longest Continuance, and
sorest Aggravations.

Jer. 8.5.
How often has God punished this Land for them? and yet we hold them fast. What
variety of Judgments has he essayed our Reformation by, but in Vain? Thou
Londons Plague and Flames, shall not they Reform thee? Will not former streams
of Blood extinguish our Lusts and Divisions? Shall we force God to repeat them?
We were lately on the brink of Ruin, and yet the same Malignant, Formal and
Irreligious Temper revives.

God has by a Train of Miracles respited our woe, and begun our Deliverance;
Ezra 9.14.
but what are any sort of men amended? Methinks we should have past our own
doom with Ezra. Should we again break thy commandment. etc. Would thou not be
angry with us, till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant
nor escaping?

These Abominations are yet more odious by our Profession and Advantages. To be
acted by such a Notion, wearing a Christian Name! these Villainies were
tolerable among Pagans, in comparison of us, but in a place of Light we have
thus Transgressed, in a Land of Uprightness we have been thus Vile. Isa. 26.10.


Oh the Convictions, Struggles, and Helps, we must have trampled on! The many
Vows we have broken in all these Transgressions. Yet in the midst of our
Rebellion God renews his Call, repent Oh sinful Nation. Let the Cry of Mourners
be heard in our Streets! Oh let shame cover our Face, if you have any pity for
your selves or Posterity, truly repent at last.

View the National Mercies you may enjoy by Repenting, and that you are sure to
loose by hardening your Hearts against it. Read them over again where I named
them, are they not valuable enough to excite your Reformation? Oh that all
would concur in their places to Reform! When will Magistrates restrain Sin,
disanul all bad Laws, and state the terms of our Ministry and Communion; so
that all may be useful, and not spoil their efficacy by guilt contracted at
their admission; nor perpetuate our divisions, the consequences whereof have
been so dismal, and are like to be more so. When will Ministers engage in the
Reformation of the Land, by faithful Warnings, sharp Reproofs, good Examples,
plain and importunate Pleadings? Will the grossly scandalous Gentry and People,
abhor their enormities, and put away their great provocations, whose cry is
gone up to the Heavens? Shall Englands Mercy be secured by a revival of
Strictness of Life, more Love and Power, among Professors? Will you be your
Country and Churches plagues? That great good, which Primitive Saints rejoiced
in the hope of; or overwhelming Judgments, which Posterity will be astonished
at; do depend upon the return we shall make to Gods present Call. Mercies of
the most Glorious Nature are in the Birth, and shall your, even your
impenitence, stifle them?

Oh return, and if you will return, let it be to the Lord your God. Jer. 4.1.
All changes that amount not to this, will avail us nothing. Your Prayers, your
Fast-days, are as water spilt on the ground, without Reformation.

How can I cease till the generality be persuaded to do this, Lam. 5.21. Hos.
5.4.
which is so necessary to our Common Weal? Let us all cry, Turn us O Lord, and
we shall or will be turned. Frame your doings, as men determined to turn unto
the Lord. Set heartily to it with all your might, for it is hard work; delay it
not a moment. Oh God bow our wills, that the Land may jointly answer; Lo, we
come unto thee, Jer. 3.22.
for thou art the Lord our God.

Can you pretend wherein shall we return: Alas, Mal. 3.7.
wherein have we not departed from him? All in a manner is out of frame, every
thing, every person considerably needs amendment. Let us all Unite in this, and
God will bless us with Light and Love for Union in other things. This work
needs all our hands; let us make up that wherein others will be defective; all
striving to begin and outdo each other. Oh that all emulation and strife were
reduced to this, which of us shall first and most Reform?

3. If the generality will not be persuaded to repent of National Sins, let not
particular persons neglect it.

I am loath to descend so low, yet this is better than none. Who knows how many
may be convinced by the Repentance of a few? At least you may preserve your
selves, Ez. 9.4, 6.
and view the public Calamity with more composure than other Men, as having
done your utmost to prevent them.

We know not, but God may delay Judgments for the sake of a few remarkable
Penitents; though we may not commonly expect it.

Shall there be so great cause, and none set themselves to it? Has God none
among us that regard his loudest Calls? Can there be so little Love to his
Name, and Honor, in England, that even a few will not afflict their Souls;
that he is so provoked that a few will not testify against this common
Apostasy?

Poor Nation, that have none that love thy welfare; that all will lose showers
of Mercy for thee, rather than sow in Righteousness.

Ezekiel. 22.30.
Oh that some would resolve this day -- Let not God say, I fought for a man but
I found none. Repent of your Personal Sins, otherwise how can you repent of
National Sins. Examine thy self how far thou art infected with the National
Provocations: What have thou contributed thereto? Charge thy Soul therewith:
Say the measure is so much the fuller for my sake. Bewail thy share; mourn over
the faults of others; thou may grieve for what thou can not reform, but be
sure to reform thy self to thy utmost; reform thy Family; yea, set thy self to
bring all (thou art in thy place capable) to amendment.

Do not judge of faults by the common Opinion; let not the Example of others be
thy Standard; but set the Divine Rule before thee, and review things thereby.
Resolve to stem the Tide, and to judge and act in the face of it. What though
the multitude be against thee; what though Bigots rail; what though many
Professors, yea, Men of thy own Party condemn thee? All is nothing, whiles God
will accept and approve thee: A Man must be singular that will reform himself
in a degenerate Age; he must be resolved, that will attempt to reform others.

2. Let us enquire, whether we may expect National Mercies from our present
frame and state. I believe God will not forsake us, but in time he will do us
good. But the Enquiry is meant thus; Whether Mercy will be immediately enjoyed;
is the wrath of God turned away; and will his progress in a way of Judgments be
stopped?

Can we reasonably conclude, though the Sword has been furbished, it shall not
destroy: Our Warfare is accomplished; the Clouds are past; the bitterness of
Death is over. Dare I say, rejoice O Land in the favor of a reconciled God?
For good, only good, shall presently be unto thee.

I shall by way of Objections give you what is matter of Hopes; and in the
Answer to those Objections give you the ground of my Fears, and in the end
declare my Thoughts.

Object. 1. Are there not some Testimonies of National Repentance, from whence
we may hope Mercy is toward us? As,

1. Penal Laws against the Worship of God are as good as disannulled, and
Persecution is at a stop.

Answ. 1. I wish the general remains of Malignity, argue not a sorrow for that
Liberty.

2. I find most of them that were guilty of Persecution, instead of repenting
of it, do justify it as a just Prosecution; though it was an Usurpation of the
Rights of People, as Men, and as Christians.

3. Are the Sacrament Test, and Act of Uniformity removed?

2. We had a public Fast Day kept with outward Solemnity.

Answ. I Will judge of no Man's Heart, yet I cannot but observe,

1. The most polluting Sins of the Land were not solemnly owned, much less
bewailed. Where was a public acknowledgment of the sinful Silencing Two
Thousand Ministers, because they durst not profane their Office, and plainly
Lie and Perjure themselves. I might name many such other sins; alas, general
Confessions avail little.

2. What public Reformation in Life and Manners appears since that day? What
fewer Oaths? Profaneness is no way abated: Men are returned with the Dog to the
vomit. Now Fastings without amendment are but a mockery with God, and profit
not a people.

3. Men are so far from Repentance, that they cannot endure to be reproved for
their sins. They say you irritate, if you mention their offenses. They like to
hear others accused, but abhor the least hint against their own faults. Tell
the imposer on the Church that uninstituted terms of Communion are sinful, and
rage is awakened. Persuade the bitter Spirit to be Peaceable, and his Tongue is
soon envenomed, and you shall be railed on, as the great disturber.

Object. 2. But a great part of the Land is innocent of some of the most
notorious Crimes; the sober Persons are many, who share not in the Profaneness
of the Land: The persecuted and ejected cannot be guilty of the oppressions
they were under; and many of the Church of England never agreed thereto.

Answ. 1. How little do such truly mourn for those sins of other Men? How much
more common is it to hear the better sort scoff and laugh at Profaneness, than
bewail it? Persecutors are more railed at, than mourned for. By this we become
guilty.

2. Are not there iniquities with the soberer part of the Nation; impenitently
continued in to this day? Do we see backslidings healed; how much more
Mortified, Heavenly, Circumspect, Charitable or Fruitful, are the hopefullest
persons in the Land, by all our Calls? Yea, our Complaints though so general,
little tend to alter us. Isa. 64.6, 7.
Our Righteousness is as filthy rags, we fade as a leaf.

Object. 3. But if we consider the Sovereign dealings of God with us, may not
we expect Mercy, though we see not Repentance? As,

1. God has lately wrought a great Deliverance, when we were on the brink of
ruin, and that by a series of Miracles, when we were as unworthy as we are now.

Answ. 1. Such Deliverances are never completed, and seldom long continue,
where Repentance does not immediately follow. Though God may command
Deliverance first, yet he annexeth Holiness to it; and where that fails, the
beginnings of safety prove a snare, Obad. 17. Ezekiel. 36.23, 25
and do expose to greater distress. When he saved from Babylon, he cleanses
them from iniquity.

2. Do not we find that Deliverance is at a sensible stop, for want of our
amendment? Instruments to save us seem less apt, our Enemies are in better
heart, and a much more threatening posture. The hand of God is at a stop: Those
hopeful touches on the minds of Men, are much defaced: They that mean well are
less spirited and entrusted: They who design ill, are more vigorous and
countenanced. What a Change have a few Months made in our hopes, though they
were raised by the highest displayes of Divine Power and Goodness? It Is almost
true; 2 Kin. 19.3. Isa. 26.18, 17. and 33.11.
You shall conceive chaff and bring forth stubble, your breath as fire shall
devour you.

2. May not we hope that God will finish our Salvation for his own honor; and
not suffer a work, wherein he has so immediately appeared, to be imperfect;
notwithstanding we reform not?

Answ. 1. God has his Honor concerned in giving National Mercies to an
impenitent People, as well as in not perfecting a begun Deliverance. He is
Sanctified in afflicting a sinful Land; Isa. 5.16. Ezekiel. 28.15. Psalm. 74.10, 18.
his Government is exposed in sparing an unperswadable People: Nay, we oftener
find him bear the reproach of not Delivering his Afflicted People, than of not
punishing a Rebellious People.

2. God can secure his Honor in both these respects, with great consistency.
He may ruin Popery in other places, whiles he exposes Protestants to it here.
He may perfect this begun Deliverance in England as to Papists, that they may
not blaspheme; and yet distress Protestants by each other, and so still punish
the Land for its impenitency.

Object. 4. God seems to single out some particular Families for Judgments, who
have been most accessory to the sins of our Land. He has altered the
succession, and so it is probable, he may not punish the Nation for the iniquity
of the Throne.

Answ. 1. God may punish a Land for the sins of a former King, though the
Government be transferred into another Family. God punished Israel with three
years Famine in David's Reign, 1 Samuel 21.1.
for Saul and his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.

2. If others do not take warning by such Judgments, as are levelled against
particular persons, and repent; Judgments will extend beyond those persons or
Families. Successors by the same neglects and provocations, will expose a Land
to miseries; though their title be not derived by descent from former
offenders. Yea, if a new Government and People purge not the Land of the
Crimes, which had their rise in a former Court; the vengeance will follow to
the extent of the infection, and the guilty at least be in danger of misery.
David righted the injured Gibeonites, before the Famine ceased.

3. How little is Profaneness or Irreligion restrained? How faint and few are
the attempts for Reforming the Nation, since God has blessed us with a
prognostic of good, in the Change of our Government? Are Men spirited for
this, as Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. To be infected by others seems easier
than to reform them.

Object. 5. Are we not under such accomplishment of Prophesies, as may argue a
Protestant Kingdom begun to be delivered; shall have its deliverance perfected,
notwithstanding its sinful distempers. Is not the Philadelphian state
beginning; the Witnesses rising; the Ottoman Empire falling, and Antichrists
ruin just reviving and perfecting even to the utmost of the Judgments
determined against him?

Answ. I am well persuaded of all this, and have declared it many years; when
the contrary was more probable as to the posture of affairs here, and in the
rest of Europe; yet let me tell you,

1. That in the accomplishment of these Prophesies, the Spirit will be
abundantly poured out, in order to the eminent Holiness of such places, as
share in these Blessings. All the Promises that refer to these latter days are
full of Peace, Purity of Doctrine, and Worship, and true Godliness. With the
Song for Antichrists Fall, the Church is made ready, and clean linen which is
the righteousness of the Saints, is given to her. Rev. 19.2, 7, 8.


2. Almost at the Entrance of fulfilling these Prophesies, there will be the
most shaking, and astonishing Dispensation toward the Churches, as ever befell
them, Then is the great Earthquake, and 16.18. and 3.10.
such as was not since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake, and so
great. This is that hour of Temptation, which shall eome upon all the world.
These Epistles I take to be Prophetic of the most eminent periods of the
Church State, from Christ's time, to the End of the World; and this Trial is in
the beginning of the Philadelphian State. Its true indeed, this will benefit
the Church at last, and be fatal to its Enemies and false Members, but it will
be terrible to all.

3. Such an awful Dispensation seems necessary to purge the Church, and lay a
good foundation of its real, and lasting Glory. This will be a means to
convince false and irreligious Protestants, Rev. 3.9.
that said they were Jews, and were not. It will pluck up every plant out of
the Church, which God has not planted. Hereby all Constitutions repugnant to
Christ's Interests, will be overthrown. Without such a Paroxisme, how should
degenerated Christianity recover it self? How shall the power of reforming the
Church be rescued out of the hands of such, who hate its Purity, and Spiritual
Welfare?

Its next to impossible, by any Calmer means to settle Peace in the Church, or
awaken Protestants out of that formal Temper, which is the Epidemick Crime of
the Sardinian interval. You have it expressed in those Words, Thou have a name
to live, and art dead. Rev. 3.1.
Many are really dead as Unregenerate, others dead in opposition to Spiritual
Liveliness.

Thus I have represented to you, what seems most considerable as to the posture
of our Land, with respect to National Mercies.

I shall offer my own thoughts upon the whole.

I think the Repentance of England for National Sins is short of that, which
may give us grounds to expect National Mercies.

The methods of God indeed seem designed to make us a happy people, but it must
be in the proper way, and season. The great things God has begun to work, the
Liberty he has settled, the disposition in many young ones to return to God,
and comply with his Designs: his manifest exposing such, who were likely to
obstruct a Reformation, support my Hopes that Blessings are in reserve for this
sinful Land; but yet its probable, that some extraordinary Storm will fall upon
the Nation, as a means to bring us to amendment, and a Testimony from Heaven
against our crying Evils, and shameful Impenitency. By terrible things, God
will prepare us for Blessings; and introduce our Happiness, by that which will
try our utmost Faith. I can hardly account our Foundations sure, while men
justify their Sins, and persist in them. Our very Reformation is impossible,
whiles men of most influence have no heart to it, yea hate, and fear it.

Whenever I see Magistrates engage in reforming us, as their great Duty, and
with their whole might:

When men of power esteem Repentance, to be the truest Interest of the Nation.

When the Ministry is awakened to cry aloud, and does impartially represent to
the Land all its Sins, and Dangers; not mistaking, or palliating our Offenses.

When the Body of the Land, at least a considerable part of it, do crave and
approve of Reformation, and concur with the Means, God shall prepare for it.

Then and not till then, shall I account our Repentance hopeful, and
consequently expect the Blessings to be established, which God seems earnest to
bestow.

Numb. 24.22.
But who shall live when God does this? What overturnings will effect it, when
so many have failed to do us any good? Its something very amazing, which can
alter Minds so averse; or remove men unchangeably Obstinate: Yet the
Providence of God toward England are like to be terrible in proportion to all
this.

I do not herein limit the Holy One, but humbly propose my thoughts, as to the
usual aptitude of Means to their End; not wholly neglecting the indications of
present Providence, as to this matter; much less would I overlook Scripture
Prophesies.

USE of LAMENTATION.
Let us Lament the Impenitency of the Nation, and its forfeiture of Mercies,
and hazard of Judgments hereby.

Jer. 8.6.
What can be Cause of Mourning equal to our Obstinateness? We are guilty of
bloody Crimes, and most regard it not: We seem reconciled to our Abominations,
as if they were innocent; and are as secure as if God had not threatened to
punish a people for them.

The Land is full of Sin, after all the means which were sent to cleanse us.
The Fire has devoured, yet our Dross remains. The plague has in its Rage
swept away Thousands, yet the provocations of England abate not. How often has
the Lord cried, Will thou not be clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 12.27.
But we have held fast our several Iniquities.

Its but lately, that Popery and Slavery, were coming on us like a Deluge to
the amazement of all, that could with any Zeal consider it; but the Nation now
seems sorry, that it was at all Convinced; and repents, that there was the
least motion in it toward amendment.

Oh the ferment! that hastily succeeded our Fears, least Sobriety or Holiness
should obtain. God has followed his rebukes with undeserved, yea unexpected
Mercies; but this Sunshine has made Weeds to grow, instead of rendering
Judgments effectual, to make us Holy.

What Methods have been untried, but none succeed. Which is the Nation, that
ever withstood so many, and various Calls to Repentance? Niniveh is England's
Reproach; she repented at the first warning. Sodom would have condemned us, had
it been trusted with half our Advantages. Can the Earth show an Instance of
perverseness, equal to ours? As if the Gospel had extinguished Natural
Conscience, or a Christian Profession did make us more regardless than Pagans.
Every thing seems to harden us, we grow worse by those things that recover
others.

Alas! We have few that bemoan our want of Mourning; are all our Jeremiah's
asleep, that none drop a Tear for England's Security? Do all think it needless,
or hopeless, to turn unto the Lord, that so few seem to set themselves in
earnest about it. How very few symptoms have we, that we are not under a
judicial Hardness? Many are convinced they ought to Repent, yea many resolve
it, but how Abortive does all prove? Our Iniquities baffle our Resolves, and
Satan triumphs over the vanity of our Purposes. What a hateful prospect does
our Nation afford to God and Angels? We are a wonder to our selves, when a
Drowsy Mind allows us to entertain any serious Considerations.

Lord what will the End of these things be? Will thou always bear, and seem to
observe our Provocations, as slightily as we do? Alas! this would make us more
miserable, than Gods sorest Rebukes: Judgments more awful than any we have yet
felt, are become even necessary to our Happiness; but though they be needful,
what heart can endure them? What Terror must attend those Dispensations, which
will separate the Precious from the Vile, pluck up Constitutions so rooted by
Interest, Custom, Malignity and Ignorance: Disable the Irreligious from
settling Church or State; and imbitter our reigning Sins to careless, scornful
and resolute Offenders?

How dreadful is that storm, that will drive all good Men together; when they
are cantoned into so many Parties, embittered by mutual Prejudices, fond of,
and valuing themselves by fond Opinions, and distances from others; especially
whiles self-conceit and ignorance so prevail?

How hot is that Fire, which will purge out the Dross among Churches, when its
eaten even into our Hearts? What Is that which can awaken drowsy Saints, make
the selfish public Spirited, bring the careless to holy Watchfulness; and
revive that simplicity, savouriness, and heavenly-mindedness, which is become
such a Mystery, and so unfashionable?

Surely we may expert a complication of Woes, and each filled with unusual
degrees of Gods avenging Skill and Power.

What may not we awfully expect? Disappointment by the likeliest men,
dissolution of the most conceited Churches, a shaking of the Nations Pillars, a
successive change of Instruments, frequent blasts on begun Deliverances,
revivals by the most improbable Instruments, many entire over-turnings and
changes; opposition among the best Friends, very near Approaches of the most
dreaded Mischiefs, Men's minds struck with tremblings, all Carnal Refuge failing
us, Reason put to a Nonplus, Probable and Improbable confounded beyond
Conjecture, Counsel hid from the Wise, Force and Power baffled, Authority
become weak, all Order disturbed, Men at a loss what to wish, or deprecate;
uncertain what to Hope or Fear, whom to distrust, or confide in?

These, and many such things seem obvious, in the Constitution of that day of
the Lord, that is like to be upon us. And how many more awful things are in his
Treasures, to fill up that Dispensation, of which he has so long warned the
World, as strange, and unusual? We cannot judge of this great Earthquake (which
will affect us as well as other Nations) by what has been; for it is to exceed
all that is past.

Who knows what new sights, strange strokes upon the Spirits of Men, and
unheard of Judgments, may be reserved for this Season.

Can we love our Nation, and be unmoved? Can we hate our selves so, as not to
Lament, that these awful things should find us impenitent; yea, carry in them
displeasing rebukes for that impenitency?

Should not we all wish, that each of our Eyes were Fountains of Tears, to
bewail at once, the Obstinateness, and the impending Dangers of the Land of our
Nativity. Look away from me, I will weep bitterly; labor not to comfort me,
Isa. 22.4, 5.
because of the spoilings of the daughter of my people. For it is a day of
trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts in
the valley of vision, breaking down of walls, and of crying to the Mountains.

FINIS.

