THE ANNALS OF LOVE, Containing Select HISTORIES OF THE Amors OF DIVERSE
PRINCES COURTS, Pleasantly Related.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near Temple Bar,
1672.

THE PREFACE.
THE Age we live in, pretending to so much subtilty, and the liberty of writing
Intrigues, being grown so common; to prevent public mistakes, I have thought
good to premise this Advertisement; That these Annals of Love are really
History, whose Fountains and Originals, I have on purpose inserted in the
ensuing Table. They are no witty and facetious Inventions, exhibited under true
Names (of which kind I have seen lately an ingenious Essay) but faithful
touches taken out of History in general. There was formerly a Countess of
Castile, who ran away from her Husband with a Pilgrim into France. There were
Fraticelles, and they condemned for the same Crimes by Boniface VIII. and
Clement V. Let no man expect a Scheme of our present Hypocrisy in this Book;
he that does, will be mistaken, and find nothing but a faithful Relation of the
Iniquity of old times. I confess I have presumed to add some Ornaments to the
simplicity of History: The Majesty of Historical matters will not allow a
judicious Author to dilate upon Accidents of Love, he speaks of them but in
transitu, and it must be no less than an eminent Battle, or the subversion of a
State, contempt him to a digression. I have excused my Annals for this sort of
austerity. When the History of Spain tells me a Sovereign Countess of Castile
followed a poor Pilgrim into France, I cannot imagine things could run so high
in a moment: they must see one another, they must meet, and discourse, before
she could come to so strange a resolution. I have augmented the History
therefore with several Enterviews, and amorous Dialogues of mine own: If they
are not what they really spoke, they are at least what they might. I have no
Memoires to trust to, but my own Fancy; when I am better supplied, or assured
my Gallants delivered themselves better than I have made them in my Annals, I
will be content with all my heart, to have my Complements expunged, and their
own put in their places. But considering the Historians do all render them
mute, why should not I make them speak as I think good my self.

If in the Conferences and Passages I have invented, there happens any
resemblance with the Intrigues of our Age, it is no fault either in the History
or in me, that was writ long before I was born, and I protest I thought nothing
of the present, when I spoke of what was past. But there having been Lovers,
and loving from the beginning of the World, it is hard to conceive but those
who have been always susceptible of the same sentiments, will be liable to the
same actions. A man is a man now, as he was six hundred years since. The Law of
our Ancestors is ours, and we love, as they loved formerly: Is it to be admired
then, if what happened in former Ages, bears a Conformity with ours? It is no
more extraordinary to see a Lover in 1669. make Love as they did in 950. than
it is to see a Child born this year with the same Members or Elements which
composed the Children of Adam and the Patriarchs. These are the common effects
of Nature, not subject to the revolutions of time; and I cannot but wonder
people should be so idle, as to Philosophize upon so natural a similitude.
Besides this, I have endeavored to comprehend a Moral sense in all things,
though (apparently) never so irregular. If I bring in a Religious person
speaking abominably, and contrary to the Sanctity of his Name and Profession,
it is but to render that kind of Impiety the more horrible, and to illustrate
the Excellence of Virtue: If I drive on the Immodesty of Women even to
Impudence, it is but to represent that Vice in its more natural Colors. Indeed
it is many times dangerous to give a feeble and imperfect description, in some
cases a Woman may be overcome by a temptation, which (had she known all the
consequences of the History) she would probably have mastered. And that I might
interlace, and inlay my Examples with profitable Precepts, I observe this
Maxim in all of them, to punish Vice, and reward Virtue. With this Caution it
is lawful to bring the most detestable action upon the Stage. The Scenes of
Congregations and Colleges are filled with Assasinations and Murders;
Sacrilege and Martyrdom, we see frequently confounded; and yet there is no
thoughts of putting them down. As the Crime is not exposed, but for the Triumph
of Innocence, so no body has so ill an opinion of his Neighbor, as to take
that for an Exhortation to Vice, which is but an ingenious way to discourage
it. I conjure the Readers of my Annals ^o have a care of that fault; they may
meet Vice in ^his Book represented many times to the life; but let them take
notice also, if they please, these Pictures were drawn but to render it more
ugly. The Allegorical sense makes good the literal all along, and the liberty
of the style, which perhaps runs high now and then in serious occasions, ought
to be looked upon but as designs of diversion, otherwise they will injure the
intention of the Author, who meant no more than their divertisement.

An Account of some Historical Passages contained in the Annals of Love.
Don Garcias Ferdinandee Count of Castile, and the Countess his Wife, History
of Spain, in the Reign of Raymire sixteenth King of Oviedo, and fourth of Leon,
Tom. 1. from the year 941. to 956.

That which I have added to the truth of this History, is easily observed by
the Reader.

Alfrede called by that Name, History of Engl. in the Reign of Edgar, 975.

There are so few additions or alterations in this Story, they are not worth
the taking notice of.

Otho III. Grandchild to Otho the Great, and Mary his Wife.

Frisin. lib. 6. Sigon. lib. 7. and for further satisfaction the Abridgment of
the general History of Jurcelin, in the year 984.

There is more of invention in this Story, than in any of the rest, but if the
Reader will take the pains to examine it, he will perhaps find the truth so
well disguised, he will not go about to find faul^ with the Author.

The three Princesses of Castile, and their three French Lords, (...) Hist. of
Spain in the Reign of Alphonso VI. third King of (...) Castile, and 20. of
Leon. Anno Dom. 1083. to 1127.

If the Reader will please to examine that History, he will ^^d the Invention
and the Truth not ill intermingled; the ^ounds are absolutely Historical, the
Fabulous part (which (...) the Ornamental) does not want its resemblances, all
taken (...) hints out of the History it self.

Frideric or Frederic surnamed Barberossa, Sigeb. in his Chro. Frisin. in the
History of Frederic, Sigon. l. 12. Abridg. of Jurcelin, An. 1154.

The difference betwixt the Pope and the Emperor, is ^escribed formally in the
Story. The Sedition of the Guelphs ^^d the Gibelins, and the Marriage of Henry
IV. with Con^^ance (who had been four years a Nun) is no less authen^^ck. The
Galantrie of the Cloister is taken out of private ^emoires; and some are of
opinion Constance was Niece to ^^lement III. and not to Alexander. But besides
that, that ^^rcumstance is uncertain, and not positively to be decided: (...)
is of so little importance to our Annals, I think it not ^^orth the time to
dispute it.

The Amors of James King of Arragon, Hist. Hisp. Reg. Ferdinand. IX. Castil.
Reg. An. Dom. 1228.

This Story is taken almost word for word out of that ^hronicle. That that is
added, is only a little piece of Gal^antry to bring in the Articles of Marriage.

The Fraticelles.

This History is taken out of so many famous Authors, so many Memoires and
Manuscripts, that it would take up a whole Table to recite our Authorities.
Platus has a whole Chapter upon them. Baronius is so particular in their
debaucheries, I dare not expose them to a modest ^eader. I confess Hortensia is
the Daughter of mine own ^ancy, but there was a necessity of some person which
might ^ive occasion for the declaration of their Doctrine. If it was not to
this Hortensia, they spoke what is mentioned in my Annals, it was to some body
else; for by consent of all Authors, that was their thoughts. If any of my
Readers be scandalized with that liberty, I refer him to my Preface.

The Extravagance of Dulcinus King of the Lombards, and of Marguerite his Wife.
Annal. Eccles. 1310. S. Anth. Arch. of Flor. lib 20. Abr. de Turcel. Reg. Hen.
VII.

This Extravagance is in History represented so horridly, I thought it my duty
to give it a better shape. Dulcinus and Marguerite introduced a custom of
promiscuous enjoyment in all sorts of people, without choice or distinction. I
have moderated that, and turned it to the changing of Husbands and Wives, which
though it be contrary likewise to the Laws of the Church; yet among Persons of
Honor, I think it would be more excusable than the other. As to Nogaret, there
was a man of that Train, at that time accompanied by Sara Colonna into Italy:
and supposing there was such an Examen of Husbands discontented, and Wives not
satisfied, it is not improbable but their Arguments and Impeachments might be
of that nature.

Don Pedro Rex Castil. XIV. Hist. Spain, Regn. ejusd. Anno 1344. ad 1360.

This Story is well-near word for word, only the Amor of Nugnez is
suppositious.

If the fidelity of this Table be suspected, I only desire the Readers to
suspend their Judgments, till they know the Author; when they know who it is,
they will believe in good breeding he deserves some connivence; and perhaps
some of them may confess there is more in his Annals, than they expected from
him.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE.
THE FIRST PART.
LOVE is agreeable in all forms, and has its influence upon all persons. We
have seen Queens in Love with the meanest of their Officers; it reigns in the
dull and almost dead eye, as well as in the brisk and sparkling: nor is there
any Condition of Mankind, from the Prince to the Pilgrim, but stoops to that
yoke, and may become an Ornament of its Triumph. Of this the Countess of
Castile is a most pregnant Example. She was descended from the Illustrious
Family of the Vermandois, she was a great Beauty, and married to a Count, whose
Estate since that time has composed a considerable Kingdom. His Court was
numerous, and the Castilian Gallantry, the most remarkable in all Spain. But it
was not with the Charms of a Courtier, the Countess was to be won, her Virtue
was impregnable as to Magnificence, or Spruceness; it must be a Hat with large
brims, a Rochet set with shells, must work upon her. The Luster of that Diadem
to which her Husband Don Garcia Fernandez was born, made less impression upon
her heart, than the counterfeit humility of a Pilgrim of S. James. This Hero
traveling to Compostella through the Kingdom of Castile, and understanding the
Countess was originally French, and particularly gracious to that Nation, he
resolved to have his share of it as well as the rest of his Countrymen. He got
himself presented by the Master of the Hospital at Burgos; where being
received, and the excellence of his Mien piercing through the obscurity of his
habit, the Countess found him immediately so complete, she retarded the
accomplishment of his Vow for some weeks, she conjured him to repose himself
for some time at her Court in Castile; and because his Equipage was not likely
to render him considerable, she found out a pretense to furnish him more nobly
her self. There was not a Family in France to which he said he was allied, but
was akin likewise to the Countess: so covering the real indigence of her
Pilgrim with the Mask of voluntary Penance, he was introduced into the Court
under the Name of Hugo d'Anjou descended from the Counts of Guien first Cousins
to the Countess, and that out of an excess of Devotion he was marching in
Pilgrimage to Compostella. He could not have had better Titles to recommend him
in that Country; for Don Garcias loved his Wife very well, and the Castilians
are a people naturally sensible of any act of Devotion. Thus far therefore our
Hugo is happy, being lodged in the Counts own Palace, and reverenced by his
whole Court for the profound humility which they supposed in him. His change of
Habit could be no disadvantage to him; it is not to be imagined, but he was as
graceful to the eyes of the Countess in the Fashion of a French Lord, as in the
Weeds of a Pilgrim. She made him tell her the Adventures of his Voyage, and
pressed it with as much importunity as was possible, she would not suffer him
to omit the least Circumstance, and for as much as good Lodging is a rare
Commodity among Pilgrims, and he had occasion sometimes to mention the
unkindness of the Servants where he lay, the good Lady was so tenderhearted,
and so sensible of his sufferings, she could not forbear blurting out unto
tears.

As sly Aeneas told his mournful tale
To gentle Dido, and so played his part;
Not only for belief he did prevail,
But riggled himself into the Ladies heart.
So our Land-Pilgrim understood so right
To explicate h troubles by the way,
That not a stumble, or a start in the night,
But spoiled the Countess's Eyelids all that day.
How great is Love! and arbitrary, all
Follows the mighty dictate of his will,
Interest, Honor, what we Generous call,
Ambition, truckle to his Scepter still.
Religion (which I Would thought would never submit)
Stoops with the rest, and kisses Cupids feet.
Hugo d'Anjou the Pilgrim perceiving (by the compassion the Countess expressed in
the beginning of his disasters) that she was favorably disposed toward him;
resolved to give her better occasion than the bare relation of his Pilgrimage.
He was perpetually attending, and indeed so much that his assiduity would have
been suspicious in any body but a Cousin. He was always ready with some
pleasant Story or other, when ever she commanded, he gathered constantly the
best flowers for his Lady Cousin, and her Chamber; and then cutting off his
discourses with sudden and most profound sighs (which were easily
distinguishable from throbs of Devotion) he inspired so much Curiosity into the
Countess, that nothing could serve her turn but the History of his Life, she
pressed him very hard, she must have every Accident, and Hugo was so cunning to
let her press as often as he thought was necessary, to make his compliance the
more grateful, at length he did it in this manner.

The History of the Pilgrim.
I Will not tell you, Madam, that I am of a Family has reckoned Kings of
France among it Predecessors. The ridiculous Proverb, that Travelers may lie
by authority, renders Strangers so suspectible of that vanity, that the best
way to discover ones Quality, is to conceal it. Here the Countess interrupted
him, and pretending to know him better than he knew himself, she ran out into
so large a Genealogy of his Illustrious Ancestors, that she saved him the
trouble of inventing one; she deduced him from Eudes, and Robert Earls of
Anjou, Governors of the Kingdom of France under Charles III. surnamed the
Simple, and quoted several historical Chronologies to prove it, which perhaps
she had never seen in her life, so that the Nobility of his Extractions cost
him nothing but two or three nods with his head by way of concurrence and
confirmation.

Since then, Madam, continued the Pilgrim, I find you so well versed in my
Pedigree, I shall trouble you with nothing but the affairs of my heart.

The Countess blushed at that word, and Hugo perceived it well enough, but like
a cunning Sophister, took no notice, but went on with his Discourse.

I was never aimable enough to be beloved; had I ever had that good fortune, I
would have dyed before I would have betrayed it: but (having been always ill
treated) I may confess (without indiscretion) I have had some little
inclinations formerly to a Lady of our Court, of as great Beauty and Quality as
most that were there. Her cruelty rather than any inconstancy in me, disingaged
me in a short time; and since, but why? Madam, said he (as if he had
recollected himself) shall I be so vain, as to discover my own weaknesses? Yes,
yes, I will do it. You are an excellent person, and I have already had
experience of your goodness.

I had framed an Idea of Beauty to my self, which I worshipped at my soul, but
could not meet with it in any person I could find: this pleasant Chimera
entertained me whole days, I was unquiet, made Verses, as I had been in Love, I
described her with the best Eyes, the best Mouth, the best Hair, made her shape
incomparable, her smile bewitching, and when I had done, gave up my soul wholly
to the adoration of the Picture, though if my soul had been at stake, I knew
not where to have found out the Original. This passion bordering much upon
folly, I was not a little ashamed of my self, and the instances of my reason
tormenting me with remorse, as often as the pleasantness of the folly inveigled
my desires, I became so melancholy, I was hardly to be known. A particular
Friend of mine, a man of great sagacity, was the first which perceived it, he
asked me the cause, and our intimacy not permitting me to dissemble, I told him
the truth. He had more patience for my Frenzy, than I expected he would have
had, for though he was severe to himself, he had great kindness for his
friends. He judged by the relation I had made of my follies, that
Remonstrances, or Arguments would do but little good, and therefore concluded
upon another way of giving me relief; He cast my Nativity, rectified his Figure
most accurately, and according to the strictest Rules of that Art, and at last
found, that if any thing restored me to my former tranquillity, it must be a
Pilgrimage to Saint James. I was affrighted at the Proposition; people of my
Age and Quality, do not relish those excesses of devotion: But the hopes
wherewith my passion had been flattered, having transported it to the highest
degree of irregularity, it was not possible for me to resist its violence any
longer; I put my affairs in as good a posture as my impatience would give me
leave, and coloring my Journey with a specious pretense, that it was a Vow my
Father had taken before, that dying of a sudden, he had enjoined me to
accomplish it for him, I began my Pilgrimage. This, Madam, is the true reason
that has transported me from Hugo d'Anjou, to a poor Pilgrim of S. James, and
though I cannot say my submission to the direction of the Heavens, has moved
them to compassionate my folly, or attribute it to the effect of a Sympathy
with which I dare not flatter my self; yet this I do certainly find, that my
desires are tending to their accomplishments, that my mind is more at ease in
Burgos than in any other place, and that the favors you are pleased to
vouchsafe me, do afford more consolation to my disquiets than I could be
capable of receiving from any one besides.

The politic Pilgrim durst not explain himself any farther the first time, but
reserved it to future Conversation to make himself more intelligible, the
Character of his Chimerical Mistress, answered exactly to the qualifications of
the Countess, and he lost no opportunity of inculcating the resemblance, to
which the disposition of the Stars contributed very largely. The Countess was
the Wife of a Sovereign Prince, and in appearance inclined naturally to Virtue;
but when one is carried away with an opinion of the Celestial Influence, there
is no room left for the Counsels either of Honor or Reason. No doubt but the
good Lady was sorry at the heart for the fatality of her Stars, but she did not
believe it was possible to evade them. She would have sworn her adventure was
decreed from the Creation of the World, and how then could she withstand so
firm a predestination? She yielded therefore without any farther reluctance;
the Pilgrim spoke his mind, and it was favorably received; and that I may not
spin out more time in the insinuation of a thing so easily comprehended, Hugo's
affection languisht not above a month in the agonies of its discovery: having
past so painful an obstetrication, the Countess and he began to use more
liberty in their converse. But is it possible, said she to him one day, that
the accidents you have related to me of your life, should be true? But is it
possible, replied the Pilgrim, you can doubt it after what you have seen? Am
not I Hugo d'Anjou? Was not I going for Compostella, when I had the happiness
to see you? Did I not adore you from the first moment I beheld you, and if I
may believe your gracious glances, were not you sensible from the first, of the
Love you had kindled in me? Believe me, Madam, this Sympathy is but an effect
o^ my Star, which could never have bin excited by any body but you; And I
believe the same Sympathy would not have been acted in you for any body bu^ me;
but we were born to love one another, the Conjunction of the Stars have ordered
it, and it i^ not possible for us to resist our Destiny. To te^^ you the plain
truth, replied the Countess, with a ^igh, this Destiny you speak of has taken
but an odd kind of way to arrive at its ends, for it might well have excused
making me the Wife of a Prince, seeing I was born to be the Mistress of a
Pilgrim: at this rate they had several Discourses; their pretended
Consanguinity furnishing them with an unsuspected liberty of entertaining
themselves when they pleased, but this was not sufficient for our Pilgrim. He
was in perpetual fear something or other should be discovered, which might be
fatal either to his Love, or his life; and not being able to continue at Burgos
much longer in that anxiety, he ventured to propose to the Countess to bear him
company her self. The motion was somewhat sudden, but she was more surprised
than offended when she heard it, and no wonder; for a Woman which once yields
up her heart to disloyalty, makes no scruple of running forward upon whatever
she is desired; the greatest difficulty was, to find a specious pretense. The
first thing they pitched upon was a Pilgrimage, which had been so favorable
already to Hugo's designs, they expected no less in the behalf of the Countess.
But Don Garcias was inexorable, they despaired to prevail with him; he could
not endure to be so long from his Wife, who pretended necessities and
revelations, but to no purpose, he was deaf to all her inspirations, and had he
not fallen into a desperate sit of sickness (as it had been in revenge of his
obstinacy) he had never consented to the Countesses peregrination: But the
danger he was in, giving her the pretense of a vow for his recovery, and the
approbation of certain good Christians (of which that Climate is very fertile)
having fortified her resolution; she promised solemnly in the presence of the
great Officers of the Court to go on foot to Saint James, if it pleased God to
restore her Husband to his health. He recovered, to the great satisfaction of
our Lovers, and the Countess counterfeiting the fear of his relapse, if she did
not accomplish her Vow with all possible speed, used her utmost endeavor, that
she might accompany her Cousin in his religious Voyage. This extravagant zeal
displeased Don Garcias exceedingly, he would have chosen a second distemper,
rather than the departure of his Wife: But the Religious people in Burgos
belabored his resolution so hotly, they overcame it at last, and the pious
Countess was permitted to march. In this manner she was turned Pilgrim, and
upon her way to Compostella with her well beloved Cousin. The slenderness of
her Equipage being an essential part of her Vow, she would let no body attend
her but an old Governess, (very subject to compassion for the frailties of
Nature) and a Footman, which by the consent of all Authors, served all
Offices, and was sometimes the French Cook, and sometimes Gentleman Usher. Such
extraordinary Pilgrims as these, ought to have no ordinary Conduct: they
advanced by small Journeys; whatever was better than ordinary in their Inns,
they would be sure to have it; if Music, and Songs were to be had, they would
have their share: and now I speak of Songs, it puts me in mind of a few Verses
in the nature of a Satyr made upon their Pilgrimage, which I hope the Reader
will not take unkindly, if I insert in this place.

We, we, are Pilgrims of Saint James.
We burn like you, with wanton flames.
Be sure, you send your Wives from home,
For we plant Horns where e're we come:
And in our Travels take such measures,
We preach up death, but practice pleasures.
You that hate all ill words, but what you give
And Prisoners in Palaces do live;
Rub up your Piety, and a place endow
Where we may mollify your Mates, and you.
And the good man whose Charity's so great
To furnish us a close and safe retreat;
We Will pray the Gods reward him with long life,
And do as much to's Daughter, and his Wife.
The design of our Lovers being to follow the Road to Compostella no longer
than needs must; the Countesses Magazins were provided for a much greater
Journey: she had Money, and Jewels good store, and the Lacquay being very well
chosen, they fetched a short turn, and recovered by his industry whatever was
convenient for their progress to Bayonne. They reposed there for some time, and
her Honor not thinking it fit to retain the name of Isabel de Vermandois, by
which she was called being Don Garcias Wife, she assumed the Title of Madame
Valerie, with which she past several Cities and Towns, till at length she
arrived in Paris, a place more proper to conceal her Intrigues, than any other,
and moreover it was the place where her Gallant was born. The Pedigree of this
Pilgrim proved not so Illustrious as he had hinted at Burgos; he was scarce a
Gentleman, and but meanly provided with Estate, but the merit of the man
supplied his defects.

In the mean time Don Garcias (who consented to the Pilgrimage of his Wife,
with no little regret) began to be impatient for her return. He could not take
a nap, but he looked upon it as ominous, the commonest Accidents past for
Prodigies with him; and though the Countess writ to him from all places, and
dated her Letters from the Road to Compostella, yet he had a secret Devil
tormented him violently, and nothing could satisfy him, but he must go after
her himself. He departed from Burgos without any Train, only some certain
necessary Officers, and two or three of his most intimate Courtiers, supposing
he had not had above two or three days Journeys to his Countess, he ordered his
affairs at home according to the proposed time of his absence, but he was
mistaken in his scale, and might have gone twenty times to Compostella, and
never heard of his Wife, had not the curiosity of some people shortened his
Journey. The persons which attended him, growing weary of their Voyage, and
(perhaps) suspecting the truth, resolved amongst themselves to try if they
could discover the business, instead, of inquiring upon the Road to Galicia,
they sent toward France, for Intelligence that way, and it was no hard matter
to inform them: For the Countess was remarkable, and all the descriptions that
were made of Madame Valery, answered exactly to the Countess of Castile. News
of this Nature is so unpleasant to tell, the Courtiers with Don Garcias
complemented one another for some time, who should have the honor to deliver
^^, every man being unwilling to be the Messenger of so unwelcome Intelligence.
At length an ancient Officer of the Counts (more familiar with him something
than the rest) undertook the design; he took ^is advantage one night, staid in
the Counts Cham^er when the rest were gone out, and having premised some
unprofitable morsels of Morality, he desired Don Garcias to proceed no further
in his Jourmey; for (said he) it is not in the Road to Compostella your Lady is
to be sought: it is easy to be imagined, whether the Count was surprised at
that word. He had often supposed that the convenience of this Pilgrimage might
deliver the two Cousins from the scruple of Incest pretended; but he could not
believe the Countess could carry it on farther than some few false oaths of
conjugal fidelity. He questioned the old Domestic, and the more questions he
asked, the more he was informed; and yet not being able to convince himself of
so incredible a thing, he could not without great difficulty believe what he
saw.

He dispatched new Scouts upon the heels of the old; he gave order for pursuing
the Pilgrims, not only where he judged they might possible be, but in such
places likewise where he was assured they were not. These Hue and Cries
confirmed him in what had been told him; he received attestations from all the
Inns where the devout Lovers had reposed betwixt Burgos and Bayonne, and of the
liberty they used. Don Garcias understood so many particularities of their
Travels, that he doubted no^ but he was a Cuckold. That Title disquieted him
more than any thing else, it was an appellation he always reckoned amongst the
most insupportable in the World. But he must be patient in spite o^ his teeth;
he was not the only man had practiced that virtue; for whilst he was making the
best of a bad Market, and meditating revenge suitable to his injury, Cupid was
taking care to provide him Companions, that the fellow-feeling of one another
calamities might be an alleviation to them all.

The Star that was so fatal to the Husband this year, had not confined its
influence to the Climate of Castile; the cold as well as hot Countries felt the
force of that Constellation. Earl Ethelwold a Favorite to Edgar King of
England, had gained so far upon the affections of his Majesty, that he governed
both his Subjects and desires as absolutely as himself. This King acted nothing
but by his Counsels, saw nothing but by his Eyes, and as if he had been to love
nothing but with his heart, he entrusted him to go and view a young Lady called
Alfreda, (Daughter and Heir to the Duke of Devonshire, one of the greatest
Lords in that Kingdom) of whom he had heard so well, that if his Favorite
sound her as she was represented, he resolved to make her his Wife. Besides her
Beauty, her Fortune was so great, it was no Policy in the King, to commit the
choice of her to Ethelwold. The Duke of Devonshire had been the cause of great
troubles during the Reign of the precedent King; for which he was confined to
his own Territory, and that was the reason Alfreda had never appeared in the
Court ^f England. In this manner was this Favorite qualified with a Commission
to furnish the King with a Wife, and the Throne of England with a Queen. This
Conjuncture seemed very consonant with his designs, he flattered the King in
his desires ^f marrying Alfreda; and though intending nothing less than that
she should be his Queen; the ^eparted with absolute power, to conclude or break
^ff the Marriage as he judged convenient.

MAXIM I.
He that with too much power imploys his Friend
In Love Intrigues, runs greater hazard far
(Example tells) than he is perhaps aware.
Unbounded power, (whatever it may pretend)
But seldom answers the expected end.
For if by chance unfaithful one does prove,
(And who will strive against his own desire)
His very trust provokes him to aspire.
He that can once for's friend with freedom move,
Takes greater freedom, and fr' himself makes Love
^thelwold being arrived in Devon-shire, and the pri^ate Article of his
Commission, being the examination of her Beauty, he resoved to see her before
he ^^ade any Proposals. He pretended he had taken ^^at Journey to set the Duke
right once more with ^^e Crown of England, and this good office deser^ing all
the Civility could be showed him, the Daughter was called down, to bear a part
in the acknowledgments. Never did old Story speak of any Lady with so much
advantage as the English Chronicle does of Alfreda: the description made of her
therein, relishes more of Romance than veritable Narration; and yet the effects
her Beauty produced were so strange, and so great, they seem to justify the
Elogy they gave her. The Count was dazzled at the very first glance, and this
surprise was presently converted into a violent passion, and that into a
resolution never to put her into the arms of his Master. He proceeded presently
to a Treaty, but it was for himself, thereby teaching Posterity, that in
matters of Love they should never give their Agents so absolute a power, as may
tempt them to abuse it. There being no person in the Court of England so great
as Ethelwold, the Duke of Devon-shire took the Proposition as a very great
Honor, and granted it without any demur, so that all things being concluded,
and nothing wanting to consummate all but the Nuptial Benediction, Ethelwold
gave the Duke to understand, that in duty he was obliged to let his Majesty
know of it before; under which pretense he took his leave of the Duke for some
time, and returned presently to Court, where he gave Edgar a description of
Alfreda quite contrary to what he had already conceived. True it is, Sir, said
the Count to the King; Alfreda has all things about her requisite to the making
a Lady handsome, and yet with all those ingredients, she is far from it her
self. She has an ill Mien, which discredits her shape, she has a red Lip, but
without any sweetness; her Eyes are large, gray, and well set, but she has a
way of opening them, which renders them abominable; her looks are so childish,
and silly, they take much from the excellence of her Complexion; in short, Sir,
the features and proportions of this Lady are not made for one another, they
are so hudled together, their confusion spoils their retail, and never was
there person before the Duke of Devon-shires Daughter that had so much hard
favourdness, and so much Beauty together. To this extravagant Character
Ethelwold added certain pretended reasons of his own; as that since the Duke of
Devon-shire had been banished the Court, he had contracted great debts, and
engaged a considerable part of his Country to the Earls and Dukes that were his
Neighbors; that he was odious to the English; that his Journey into
Devon-shire having given some Alarm, and suspicion, the people began already to
declaim against the Match, and in this manner employing all parts to divert his
Majesty from those inconvenient desires; he wrought upon him so, that he gave
over his design. But this single effect of his Counsels could not content him,
he knew Edgar was of an amorous Complexion, and he must find out something or
other to entertain him. Ethelwold sent up and down, inquired himself, and it
was not long before he was provided; England is not barren of Beauties, and it
was a Mistress for his Majesty he wanted. He pitched therefore upon a young Lady
called Wilfrede, who had withdrawn her self into a Monastery to avoid the
insolences of her Guardian. She was young, unfortunate, and next the Dukes
Daughter the handsomest Woman in that Kingdom. The Count presented her to the
King to obtain his protection against her Guardian, who would needs marry her
to a person she could not possibly love; and seconding his Harangue with all
the commendations he could give her, he represented the good qualities of
Wilfrede with such efficary, that before she left the King, she received
sensible marks of his inclination. Ethelwold liked his success very well, he
used her with all kindness and compassion, undertook to be her Mediator in that
affair, and in a short time managed things so, that he had brought her to his
Lure, and got an absolute command of her. Finding the King engaged with this
Lady, he took occasion to renew his Counsels against the Duke of Devon-shire,
he pretended advice of intelligence betwixt him and the Duke of Normandy; and
pressing his Majesty to put a stop to the ambition of this man, by marrying his
Daughter to one of his Subjects, it fell naturally into the Kings head to
bestow her upon him. It is easy to believe he consented without any great
trouble, and yet he called it a Sacrifice, pretending that Alfreda was her self
so unacceptable to him, that no consideration but the Peace of the Nation could
have prevailed with him to marry her. But to serve his Master, and advantage
the Nation, what was it he would not readily endure? At length having used all
the Grimaces and Artifice he could think of, Ethelwold is dispatched into
Devon-shire to marry the Dukes Daughter, for the tranquillity of the Kingdom.
Never was any man so happy as this Lover, he admired Alfreda, even to
adoration; he esteemed her a thousand times more handsome since she was his Wife
than before, and though it was obedience only which obliged Alfreda to marry
him, having never loved any thing but him. The bare act of Marriage wrought as
effectually upon the heart of this young Lady, as long Love did upon other
people. The presence of her Husband was quickly dear to her, she apprehended
his absence; and perceiving him laying his design of returning whither his
ambition called him: Ah, Sit, said she to him one day, this is that I have been
always afraid of; the Loves of a Servant, and a Husband are exceedingly
different, I remember a roguish Song my Governess taught me when I was a Child,
which I fear contains a fatal prediction of my destiny: having said so, with an
innocent smile that almost ravished her Husband, she began to repeat them.

SONG.
Whilst Love's suspended, and in fear
Of a Repulse, nothing's too dear
Or good, to hang at Ladies ear.
But if the Damsel once complies,
And pities Rheum in Servants Eyes,
Farewell all future Sacrifice.
Six days possession at the most,
Makes a man curse his former cost,
And reckon time, and Presents lost.
No, no, dear Alfreda, replied the amorous Ethelwold, catching her fast in his
arms, nothing shall ever extinguish the passion I have for you. I am too much
enamoured, and you are too handsome not to be always the Mistress of your
Hasband. Why, this leaving me then, my Lord? replied the melancholy Alfreda,
could you leave me so soon, if you loved me as you say? Nay, my Dear, replied
the Count, my Journey is of necessity, I must needs go where my duty requires
me, would you have me renounce the favor of my Prince, the advantages it
beings me, and the care of the State, which his most gracious Majesty has
committed (almost entirely) to my Conduct? What necessity of this State,
replied Alfreda, or those Chimerical advantates? Is not the Duke my Father
rich, and great enough to erect you a Fortune? And can you think that when I
cannot enjoy you, the thought of your traveling for the good of the Nation,
will give me any ease? Ah, my Lord, let us consider our own private felicity,
and leave the general to others; the satisfaction, and pleasantness of the
whole World, will not wipe off one of the tears your departure will being upon
my cheeks: and to tell you may final resolution in a word, either you must be
kind, and stay here with me, or so merciful as to let me bear you Company,
otherwise God knows what danger there will be of our meeting no more. These two
Propositions were equally fatal to the Count, he used all his Art to reduce her
to reason. He loved Alfreda very well, and his Fortune no less; he was
conscious of the cheat he had put upon the King, and he had no mind his Wife
should come to Court to convince him. He excused himself therefore by the
illness of the weather, he promised to return again very speedily: But the new
Bride would not be paid in that Coin; she charged him sometimes with
inconstancy, sometimes with contempt, and not allowing him any intermission,
she forced him at last to confess the whole truth. What confidence is to be
placed by a Husband in a young person whose heart has been acquainted with Love
but a few days, and that in a Conjugal way? Ethelwold expected that narration
should have stopped her desires of accompanying him to London, and have cleared
that doubt, that he loved her not as he should do. But alas! he was not
acquainted with the humor of the greatest part of that Sex; Ambition is natural
to them, and the honor of being a Queen will startle the most Philosophical
Lady of them all. The Countess easily comprehending by this Discourse, that
Ethelwold had not only cheated her of a Crown, but deprived her of all
opportunity of going to Court whilst Edgar was living. She found her self
possessed with so great an abhorrence of her Husbands disingenuity, that she
began to hate him more than she had loved him before. And in truth after this
discovery* ^^^re was no need he should fear her following ^^^n against his
will: She could have seen him depart for the Valley of Jehosaphat, and not
spoke one word in order to his stay. She looked very ^^dly upon the Walls of the
Town, as her perpetual Prison, and the only part of the World she (...) like to
see. She was still talking with her Father, or the new Servants her Husband had
left with (...) about the Beauty of the City of London, the M^g^^ficence of the
Court, etc. and revolving that she was banished for all her life time, at least
for (...) Youth, from a place where she might have reigned as Queen, but for
the Treachery of Ethelwold, sHe gave her self over to Melancholy, so that
nothing could comfort her. The Duke imagining this sadness had proceeded from
the absence of her Husband, assured her constantly of his speedy return. He
showed her the Letters he had received to that purpose, and used all means
possible to divert her: But it was not the sight of her Consort she longed for,
she feared it as much now as she had desired it before. Whilst her thoughts
were in this agitation, a Painter arrived at that City, who went from Court to
Court to make a collection of the Pictures of all the fine Ladies in Europe, to
hang up in the Gallery of his Master the Duke of Modena. This Picture-drawer
had heard much of the Beauty of Alfreda from a Frenchman of his acquaintance
in Rome, who had been some time in England: Upon the report of this Frenchman,
he concluded he could carry nothing more grateful to his Master than the
Picture of this Lady. He came therefore to Davon, and having withal due
formality, begged leave of the old Duke that his Daughter might sit, he
obtained it without any scruple. The Old man loved his Daughter very tenderly,
and not knowing his Son in Laws Intrigue, he thought the giving her Picture but
an indifferent thing: But the Countess looked upon it in another nature; she
contributed all her power to make it more amiable, and perceiving she had hit
her design, and her Picture very well done, she told the Painter, if he would
acouit himself well of his Commission, he must go to the Court of Edgar, where
the greatest Beauties were; but the Painter intended that before. The English
Women in all Ages have been allowed the handsomest in the World, and though the
Italian and got the choice of all in the Picture of the new Countess, yet he
must needs have Wilfredes too, for the reputation she had of being the Kings
Mistress. As soon therefore as he had dispatched in Devon-shire, he repaired to
London; but Alfrede having dispatched some of her Creatures before, she caused a
report to be spread abroad underhand of an Italian Painter, who was coming
thither with most admirable Rarities. She had been told that Edgar was very
curious in Pictures. She hoped by this means he might come to have a sight of
hers, and be taken out of the error the Count had drawn him into, without her
contribution: Nor was she mistaken in her forecast. The King would needs see
his Pictures as soon as he heard he was arrived: And though the Duke of Modena
had directed him to show them to very few persons, the liberality of the King
removed that difficulty. When a thing is desired in that way by a King, he is
seldom denied. The Italian promised Edgar he should see the best he had, and
the King chose Wilfreds Chamber to see them in, as being desirous to have her
share in the divertisement. The Painter beseeched that he would bring as few
with him as he could, and to comply with his design, Ethelwold was the only
Person had the Privilege to attend him. The first Picture the Painter took up
was Eleonor, Daughter to the Earl of Guyenne, married afterward to Lewis
(surnamed le Jeune) King of France. History has represented this Lady so
beautiful, it will be needless in me to describe her: She it was that charmed
the brave Saladin General of an Army of Sarrasens; and having let him know that
she could not believe his protestations of Love, unless delivered in her own
language, she forced the great Captain to betake himself to his Book, and to
study the French Tongue, which he attained in some sociable proportion in a
fortnight. After her came the Picture of Elvira, Mistress to Ramire the
Conqueror, who first erected the County of Arragon into a Kingdom. Ethelwold
who knew the story very well, and had a mind to be entertaining of Wilfred,
giving them the relation, he told the King. This Elvira is a famous Example,
that Honor and Love are not incompatible in the heart of great Persons. Never
was Prince more renowned than Ramire; they reckoned his Victories by the number
of his days, and yet he thought Love so necessary to his Courage, that he used
to have his Mistress in some weak place when he went to engage, that his desire
to preserve her out of his Enemies hands, might oblige him to extraordinary
Actions in the Battle. This kind of History pleased Wilfred exceedingly, she
made her acknowledgments to the Count by her simpring, and nodding her head;
and promising to her self that he would tell her as much of every one she
should see, she addressed her self to him to know who that Adelaid was which the
Painter was then showing. She was formerly, Madam, replied the Favorite, Queen
of the Lombards, and dyed lately Wife to Otho the Great, who is at this day
Emperor of the West. The Amazonian Habit in which the Painter has drawn her,
corresponds exceedingly with the actions of her life; for she defended a Town
in Lombardy in the absence of her first Husband, as well as the best Captain he
had: in the War Otho the Emperor had lately with the Sclavonians and
Dalmatians, she did him as much service as the best of his Generals. These
Actions of Valor, replied Edgar, interrupting him a little, are rare in
persons of that Sex, and I cannot but commend the Judgment of the Painter in
the Election of his Pictures.

In this manner the King of England and his Favorite were discoursing of the
Italians Pictures, and the Count perceiving his Majesty much delighted with his
stories, there was not a Character of Beauty, a Punctilio of Art, nor the least
particular Adventure, but gave him opportunity of some pleasant Narration; when
of a sudden the Painter changed the Scene of their mirth by producing the
Picture of Alfreda, and struck the poor Count, as it had been a clap of
Thunder. The Countess had given him no notice that her Picture had been drawn,
and so he was utterly unprepared against so unexpected an Accident: He looked
pale, he trembled, and the King perceiving his distraction, and attributing it
to his surprise (in which he shared with him himself) Is it possible, says he
to the Painter, that this Picture should be after the life? Yes, Sir, said the
Count, interrupting the Painter, and it is the Picture of my Wife: but so
flattered, and improved, that if the other Ladies you have seen, be used at the
same rate, I dare assure your Majesty, there is no one Original to be known by
its Copy. The Painter knew well enough it was no hard matter for him (in her
case) to justify the fidelity of his Art. Alfreda was much handsomer than her
Picture; and she was not above three or four days Journey from London: But
observing the Count her Husband decrying her Beauty with more than ordinary
vehemence, he supposed very prudently he had some private reasons for what he
did; and being unwilling to contradict a Person of his Authority, he replied
very coolly, I have not seen, Sir, all the persons whose Pictures I have with
me, some of them are Copies, as Adelaid and Elvira, who are both of them dead,
others were taken by some of my Companions, who have assisted me in satisfying
the impatience of my Master: But for those I have done my self, I dare assure
his Majesty, I have added nothing to the life. This prudent and judicious
answer one would have thought might have eased the Count of his trouble; but
the King was so surprised with the contemplation of Alfreda's Picture, that he
took no notice of what had been said. What, says he in great transportation, is
it possible but the features of this face must make the handsomest Woman in the
World? Tell me, Ethelwold, and tell me ingenuously, has your Wife these Eyes,
this Mouth, this Nose, and, in short, this Tour or mould of her Face. Yes, Sir,
replied Ethelwold, (much distracted with those kind of questions) she has all
of them, and if your Majesty be pleased to recollect, you may remember, that in
the description I have of her, I told you that never an ugly Woman was so well
provided to be handsome, and that all the features in her Face were excellent;
but they are not so well laid and connected in her Face, as in the Picture: The
Majestic and vigorous Air you behold, is but the fancy and strong imagination
of the Painter, and not at all visible in the life. I will see this Prodigy,
replied the King with some eagerness: For if Alfreda has all these lineaments
as his Pencil has represented, and be ill-favored notwithstanding, she is in
my judgment the greatest Miracle in the World. This Proposition of Edgars made
both Ethelwold and Wilfred tremble, and though Ethelwold did his utmost to
constrain himself, and answered the King (as if he had bin nothing concerned)
that his Wife would be much honored with such a Visit, yet nothing is more
certain than that he turned every stone that might divert his resolution. He
admonisht Wilfred to contribute what she could, he counterfeited Letters that
Devon was visited with the Plague, and when he had done, opened them in the
presence of the King; he bribed all the Physicians to oppose themselves against
his Journey, but all to no purpose. The Picture of Alfreda had inspired so
fierce a Curiosity in the breast of the King, that no danger, nor dissiculty
could withstand it; he appointed a Hunting-match at a Country House he had
about a days journey from Devon, and resolved to see the Countess the next day:
All the Count could obtain was the liberty to go two or three hours before, to
give the Duke notice of his coming. There is no difficurty to conceive how his
thing. Its were employed all the while he was upon the Koad. His Ambition, and
his Love divided them equally. When he considered the crime he had committed
against his Majesty, in betraying his confidence, and the inevitable danger he
was in of being discovered; he believed he could do no less, than to deliver up
his Wife with his own hands to the King, and to try how far that would work for
his pardon. On the other side when he remembered her endued with all the
Beauties which were capable to adorn her, he resolved to dye a thousand deaths,
rather than to see her in the possession of another; and this last resolution
being fortified with the sight of her, he used all his Rhetoric to persuade
her to counterfeit her self ill, and conceal her self from the King. But good
God! to whom was it he addressed himself? Alfreda would have purchased that sight
he prohibited, with the loss of her life. She told him that the humor of
concealing her self from the Kings curiosity, would but aggravate and augment
it; that be being King, and she his Subject, he would see her some time or
other, is he had made it his resolution; that the best way was to appear
cheerfully, seeing there was no possibility to avoid it. These Arguments made
the poor Count almost desperate, but considering there was reason in what she
said, and that the King, if he saw her not that day, would be sure of her
another, seeing she consented her self, he cried, Well then, see him if you
please, see the most curious Monarch in the World, he is our Master, he will
see you, and I know very well you are pleased with his resolution: but let me
desire one thing of you, dear Alfreda, not to make the best of your Beauty, nor
exhibit to his Eyes all the Charms with which it is in your power to attaque
him: let me beg of you at least to be ill dressed, negligent, to speak little,
and what you do, as far as you can from the purpose. Alfreda made the same use
of his Doctrine, as a witty Woman would do; she knew (by his directions how to
displease the King) what course she was to steer, to give him satisfaction.

MAXIM II.
No, you are deceived when you suppose
Your Wives mill part with Whisk, or Clothes,
Or paint, to purchase your repose.
If their obedience you design,
Bid them be proud, unconstant, fine,
Their dutiful, my life for thine.
But, but confine them (though to the Court)
The Law of Nature will exsert,
And God knows what becomes oth' Fort.
Whatever he enjoined her, Alfreda did clear contrary, never was she so
handsome, nor never so well dressed. The King went away strangely enamoured, he
admired, and loved her already at his very soul, her Wit, her Air, and every
thing took him; insomuch that not being able to conceal his resentment of the
Counts infidelity, he had certainly clapped him in Prison, had not the
apprehension of displeasing his Wife restrained him. It is not to be asked,
whether Alfreda came to Court after this Visit. Edgar found her too handsome, to
suffer her to languish in the solitudes of the Country. He conferred great
Offices and Preferments upon the Duke, to bring him nearer with his Daughter:
The Duke came, and his fair Daughter along with him. Ethelwold forbid his Wife
coming near London, but to no purpose, she had too great a Protector to
apprehend any revenge he could design; his best play was patience: But such
kind or usage being troublesome to such Husbands as have more the ordinary
affection of their Wives; the poor Count took his misfortunes so deeply, it
would have been charity to have knocked him on the head. In a short time he dyed
of Melancholy, and the love of Edgar, being no longer restrained by the
presence of Ethelwold, it ran up to so high a degree, that no less than the
Throne of Great Britain was able to circumscribe it: and indeed it was not long
before Alfreda was advanced to it, in spite of all arifices to the contrary:
the fury her Ambition exercised in so eminent a place, makes the most Tragic
part of the History of England. Wilfred was poisoned, the Children she had by
the King had their throats cut, and Edward sent out of this World, to be one of
the greatest Ornaments in the next: But these are accidents more proper for
Tragical, than amorous Annals. I desire of the Reader I may not straggle too
far from my design, I fear Don Garcias takes it ill I have left him so long
pining in his regrets for the loss of his Lady, without inserting the effects
his just indignation did produce.

This good Count, whose confidence had been so ill requited, and who was
notable to make use of the remedies of a discreet Husband (who conceals with
all possible care his domestic disorders) perceiving his disgrace public all
over Castile, and that it was ridiculous in him to suspect only he was laughed
at, he resolved to repair himself of the injury had been done him, in such a
way as should extinguish the reproach. He made his Uncle Alphonso de Castile
Governor in his absence, and parting from Burgos without any Equipage but a
single Gentleman, he traced Madam Valery to the City of Paris. It was no easy
matter to discover in that place a Woman who lived obscurely, and whose
Mother Tongue was the Language of that Country. And Don Garcias undertaking
that difficulty, concluded it necessary to get some assistance extraordinary
for the accomplishment of his design: he made a solemn Vow, that if he was so
happy to be revenged of his old Consort, he would take another from her
debaucheries, and place her upon the Throne of Castile. Let not the Reader be
surprised at this kind of Vow, it is not so fabulous as he may imagine; for it
was not only made, and executed by Don Garcias, but it has past to his
Posterity, is the common devotion of the Castilians, and they believe they gain
Battles sometimes, by such good intentions; nay evey in our days we have seen
the greatest Lords in Spain practice that custom, as one of the most pious
engagements in that Country. The Count of Castile desirous to put himself into
a condition of fulfilling his resolution, and judging moreover he was most
likely to find his Wife in the Company of loose and licentious Women, he
insinuated with one of that sort, the most subtle, and famous in Paris, he
showed her money enough to convince her he was worthy of her fidelity, and
desiring her to convey him amongst the Ladies of her Acquaintance; she agve him
a Munster of about twenty Harlots, all very handsome, and fine, and under the
protection of a rich Officer of the Treasury, which delivered the Stranger from
a considerable expense. Among these chaste Damoiselles, Don Garcias had an
opinion he might find his Wife: the error she had committed with the Pilgrim,
promised him no less, but he was mistaken, for the good Woman was more faithful
to Hugo, than she had been to him: he could not find her in that Inventory, nor
in several others of the same nature which he examined afterward. To render
his fortune more favorable, he thought his best way would be to hasten the
accomplishment of his Vow, and casting his Eyes upon a brown young Lass called
Radegond, with whom the action as he thought would be more pious and charitable
than any other; he intimated to his old Friend that that was the person he
desired to marry. His liberality had prepared the good Bawd for his service; he
had scarce spoke the word, but the Victime was brought to the soot of the
Altar: The Girl was witty, never Wench better killed in the Mysteries of Love,
nor understood the Art of Cullying better: one had need to have had good
Judgment in Magic, to have won her to a compliance, and yet she had a natural
tendency to be prodigal of her favors; that Don Garcias had he had any designs
upon her that way, must have used violence to obtain them. But he had no such
intention, his thoughts were only to reclaim her, and having given her a
description of Vice, (which was more tedious to her than the vice it self) he
promised her the Crown of Gastile, as the price of her Conversion. The first
part of his Sermon astonished her, she understood not that kind of Divinity,
but the conclusion fetched her again. The most dissolute Dame of them all would
promise Penitence for a less reward than a Sovereignty; and our Radegond forgot
not to make use of her Wit at that time: She cast her self at Don Garcias feet,
gave his Highness many thanks for his gracious offer, and swearing (with an
ingenuity she had often counterfeited before) she had never used any such
Complacency but out of pure necessity: She promised the Count so sincere a
Conversion, that the Ages to come should speak of her Piety: after what had
happened, Don Garcias ought to have been wiser; but he was of the temper of the
Cat metamorphosed into a Woman, and returned to his own Nature. The good Count
looked upon Radegond, as a second Egyptian Mary, and giving her an account of
his Vow, and the cause of it, he conjured her by the interest she had in its
accomplishment, to assist him in the discovery of his Wife. And indeed he could
not have addressed himself better. Radegond was own Sister to Hugo, she served
the Countess by the name of Madam Valery, in the quality of a Waitingwoman; and
the Gentleman's means growing small, and Valery's beginning to lessen, the young
Gentlewoman, his Sister was forced to make use of her own parts for the
subsistence of the Family. It could be no great difficulty therefore for her to
promise Don Garcias the accomplishment of his desires; but having heard, and
remembered an unlucky story of the Seamen, who make great vows in a storm, and
forget them when they are out of it: She was afraid the Count of Castile should
make but little conscience of breaking with her, when she had no farther
obligation upon him than his word. She contented her self to flatter his hopes
for the present, and then betaking her self to a great Lord of the Court, who
had had the first fruits of her favor, and for that reason protected her upon
all occasions; she told him her adventure, and the probability she was in to be
Countess of Castile. Her Protector could not believe (at first) one word that
she said, and looked upon all as Chimerical; but Radegond promising to bring
him to the speech of Garcias, and giving him the same Arguments to preswade him
it was true, as she had exacted from the Count for the strengthening of their
own faith, he believed her by degrees. His advice was to make the discovery of
the Countess as difficult as she could, he gave her lessons of Hypocrisy to
impose upon the Count, andc pretending himself her Uncle, he made Don Garcias a
Visit, to draw him to a promise under his hand of marrying his Niece, if she
brought him to Madam Valery. The Count consented to the conditions without any
resistance, as well because it was his real intention at that time, as because
he supposed this Uncle not in a posture to constrain him, if he repented it
afterward. The Uncle disguised himself in an ordinary Habit, was followed by
none of his Servants, and judging his true Name might fright him from
promising, he took another more suitable to the Quality he professed, which Don
Garcias regarded no more, than if he had been no body at all. Radegond finding
her self so well supported, she kept touch with the Count, and that without
much trouble; for she had no more to do, but to deliver him the Key of Madam
Valery's Lodgings. The Husband being very angry, got himself conducted by
several Footmen which he hired: And Paris being a Town, where they who have
money may do any thing, and the Count having found his Pilgrim and his Wife
close in one Bed, he needed but one stroke to rid himself of both. When he had
satisfied his vengeance in this manner, I am of opinion he would willingly have
had no further business in Paris, than to provide for his return. He began to
talk of compounding with Radegond, he offered her a sum of money to dispense,
and it is generally believed his conscience would have been much at rest, could
he have prevented the accomplishment of his Vow. But the pretended Uncle would
not admit of any such terms. The thoughts he had of seeing one of his
Mistresses in the Throne of Castile, flattered his vanity exceedingly; he
discovered himself who he was, and the Count de Castile, being in no condition
in Paris to contend with the interest of one of the chief men in France; he
thought if sufficient that he had been the discourse of all Spain by his first
Marriage, without making himself so at Paris by his second. He married Radegond
as he had promised, and the Marriage being ratified, and all the Grandees in
Castile assembled, Radegond was pronounced Sovereign of Castile under the the
same Name her Brother had carried in that Country before. Some may say perhaps
that Don Garcias might have as well have accomplished his Vow in the person of
his old Wife Isabel de Vermandois, as in the person of Radegond. The Subjects
were equally disposed, Harlots they were both, and the repentance of the first
might as well have been expected, as the conversion of the latter. But this
second alliance satisfied his revenge more than Madam Valeries remorse, besides
the debauchery of the Countess was known in Castile, whereas Radegond might
pass there for a Saint. He presented her to the Castilians for a great Example
of Virtue, for a person who abhorring the wickedness of her Brothers life, had
chose rather to deliver him up to Don Garcias indignation, than to see the
honor of her Family depraved by so ungodly an action: it is strange how the
natures of things change, according to their different faces. We know none of
these intrigues, bu by the imprudent discovery of some persons concerned: and
those persons appear to us the shame of their Sex many times by the
incontinence they are charged with, who perhaps are much more discreet than
they which accuse them.

Love is a nimble Deity, and marches a great way in a little time. From the
Territory of Castile he has brought us into England in the time we can read
half a sheet of Paper; from London he has re-conveyed us to Burgos, and from
Burgos to Paris, with the same expedition, and now he is carrying us out of the
middle of France, into the Court of the Emperor of the West, without desiring
more time for the Journey, than is requisite for the writing a few lines. In
the preceding stories he has pleased himself in triumphing over Marriage, in
this he sides with it, and leaves the succeeding pair an everlasting instance
of Constancy and Virtue.

MAXIM III.
Some Husbands still there are, whose Love is more
After their Marriage than it was before,
Their Wives are welcome, and themselves they please
As much in them, as when the were Mistresses.
But when the good man's naught, and every room
Smoaks with his curses, when his Wife comes home.
The story's sad, and surely't may be said
Love lies intombed in that Marriage Bed.
Examples of this kind, I must confess are rare, yet we are not without some,
and the Duke and Duchess of Modena fall very luckily into my memory for an
instance. This Duke had for a long time been in Love with the Princess of
Bavaria, Daughter to Duke Henry, and Cousin German to Otho the Third, at that
time Emperor of the West. His passion for her had engaged him to follow Otho
in all his Wars against the Sarrazins in Pouille, and against Lothaire (the
French King) in Austrasia. Love is a kind of Proteus, and assumes all shapes
upon occasion, if it meets with a base mind, it becomes the Author of all sorts
of baseness; but when it is so happy as to meet with a noble, and sublime
inclination, it excites to the greatest actions, and nothing prompts more to
virtue, or makes a man more illustrious. This was the Character it had taken in
the heart of the young Duke of Modena. The Princess of Bavaria being the price
he had proposed to himself of all his Atchievments, he had done Miracles to
deserve her. For her sake it was he had fought many Battles, and defended many
Towns. The Idea he had of her beauty accompanied him in his greatest perils,
and (considering his Conquests, as so many steps which advanced him toward the
possession of the Princess, and alliance with the Emperor) one may say, that
Otho ought more of his Victories to the passion of the Duke of Modena, than to
the Armies of his Subjects, or the Conduct of his Generals. So glorious an
affection could not but be crowned with glory. The Duke of Modena obtained the
Princess of Bavaria, as an acknowledgment from the Emperor. The Imperial
Residence being at that time at Aixla Chapelle, the Marriage was celebrated
there, and the new Duchess being well worthy of whatsoever the Duke had done
for her; and the Duke on the other side as worthy of what Love the young
Duchess was capable of, never was Bride and Bridegroom more happy, than the
Duke of Modena, and his Princess, they expressed the same cares and complacences,
as are used by the most violent Lovers: they delighted to be near one another,
and were never separated but in public; their Eyes, their actions, their every
thing discovered the kindness of their Hearts; and in a word they loved at that
rate, they set all persons a gog who observed them. The Empress Mary, Wife to
Otho, (who merited as much from him, as the Duchess did from the Duke) not
meeting so much kindness from her Husband, began to envy her felicity. She cast
that Matriage in Otho's dish upon all occasions, as an Example he ought to
follow, and the reproaches of the good Women, being the worst way they can take
to warm the blood of their Husbands, the Empress did but little good upon hers:
She plagued him so continually with that pattern, that she began to be
insupportable: In short they looked upon one another as Judgments sent down on
purpose to torment them; and this secret abhorrency betwixt Man and Wife, being
usually a presage of new passion for Strangers, the Emperor and Empress might
on a sudden have perceived, that unlawful Love builds always upon the ruins of
Conjugal. The Empress could not see the Duke with his own Wife, without
distrubance; she invented every day some new pretense or other to divide them,
(not considering that little interruptions in things indifferent, render our
Loves more ardent in matters of concernment) she by that means insensibly
increased, what she desired so earnestly to destroy. On the other side the
Emperor finding the Duchess always alone, because the Empress could not live
without the Duke, that opportunity completed that flame, which her Charms had
scarce kindled before: her first Confidence was, acquainting her with the
impertinence of the Empress; how troublesome, how unappeasable she was, and from
thence passing in course to a solemn wish, that she was but half so well
disposed as the Duchess; his desire struck so plausibly upon his fancy, he
could not afterward get her off on his thoughts. Had he believed, that this
extempore wish would have one day grown up to a passion, and the Empress
suspected, that the twittering she had for the Duke, would have made her forget
all her obligations to her self; there is no doubt but either of them would
have made greater resistance. The Emperor was just, honorable, and grateful,
and well understood his engagements to the Duke, and the Empress was not
without her natural inclinations to virtue; but Love surprised both their
Hearts before they were aware, and they discovered it not, till he was too
strong to be repelled, for when that passion has once got possession, all the
struglings, and all the contentions in the World do but fortify and augment it.

MAXIM IV.
At Loves first sight, the surest way,
iIs to give ground, and shun the frey.
For if he once but fix his foot,
No Oak comes harder from the root.
The Love of Otho for the Duchess, and the Love of Mary for the Duke beginning
much about a time, it happened they broke out, and were discovered near the
same day.

There was about that time a famous Painter at the Emperors Court, who had
found out a new way of painting, very rare and ingenious in it self. He used
neither cloth nor colors, prepared after the old way, his work was not
infected with the odor of oil, which discourages so many from sitting for
their Pictures, his Colors were mingled with Water and Gum Arabic, his
Canvas, a sort of Vellam, and without any more Tools, than two or three
Christal-shells, and a few Pencils he made strokes which were almost invisible,
and his Pictures were so like, they wanted nothing but speaking, to be the
same. True it is, he was something long, and for that reason as well as the
delicacy of his painting, he drew all in little; yet he would express the same
things in a piece of Parchment of a foot square, as well as another Painter
would do in a cloth as big as the life. The Duchess being a great Lover of
Arts, would needs see this man, and make experiment her self, whether he was as
ingenious, as his reputation published: She made him draw her Picture, but her
own alone, being nothing so grateful to her, as when joined with her Dukes; she
told the Painter he must contrive some way or other of putting him into the
same Vellam. He represented her therefore as the Painters Muse, setting upon a
Bundle of Pencils, with her Marble and Pestil by her side, painting a little
Picture with her own hand like a Meddail, wherein she had drawn the Duke of
Modena's head. The Portraicture was born up by a Cupid with a Garland of
flowers about his head; two or three more Cupids as it were fluttering about
with their wings, pointed to her beauty, and made the Spectators take notice of
each feature in spite of their teeth, and besides the Excellence of the Work,
which was sufficiently conspicuous in either of the Pictures, they had so happy
a resemblance to the life, that they were scarce to be matched in all Europe.
This Picture was carried home to the Duchess at a time the Duke fortuned to be
abroad. She set it by in his Closet till he came in, intending to show it him
as soon as he returned, and some business having called him into another Room,
the Emperor chanced to enter just as she was gone forth: he thought to take
advantage of her absence, and to write some piece of Galanterie, some merry
Conceit or other that she might find when she came again; and having opened the
Closet-door with that design, the first thing he cast his eyes upon, was her
Picture, he found it the piece, and the best design of any he had seen, and
Love having a custom of turning all things to his advantage, he put it into
Otho's head to take hold of that opportunity for the declaration of his Love.
He had seen Pictures in Watercolors before, and knew they were to be defaced,
to that end he wet the corner of his Handkerchief with Orange-flower water
(which he found by accident upon the Table) rubbed the Picture of the Duke of
Modena quite out, and in the place left these Verses, which he writ with his
own hand.

Madam, this Picture you so highly prize,
Is a Companion too slight and poor
For you, a proper Object for your Eyes
Can be no less than your own Emperor.
As soon as he had writ these Verses, he went out, and left word with the
Dutchesses Women, that he had left something in her Closet, that was not to be
seen by any but her self, and therefore he charged them to let no body go into
it till she returned. They observed his Commands, and the Duchess being come
back, they told her what word the Emperor had left. She went immediately into
her Cabinet to see what it was, and finding her Picture dissigured, she was so
much concerned, she could not get it out of her mind: She believed it might be
some accident at first, but taking it up to look closer upon it, she was much
surprised when she found the Emperors Verses. Just as she was in her
astonishment, the Duke coming suddenly into her Closet, Ha, my dear Lord, said
she, I thought to have presented you with the best Picture I ever saw, but
whilst I was but stepped into the next room, some body has spoiled it: and I am
afraid the injury to the Picture is the least of the mischiefs it gives us just
occasion to fear. And having, said so, she told him how it had been designed,
how she had left it in her Closet when she went out, and in what condition she
found it when she came in. The Duke, knowing the Emperors hand very well,
cried out, What, by consent! both in one day! this is too much. After which
words, he stood still for some time, overcharged with reflections which
thronged upon his Spirits, and perhaps troubled he had said so much. A Person
of Honor cannot but blush to have confessed any overture of Love from a fair
Lady, let it be in what manner it will: Insomuch that the Duke being conscious
of the same practice from the Empress, had no sooner let these words slip, but
he wished they had been unspoken again; but it was then too late to repent. The
Duchess being quick, and apprehensive, what both? and what consent do you
mean, Sir? said she: have you been solicited by the Empress, as I have been by
the Emperor? The Duke would fain have dissembled it, and endeavored to give
his words another explication, but perceiving the Duchess could not be put off
so, and that by her silence, she conceived an invincible suspicion in her soul,
which he would willingly have illuded; he confessed the truth, and told her
that the Empress had indeed signified an affection for him. I had, said he,
some apprehensions of it before, but a man of Honor ought not to believe his
own sentiments in such an affair, I observed she had great inclinations to my
Company, and Discourse, and more than I thought could proceed from a simple
Civility. She looked upon me (as I fancied) like one that was in Love, and she
commended me above the rate of common respect; but I had rather give esteem
more than belongs to it, then to grant that to Love which I knew was its due.
In this consideration I waited many times upon the Empress upon the least of
her Commands, and many times I prevented them, and attended her without; for I
had a suspicion, that by denying her passion indifferent compliance, I might
provoke it to demands more particular, and considerable: Upon this score it was
I went to her Court this afternoon, as I had done many times before. I found
her alone with her Daughters, all of them employed in stringing of Pearl. By
misfortune a rich Picture-case of a very great value, fell out of the lap of
one of the young Ladies, as she was rising to salute me, I ran presently to
take it up, and having presented it to her who let it fall, I was making some
Complement for the disorder I put them to: But the Empress coming up to me, and
whispering me in the ear, said, Keep the Box, my Lord, your power is too great
over the Original, not to have the Copy at your absolute Command. I opened the
Case, and I found (what I expected) the Picture of the Empress. I pretended to
understand her discourse no otherwise than as a trial of my respect; and
presenting the Box with great reverence, No, no, Madam, said I, do not suspect
me of Sacrilege, I am so Religious an observer of my duty, that the very Copy
of this Original is too sacred a thing for me. Be not so modest, replied the
Empress, and made signs to me follow her to the Window. Sometimes it is more
criminal to refuse favors that are offered, than to force them where they are
refused; and then her passion having vanquished all opposition, the
inconsiderate Princess told things so plain (and her Eyes insinuated the rest)
that I could have wished I had lost the exercise of my senses, that I might not
have been privy to a thing so derogatory to the Imperial Family. The Duchess
of Modena heard her Husbands relation, with a concernment that was visible in
her face, and looking upon him with tears in her Eyes, Ah, my Lord, said she
when he had done, I see the Heavens do envy my Felicity, I should have been to
happy for a mortal Creature, could I have loved you, and been beloved by you
without interruption; but I was not born to so much good Fortune, and the
Empress has reason to disturb it. In what is it that the disturbs it, replied
the Duke, something hastily? have I complied with her affection? have I
concealed it from you? or do you find I love her better than you? No, Sir,
replied the Duchess, and I give you thanks that you have not, but I fear what
the Empresses Charms were not able to compass, the ingratitude of the Emperor
may possibly procure; you looked upon that Princess as the Wife of your Master,
and thought it your duty to the goodness of Otho, to make a generous opposition
to the infidelity of his Consort. But alas, now the case is altered, and the
same Otho become the greatest of your Enemies, what is there left to secure
your affection from a young Princess, which loves you so entirely, and is the
first person of her Sex in the World? Your Charms, Madam, replied the Duke,
interrupting her, are so powerful, and so rigorously adored by me, that they
will infallibly secure my faith for your self: Rest you contented in that, and
do not imagine that my desire to be revenged of the Emperor, obliges me to
give him a pretense to take his vengeance on me. The Empress would be too dear
a purchase, if I should gain her by the loss of you; and you would have reason
to rejoice at your losses, if I my self should show you the way to repair them.
This excellent Pair satisfied one another so amply against all the suspicions
that conjuncture represented; That Cupid knowing well he should not have such
opportunities every day, to make his puissance known upon Lovers of their
Character, resolved to make this Example as famous as it was rare. The Duke
resisted the kindness of the Empress with so constant a firmness, it looked
almost like contempt; and the Duchess received all the attapues of the
Emperor, with the same resolution; but it is dangerous sometimes to push things
too far. The Emperor made a Treat (one day in a Garden of his not far from the
Town) upon the Bank of a River which runs by, it was not long the Trees in it
had been planted, and so gove not much shade; but that defect was supplied by
certain Arbours, or Cabanes covered over with a sort of Leaves, which put forth
sooner than ordinary. Part of the Cabanes were made into the form of a
Labyrinth, some were double, some single, and all of several fashious. Into one
of these Cabanes Otho had conducted the Duchess of Modena, and the Empress
pretending her self weary, was retired with the Duke (who had the honor to
lead her) into another. It is to be supposed, that neither the one Lover, nor
the other would lose that convenience of complaining of their Destiny. The
Emperor begged, and sighed, and perhaps wept: The Empress (the more impetuous
of the two) when fair words would not do, began to threaten revenge. The
coldness wherewith the Duke entertained the Empress, was more intolerable, than
that with which the Duchess received to Empress. It is an Honor to a young
Prince to be a Gallant, and an amorous Atchievment, gains as much reputation
sometimes, as the bloodiest Victory. But with the Women it is not so, a Lady
cannot advance one step, but she charges her self with the whole Intrigue; and
a repulse which would be nothing in a Lady to her Servant, becomes an
unpardonable indignity in a Servant to his Mistress. The high-spirited Empress,
seeing her self rejected by a person she had obliged by so many favors,
conceived so great a displeasure, that she could not conceal it. She threatened
him with all the mischiefs an enraged Empress could bring upon him, and
departing with a gesture importing fury and indignation, she left him to take
his choice, whether he would prevent her revenge, or feel the effects of it. On
the other side the Emperor perceiving his passion as tedious to the Duchess,
instead of having gained any advantage, he left her, and that as ill satisfied
as the Empress with the Duke. They both of them walked some time up and down to
dispel the trouble their disappointments had brought them; both of them
perceived the Duke and Duchess come forth of the Arbors where they had left
them, and enter together into another, where they suspected, they retired to
give an account to one another what had past. This Arbor was one of those that
were double, one might slip by betwixt the Pillars without being seen of those
who were either within, or without. An unluckly concurrence of Curiosity
excited these two Lovers to hide themselves behind the Curtain, and though Otho
knew nothing of the Empresses Intrigues, and the Empress had but a slight
suspicion of Otho's, their passions carried them (as it were by consent) to two
several places, from whence (without perceiving one another, or being perceived
by any one else) they might hear all that was spoken. The discourse was very
terrible for all four. The Dake and the Duthchess understanding the danger in
which the pertinacity of their Persecutors (as they called them) had placed
them, expressed their apprehensions in such terms as confounded the two
Evesdroppers with jealousy; but when from simple Narratives they proceeded to
imprecations, what Satyr, what Invective was it, which the Duke bestowed not on
the Empress? He called her by the worst names he could invent, the Duchess
making up the Consort by the same Elogies upon the Emperor: They spoke with
full liberty, for being ignorant of the fashion in which that Arbor was made,
they believed they were to fear no body they did not see; besides the Emperor
and Empress being gone in a huff, they did not expect that either of them
should return. In the mean time the two persons of whom they discoursed so
liberally, heard every word, and I leave it to the Reader to judge how much
they were surprised to understand such tidings of their affairs. The Emperor
had no kindness for the Empress, and the Empress had too much for the Duke of
Modena, to care much for him: But Honor and Jealousy in their hearts
performed the functions of Love. Otho could not hear the ill designs of Mary
without passion, and resentment: and Mary was as impatient that the Duchess
should triumph over all the hearts she had interest in. She thrust her self
furiously out of the place she was hidden, and perhaps in the first motion of
her transport, might have run into some actions less suitable to her Sex than
her despair; But the Emperor coming out upon the same design at the same time,
they met, and were so surprised at the sight of one another, they had no power
either to move or to speak. The Duke and the Duchess came out also in the
nick, and perceiving them in a place where they believed they had heard all
they had said, the sour Lovers represented such a Scene of silence, as is more
easy to imagine than express. The Emperor cast about his furious eyes
sometimes upon the Empress, sometimes upon the Duke, and sometimes upon the
Duchess. The Empress (divided betwixt choler and shame) changed her color
according to the variety of her thoughts: and the two innocent Causes of all
this distraction (apprehending nothing for themselves, but each for the other)
by the motion of their eyes seemed to say, they were ready to become Victims to
their Destiny, rather than to fail in the least just duty of their Loves.
Persons of their Character and Quality do seldom evaporate into unprofitable
words; and in these kind of occurrences, silence is more serviceable than
Rhetoric. The Emperor withdrew without any other intimation of resentment
than by his looks; and the Empress following, in great fury and confusion, all
the Court did the same. The Feast was interrupted in this manner, and very few
knew the reason: Every one guest as his own fancy suggested, but scarce three
of the whole Company could hit of the right. Whether the rage was greater in
the Emperor or Empress, is not easily decided: Some are of opinion that their
Love commencing at the same time, expressed at the same time, and now discovered
by the same accident to one another, their Revenge kept the same consort: But
whether it was Otho who had a desire to rid himself of a person who triumphed
over him, in the heart of his Empress, or Mary (who had a mind to be revenged
for the contempt of her kindness, and so prevent the reproaches of the
Emperor, by taking away the object) so it was, the Duke was found murdered the
night after the Feast. The Instruments of the Murder set upon him like Thieves,
and demanded his Purse; but they quickly made it evident it was his life, not
his money, they sought for; for having given him three mortal wounds, they left
him expiring upon the ground, without taking his purse which they demanded, or
his Jewels which he had in plenty about him. It is not necessary to insert how
the fair Widow resented so foul an action. I should have expressed the affection
she had for her Husband but weakly, if the Reader could not imagine the extreme
sorrow she conceived for his death. She doubted not but it was contrived by the
Emperor, or the Empress, and lest she should mistake in the object of her
Revenge, she resolved to sacrifice them both. I shall not mention the means she
used to accomplish it, such Tragical Catastrophes do not accommodate with
Annals of Love; and I shall refer the Reader to the Chronological History, to
inform himself how the Duchess having revenged her self upon the Empress, by
the resentment of the Emperor, made use of the Empresses Creatures to
sacrifice the Emperor to her Ghost. But some will say, why this insatiable
fury? why does it not stop in the middle of its Career? The Empress death was
but just, and it was no more than the Duchess was obliged to; she accused her
of the Murder of her Husband, and if she was not the only Instrument of his
death, she was the moving Cause; for had she not loved the Duke Otho had not
been bound in honor to have made him away. The Emperor ought not to be
comprehended in the Revenge, he might be innocent for ought she knew; and if he
were guilty, he might have married her, and ransomed his life. I must confess
this objection is not altogether impertinent.

But in affairs of Love, all men pursue
Their proper fancies, and the man whose Fate
Directs him to a means legitimate,
Is just, and happy, though his way be new.
For when the heart's endued with Grace, and fear
Of Heaven, what e're it does, what e're it will,
Is but a Sacrifice to Honor still;
Yet sometimes (when no sense of that appears)
Vice eggs them on as furiously to kill,
As all thy Virtue in the World were there.
The Duchess of Modena was necessitated by her Stars, and her Revenge
justified by her Conjugal Love; and perhaps she would have done as much for her
Servant, had she had one; for minds as tender and as constant as hers, are
capable of great Enterprises; but marching under the Standard of Duty, that
which at another time had been furious and criminal, was at this, an Example of
Virtue. But let us leave her in the enjoyment of a passion whose violence was a
virtue, and proceed to an Accident of no such Constancy and Resolution.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE
THE SECOND PART.
THE Chronology of History not according exactly with the Chronology of Love,
there are some years in which no amorous Intrigues are to be found, and there
are others in which all the considerable Accidents are Love. My Annals
containing only matters of Courtship, I cannot be strict in the observation of
Times; but shall presume (upon occasion) to put the passages of the same Age,
into the Amors of the same year, and so skip from one Age to another in my
Description of Years. I shall begin therefore this third Annal, by the Reign of
a Prince who lived about a hundred years after the Emperor I mentioned before.
Castile being a Country too flourishing to continue long under the denomination
of a County. Don Garcias Fernandez (of whom we spoke in the beginning of our
Annals) was the last of its Counts. It took the Title of a Kingdom under
Sanchyle Grand, next Successor to Garcias Fernandez: and having past in that
way, to the time of Sanchy III. it devolved by his death to his Brother
Alphonso King of Leon, who was from that time called King of Castile. At the
beginning of his Reign this Prince was perplexed with several Wars; the Mores
and the Sarracens infested him so, that he was forced to implore the aid of the
King of Fance against those Enemies of Christianity. Many Knights and
Reformades repaired to him from all parts. But the French, as the more Martial,
were most kindly received. Raymond the Son of William Duke of Burgundy, Raymond
Earl of Toulouse, and Henry Lorraine Son to William Earl of Boulogne, Brother
to Godfrey of Boulogne, performed such eminent Exploits, that Alphonso believed
he could do nothing more for the advantage and security of his Crown, than to
continue those three Captains in the Command of his Armies. He had three
Daughters, two of them natural, and the other legitimate. The eldest called
Vrraca, he married to Raymond of Burgundy, and gave him in Dowry the
Principality of Galicia; Theresia (the eldest of the two naturals) married
Henry of Lorraine, and had for her share the Conquests in Portugal: and the
youngest, Elvira (much handsomer, and better beloved by her Father than either
of the other) was married to Raymond of Toulouse with secret engagement from
Alphonso to assure to him the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, after his death.
And thus I have given you the Commencement of this year, not so eminent for
Love, as it promised in appearance. These six persons had almost no sooner seen
one another, but they were married, and no soouer married, but they differed,
so that this place would be more proper for an Historical Abridgment. than the
Introduction of an amorous Intrigue.

But bold! determine not, Loves ways are strange,
He had his private and peculiar Laws.
Nothing is so remote, but he can change,
And bend it to the Model of his Cause.
He makes the Lady fair, the Statesmen great,
Though one be old, the other near so mean,
And when he please, can both of them defeat,
And throw them down to their old state again.
When he is disposed to sport himself, the man
'S unhappy, let him be as happy as he can.
Elvira was so obsequious to her Father, and he so transcendently kind to her,
that Vrraca (being his only legitimate Child, and by consequence had best right
to that preference) began much to resent it. She had private advertisement
every day, that Alphonso designed the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile for his
Daughter Elvira: and judging it necessary, that either the Prince her Husband,
or her self should be constantly about his Majesty, to have the better eye upon
his actions, they consulted together to resolve which of the two was most
proper for the Journey, and it fell to Prince Raymond. Never did French man of
his Age, and Spirit, and married for interest (as he was) refuse any
opportunity of traveling. Vrraca in the mean time continued in Galicia, to
govern that new Territory in the absence of her Husband; and the Prince set
forth for the Court of Castile. The pretense of his Journey, being a concern
for the Kings health, it is easy to imagine he was not unwelcome at his
Arrival. There was no noise but of Entertainments, and Balls. Raymonds business
there was not to complain, he came thither to discry, and make advantage of his
observation. The young Elvira was much pleased with Divertisements, and indeed
at her age, who is it that hates them? She was extremely delighted with those
her Brother-on-law gave her, and she wanted neither Civility to invite, nor
kindness to press him to stay at that Court as long as he could: And to speak
the truth, she had no hard task to persuade him to stay. This Countess was one
of the greatest Beauties in the World; Raymond had always thought her much
handsomer than his Wife: And though Elvira had scarce seen the Prince before he
was married, yet she also esteemed him more complete, than the person she
married. But Persons of their Rank, are the least guided by their own
inclinations. The advantages Raymond purposed by his Marriage with Vrraca, made
him prefer her to Elvira; and Alphonso's Election happened upon the Count de
Toulouse, for his youngest. Marriages in this nature do seldom suffer the
Husbands, to consider the virtue of their Wives. Hence it was the Prince of
Galicia found his Sister-in-law as charming under the Title Countess of
Toulouse, as he had judged her when she was but Elvira of Castile. Behold them
therefore in perfect intelligence, the Countess took singular satisfaction in
the Company of the Prince, and the Prince was as much pleased with the Commands
of te Countess. Her Husband the Count of Toulouse, being of the same Nation
with the Prince, and not ill acquainted in matters of Love, was the first that
observed the inclinations of the Prince of Galicia. He took the Countess aside
one day, and after a long enumeration of the subtilties and falseness of
Mankind, he concluded his Harangue with a serious admonishment to guard her
self from the inveiglements of the Prince of Galicia: of the Prince of Galicia?
cried Elvira, in no little surprise; alas, my Lord, he has married my Sister.
And because he has married your Sister, replied the Count, is he the less
capable of being your Gallant? Believe me, Madam, these kind of relations are
no impediment at all, on the contrary, the greatness of the sin gives it many
times a Ragoust, and I my self have known several make Love to their Kindred,
who would not have regarded them, had there been no Alliance. The young Elvira
had been brought up so modestly, she could not hear the word Incest without
trembling, she would have sworn there had been no such thing committed in the
World, since the days of Lot, and his Daughters: and doubtless had the Prince
of Galicia spoke half that which her Husband had done, she would not at that
time have endured him. But mark the indiscretion of some Husbands, they are
many times the Authors of all the mischief which befalls them: and some Women
are so ignorant in those kind of affairs, they would never have known what that
Love had meant, had not the reproaches, and impertinent admonitions of their
Husbands instructed them. The Countess fixing her eyes upon the Count, with an
astonishment that demonstrated her innocence: Ha, my Lord, said she, tell me I
beseech you, in what is it you observe the Prince of Galicia has such kindness
for me? I am not insensible of his desire to oblige me, but I persuade my self
it is in consideration of Vrraca, and I see so little probability that a man
should be enamoured of his Wifes Sister, that Raymond de Burgogne might tell me
so a hundred times, and I desire to be excused. He need not tell you once,
unless you please your self, Madam, replied the Count, what I have done is but
to advise you to prevent that declaration, have a care how you are with him
alone, interrupt him in any discourse you think tending that way, and suffer
him not to endanger so virtuous an innocence. He loves you, Madam, and it is I
do assure it: do you not discern his diligence, how his eye is always upon you,
how he crowds and steals himself close to you in all Assemblies, and how he
sighs when he is forced to forsake you? He was so inconsiderate the other day
before me, that in describing what Beauty it was he liked best, he had no more
wit than to delineate you. The Countess had taken no notice of that
circumstance, she was too much a Novice in Love-affairs to apprehend any such
thing, but her curiosity kindling at her Husbands discourse: Why, my Lord, said
she, do you call that Love? what hurt is there in that innocent way of
diverting the Company? For my part I have always looked upon Love as a dangerous
business; but if all its effects are blemeless, as that with which you are so
highly alarmed, it is not so terrible as I did imagine. You do well, Madam,
replied the Count in some passion, to be no more affected with my admonition,
but let me desire you once more not to depend upon your own Judgment in matters
of that importance; the beginnings of Love as always inconsiderable, but the
consequence of those trifles, are commonly unfortunate: and then entering upon a
long recitation of amorous Adventures, which no man but her Husband durst have
undertaken to have told her, he closed up all with some Original Examples, and
gave her more knowledge by that single Dialogue, than she had gained of her
self in ten years experience.

MAXIM V.
Husbands, let me advise you, never tell
Your Wives, whatever misfortunes you foresee.
They are too apt, and can transgress too well
Themselves, though you never help their memory.
Better be silent far, whatever they do,
Than to be Table-talk, and Cuckold too.
The amorous Prince of Galicia not knowing how officious the Count of Toulouse
had been, to give the Countess a sense of his affection, attended with
impatience all opportunity to let her understand what she was already informed
of. He found Elvira alone many times; by her deportment she seemed not to be
cruel, nor did he want either Courage or Wit; but her little experience in
those affairs was the thing he principally dreaded; he feared his confidence
was not great enough to pronounce the name of Love, much less to commit Incest;
and therefore not daring to venture a secret of that nature to so young and
squeamish a person, he consumed himself in unprofitable desires, when on a
sudden his Destiny befriended him with an opportunity to accomplish them: and
indeed Cupid seldom abandons his Votaries in their extremities; when a man has
nothing to do but to speak, the greatest part of his Adventure is done to his
hand. There was about this time an Astrologer arrived at Burgos, or at least a
man pretending to be so, and several Miracles were reported of him. These sort
of people in former Ages, being more rare, were more venerable than in ours:
formerly the opinion was, nothing of futurity could be predicted but by Magic:
But now a days every one pretends to it. Our Astrologer having set up his
Bills, and made a large Paneyrick in Commendation of his Art, the noise he made
in the Town, by the means of his Officers, came to the ears of Alphonso:
Alphonso must needs see him, and amongst other admirable things which he
presaged, and would answer for them upon his head, he show himin a Book the
Names of all the Mistresses he had formerly had, and the principal Occurrences
in his Amors. He needed no more in the Judgment of the good King to entitle
him a Magician: Whereupon he forbid his Daughter, and all the rest of his Court
to have any communication with this man, being assured what he had shown him
was more than natural, and looking upon his Book as a piece of Lucifers
Library, he believed it composed by the Devil. The Prince of Galicia who did
not fancy the Devils so sociable, apprehended not that horror for the
astrologer, as the King would have persuaded him to. He sent for him to his
Appartment, and having threatened to cut his throat, if he told him not the
truth; he promised him a considerable reward, if he would be ingenuous and
discover. The Conjuror being frighted with his threats on one side, and
encouraged with his rewards on the other, confessed freely to the Prince that he
neither understood Signs, nor Planets, that he questioned, whether any man
alive was so skilful as to deduce any certain Presages from them, and that as
to his Book, he owed all the reputation of that to a certain Water he made,
which covered what he writ when he had a mind to it, and being exposed to the
rays of the Sun, went away again it self, and left the Character entire. By the
help of this Secret, my Lord, said the Astrologer, I write down in my Book
whatever I know of any persons Intrigues. When I have done that, I wash over
what I have writ, with the aforesaid Composition, and then laying it in the
Sun, I make it appear according as it is necessary for my Fortune or
Reputation: But, said the Prince, then you but seldom hit right, for it is
impossible you should know all the Intrigues in the World. My Lord, replied the
Astrologer, I put so great a price upon the Predictions of my Book, that the
Common People are not able to go so high: it is only Sovereign Princes, and
Persons of eminent Quality can reach the recompense I require; and for those of
that Character, their most secret Intrigues are known, and so it is they come
to think my knowledge infallible. The Prince of Galicia was very much satisfied
with the integrity of the Astrologer, and inferring from his fidelity in this,
he might be trusted in greater matters, he resolved to make use of him for the
discovery of his passion to the Countess of Toulouse. He gave him so
magnificent a Present, that he might promise himself the utmost of his
assistance, and passing from thence to the Countesses Appartment, he was so
fortunate as to find her alone. He began his converse by the praise of the
Astrologer, protested he had told him such things as he could not have learnt
but by Miracle, and having understood by Elvira that she had not seen that
Prodigy as yet, he offered to attend her to him when she pleased to command.
Alas, Sir, replied the innocent Elvira, I would willingly accept your offer,
but the King is so persuaded of the man's communication with the Devil, that he
has enjoined me to the contrary. How enjoined you, Madam, replied the Prince,
is it for a Person of your Quality to have any thing forbidden you? were you a
Child, or had not the wit or discretion which is requisite at your age, the
King might use his Authority; but for you, Madam, one of the most ingenious,
and prudent persons alive, to be interdicted so indifferent a Curiosity,
believe me, Madam, you will deserve that usage, if you endure it without
regret; and were it not but to instruct his Majesty in what manner you are to
be treated, I would persuade you to see this Astrologer, and I do not doubt but
to justify your disobedience. This discourse jumpt exceedingly with the vanity
of Elvira, she had desired a long time to be rid of Alphonso's Tuition, and
have the management of her own Affairs, but she had a habit of awe upon her,
that hindered her from shaking off the yoke: For some time she resisted the
Princes Proposition. He saw well enough she had a desire to be with him, but
she durst not follow her own inclinations. Sometimes she said she had no faith
for such kind of things; sometimes that she had nothing upon her heart, about
which she needed to consult an Astrologer; and as the last Argument of all, she
told him she did not know how far it might dissatisfie her Husband. He was a
passionate man, and she durst not enterprise a thing of that importance,
without his permission. Upon this Article Raymond de Burgogne began to show his
Rhetoric. He told Elvira that for her Husband to take cognizance of such
particular actions, was Tyranny: that Persons of her Virtue and Quality, were
to be left to their own Conduct, and proposing to her the Example of Vrraca,
whom he had left absolute Mistress both of her own actions, and all his Estate,
he brought her at length to a resolution of seeing the Astrologer: they agreed
upon the next day. The King and the Count being to give Audience to certain
Deputies from Toulouse, and that Ceremony being to take them up all that
afternoon, the Countess had full liberty to see the Astrologer without danger
of surprise. The bargain being made in this manner, the Prince returned to his
Chamber, sent immediately for his Astrologer (which we shall call Abdemelec)
and having received him with a long story, and a thousand pretenses of kindness
to him, he told him he had a design to put a Trick upon the Countess of
Toulouse, and he would entreat his assistance. The Astrologer offered his
service freely; he had had too great experience of his liberality, to neglect
any occasion of receiving the fruits of it; he wished with all his heart he was
as necessary in all the Princes Affairs, and never desired so much knowledge in
his profession, as at that time. Raymond perceiving him so well disposed,
persuaded him that he would pretend Love to his Sister-in-law, and gilded over
his intention with whatever he thought might make it appear innocent. He told
him it was by agreement betwixt the Countess and he, and that it was to be done
upon a Wager. Abdemelec understood very well what he had to suspect; he had
Judgment and Experience, and had seldom observed a Person of any Parts enter
upon a design, without some end or other. He promised the Prince therefore to
discharge himself faithfully of his Trust, he put one of his blank Books into
his hands, which the ignorant look upon as a Devil. The Prince writ in it what
he desired the Countess should find there, and the Astrologer engaging to
remember the rest, he left Raymond in great impatience of receiving the fruits
of his contrivance. The History does not mention how he slept the night before
this declaration was to be, but I dare affirm (and not apprehend to be thought
rash) it was not without interruption. The long wished for hour being come,
Raymond fetched Abdemelec to his Lodgings, and carried him from thence to the
Countesses Appartment, they shut themselves all three up in her Closet, and the
Astrologer being Master of his Trade, began to ask Elvira about her Nativity;
he examined her Physiognomy, inquired after the principal accidents of her
life, and judging he had done enough to give her an advantageous impression of
his skill, he began to produce the Book the Prince of Galicia had told her of.
Elvira trembled as soon as she saw it, she had endured the sight, and
examination of the Conjuror, with very good courage; but when he mentioned the
Book of which she had heard so many Miracles, and which Alphonso had assured
her was no less than the body of Magic in little, her resolution began to
forsake her. The Prince confirmed her as much as he could, he showed her the
leaves of the Book, in which there was no writing to be seen. The Countess
having turned them over, the Astrologer took it out of her hand, and going
aside to the Window, under pretense of looking out, he laid his Book in the
Sun, and having staid there some little time, till he judged the heat had
exhaled the Water which covered the Writing, he brought the Book opened to the
Countess, with the right end upwards, that she might read with more ease what
was about to be discovered. But the poor Lady, affrighted to see Characters
there where but a moment before she was confident there was nothing, she gave a
great shreek, and instead of reading it, threw the Book down, and ran as fast
as she could to the door, to save her self from the Devil. The Prince of
Galicia caught her by the Gown, and protesting there was nothing but what was
natural in all that she faw, he brought her back (almost by force) to a Table
where the Book was laid. It was pleasant to see the terror the poor Countess
was in: her Curiosity scarce made her step one foot toward the Table, but her
fear fetched her as far back again toward the door. She put such innocent
questions to the Prince, and the Astrologer, they had no small trouble upon
them to keep from blurting in her face. But, good Brother, said she to Raymond,
what if the reading in this Book should put me into the power of the Devil, and
he should fetch me away as soon as I had done. Ha, Madam, replied the Prince,
he will not fetch you, my life for yours, approach, upon my word: Ha, Sir,
replied the Countess, your words will do me no good amongst the evil Spirits,
you may give me an hundred before one of them will pass there. But, Madam,
replied the Prince in some impatience, has the Devil carried me away? and yet
I have seen, and consulted this Book several times; do you think he can carry
away people as he pleases? Alas, he has not power to carry away those who give
themselves to him, much less those who do not. Come, Madam, I beseech you, and
then thrusting her to the Table, in a great fear she read these Verses.

Would you be happy, 'bove all earthly things?
A Prince adores you, ease his sufferings.
If Hymen's Law disswades, and tells you, no.
It Is sin to love besides your Husband, know
It Is none to love him that loves none but you.
And at the bottom of these Verses there was written in Capital Letters,

THIS PRINCE IS RAYMOND DE BOVRGOGNE.
Alas, cried the Countess, after she had seen the Name of Raymond, if this be
all your Astrologer can tell me, I might have saved my self the labor of
seeing him, for without consulting the Stars, the Count of Toulouse told me
long since what has happened to day. The Count of Toulouse, Madam? replied the
Prince of Galicia in some heat, Why has he troubled himself to take notice of
the passion I have for you? Yes he has taken notice of it, and has caused me
to take notice of it, and which is yet more, he has persuaded me to accept it.
Certainly, replied the Prince of Galicia, I did not believe I had been so much
obliged to the Count of Toulouse, and just as he mentioned that word, the Count
came into the Closet. He had learnt by his Spies, that the Prince of Galicia
was with her, and carried the Astrologer with him; and being of a distrustful
nature, and suspicious of such kind of people as Abdemelec, he had pretended to
be taken ill at his Audience, and came thither on purpose to prevent a mischief
he so plainly foresaw. His Arrival was so unexpected, and his Entrance so
sudden, the Astrologer had no time to take his Book off the Table. The Count
snatched it up immediately, and casting his eye upon what he had apprehended he
should find, he let the Prince of Galicia know he was not of an humor to
endure such kind of affairs. Raymond would have turned all into Raillery,
whilst the Count was reading, he had had some time to recollect himself, he
endeavored to persuade him, that this declaration of his Love was but an
innocent design to punish Elvira for her Curiosity. But the Count (having
signified by the shaking of his head, and other gesticulations, he was not to
be deluded so easily) he desired the Prince very gravely, that he would use no
such Stratagems for the future; and doubtless he had paid the Astrologer for
his pains, had he not foreseen the storm, and prevented it by a timely recess.
The Astrologer was no Fool, he discerned by the Princes looks when the Count
came in, that this Intrigue was not by consent, as he had endeavored to
persuade him. He knew that there was nothing more ordinary than for little
persons to suffer in the quarrels of great; so that slipping away out of the
Cabinet while the Count was reading the Inscription, he was not to be found
afterward when he was wanting; and indeed I am of opinion he would have sought
all over the Town, to little purpose; for after such an accident, he thought it
would be too hot: and if in such a case any man should ask my advice, I should
never consult the Stars to persuade him to abscond. From this passage of the
Astrologer, the Count de Toulouse became so jealous of his Wife, that he left
her not one moments repose. He gave her Lectures every day, he forbid her the
most innocent Recreations: she could not go one step without Spies. And now let
any one that knows the World judge of the efficacy of these precautions, and
say whether they be like to support and reinforce a staggering Virtue. An
unjust Command is the fountain of disobedience, and Women never desire any
thing so impetuously, as what is expressly forbidden. But it was the Count of
Toulouse his Destiny, to advance the affairs of the Prince of Galicia, which
all the Charms and Oratory of Raymond would have attempted in vain. Her desire
of punishing the Count for his Jealousy, put it into her mind to give him
occasion; so that this imprudent Husband completed the felicity of his Wifes
Gallant, as he had began it: and as the highest effect of the Princes good
Fortune. The Count of Toulouse was never so well pleased with his imaginary
preventions, as at the time when his Wife and Raymond had illuded them.

It seasons much a Victory, to owe
It to the Caution of a watchful Foe:
Of all the artifices and tricks we meet
In Love, it is circumvention is most sweet.
To cheat Report, is common; but to be
Too wise and vigilant for Jealousy,
Is Loves peculiar Complement to she.
The Amors of our two Lovers continued secret for some time, to the mavelous
content of both Parties. Raymond came many times to a Closet-Window, which was
no higher than a Buttress, and looked into a private Walk that was much
unfrequented. This Window had an Iron Lettice before it, but the Countess was
so cunning, she got a Grate made with Joints, to be taken down upon occasion;
and this was so artificially done, it was not to be perceived. This part of the
Palace was so strong of it self, it was not thought necessary to guard it.
Elvira went to this Closet every night, attended only by one person which
lighted her, and was well paid for his pains. It was known her custom was to
read, when she was there, so that her Women were not affrighted, if she staid
sometimes an hour longer than ordinary. As soon as the door was shut, she took
down the Grate, and receiving the Prince (who leapt plum into the Window
without the help of a Ladder) they past the time very happily without any
discovery. Besides this, they had found another Expedient. There was a Covent
of Nuns at Burgos, to which the Countess made her Visits very frequently. She
carried few of her Friends or Servants with her, pretending unwilling to
incommode the young Damoisells in their Retirement. The Prince of Galicia had
corrupted the Porter so far, as to suffer him to enter the Monastery in the
habit of a Gardener; he met the Countess still in the most obscure part of the
Garden, and it was at these Enter-views they agreed where and when they were to
meet next. This convenience of private meetings excused the Prince from all
formal Visitations; he sees the Countess in public but very seldom, and the
Count of Toulouse judging of their Amors by the frequency of his Visits, was
grown to that pass he could sleep pretty well. But nothing is so close, but
time will discover; let one manage his affairs with never so much prudence,
something or other falls out still to detect it. Upon a night as the Count was
passing from the King of Castiles Lodgings, the door of one of the Terrasses of
Communication, being shut, he past by the private way the Closet-Window opened
in to; no body but the Count of Toulouse himself, durst have taken that
liberty, for that being the usual Walk for the Countess, and her Maids, it was
kept as sacred from all other persons: as he was going by, the Count perceived
a light at the Window, he went softly to it, and commanded his Servants to keep
back. By disaster the Countess opened the Grill at the same instant to let out
the Prince, and observing the Flambeau which attended her Husband, she not only
clapped the Grill to again, but put out her Candle in such haste, that the great
light which was there, and the sudden putting it out, gave him occasion to
suspect: he ran up directly into his Wifes Appartment to see what was the
matter: But he found no Prince, for he had had time to save himself, but with
so much precipitation, he left his Gloves behind him. The Count knew at first
sight who was their Master. He fell into great agonies and imprecations; he
caused her Lodgings to be searched, and threatened fire and faggots to every one
that came near to, and calling for his Flambeau to examine the Lattice; he
looked about it so narrowly, that at length he found which way it was to be
opened. Had he found his Countess in that fury, he had doubtless been
transported to some violence against her, but she had the discretion to run
immediately to the Kings Chamber; and the fright she was in had produced so
much compassion in the good man, that when the Count followed her with
complaints against the ill conduct of his Daughter, the old King received him
with no other Ceremony than threats and reproach. Not liking that kind of
Entertainment, he retired secretly from Burgos, and left his Wife to her
Destiny. His first thoughts were to have gone into France to have raised Forces
there, and to have demanded reparation with his Sword in his hand; but
remembering himself that he had heard Vrraca was an imperious and high-spirited
Princess, he conceived she might probably be made so sensible of her Husbands
insidelity, that she might contribute considerably to his Revenge. He took his
way therefore toward Compostella, and indeed to do the Prince of Galicia a
mischief, it was the best course he could steer. The Princess was of a very
sensible complexion, the long absence of the Prince began already to disturb
her. The Count of Toulouse was a very handsome Person, and a Frenchman by birth
(which is a Nation so acceptable in Foreign parts, that the very name of a
Frenchman is enough to startle the severest of the Ladies, and mollify the
most unmalleable obduracy amongst them. Vrraca no sooner saw her
Brother-in-law, the Count, but she felt the force of the French Constellation:
she promised him whatever he asked; she gave him absolute Command over the Town
of Compostella: but these were but Complements and Formalities as yet. Vrraca
was not so beautiful as Elvira, but Elvira was the Count of Tholouses Wife, and
convict of infidelity. In this posture were our two Brothers-in-law preparing
for reprisal. Raymond de Burgogne lent nothing to the Count of Toulouse in
Castile, but the Count repaid very punctually in Galicias and (some say) with
interest: for the Intrigue betwixt Raymond and Elvira being private; nothing
was known of it, but what her Husband had been pleased to divulge; but that
betwixt Vrraca and the Count was so public at first dash, there was not any
friend the Prince had in Galicia, which had not given him advertisement. This
is an offense in which a man generally considers himself more than any body
else: Whether the Wife be beloved, or whether she be not, her inconstancy is
always abominable to her Husband. Raymond repairs with all diligence to
Galicia: He was of opinion he need but show himself to dissipate that storm;
but he was mistaken, and kept out at the Gates of Compostella, the new
Governor sending him word in a Military way, he had found in the Astrologers
Book, that he ought to be Vrraca's Gallant, as Raymond had been Gallant to
Elvira. It is easy to imagine this Complement appeared something strange to
the Prince of Galicia: He was conscious of having been the Example: but he had
kept within the bounds of outward Civility. There was none but the Count knew
any thing of his Amors, and he had done his utmost to conceal it from him: but
to see the Gallant of his Wife refuse him entrance publicly into his own
house, was a thing he had never seen practiced before. Raymond being highly
incensed at the outrage, forgot nothing that might revenge it. He dispatched a
Messenger to Castile, to demand of King Alphonso possession of the Principality
he had promised him upon Marriage. He sent into France for Supplies from his
Father the Duke of Bourgondy, and all the rest of the Allies. The Count of
Toulouse seeing him take that way, followed his Example; he complained to the
King of Castile of the injury he had received by his Daughter. He writ to Lewis
le Gros, King of France, to desire his Protection. In this manner all Castile
was in an Uproar; The Province of Galicia, like to become the Seat of a bloody
War, and all, for the impertinence of Love: Love is so seditious; it works it
self into all Plots, and all Parties. No man can tell its power, till he has
tried it, and no man that has tried, is fit to describe it. Henry de Lorraine
the Husband of Theresia of Castile, and Prince of the Conquests in Portugal,
being of a Family to which life and Generosity were connatural, with great
sorrow understood the distraction of the Royal House of Castile. Any body but
he would have made his advantage of them: the displeasure of the Father against
two of his Daughters must needs be of great importance to the third: But the
Princes of his Race, are not capable of so mean a thing as private interest. He
departed from Lisbon immediately, went directly to his Father-in-law the King
of Castile, and undertook to mediate betwixt his two Brothers-in-law. But for
as much as new Acquisitions are more tottering and uncertain than what are
anciently established. Henry apprehending his absence might give opportunity to
new Commotions, he kept his Journey very close, and leaving Fernandez Paw, a
Portugal, to assist his Wife in the Government of that Kingdom, he departed so
suddenly for Castile, that Theresia had scarce time to write two lines to her
Father. But for the making the occurrences at Castile (at the Arrival of Prince
Henry) perspicuous, it will not be amiss if we insert what passed in Portugal
before he set out. This Fernandez Paw (whom he had left chief Counselor to the
Princess in his absence) had long since possessed himself of that Character in
her heart. Henry was a young Prince more enamoured of the Quality, than the
Person of Theresia. This Paw admired her for both; and it is a great
satisfaction to a Woman to have her Dominion founded upon her own Excellence.
Paw therefore had got an intimacy with the Princess upon that score; and having
managed it very discreetly, Prince Henry had gotten no notice of it. Paw served
his Prince so well in his Foreign Affairs, he was not the least suspected at
home. Theresia carried herself with as much modesty as could be expected; but
by misfortune, the day before Henry was to depart, there had been some Letters
past betwixt Theresia and Paw: the Princess was subject to some Christian
reflections, which had put her Gallant into some confusion. He had writ to her
upon that subject, and Theresia was so pressed by her Husband to close up her
Packet to Castile, that she sealed up Paws Letter instead of one to her
Father. This mistake was not discovered till three or four hours after the
Prince was departed. They had been employed all that time in instructions pro
and con. But when the Princess was alone, and had a mind to read Paws Letter,
which she believed she had left sealed upon the Table, she was much surprised
to find the Letter she had writ to her Father Alphonso, in its place. That she
sigh't, and wept, and tore her hair, is no great difficulty to imagine. Nothing
could serve, but she must dye, Fernandez could not comfort her, and to speak
truth, he himself wanted no little consolation: But there was no remedy but
patience. The Example of her other Sisters gave his some relaxation, she could
not do worse, than they had done before her. In the mean time Henry arrived at
Burgos, with Paws Letter, instead of his Fathers. The good Alphonso was much
revived at the sight of his dear Son-in-law; and looking now upon Theresia as
the sole Inheritrix of that Love, of which Elvira and Vrraca had rendered
themselves unworthy, he observed the tears drop down his venerable Cheeks at
the sight of the Letter the Prince presented him from her. He opened the
Packet with great joy, and supposing there was nothing in the heart of his
Daughter, to which her Husband might not be privy, he began to read it aloud;
but recollecting immediately that it was not Theresia's hand, he stopped at the
first line, and then looking upon the Superscription to see how it was
directed, he found it, For the King of Castile: and that the Superscription was
written by Theresia her self; he concluded then that she might have some
reasons (which he did not know) to make use of a Secretary, and then stepping
to the Window, he read these Lines, which (to accommodate our selves to all
sorts of Readers) we have taken the pains to translate our of Spanish.

Ah, my dear Princess, how insupportable are you grown with your remorses! have
I not told you a thousand times, that there is nothing owing to Husbands, but
the conservation of their Honors? That the great discretion lies in choosing a
friend, who by the prudenee of his Conduct, would keep them from scandal: and
these Formalities being observed, there is no more due from you to Prince
Henry. Courage, Madam, overcome this unseasonable compunction; and that it may
be nipt in the bud, permit that I may wait upon you this night with new
Arguments against it.

Never was any man so surprised as Alphonso at the reading of this Letter. It
was to be his common custom to see his Daughters disloyal. Elvira had taken
that liberty in private, Vrraca did it publicly, and the old King of Castile
was so good a Father as to impute all to the imprudence of his Sons-in-law. He
could not believe it was their temperament, or natural inclination which
disposed them to so unnatural actions. The one was debaucht by the Jealousy of
her Husband; the other by her desire of Revenge: but for Theresia, he had
nothing to say in her defense. Henry was accomplished in himself, he had settled
the French economy in his Family, and Theresia lived at Lisbon, as she would
have done at Paris: He was liberal, frank, and faithful, so that Alphonso was
so much transported at the injury done to this Prince, that he could not master
his first resentments. However it had been but prudence in him to conceal the
exorbitance of his Daughter, but the good man was so transported with choler,
that he threw the Letter upon the ground, cast up his eyes to heaven as a
person under some eminent affliction; and answering his own thoughts as it had
been his Daughter, he cried out, You shall dye, unhappy Child, you shall dye:
if your Husband should be so merciful to forgive you, I would tear you in
pieces with mine own trembling hands, rather than your infidelity should go
unpunisht. The Prince of Portugal had like to have swounded at this transport,
he could not conceive the Contents of the Letter, nor the cause of Alphonso's
disorder; and asking him (in his surprise) what infidelity it was he charged
upon Theresia, the King took up the Letter again, and delivering it into his
hand, here, says he, see what reason I have to be disturbed, and confess I have
brought Monsters, not Daughters, into the World. Henry took Paws Letter from
the King, he knew the hand, and reading it half out, was so astonished at the
Contents, he could scarce tell whether he was waking, or asleep. His
conversation in the World had not been so small, but he knew a Woman's virtue
was not to be warranted without good counter-security. He understood the Sex by
experience, and was not ignorant that the best friends are usually they which
disparage the Husband. But to consider that he should be the Porter of that
unfortunate Letter, was a Pill he could not swallow, nor digest. His misfortune
was too common to be incredible, but the Circumstance with which it was
accompanied, was beyond all belief: and it was not so much Paws Letter that
affected him, as that it was his Destincy to deliver it. This consideration
stownded him for some time, and the transportation of his Father-in-law, added
fuel to his fire; but at last the storm was blown over. In that Age (as it is
in this) the Tilte of Cuckold was so common, it was scarce any trouble to be
so. The disgrace lies only where it is known: when a Woman's inconstancy is
public, nothing is greater dishonor to her Husband: where it is managed with
secrecy, nothing is so trivial. Henry looked upon it as no point of discretion,
to publish the infirmities of his Wife, and therefore gave himself some few
days to digest his resentment. But the Examples of his Brother-in-law having
learnt him some Wit, he came one morning to the Kings Chamber, and said to him,
You see, Sir, by the Letter I have brought you, that your Daughters have no
reason to upbraid one another. They were born under the same Constellation, and
if any thing discriminated me from the Prince of Galicia, and the Count of
Toulouse, it is this, that their unhappiness is known, and mine is a secret. I
have no inclination to publish it, and if you please you may conceal the Letter
you showed me: Send word to your Daughter that you kept it from me, and I will
never convince her of her error. In giving me Theresia, your Majesty gave me
also a Province, which I hope in time to improve into a Kingdom. I have
Children already which may succeed me hereafter. There is no necessity the
Portugals should suspect whether they be mine, or Paws. Conceal the dishonor
of your Daughter with as much care as I, and by the Example of your Family we
will demonstrate, that it is the discretion of the Husbands which makes the
difference betwixt the Women which are prudent in appearance, and those which
are really irregular. The King of Castile took this Proposition very kindly. He
began to repent himself of what he had done, insomuch that magnifying the
Generosity he had expressed, he seconded his Counsels with several Examples, and
most irrefragable Arguments: and the troubles in Castile being appeased by the
death of the Count of Toulouse, and the interpostion of the King of France,
Henry returned into Portugal, without any mark or token of that he knew. The
truth is, he found out a pretense to send Paw out of the World, and I have been
told he had another to make his Wife more obsequious for the future. But (as he
presaged very judiciously) his Posterity have reigned several years in
Portugal, whereas the younger Sons of the Royal Family of Castile, have always
disputed the Crown with the Children of Vrraca.

MAXIM V
This I Will affirm, let things to how they can,
The marri'd's really the happiest man.
Let her be what she will, I Will lay my life.
His owns more faithful than this Neighbors Wife.
But shall we never have done with these Daughters? does no other condition of
life but the married, afford matter for our Annals? Yes certainly, History is
so fertile in amourous accidnets, she supplies us with variety. About the same
time while things were in this agitation in Spain, Love (which had laid about
him so in the Royal Family of Castile) was not idle in the Court of the
Emperor of the West. This Empire was then under the Dominion of Frderick
Barberossa, a valiant and ambitious Prince. He had signalized the beginning of
his Reign by remarkable Victories, so that there was nothing discoursed of in
all Europe so much as his Power and Greatness. He kept his ordinary Residence
in Rome, as well because the Climate agreed with his body, as upon certain
secret Designs he had upon the Lands of the Church: and because his remoteness
from the heart of his Empire, caused him to apprehend some Mutiny in the Towns
of Germany, he obliged Prince Henry (his Son) to continue in that Province the
greatest part of the year. This young Prince was extremely hopeful; the people
of the Empire loved him entirely: So that his Father conceiving some Jealousy
lousie thereupon, took the pretense of his Coronation to recall him to Rome.
They past the Winter very lovingly together; and the Emperor having a mind to
pry into the Conduct of Alexander the Third (who was then Pope, and in
possession os the Patrimony of S. Peter) he ordered his Son to visit him
frequently. The Prince, in obedience to his Father, waited upon him as often as
he was visible. He attended him in all his devitions, and among other places to
a Monastery of Nuns where his Holiness had a Niece he loved most entirely: She
was descended from the Blood Royal of Si ily, and her Uncle the Disposer of all
Ecclesiatical preferments; but as yet she was not of, years to be an Abbess,
and therefore at Rome was known by no other name but Madam Gonstance. She was
as handsome as was possible to wish, and besides several other good qualities
she had a good voice, and sung incomparably well: at one of the Solemnities of
that Covent the Prince heard her one day; and being a great Lover of Music, he
had a great ambition to see her; the dignity of her relation to the Pope
authorizing his desire, he asked leave to see Constance when the Ceremony was
ended. He was much transported at the sight of her, and had never seen so many
graces in one Assembly before. Till that day, he was free, his soul was his
own; and he seemed born for Mars's (not Venus) Wars. But he was not the first
man has become a Captive to the simplicity of a Nun. There is a sort of people
not to be captivated but in this shape, and there have been Letters seen in our
days which have taught us, that of all people in the World, none make Love with
that confidence and freedom as the Nuns. The Monastical Gallantry has its Laws
and Rubricks apart. There are no elegant Entertainments, no Assiduities, nor
public Attendances, all things within the Cloister are so carried privately
and with discretion; nevertheless their Religious Civility is so great, they
will not discourage any man's affection, and there is but few which attempt
them, but they arrive at their designs. The Imperial Prince was a handsome
Person, and a fine Gentleman; Constance had taken a Monastic life upon her,
more in obedience than choice, and in vows of this Nature, there is something
always reserved to direct the intention: Thus have we brought them into Cupids
Highway. The Prince seconded his first Visit with another, and lost no
opportunity of multiplying them: the more he saw, the more he admired her; and
Constance was no less taken with him: The Prince spoke, Constance attended.
Constance suspected, the Prince protested; and in short, all Formalities being
observed on both sides, the Prince persuaded her he loved her, and was
persuaded himself that she loved him no less. The Policy of the Grate confining
the Princes Visits to certain and regular hours which his passion could not
brook; he wanted some way of seeing Constance when he pleased, and that was not
easy to find. Constance was very conformable, and the Order not permitting any
Abbess of Quality (who would perhaps have known better things) there was a most
severe old Governess who would trust no body but her self with the keeping of
her Hock: The keys of the doors she brought up her self every night, and laid
them in her Chamber. But what is it which Love cannot do? Love is the Father of
Invention, and when a Lover has no more to do but to lull the numerous Eyes of
Argus into a sleep, he thinks it a trifle, and performable with ease. Prince
Henry judging of the inclinations of the rest, by what he had experimented in
Constance, resolved to insinuate with such of her Associats, as he believed
might be useful to his designs. He selected such of the young Cavaliers of his
Train as were best affected to his interest, and most like to ingratiate with
the Nuns; and gave them in charge to make Courtship to her that kept the Gate,
her that was appointed to be present at all discourses, and another whose
Office it was to rouse the Sisters in the morning. The Enterprise succeeded as
was desired, and the Gentlemen gained upon them so, that by their mediation the
Prince had all the liberty he could wish. She which was to attend their
Discourses, reported nothing to the Governess but Dialongues of Virtue and
Piety. The Sister which was to awake them, did it as she was directed, and she
that kept the Gates was so favorable, as to give them the impression in Wax of
all the Keys in the House: By these impressions the Prince caused new Keys to
be made, and whilst the rigid old Matron presuming upon her own providence, was
sleeping quietly in her bed, the Prince and his three Confidents past away
whole nights with the four Nuns in the Garden: And there was this very
remarkable in their Society, that the Nuns were all of them true to their
Camarade, lest they in revenge should be otherwise to them.

MAXIM VII.
Some men there are so vain, they cannot be
Secure (they think) of their felicity,
Unless the World does know it: but let them know,
There Is no man counted wise, that thinks them so.
He who fares well, and cannot hold his peace,
Must not be angry at too many Guests.
The desire of things forbidden is an irregularity of Nature, which knows no
bounds but excess, the respect and deference we bear to it, renders it
insatiable; and it is commonly seen, the first step one makes toward things
which are unlawful, is not long before it is followed by the last. Our Nuns
were grown to that pass, they were not satisfied to manage their Loves within
the Walls of the Cloister, to reveive and entertain their Gallants in the
Garden, and to wait upon them out again a good way beyond the Gate; but their
temptation increased by the pleasure they found in it. The Coronation of the
Emperor was to be celebrated with so many fine Spectacles, that the noise of
the prepartation was got into their Covent. They were taken with a Curiosity of
seeing one or other of them. The heat which is commonly extraordinary in Rome,
had obliged the Emperor to make choice of the night for the greatest part of
there Solemnity; and the custom of going veiled having bin long used in Italy,
Constance and her Companions could see no great difficulty in satisfying their
desires. They communicated with the Prince, and he opposed not their designs.
The more a Woman transgresses the Laws of Civility, the fewer scruples and
impediments a man has to encounter. For the accomplishment of this Enterprise,
he pitched upon a night in which the Emperor gave an Entertainment in a Garden
upon the Banks of the River Tiber: and Frederick having contuived a new way of
Divertisement, resolved to appear in Masquerade, and no persons were to be
admitted, but such as were in Disguise. Price Henry caused Masuerade Clothes to
be made for Constance and her Camarades; he furnished them with a Foreign
Equipage, and (committing them to the Conduct. of him who was Gallant to her
which kept the Gates) took order for their entrance, and places in the Garden.
They arrived without any accident; the person appointed to conduct them,
attended in an unknown Coach at the Back-gate of their Covent, with Habits
proper for their Disguise. The Ladies dressed themselves by the way, and left
their own Clothes in the Coach; they entered into the Garden, and placed
themselves. The Prince saluted them as Strangers, but whether that Complement
made them more remarkalbe, or the transcendant Beauty of Constance pierced
thorough her Disguise, she was scarce entered into the Garden, but the Emperor
perceived her, and had the curiosity to inquire who she was. Either they could
not, or they would not inform him; so that desiring to discover her by her
voice, he accosted her, and fell into a discourse. The Prince told her which
was the Emperor, as soon as she came in: So that notwithstanding his Disguise,
Constance understood how she was to depart her self. At first their discourse
was about indifferent things, the Emperor commended the fancy and neatness of
her Habit, and Constance magnified the magnificence of his: But their
conversation increasing insensibly, Constance (who understood the Emperors
affairs better than he did hers) gave him so many pungent and ingenious
answers, that augmented his desire of knowing who she was. He conjured her
therefoe to satisfy him in that point, but her reply was so ambiguous, he
might believe she was of any good Family in Rome, and not know of which: And at
last observing the Emperor to persist in his obstinacy, and fearing lest he
should cause her to be dogged home to her Covent, or find out some other way to
satisfy his curiosity, she promised the next day to give him a meeting in a
Garden (which she knew not but by the name) where the Ladies of Pleastance did
usually walk. She thought that Circumstance would make the Emperor believe
that she which spoke to him was a Lady os that Rank, and so thinking her
unworthy of his Company, leave her to her self, but it fell out quite contrary.
Frederick indeed judged of her as she had presaged, but that opinion made his
desires more violent: for finding them accompanied with hopes, from their
conception, he gave himself wholly up to them without either fear or
discretion; he considered Constance afresh, her shape, her air, the sound of
her voice, the quickness of her Eye, and the Pleasantness of her Wit: All of
them were as charming in appearance, as they were in effect: and flattering his
imagination with a thousand fantastical Chimera's, he took his leave of her,
the most enamoured Person in the World. Prince Henry discovered this new
passion at the very first: he observed the Emperor stick to her, as he had
been retained by Enchantment. He bad the Courtiers (especially his Favorites)
to take notice of that Lady, of her Presence, and bonne Mine, and believing her
unknown to the Prince, he called him to him two or three times, to inquire his
opinion about her. The Prince was at first well pleased with his Curiosity, but
considering the violence of his Fathers humor better, he apprehended what
might follow. He made signs to the Conducter of the Masquerades to retire with
them immediately, and he being intelligent enough, took his direction, and
making use of an opportunity when the Emperor was speaking to a French
Ambassador which was there, and just come into the Garden: he withdrew
Constance out of the Crowd, and re-conducted her to her Covent. All the time
they were passing in the Coach betwixt the Garden and the Nunnery, they
employed in changing their Habits, as they had done as they came. They were
just got to the Gate they were to go in at, when day began to break (as if it
had attended their coming back, before it durst appear) but who could imagine
the misfortune that befell them? She of the Party which carried the Key, had
been so much taken up with the contemplation of what she had seen, that she had
forgot where she had laid it. She examined her Gallants Habit, and she examined
her Religious, gropt up and down the Coach, turned over her Papers, but no Key:
The hour they rise in the Monastery approached. The people which brought
Commodities to the Market began to appear in the streets: and not one of the
poor Sisters could imagine by what Miracle they should be conveyed out of the
Coach where they were, into the Cells where they ought to have been. No wonder
if they invoked their good Genius, and made millions of promises never to run
themselves into the like error again. There was not a Saint, nor a Protector
belonging to their Covent, but they promised a Wax-canle, though by the
tediousness of their delivery, they did not seem to be accepted: But at length
length their Destiny was merciful, and their Key found in the fold of her
sleeve, where she had put it her self, and where (according to the common
accident in such cases) she had searched twenty times, and could not find it.
They gave great thanks for so seasonalbe a discovery; they opened the Gates as
easily as they could, and stole to their Quarters without any noise; and in the
morning one was troubled with the Colic, another with the Headache, every one
had her distemper, to excuse their lying in bed the next day. The Emperor in
the mean time (pressed by his curiosity) was as impatient till the hour os the
Rendez-vous came, as she was indifferent. He got up earlier in the morning,
than his setting up the night before did seem to permit, but all that time he
could take no rest, though Constance slept very sweetly. Scarce was the heat of
the day over, but the Emperor was at his assignation: he took some turns about
the Garden, before the Ladies which were used to walk there, could get into a
condition to appear; but at length the walking hour approaching, he see four or
five the handsomest Courtisans in Rome enter, amongst whom he imagined his
unknown Mistress was one. He accosted them, and laid her particularly aboard
with a Complement upon her good Air, her excellent Shape, and the Majesty of
her Walk. The Damoisel was mighty well pleased with his Judgment; she bridled,
she strutted, and strained as much as was possible to deserve it; she bit her
lips to make them look red, and put her Eyes into the best posture she could:
but she might have let them alone as well. The Emperor found his mistake, and
that she had neither the Shape, Eyes, nor Voice which he looked for. The
conversation of this Woman was tedious to him, when he compared her with
Constance: and so leaving, and throwing his eyes up and down the Garden, he
continued there till night, but no Nun, nor no body to supply the place she had
gotten in his heart. This disappointment went very near him; he could not think
of it without indignation, and his Choler fermenting with his Love, he retired
into his Palace so agitated, and disturbed, one would have thought he had been
to fight some great Battle, or had the Conquest of all Turkey in his head.
Whilst he was consuming in his Melancholy, and fruitless desires, the Prince
and Constance did but laugh at his misery: he understood by the person he sent
home with them, of the meeting she had appointed with Frederick, and of her
resolution to fail: and being told that afternoon by some of the Emperors
Servants, that the Emperor was gone into the Walks: He thought that a fit
opportunity to visit the Popes Niece, to see how she liked the Magnificence of
the Solemnity she had seen, and to droll with her about the Emperors
credulity. Thus we may see the advantage youth has over age, and how
successful a man is like to be in his Career, when his own Son runs against
him. The abused Frederick having to the motions of a violent curiosity, added
the impulses of shame and indignation, his life became so uneasy, and
melancholy, he was scarce to be known. He went from Church to Church, from one
Company to another, searching of a person he did not know when he saw, and
inquiring after one whose name he could not tell. Those who pretend great
penetration into matters of Policy, attribute that to the Ambition of this
Prince, which was indeed due to his Love. The unquiet air which was visible in
his Countenance, portended some secret design. The frequent Visits he made (in
quest of his Mistress) to the chief Families in Rome, presaged some fatal
Revolution in the Ecclesiastical State. Those who where faithful to his
Holiness, ceased not to put him in mind of the turbulency of Fredericks Spirit,
and that he had some evil designs or other in his head, which unless carefully
prevented, would be mature immediately. Upon which ad vertisement, Siena (as a
Town like to be the first object of his Ambition) was fortified forthwith: all
his Holinesses Troops had order to march down toward Milan, which was looked
upon as inclining to the Emperor. The Emperor having notice of what past,
thought it high time to look to himself. His new Love had laid his Ambition
asleep, but his anger had waked it again; and therefore it was necessary he
should do something to divert his imagination from the Object that affected
him. He drew together what Troops he had in Italy, and quartered them as close
as the Country would bear. To excuse these proceedings, he pretended a
necessity of relieveing Vladislaus King of Bohemia, his near Kinsman and Ally,
against the Polander, who was become jealous of his Kingdom. In the Imperial
Court nothing was talked of but Musters and Preparations for War. Prince Henry
(who by his employments, was hindered from visiting Constance as he had been
used, and who foreseeing the Emperors Affairs, must of necessity send him
packing into Germany) began to suspect his Father might make some advantage of
his absence, and signified his apprehensions by Letters to his most
incomparable Nun. Having observed one day in one of her Answers, a Curiosity to
know what the Emperor thought of his, it stirred up Jealousy, and not able to
satisfy her in person, being to draw some Troops some few miles from Rome; he
sent her his Answer in a Letter. Constance had no paper ready to return him an
Answer, and the Princes Messenger pressing her to write, because his Master
requested it; she did it, and writ her mind in the blancks betwixt the Lines of
his Letter, and then sealing it up, sent it back again to the Prince,
containing both the Letter and the Answer. The Prince was on Horseback when he
received it, and the Presence of the Emperor not allowing him time to read it,
he put it up (as he thought) safe in his Pocket. But whether the trouble which
was upon him, hindered him from putting it right in, or that it was the
inevitable Destiny of all Lovers to have their Secrets discovered by their
Letters; this from Constance fell down, and was observed by the Emperor: he
made signs to one of his Servants to take it up, and give it to him; and was
mightily well pleased, that it was in his power to understand any of his Sons
affairs, he opened it as soon as he was got where he might do it secretly. He
was surprised at first to see the two different hands, he could not imagine the
reason of that Novelty: but at last perceiving one of them to be the Princes,
he began with that, and found these words expressed therein.

Madam,
You are too much concerned at what is thought of you, not to rejoice when it
is to your advantage. I am not to give Laws to your Curiosity: yet believe me,
Madam, it does a little discompose me, lest to your desire of knowing what the
Emperor thinks of you, you should add a readiness to inform him what you thing
of himself.


The word Emperor started him a little, but he did not conceive at first it
was meant of him. There was at that time three or four other Emperors in
being: Henry had been a long time at the Court of the Emperor of the East; and
he had Intelligence with the Emperor of Trebisond: He might therefore have had
some amorous Intrigue; where the name of those Princes might be concerned, but
he was not long in this doubt, for this was the return Constance had made.

Sir,
Your apprehension is a Chimaera my assurances might have dispelled: I love
you, you know, and you know likewise you deserve to be beloved: But though you
can forget your own merits, and my kindness, remember at least that you are in
the Spring of your Youth, and Frederick in the Winter of his Age.


This Letter opened the Emperors eyes, he perceived clearly now, that he was
the man, and knowing within himself, that he had not had any Frolic with a
Lady for several years, besides what past lately with the Lady in Mascarade; he
concluded it must be there, and that his Son was his Rival. It would be a hard
thing to determine which was most violent in his soul, the pleasure he
conceived at the news of the unknown Lady, or his displeasure to find his Son
was like to be his Rival. His first resolution was to send immediately for his
Son, to conjure him to tell him where she lived, and her name, and afterward
to forbid him any Converse with her for the future, under pain of his
indignation. But judging upon second thoughts, that in affairs of any standing,
or settlement, open resistance does commonly more mischief than good: he
altered his mind, and concluded the best way to try what might be done by
artifice before he came to violence. He set Spies upon his Son, he understood
he went abroad every night, he employed people to dog him, and at leagth
discovered he went into the Covent to Constance: and to complete the discovery,
he saw another Letter of hers (under the same hand) lying upon the Popes Table,
to whom she had addressed it. He knew the hand was the same with the Ticket he
had. From whence he inferred, that Constance must needs be his Sons mistress,
but he was not certain she was the disguised Lady. The dignity of Constance,
the reputation of her Virtue in Rome, and the Profession she had embraced, all
these, I say, agreed so little with her being in Mascarade, that he had no
sooner formed a suspicion of what was too true, but these reasons confuted it:
At leagth considering with himself, that a Nun when she forgets the Religious
duties of her Profession so far as to love a man more than she ought, she might
as well forget her self quite, and see spectacles as well as other people. He
thought Constance had nor perhaps found so much difficulty to accommodate her
Disguise with her Profession, as he had himself. He called for his Coach, and
away he went to her to the Covent to consult the opinion of his own senses in
so extraordinary an Intrigue, and scarce had Constance opened her mough to give
him thanks for that honor, but he found it was the same voice he had heard in
his Dialogue with the disguised Lady; he peept through her Habit, and observed
the same shape, and Majesty, which had so far transported him at the Masque.
Her Eyes had the same fire, with which the Heart of Frederick was inflamed; and
though her Monastical modesty would not permit her to use the same Wit and
Vivacity as she had done before, yet he found she had the same quickness of
apprehension as then. He had seen her several times at the Ceremonies of Saint
Peter, he knew she was handsome, and sung very well, but looking upon her as a
Religious, whose Talent was to be locked up from the World, he did not trouble
himself so far as to consider each particular of her Graces. See him then at
this time the most loving, and the most jealous Creature alive. Love in a young
man, is but a youthful efflorescence, which reason and time tempers by degrees:
But when it seizes upon a man that ought to have more wit, when settled and
experienced, reason is not able to oppose it self against its first impulse,
time does but increase it; for never was any man cured of a folly which took
him at an age when other people grow wise. This first Conversation of the
Emperor, was only about indifferent things, he would not discover the bottom
of his designs, whilst he had a Person so near him as his Son capable of
defeating them: but having a fair pretense to send him farther off; he gave
Orders that night that he should prepare for a Journey into Germany within four
and twenty hours. The Prince had a long time expected that Command, and yet he
could not receive it without changing his color: He produced certain reasons
to defer it for some time, but the Emperor would hear none of them; all the
favor he could find, was only to be permitted private Conversation with
Constance for a while. The farewell of these two Lovers was extremely kind,
accompanied with great protestations of fidelity. This place would make a
mavelous Ornament for a Romance, and I should have a great care how I past it
over in silence, were this a Romance, and not a History;but the style of Annals
do not suit with Rhetorical Ornations, and therefore I shall refer my curious
Reader to the passionate partings in Cirus or Clelia. As soon as the Emperor
was delivered from the presence of the Prince, he laid aside his former
dissimulation: He made his Visits to Constance openly, and presuming that the
young Ladies profession would not admit him to discourse his Intrigues in the
Secular forms, he told her bluntly at once, what he understood of her affairs.
The Lady was (doubtless) much surprised at the Complement: She denied it
courageously, and believed that it was enough to have hindered the Mascarade
from ever, having been, if she swore stoutly there had been no such ting. But
Frederick having wherewithal to convince her by his own Eyes, he show her the
Letter she interlined with the Princes, and swore as heartily as she, he would
show it his Holiness, if she did not oblige him to the contrary by an ingenuous
confession. This Menace made poor Constance to tremble, she betook her self to
her whimpering, and her tears, and beseeched the Emperor that he would not
ruin a Person of so Illustrious Extraction, whose Reputation was entirely in
his hands. That it was true indeed her Curiosity had been indescreet, but that
at the bottom it was innovent, and that as to her Intrigue and Correspondence
with his Son, it was the common Entertainment of young people, and had no other
end but the diversion of their minds, and a harmless affectation of making
innocent Love. Frederick countefeited a belief of what she said: He was too
cunning to testify the suspicion of a Crime, which would have put an
invincible obstruction upon all designs. But the more he fancied her to be
chaste, the more obstinate he was in his desires to debauch her. Had you
consummated your Intrigues with my Son, Madam, said the Emperor, I would dye a
thousand deaths before I would propose any thing of that nature for my self; I
am too good a Father to him, and not so impious inclined. But, Madam, the
Amors and Gallantry betwixt you two having been so innocent, it cannot hinder
you at all from granting me some favorable indulgence. These Propositions were
close, and Constance could not hear them without horror, she cried out in her
heart for the assistance of her dear Prince, she accused her self of imprudence
in letting him go, and she used the utmost of her Rhetoric to mollify his
Majesty, and render him less importunate. But he was a Person for dispatch, not
easily changed in any thing he undertook, and would have thought it a great
diminution to his Honor, should he have been wheedled out of his designs by a
pitiful Nun. To make him desperate, was but to justfie his Revenge; to satisfy
him, was to transgresas the Laws, both humane and Divine; all therefore that
Constance could do was but to beg time, and he gave her much less that she
desired. But she was to be contented with what Frederick would give her; she
was in no case to stand upon Conditions. As soon as she was rid of so
troublesome an Entertainment, she ran immediately for Counsel to her three
Companions. And having told them in what danger they were of being discovered,
she conjured them to assist her in so perilous a station. The most timorous of
the three was presently for satisfying the Emperor, it was indefferent to her
what Victime they sacrificed to Fortune, so it rendered it favorable. But
Constance was for dying a thing a thousand times, rather than following her
direction. She loved the Prince, and the Tyrannical proceedings of his Father,
made her abominate him. It was concluded at last that she should suspend him,
and keep him in hopes, till she could by some opportunity or persuasion recover
the Letter out of his hands, which was the only Evidence against Constance: and
that having rescued that, she should then handle him as she pleased for his
sacrilegious Attempt. Constance pondering very seriously about this resolution,
she did two things at one time, both opposite, and yet both answetable to her
Policy and Address. She writ word to his Holiness, That the frequency of the
Emperors Visits alarmed their Society, and disturbed them in the Exercises of
Devotion: for which reasons she did humbly entreat that out of his Pastoral
care, he would forbid him any such Civilities for the future: And having at the
same time intimated privately to Frederick, that she desired infinitely to see
him, she put him upon a cecessity of displeasing the Pope, and furnished her
self with a justisiable pretense, to receive them no more. This Expedient made
great difference betwixt the Pope and the Emperor; so that for some few days
Constance was quiet. But Frederick being too tenacious a Prince to give over
upon the first difficulty, bethought himfelf of a Counterbattery for the Pope.
He put Constance in the number, and declared himself a Benefactor to the Covent
where she was. There was not a night but he pretended some heavenly Revelation,
which required him to enlarge both the Revenue, and Fabric of that Monastery.
He designs a Dormitory in this place, a Chapel in that. The Governess looked
upon him as the Tutelar Angel of her Order, and the Hloy Father himself
relenting at so specious a promise, magnified Frederick for his good
intentions, and blamed his Niece for having interpreted them so unchristianly.
The Emperor finding himself justified by the Pope, began to ress Constance
again to a final resolution, the Walls of the Covent were broken down in some
places, in order to his build so that Constance might honor him with
particular meetings that way, if she thought good; and if she did not, he swore
desperately he would be revenged. Constance observing his resolution, concluded
her condition so desperate, she was now or never to make use of what remedies
she had. She came to an agreement with the Emperor, and gave him an
assignation in the night. The Emperor got very punctually into the Garden, at
one of the Breaches: And all things being prepared both within and without,
Constance presented her self, where the Emperor attended. She fell into a
large Encomium of his confidence, told him that that was the surest way to win
her heart, and having engaged to follow what directions he would give her, she
conjured him to return her the Letter, and to choose rather to receive her
favors from her own pure will, than to owe them to any fear or constraint,
which would be unworthy of either of them. Whilst this Letter is in your hands,
Sir, said she, you will always believe you obtain that by force, which nothing
but your merit ought to make you to hope. This imagination must needs trouble
your joy, and I am persuaded you are of a more gentle and delicate temper, than
to govern like a Tyrant, where you may reign like a lawful Prince. Restore my
Letter then, I conjure you, I beg it in the name of whatever it be that is most
dear to you, and I do promise my acknowledgements shall follow your Generosity
so close, you shall not have time to repent you of any thing you do. This
Proposition was not pleasting to Frederick: He had a mind Constance should make
the first step, and told her she ought to have the same confidence in his word,
as she desired he should have in hers: But the conning Nun knew to complain so
artificially of his injustice to her sincerity, she was so apt to take his
unkindness to heart, and he was so well pleased with her tenderness, it was not
possible for him to refuse her any longer. He pulled the Letter out of his
Pocket, and gave it into her hands; but he was much surprised to see her run
away with the Paper, and to observe that at the very first step of her flight,
he heard some body cry fire round about the Covent. This noise was made by her
three Companions from their several Posts, they had agreed among themselves of
this Stratagem before, and the Emperor suspecting nothing of it, was advancing
toward the house to examine what might be the reason. But the Confusion was so
great, and his Train which he had placed without, hearing the Name of
Frederick, and Emperor, frequently reiterated in the Covent, they persuaded
him so forcibly, that it was not safe for him to stay longer in the Garden,
that he retird with all speed, and went directly to his Palace, so mad and
outrageous at the Trick they had put upon him, that had he followed the first
motions of his Choler, he would have set fire to the Monastery indeed, and
sacrificed Constance and all her Sisterhood to the justice of his resentment.
But not thinking himself strong enought at that time in Rome, he durst not
attempt so great a piece of violence, besides it would not have been easy for
him to have done it; for at the first Alarm about the Town, and the Palace of
Alexander, that some body was stealing his Holiness his Niece, the Monastery
was immediately encompassed with such a number of Soldiers, it would have been
a difficult matter to have made any such Attempt. The Popesent one of his
Officers to inform himself of the particulars. Constance told her story so
well, there was no body but believed her. She said she had been drawn by force
out of her Cell, and carried into the Garden, whence they had certainly
conveyed her through the breach of the Wall, had not the Cries of her
Companions (who heard her skreek out) prevented their violence. This Tale was
so well invented, and the Evidences against the Emperor so probable, that the
Pope doubted not in the least but the Emperor was the Author of this Tumult.
Constance had long since complained of his Visits. She affirmed she heard his
voice in the throng: He went abroad that night attended by several armed men,
and had been met in the street with his Mirmidons, by some of his Holinesses
Servants, which put the Pope into the highest indignation against the rashness
of that Prince. He commanded his Guards to their Arms, he beset the Emperors
Palace, with resolution to revenge himself for the indignity done to him in the
person of his Niece. But Frederick had prevented his diligence, he had
withdrawn himself and his Family into the Quarters of one of his Troops, where
he complained as much of the Affront done to him, as Alexander did on the other
side. From hence it was arose that famous War betwixt the Guelfs and the
Gibelins, which was the desolation of Italy for so long time, and divided all
the Princes of Christendom. The public pretense was, That the Pope refused the
Bishopric of Ravenna to a Favorite of the Emperors, but the occult cause was
Constances rejection of the Emperors Love, and that passion being turned into
Rage, by the Trick she had put upon him, it is a hard matter to describe the
effects that rage did produce. Rome was pillaged, his Holiness forced to
abandon the holy See, and seek Sanctuary in France: Autipopes where chosen,
Excommunications thundered abroad; and all these the consequence of a fatal
Amor; though of so many dire accidents are reported in History, there are few
people that can trace them from their true source and Original. The ambition of
Frederick, and the perverseness of the Pope are generally charged with these
disorders: The latter has been condemned of severity; the first of an
injustifiable design upon the Lands of the Church. The super Aspidem and
Basiliscum of Alexander the Third is recorded in Capital Letters in all the
Relations of that time. But there are few Memoires which attribute that to
Constances Gallant, which History imputes to the Protector of the Antipope: and
thus it is the great Affairs of the World are secretly carried on: They have
all several faces, and we see nothing but as the partiality or ignorance of the
Historian represents. But without fear of digressing too much from the ways of
truth, we may always mingle some amorous Occurrences with the Accidents which
seem most remote and foreign to that passion; for if we take our measures
right, there is seldom any passage, how Tragical soever it may appear) of which
the Annals of Love may not become a Chronological History. As Constance was the
secret Cause of the War, it was but just she should give her Uncle all the
assistance she could to maintain it. She writ word to Prince Henry all the
violences the Emperor had designed against her, and the ways she took to
defeat them. Jealousy has been always a kind of Apple of Contention, which
spares not the most Sacred Alliances. The Emperor was most violently jealous
of his Son, as well in point of Honor, as of Love. He saw he had a great
Reputation in the Army, and he imputed the Affront Constance had done to him,
to her passion for his Rival: so that the secret dissatisfactions of the
Prince, cooperating with the ill disposition of the Emperors mind, they began
to look upon one another with diffidence, to that diffidence succeeded
indignation, and to that, an irreconciliable disunion. The Prince deserted him,
and went to the Pope, who having interdicted Frederick for his Attempts against
the Ecclesiastical See, offered Henry to make him Emperor, though his Father
was still living: and certainly the Condition he required was but reasonable;
it was only that he should marry Constance of Sicily his Niece: he told him
that without that security, he could not rely upon the word of the Prince; But
in short, the Intrigues of his Niece were come to his knowledge, and he found
it troublesome to conceal them; and as certain it is, Henry would been have glad
if the Popes Generosity had been entire without terms. He loved Constance most
passionately, but every one knows.

MAXIM VIII.
However one loves before, the very name
Of Wedding mentioned gravely, does rebate
His edge (no doubt) checks his consuming flame,
And brings the Martyr to his former state.
The thought of Marriage, to a thoughtful mind,
Opens his nerve, and shows'em he was blind.
But his Holiness was not affrighted at this Doctrine, and less at the
difficulty of granting a Dispensation for her who had been four years a
Professor. But Prince Henry was under a necessity of submitting, however to
comfort himself by the consideration of having Companions, he proposed to the
three persons (who were Gallants to Constances three Confidents) to follow his
Example. They had made Love as furiously as he, he promised them considerable
advantages, and the Pope was in so good an humor at that time, he would have
given Dispensations to the whole Covent, if his Niece had desired it. But they
who were his Camarades in his Amors, would by no means bear him Company in his
Marriage. They told him that if they were as accomplished as he, they might
undertake any thing upon confidence of their Merit; but for them who had not
been so great Favorites of Nature, they could not but fear the Laws of Wedlock
might be as casily violated, as the Rules of a Covent: That in so tender a
point one could not be too cautious, and that if the worst happened that could
be, and they must marry, they desired to do it upon his terms, and have an
equivalence to the Empire of the West, for their Wives Portion. The Prince did
not think it convenient for his Chaity to the Nuns, to renounce his possession
of the Empire, He left them unkindly in their Monastery to deplore the
ingratitude of the Gallants, and launcht himself alone into that Gulf in which
his Associats had represented so many difficulties. He married Constance, and
was crowned Emperor by the Name of Henry the Fourth. A famous Abbot in those
times, who dyed not long after, and left a great Reputation of his Sanctity
behind him, declaimed bitterly against this Marriage, and indeed the
misfortunes which followed, turned his Imprecations into a Prophecy: But let
him say what he please, Those ways which lead a man to the chief place in the
World, are always counted the best paths one can walk in. And now let us take
our leave of our new Emperor and Empress, and take a fresh turn about the
World, to see if we can find any new Adventure in that Age, that may be fit to
close up our Annals of this year.

James King of Arragon, endued with much natural Chastity, and as much
Experience as sixteen years of age could confer, was married to Eleoner of
Castile, Aunt to the King which reigned in that Kingdom at that time, who for
the number of her years, and her own inclination, was as well skilled in
matters of Love, as her young Husband was ignorant. This Princess had an Amor
with a Castilian Lord, whom she loved most passionately. She had past her Faith
to him, and attended it with so many oaths and imprecations, she might justly
fear the Justice of Heaven would follow her, if she transgressed. For this
reason she did what she could not to marry the King of Arragon. She cast her
self a thousand times at the King of Castiles feet, though he was but her
Nephew: She wept, she sob'd, she threatened to starve her self, but her tears,
and her prayers were to as little purpose as her threats. The Marriage was
concluded by the Counsels both of Castile and Arragon, to be advantageous to
both Nations. Eleonor used her utmost to prevent it: But Princesses of her
Quality are as so many Sacrifices to the Policy of their Countries, and never
to be disposed of by their own inclinations. The new Queen seeing her self
forced upon a Match which gave her so many scruples, she considered of a way by
which she might like a constant Mistress, continue faithful to her Gallants.
She suborned an ancient Physician to insinuate into her young Husband, that he
could not marry Eleonor, that there were invincible obstacles in the way which
opposed its Consummation. The young Monarch, who was scarce got out of his
Infancy, had never seen Woman (as it were) but his Queen Mother, his
Governesses, and Nurses, and had been always told that Eleonor was a sprightly
Princess; believed what was told him very honestly: and remembering that he had
heard it wished several times that he would provide Successors for the Crown, he
understood it a great shame and misfortune for him, to be unable to satisfy
the desires of his Subjects. This consideration rendered him so melancholy, he
could not endure the sight of any body. He shut himself up whole days together
in his Closet: if he went walking, it must be alone; and having read in the
Histories of that Kingdom, what sorrow some of his Predecessors had conceived
for want of Issue, and what ill Consequences had followed the default of Heirs
in several Kingdoms, the good Prince (who had an apprehension above his Age)
began to look upon himself already, as the object of his Subjects hatred and
contempt. Those who had the care of his Person, perceiving his humor and
Complexion changed, entreated him many times to tell the reason of his
Melancholy; but he answered with nothing but sighs, and the Queen confirming
him daily in the Error he was plunged, he proposed it himself, that Eleonor
should take her own liberty. The Queen had in her Train a young Lady called
Theresia de Bidaura, witty, and handsome, and to whom the Person of the King was
not so indifferent as to the Queen: She was originally of Castile, and brought
along with the Princess Eleonor out of Arragon. This Lady (finding the young
Monarch exactly according to her mind) had studied all his actions, and took
all the care she could possibly to please him. She invented sundry Dances, and
other Pastimes with her Companions, on purpose to divert him. If he did her the
honor to speak to her at any time, she would be sure to make him smile with
the wittiness of her answer; and kindness producing usually the like, Bidanra
became by degrees as dear to the King of Arragon, as the King of Arragon had
appeared amiable to Bidaura. The first apparition of his Love was in little
confidences only, as in discovering to her his thoughts and Characters of the
great Lords in his Court. From these trifles he past higher, and at length told
her the secret of his Marriage, and that he was Eleonor Husband only by name.
Bidaura was exceedingly surprised at a discourse so little understood. She
looked earnestly upon the King, as if by so doing, she could discover the truth
of what he said in his eyes, and not perceiving any thing in his person, but
what seemed to accuse him of equivocating, she ventured to tell him, That he
had bin abused, and that what they had persuaded him, was nothing but a
Chimaera. Alas, replied the young King very sadly, this Chimaera is too real
for my repose, one of the most famous Physicians of our Kingdom has sworn it,
and Eleonor her self confirms me that it is true: What advantage would it be to
her to put such a fallacy upon me? she would rather convince me, if it were
otherwise. Bidaura ruminating upon what the King had told her, desired to know
the Physicians name, who had persuaded him of that impotency, and understanding
it was a Castilian (who she knew was entirely at the Queens disposal) she stood
still for some time, as recollecting her memory, when starting out on a sudden,
and clapping her hands together, Courage, Sir, said she to the King, you shall
be cured very suddenly, now the cause of your distemper is known. After which
words she fell into a discourse of the intimacy betwixt Eleonor and the
Castillian Lord: That all Castile believed they had been privately married, and
recollecting that the Physician (which upon the Queens persuasion had put that
Error into the head of the King) had all his life long been a Creature of
Eleonors Gallant, she represented to his Majesty how probably it was that this
might be a design to preserve the Queen of Arragon to her secret Husband. The
King was much satisfied at the likelihood of what Bidaura had said, and he
would have given half his Kingdom to have been cured so well. He went imme
drately to Eleonor, and charging her positively with what Bidaura but
suspected, supposing he had made some further discovery, she confessed is without
much ado. But it was with such strong protestations, that she could use him no
otherwise without violence to all Law both humane and divine; and with such
instant supplication that he would protect her against the indignation of her
Nephew, That the young Prince was so far from reproaching her for abusing his
Credulity and small Experience. that he commended her fidelity to her first
Love, and promised her protection. In the mean time Bidaura began to add
Ambition to her Love, at first she aspired only to be his Mistress; but finding
the Queenship of Arragon vacant, she fancied it might fall to her share to
supply it, She dressed, and made her self as lovely as possible, she redoubled
her diligence, and Complacences, and having brought the King to a Condition of
making trial of his recovery, she knew so well how to keep her self within the
bounds of Civility, she put him upon the first motions of Matrimony. The
Marriage of Eleonor and the King was not quite nulled. The truth is, it had
never been consummated, and the Counsel of Arragon had sent to Castile and to
Rome to press an absolute dissolution, but Affairs betwixt Kings and Queens are
not so easily dispatched. The passion of Eleonor for her Paramour might decline
by degrees; if ambition or solid reason should take the place of her Love, it
would have been more casie to break her pretended Marriage with her Castillian
Lord, than her public Contract with the King of Arragon. We may say then that
Eleonor was the Wife of James, till further Order from his Holiness. But the
King pressed by Bidaura's Charms, could not with patience believe those
Formalities were to be preferred before the desires of his heart. He married
Bidaura privately, and this Marriage being as blameable as it was unequal, he
made it in his Conditions that she should not discover it. This Proposition was
not at all pleasing to Theresia, and she did what she could possibly to divert
him; but finding the King obstinate, and inexorable, she thought it good to be
a Queen upon what terms soever it might be: And these were some of the Articles
agreed on betwixt themselves, which perhaps may be of some use to the Reader,
if he be in the same predicament.

The Private Articles of their Marriage.
We who subscribe these Articles, design,
(As our Love is) our Marriage Clandestine,
Next the word duty shall be laid aside,
No Sover aignty in Bridegroom, or in Bride;
In case of difference, both shall comply,
And neither be too humble, nor too high.
If Husband sins, the Woman must connive:
If she, the man dispenses with the Wife.
All must be one, one Love, one lofe, one joy,
And what does one must both of us destroy.
These Terms we marry on, but reasons bid
Conceal the Marriage, and let it be hid,
With this severe condition ('cause good Wives
Love tattling gen'rally as they love their lives)
If mine discovers, it is agreed by this,
The Marriage's void, and farewell gentle Miss.
These Articles were observed very religiously by the King. His private
Marriage was every was as pleasant, as his private Amors, and pleasanter in
this, that there was no occasion for remorse: and though his Marriage with
Eleonor was solemnly dissolved, and she left to be his Wife to whom she had
been formerly engaged; yet Theresia de Bedaura could never obtain liberty of
the King to appear publicly upon the Throne; she had this satisfaction, that
it was not possessed by another, and she brought Children into the World, who
stood fair one day to govern the Kingdom of Arragon, but for all this she could
never work upon the Kings resolution. He had been so much dissatisfied with his
public Marriage before, that he could not be won to renounce the pleasure of
his private Bidaura, she had got the Ministers to her side, and all the
Religious in the Kingdom were her Sollicitors, but the King answered them all
with this Article,

If mine discovers, it is agreed by this
The Marriage's void, and farewell gentle Miss.
But we do ill to employ so much leisure, upon so barren a Story: Our
Chronology leads us insensibly to a far better History, and it is time now to
bring Love upon the Stage in better form, than as yet it has appeared.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE
THE THIRD PART.
IT is the Universal Confession of the whole World, that Constraint creates an
appetite of Liberty; we desire nothing so ardently as what is prohibited, and
yet some Husbands there are which cannot be cured of restraining their Wives.
The Italians be the Husbands in the World the most liable to this kind of
madness, and are by consequence most subject to the ill Accidents which follow.
They tell stories of their revenge upon their Wives, which would pass for
Prodigies in any other place, where their Captivity does not authorize them.
But the most pleasant (in my Judgment) that ever was transmitted by History,
was that which happened betwixt the Roman Ladies and the Traticelles. These
honest Gentlemen were near twenty young Fellows, living about four hundred
years since. In their time there was a great year of Gallantry in Rome, and
Courtship: The Lovers running like Rats up and down the streets all night long,
sometimes with their Serenads, sometimes petrolling under the Windows of the
most illustrious Houses, in hopes of a happy glance from the Persons they
adored. But these amorous Exploits being too frequent to be private, the
suspicious Husbands took the Alarm, and augmented the number of their Spies to
such a Proposition, that that Trade was in a short time quite interrupted. The
young Devots we mentioned before, were heavily afficted at that sad
Information; they had had no share in the nocturnal Gallantries which had past,
and they thought it unreasonable that they should be punished for the
indiscretion of other people. Seeing then this Clutter and public Ostentation
of Love, had been the cause of so much disorder, they resolved to carry on
theirs privately, and a la Sourdine, without giving any more occasion of
Jealousy than needs must. They pretended to live very recluse, they affected
an outward mortification, and forming themselves into a new Religious Order
under the Name of Fraticelles, they became in a short time so venerable for
their visible piety, that they were never mentioned but as a new sort of
Anchorets. Some of the most unquiet, and worst coupled Husbands, had a great
curiosity to see these Devots; those persons who are under the anxiety of that
Domestic care, find great comfort in pious Discourses, and the Conversation of
these Fraticelles being then very grateful, there was scarce a married man in
Rome but expected from their charitable admonitions, the Conversation of his
Wife, were she never so extravagant. The Husbands were mad to be at home, to
tell their Wives of this new Institution: and the good Women looking upon the
pretense of a Visit, as a good opportunity to gad, expressed great satisfaction
at the News, and had a strange desire of seeing these good Brethren
immediately. By this means the Fraticelles were visited, by degrees, very
often; and the good men at home, as well contented as might be. For the
Fraticelles (for the better establishment of their Dominion) preached nothing
but Conjugal Love, Fidelity, and Obedience in the Wives toward their Husbands;
and variety of such other Precepts as were very useful for the tranquillity of
a Family, and of great comfort to the Gentleman at home. But because what was
good to be said to the one, might not perhaps be proper or agreeable to the
other, they desired the good Women would come by themselves, to the end, said
they, That we may labor the more effectually for your entire Conversion. There
was no great difficulty of obtaining that mark of their respect; they had
rather go th Church, than not stir out at all; and the private Lectures of the
Fraticelles not appearing so hard to be put in practice, as the Documents of
the Ordinary Priest; they became very assiduous, to the great satifaction of
their Husbands. See, Daughter, said one of the cunningest of the Friars, to one
of the handsomest of the Penitents one day; Appearances, and secious Pretenses,
are the Children of Prudence, which cost but little bringing up, and are of
great use in Civil Society. What pleasures do you find in the disorders of a
jealous Husband? Alas, is it not an easy matter to deceive him; a little Kiss
given opportunely, hides a blush sometimes from his eyes, that (had he seen it)
would have been as welcome, as a Dagger to his heart. A counterfeit sorrow when
you take your leave, makes him the more courteous, and hastens your departure.
And to speak truth, we do very well consider, all flesh is but frail, we do not
(when you come for instruction) expect you should be Statues of Marble. All
that we admonish is this, that you study the humor of your Husbands, and
cajole it so cunningly, that they may not complain, and you do as you please.
Love what is lovely, write Letters, appoint Meetings, it is no matter, they are
things not criminal in themselves; it is the prattling, and discovery that makes
the Crime: and that it is so, let me ask you, do not you know Segniora
Petronilla, who lives at the Corner of the Via Appia? Yes certainly, replied
the Penitent, my Husband casts her every day in my dish, and proposes her to me
as an admirable Example of Virtue; and doubtless she is one of the wisest Women
in Rome. You are misinformed, good Daughter, as to that, replied the Confessor,
she has had ten Gallants in her time, and I know them all my self. The
Marquess Cocles was one of them, he courted her two years together., and upon
her score it was the brave Brundivisi was killed. The money she pretended to
give to the poor, was carried privately to a younger Brother of the House of
Vrsini by a Templer, an Acquaintance of mine; and that Father you see with her
so often with long sleeves, was formerly one of our Fraternity, banished for his
licentiousness, and is now driving on an amorous Intrigue with her, under
pretense of religious Conference, but I must needs say the Hypocrite has Wit,
she disguises her inclinations with a visible modesty; she caresses her
Husband, complies with him in every thing, and makes the Servants pay him a
most transcendant respect. Thus indeed it is Husbands ought to be dealt with;
thus would I have you do with yours, and I Will assure you I speak it out of a
true Charity for you. Such judicious Doctrine as this could not choose but
produce great effects in all the discontented Families. The most cross-grained
Wife of them all, became a Pattern of Complacency, and the Husbands came in
Troops to give the Fraticelles thanks for the repose they had procured. The
Friars perceiving their Reputation pretty well settled, they began to reflect
about their own private felicity. They chose from amongst them a Superior, they
called Friar Conrard an acute man, eloquent, his gravity and superciliousness
imposed upon the World, and his outward Conversation he managed as he pleased.
This new Governor chose out of the rest twenty of the youngest, the
cunningest, and the most plausible men he could find, and as it were
restraining the piety of the Order to this number, he chose as many
she-Penitents for them, and (one half by Lot, and another by Election) bestowed
them all amongst his Brethren, so that each of them had one. Having settled
their Chapter in this manner, they divided the rest of their Congregation into
two inferior Orders, one of which being absolutely ignorant of what past
amongst them, believed the Fraticelles as really devout as they pretended to
be, and applying themselves wholly to the care of the Family, they made
Sweetmeats and Restauratives for the Favorites of Conrade. The last Order of
of this terrestrial Hierarchy was a certain number of old men, who being past
the emulation of other peoples felicity, and finding great Relief in the
Magnificence of the Friars, they went up and down magnifying their Sanctity,
inveigling Penitents, and endeavoring to corrupt some Notary or other, to
foist them into the wills of rich men, that their Estates might escheat upon
their Covent: And these Disciples were called the Secular Brethren. The Patron
of this Society was one Hermanus, whom they honored with the addition of
Happy, and he was the first man amongst them that thought upon this
Institution. The she-Penitents or Female Fraticelles were enrolled in this
Cloister; and this Hermanus having been polluted with as many Heresies in his
Faith, as Enormities in his Manners, the Fraticelles made use of his Name, and
Opinions to support their false Explications of Scripture, and the ill
Doctrines they disseminated among the credulous people. An Order so well
contrived, ought not to be without its Rules and Constitutions. The more
ignorant Friars had the Rules of a certain Friar very famous in the Church
proposed to them, which they observed with all rigor; but the Virtuosi, and
more Privileged Friars, had their particular Canons by themselves, of which
these following are some fragments which with grea labor and charge we have
collected out of the best Libraries of this Age.

The Rules and Constitutions to be observed by the Fraticelles.
A Young man called to the Profession of a Fraticelles life, shall be first
examined, and give good testimony of his Secrecy, and exterior Mortification;
and then being transmitted to a second trial by one of the Fraticelles,
purposely appointed to that Office, upon his Certificate he shall be received
into the said Brotherhood, upon these ensuing Conditions.

I. He shall love and honor the Lady committed to his Instruction, in
consideration that those whom Love units, are but one Soul in two bodies.

II. He shall preserve the Honor of the said Lady by all possible means,
whether they be lawful or unlawful, natural or unnatural: for his chief Duty is
to prevent all suspicions or appearances whatsoever, that may any ways reflect
upon the Reputation of their Fraternity.

III. He shall maintain to the utmost of his power an entire and perfect Union
betwixt the Penitent and her Husband, in such manner that the confidence of the
Husband, may be a seeurity to the Gallant; Prudence being the Basis of all
amorous Converse, and the heart of a Woman vast enough to receive a lawful and
a prohibited Love, without any justling or concussion.

IV. He shall never mention the word Love in public, but with the Epithet of
Divine: Secrecy being the life and salt of an amorous Intrigue, for it is a
Sacrilege worthy of death to impart an amorous Mystery to an indifferent
Person.

V. He shall always carry two Tongues in his Mouth; he shall write two Hands,
not only in two different, but in two opposite styles, so that upon good
occasion he shall at the same time be able to send pious Meditations to the
young Friars, and Madrigals to his Mistress.

VI. He shall indispensably practice the motions of his Countenance, and when,
and which way to change them for his advantage, for as much as the Glance that
is requisite for a Mistress, ought to be kept entire for her, and the humble
Look toward the Earth, and the sanctified Look toward Heaven, to be kept for
all the rest of the World.

These holy Constitutions were engraven upon a Table of Copper, and hung up in
Conrards Chamber, as well that (by virtue of his private Authority) he might
alter what he pleased; as that he was the Person of the Society more especially
obliged to put them in practice. Having disposed things in this good order
without, it was thought convenient to make some directions for whthin. The care
of their Houses taking up all the good Women's time in the Mornings, and their
Conferences in the Afternoon being too liable to observation, it was coucluded
they should make choice of the night for their Assemblies, and the pretense of
these Vigils, being Devotions, the most jealous Husbands in the City solicited
their Wives many times to repair to them often. From this point of precaution,
Friar Conrard past to the Muster of his new Penitents: He found them too
numerous for his Fraticelles, and this redundancy was a trouble to them, they
could not be at leisure to perform all the Offices of Directors as they
required: To remedy this, it was concluded their Fraternity should be
augmented, but their Revenue being judged too small, it was resolved, they
should apply themselves to some of the most eminent and wealthy Ladies in Rome,
and to draw them to a Contribution for the support of their augmentation.

Hortensia, Sister to Pope Boniface the Eighth, who was Pope at that time, was
the first Person they addressed themselves to. She was a Widow, and past the
prime of her age, and yet handsome enough; she was rich, and liberal, and had a
great influence upon her Brother the Pope, from whom by her mediation they
hoped to obtain many favors. They employed themselves therefore unanimously
might and main, to get her Ladyship enrolled in their Fraternity. This Princess
had a Sister called Valentina, one of the most zealous Penitents belonged to
their Fryary: she was very devout, she thought the Name of God sounded well,
upon any occasion whatever, and this Valantine was fallen to the Lot of Friar
Robert, the most intimate with Conrard of the whole Chapter; and the most
capable of succeeding him, had his place happened to have been vacant. Friar
Robert had a great mind to be nibling at Valantina's innocent: He told her it
was impossible the Fraternity of Herman should be so holy in her Judgment, as
it pretended to be, seeing she had not as yet inspired Hortensia with a defire
to be of it. That he could not but admire (having so great influence upon the
first Princess in Rome, and making profession of so great kindness to the
Fraticelles as she did) she had not as yet brought her to their Assemblies, and
thus mingling his flatteries and reproaches together (as he saw it convenient)
he put Valentina into so good an humor, that she was almost impatient till she
got to Hortensia, and performed that service to the Fraticelles, which Eryar
Robert had desired. She named their Names in two or three of her Discourses,
where they were nothing to the purpose: when she took her leave of the
Princess, she was still going to the Fraticelles; when she came into her
Chamber, she came always from that Covent, whenever the Clock struck, she must
be gone to some of their hourly Devotions; nothing was so indifferent or
occasional, but it had some relation to this Order; and at length having with
the continual repetition of the Name of the Fraticelles, as it were broken
Hortensia's brains, she forced her at length to inquire what those Fraticelles
were, which were so much in her favor. What are they, Madam? replied
Valantina, with a tone a top of the house: they are living Pictures of
Penitence, they are Mirrors of an Apostolic like; and in short5, Madam, they
are all the Devotion of the Earth crammed up into a small number of religious
men. A great Character indeed, replied Hortensiae smiling. Ha Madam, replied
Valantina, one cannot give those Sacred persons so much as they deserve. But
the Princess interrupting her, demanded, what extraordinary thing is it they
do, to deserve such extraordinary commendations? Do, Madam, replied Valantina,
why their whole life is a continual act of Charity, they go about from house to
housE appeasing domestic disorders, they calm the disquiets of the Soul by
discourses (for their piety) may be called Angelical; and besides they show so
easy and so pleasant a way to Heaven, one has no more to do than to wish to
be holy, and he is sure to get thither. Hortensia was a Person of a solid
Judgment, and singular Piety. Alas, Valantina, said she, it is in vain to
describe the way to Heaven so easy, there is no coming thither but through
many tribulations. I am not, I thank God, inclined to any great sins; yet I can
find nothing so difficult as to preserve my self in this World. When I reflect
upon the Precepts of the Gospel, and consider how express and bitter they are
against the most indifferent actions of Mankind, I must confess I cannot but
tremble, and nothing but the thought of Gods mercy re-assures me. True, Madam,
replied Valantina in an anger, before I knew these people, I was of your
opinion: Our ordinary Confessors have so troubled my brains with their
scruples, I thought I should be damned for the least lie I told, or for hearing
but a Flajulet with delight; but the Fraticelles know which way to cure a Soul
of these Niceties. They affirm, that sin is not but in the Law: No, hold Madam,
replied Valantina correcting her self, I cry you mercy, it is not so, they
affirm (I say) that the Law was not made but for sin; that before the Law, sin
which is now sin, was no sin: In short, Madam, said she, I cannot range my
words so well as they, nor make it out so perspicuously: But see them, Madam, I
beseech you, and then you will do me the honor to tell me what you think of
them. Hortensia did not promise her to see them that time: She told her that
naturally she had no inclination to new acquaintance; that she had Visits
enough already to employ all the time her affairs would afford her. But the
playing Valantina persued her so close, and the Princess was of so sweet a
disposition, that at last she told her she would see them once in her life. The
day being appointed for this Visit, and Valantina having given Friar Conrard
notice of the hour, it is two to one but he put himself into the best posture he
could. He put on his best Robe, he shaved, cleansed his teeth, picked his nails,
and then launching out into the Court to meet the Princess to give her thanks
for the great honor she did him and his Fraternity, he forgot not the choice
of his Grimaces, and Gesticulations, to render his Harangue more respectuful
and gracious. He was a man as well bred as was perhaps in the World; he had an
insinuating way, he had got the Bell air of Bigotery, and pretended preciseness,
as exactly as any Courtier has the gentile way of the Court. Hortensia was
much satisfied with his aspect, and after some discourse having desired him to
let her know the particular Practices of that Order: He told her, Madam, we
know all men have their faults, and though we inquire strictly into them, yet
it is with the Spirit of Secrecy and Compassion, and our desire is to reform
them with private and familiar Examples: if Jealousy be a Husbands infirmity,
we let him know how ineffectual it is, by the multitude of suspicious Husbands,
whose apprehensions have served for no other end but to make them more
miserable, If the Woman's fault be Wantonness, we instance in several such
Women, who by their Levity have precipitated themselves into misfortune and
ignominy, and having found by long Experience it is much easier to destroy
Nature by Nature, than to elevate ones thoughts by supernatural Reasons, we
combat Vice with Vice, and by the Portraicture of the World, we reform it. But
good Friar Conrard, replied Hortensia, is there not some kind of Scandal in
that way of proceeding? for by citing the Examples of other Persons, you
declare the infirmities of your Neighbor, to them perhaps which never heard of
them before. Madam, replied Conrard, it is good sometimes to commit a small
evil for a greater good. When a man is ignorant of his faults in his own
Person, they are to be represented to him in his Neighbors, where they are not
disguised by felf-love or partiality; and if by the reprehension of another
man, he comes once to reflect upon themself, he must of necessity grant it
scandalous in himself to practice the same things which are condemnable in
another. And can he not be brought to this, replied the Princess, by
inculcating the Precepts of the Gospel, and general Examples, without running
into a Retail of particular men's actions? for let me tell you, let the
publication of your Neighbors faults be grounded upon what foundation you
will, it is in my Judgment very dangerous. Some Stories there are which the
imprudence of some people have published, that are indifferent almost in
themselves, and of no importance whether they be known or not; but for such
things as are secrets, or known but to very few, believe me, Friar Conrard, it
is little less than Homicide to discover them. We manage all things well enough
for that, Madam, replied Conrard, our very tone altering the sense of what we
say many times. That which would be a criminal reproach in the mouth of an
Worldling, passes for charitable Instruction from a man in Reverence and
Reputation for his Piety. The Privilege of Devotion gives us great Authority,
otherwise, Madam, how could a public Director manage so many different Souls,
and reconcile so many opposite sentiments? it must needs be, that he be
permitted to dilate sometimes upon Virtue, and sometimes upon Vice, as he sees
either of them necessary for his designs. When a Penitent relyes too
confidently upon his own integrity, and manners, we are to affrighten him out
of that opinion of himself, before we can render him tractable and docile.
Though he be virtuous in the highest perfection, yet he must be persuaded he is
in a way of wickedness, because (as our great Herman has very well observed)
he that walks without the asistance of a Director, is always in danger of
straggling; and therefore to inure the Penitent to a blind submission to his
Director, he is to commit all his own experience and knowledge to the
management of the devout person which directs him. The submission to the Orders
of a Director is a holy kind of slavery, which leaves nothing free to the
disposal of him that is to be directed: he must believe without seeing; he must
be persuaded without understanding, and obey without expostulation. But, Madam,
I wish the Heavens would be propitious to me so far, as that I might reduce
into practice with you the little Documents and Instructions, I have taken the
liberty to discourse to you to day: what extreme joy would it be to our whole
Order, and especially to the meanest of the Fraticelles your most humble and
respectful Servant Friar Conrard, to reduce to this holy submission I speak of,
the great, the illustrious, the excellent, the incomparable Princess Hortensia?
Ha, Madam, how should we build a Temple to Virtue upon the foundation of your
fair inclinations; and how would the increase of so admirable a Plant,
contribute to his glory, who should have the honor to cultivate it. These last
words Friar Conrard delivered with so much fervor, that his Eyes sparkled, his
Face was transfigured, and his Complexion animated with an admirable Scarlet,
which Friar Robert desiring should be observed by Hortensia, recommended to her
in these terms, Look, Madam, I beseech you, and see how our good Governors
Charity has transported him. Hortensia could hear only that small parcel of
their Doctrine for that day; she had business of importance required her
attendance on the Pope, but not many days after she had an opportunity of
knowing much more. There was at that time in Rome a devout Person of the Order
of S. Dominick, who dyed Archbishop of Florence, and was one of the greatest
Pillars of the Church. He was called Anthony, and though he was not arrived at
the degree of perfection he attained afterward; yet he deserved it so well,
and was in so fair a way of acquiring it, that Hortensia esteemed him
exceedingly. Two or three days after Hortensia had been with the Fraticelles,
Anthony came to wait upon her, and the Princess being accustomed to give him an
account when she saw him, of all occurrences since she saw him the last time;
she told him she had been with the Fraticelles, and she began to recount the
Conference betwixt Friar Conrard and her; but Anthony interrupting her at the
first word, cried out, Madam, see those Creatures no more: They are nothing
less, than what they appear, and believe before I dye I shall see them
exterminated by the Thunder of the Church. Why so? good Anthony, replied the
Princess in a surprise, I never heard them speak any thing that might deserve
that Prophecy. It Is true, they have a particular way of direction by
themselves; and it is possible, there may be as much interest as charity in the
care they take of accommodating domestic differences in Rome. But Anthony?
They design to establish themselves, is not my opinion so criminal as to draw
down the Thunder of the Church; and if we examine all Societies strictly, we
shall find all of them infected with that sort of Heresy. It is true, Madam,
replied Anthony, Covetousness is become an Epidemical disease, it is abominable
in those who are consecrated to God, who are to give up themselves wholly to
Providence, for them it is those passages were particularly pronounced, The
birds of the air, and the lilies of the field; but, as you have observed very
well, so many Societies are subject to that Crime, that I should not impute it
as a Vice peculiar to the Fraticelles, had I nothing else but that to excuse
them of. But, Madam, there are many more besides that, which they are guilty
of. They practice a pernicious Hypocrisy, which conceals the love of
themselves, under the veil of an exterior Mortification. These people (who
pretend to the severity of Anchorets, and suffer themselves to be called by
that Title) would not be refused the least delicate, or convenience for this
life: they never open their mouths but to traduce some body or other, and under
pretense of impugning Vice, they discover the frailties of their Neighbors
with unmerciful liberty. To what good is the ostentation of their nocturnal
Prayers? is it not a duty which we owe to public Example to be present at all
Christian Assemblies? if they have a mind to pray in the night, let them pray
in private, and by themselves, and not wake the whole Parish, that the poor man
that is weary and asleep in his bed may be rouzed to take notice they are going
to their Devotions. Prayers at those hours are not permitted but to the
Religious, and such persons as by their open Profession have dedicated
themselves to God; and certainly it must argue intolerable vanity in the
Fraticelles, that they admit Women of all Qualifications, to be present at
their Devotions. But, said Hortensia, these things (which would be abominable,
if they were carried on by evil designs) may be well intended, and excusable.
What is your reason you will not have the Fraticelles such as they appear?
Because, replied Anthony, those who are really pious, strive what they can to
conceal it; but the Fraticelles on the other side take all the pains imaginable
to divulge it: Simplicity and Modesty is the Character of Charity; do you not
observe how the Son of God forbid the cleansed Lepers to tell he had cured
them? Examine the Conduct of the Fraticelles: do they follow our Saviors
Example? on the contrary, the least of their actions they cry up as a Prodigy:
The least step toward Repentance they call Conversion: If you will believe
them, there is not an Hospital built, or endowed but by their means, without
their Care, and their charitable Exhortations all the poor in Rome had been
starved before now: the most illustrious Families would have been divided, had
not their Counsels watched over them, and preserved them in peace. Ah, Madam, to
speak truly and in Charity, what does it concern me to know my Neighbors are
hard to the necessities of the Poor, that such a one, and such a one is at
difference with her Husband: let them do good as they have occasion, but let
them not boast of it when they have done, lest whilst they teach me the remedy
they were forced to make use of, they teach me also the nature of the disease.
The Eloquence of Anthony being invigorated by a true Christian zeal, and
sustained by the esteem Hortensia had of him, produced a considerable effect in
the Spirit of the Princess. She called to mind how Friar Conrard had demeaned
himself; how much his discourse suited with the vanity and detraction Anthony
attributed to that Order; how Friar Robert had made her take notice of the zeal
of his Superior, and concluding with her self, that if the Fraticelles were
such as Anthony described them, she could not do better service than to root
them out of the Church; she told the good man she would inform her self as well
as she could of them, and employ all the interest she had with his Holiness to
destroy them, if she found them guilty of those vices of which she began to
suspect them. Anthony had a particular reason to promote the destruction of
that Order, which the Princess did not know, his discretion permit him to
declare. These Hypocrites had debauched a Sister of his, and under pretense of
accommodating some small differences betwixt her Husband and she (which reason
and time would without doubt have composed without their charitable assistance)
they had made themselves Masters of their Family, disposed of their Goods, and
Revenue as they pleased, and governing both Husband and Wife in their own way,
they drew upon them the derisions of the sober part, and the imprecations of
all the rest of the family. It is not to be supposed therefore, that Anthony
would suffer Hortensia to forget her promise: he pressed her on to the execution
of it very zealously, and the Princess partly in compliance with his request,
and partly by an intrinsic stimulation of piety, (being desirous to instruct
her self in the secrets of their Conduct) scarce past one day without visiting
their Covent. Friar Conrard interpreting this assiduity quite contrary, managed
the Commencement of his good Fortune with all possible Hypocrisy. Every
morning he sent Presents of Flowers and Fruits to the Princess. there was not
one of his Brethrens Penitents but was employed in making some fine Works or
other for Hortensia, or if she could not do it her self, she set all her
Acquaintance on work quite through the Town. All these officious insinuations
and expressions of respect confirmed the Princess in the opinion she shad
conceived, that the Fraticelles mingled much Policy with their counterfeit
Charity: she observed also a continual thread of detraction interwoven with all
their discourse; but she discovered none of the abominations wherewith Anthony
accused them. Friar Conrard (who knew that upon Hortensia's esteem, the entire
Establishment or Ruin of the Fraticelles depended) he communicated but by
halfs with her about the Eerours with which he infected the rest. But at length
the Princess having given them so many Visits, they began to be persuaded she
was absolutely theirs, and the necessities of the Covent at that time pressing
Conrard on to put his shoulder to the work, he began to praise Hortensia's
Beauty with more passion than ordinary: he found out amorous terms to express
his most serious Mysteries, and one day as the Princess was going in Pilgrimage
to a Chapel some few miles out of Town, and was willing to permit Friar
Conrard to accompany her (Religious persons being much reverenced in Italy) the
Servants and the rest of her Train thought it no less than their duty to the
Superior of the Fraticelles, to leave him alone with their Lady. This
opportunity tempted him: he took her Vmbrella out of the hands of one of her
Lacquays, and desired she would vouchsafe him the honor to do her that small
piece of Service. The Princess consented, and the Friar Conrard thinking
himself much honored thereby; Certainly, Madam, said he (by way of
acknowledgment) it is not without good reason that Beauty is termed a Ray of
the Divinity; for we see no persons admirably handsome, but they are withal most
exquisitely good: So that it seems these two things are inseparable, and the
Creator has so well signified his Complacency in beautiful Creatures, that he
allows them to share in two Attributes which are the most proper to himself.
Hortensia smiled at Conrards Complement, and imagining presently this would be
a convenient Juncture to inform her self of what Anthony charged him, she
replied, Till now I was of opinion that the beauty of the body was not a
quality much regarded by God; the aspect of the Stars, or the disposition of
Nature, make people handsome or ill-favored; but this ill-favouredness, and
this Beauty contribute so little to the glory of God, that by common
observation we may see the handsomest Women the most subject to be ungrateful
toward their Creator. What is that, Madam, you call Ingratitude toward the
Creator, replied Conrard. I call it Ingratitude, replied the Princess, to
employ the Talents he has given us for the manifestation of his Power, to the
Worship of his Enemies, as most part of your Beauties do every day. Alas,
Madam, replied the Friar, how is your Highness mistaken in your ingratitude, so
far is it from offending God, to make use of the Talents he gives us, that many
times our not using them at all, may be more properly called Ingratitude
toward the Creator. For (as our Herman says very well) to what end did God
create Beauty but to please? and why did he give that power of Charming to
Beauties, if it were a Crime to be charmed by-them? The Princess perceiving
Friar Conrard in so good an humor for discourse, would not answer so as to
silence him, but on the contrary resolved to make her advantage of this
occasion. But Brother, said she, you quote this Herman so often, I cannot but
desire you to tell me something of his Doctrine. I know you preach it up more
freely to other people, than you have done to me; and to tell you the truth, I
do take that reservedness something unkindly, and resolved to complain of it
the first time you and I were together done. Friar Conrard was ready to leap
out of his skin for joy at the Curiosity of the Princess, he had a long time
expected this opportunity. Madam, he replied (with an alacrity above his
dissimulation) we are neither reserved as to your Highness, nor does your
Highness want any necessary disposition for the comprehending Secrets of our
Doctrine; but our thrice happy and thrice Reverend Herman has said things so
odd and novel, and they are to be heard with so profound a submission, that I
doubted whether your Highness would condescend to the obedience required to the
hearing them. Yes my good Brother, replied the Princess, I will condescend, and
at the same time sitting down at the foot of a Tree which afforded them a
competent shade, Come, said she, let us rest our selves here a while, I am
weary, and we may spare an hour for this Discourse, without danger of wanting
time for the finishing our Voyage. Friar Conrard sat himself down at
Hortensia's feet, so transported, he could scarce contain his joy within the
limits of his heart: The Servants which attended the Princess, placing
themselves at such distance behind, that they could not hear the Harangue; the
good old Friar began it in this manner.

LOVE is as natural to Mankind as life. The World was made at first, and is
still preserved for him, and the Venus of the Ancients, which they pretend
animates Nature, is nothing but a desire in every Creature to unite it self
with what is most proper. This desire in Animals degenerates into Instinct; in
inanimate things it becomes a natural tendency toward the Center; and in man
it is the true mark of the Soul. It is not more natural for him to sleep, nor
to eat, nor to perform the other functions of life, than it is to love; and if
Love be so natural to the people of the World, who are subject to so many other
passions, and diverted by Secular Employments; how much more ought it be so to
us, who delivered from the continual activity of worldly people, pass our whole
lives in a perpetual vacation? We are to day what we shall be to morrow, no
Dignity gives us any care, nor no fear of indigence gives us any trouble; if
our Luxury be bounded, our subsistence is assured. Ha, Madam, is there any
thing in the World like one of us Religious to receive the impressions of Love
in perfection? It is this disposition (both Physical and Moral) which for a
long time has peopled Heaven with Saints; for the Religious, affected, (like
other men) with a natural desire of loving, this desire not being crossed or
counterballanced with Ambition, Revenge, or any other passions that occupy the
mind of the rest of the World; he loves with all his force, with all his soul,
and with all his strength, as S. Paul teaches. But as among Animals, there are
some proper for the Race, and some for the Charge; so among us Religious, some
are for one kind of Love, and others for another. The Religious predestined
to the Love of God, gives up his heart wholly to the Divine Love; and this is
it which has produced so many Martyrs and so many Confessors. The Religious
who is not endued with so violent an inclination for Heaven, he lifts himself
up to the Creator, by the Contemplation of his Creatures; and this, Madam, is
the Vocation of the Fraticelles, We love God as well as the other, but we love
him dilated in the things below; the enjoyments of this life make us admire his
goodness, and your Beauty, Madam, continued the ungracious Friar, with his
wanton Eye fixed fast upon Hortensia, your Beauty makes me adore his
Omnipotence: when I consider the Charms so conspicuous in your Person, and in
all your actions, I do comprehend there is but one God could have created you
so excellent, and so rising by degrees to the Eternal Principle of all things,
by the effects of its natural Emanations, I enjoy, as one may say, the delights
of Heaven, and the pleasures of the Earth at one time, my heart being divided
(without Sacrilege) betwixt divine Love and profane, I may say what our Herman
has taught us, he is to be found in things (which according to the depraved
sense of Humanity) seem absolutely contrary.

This is an odd Doctrine indeed, replied Hortensia, and you had good reason to
say it was novel; but, good Brother, I would fain know how you can accommodate
it with the Orthodox Doctrine of the Church? for it appears to me diametrically
opposite to what you have expressed. The Gospel commands us to look upon this
life but as a passage: the Son of God nothing more than our denial of the
Creature, and that we must renounce Honor, and Riches, and Kindred to follow
him: But you Fraticelles find him in the midst of those things he has
commanded us to shun; make me understand this Mystery, I beseech you. It is a
great Mystery indeed, Madam, replied Conrard, and well worthy of the acuteness
of your Wit. We search God, I say, in all his works, and judging his design was
to make man happy, seeing he created him after his own Image, we do endeavor
to establish this felicity by all things which render it perfect. In truth, all
men being not capable of these kind of Arguments, and some having been so
inhumane, as to make Laws, and establish Maxims contrary to the felicity of
this life, we frame our selves (as to our outward deportment) to the greater
number, but it is so, as that we have our own private happiness in our Eye; for
we look upon public Esteem as one of the Conditions necessary to make it
complete. The Princess thought she had no need of hearing Conrard any longer,
to persuade her self of the Crimes Friar Anthony had charged upon the
Fraticelles: The discourse he had made abounded with so many Errors, and the
Hypocrisy (which the Friar had confessed at the latter end of his Speech) was so
formal, there needed nothing more to assure it. She started up on a sudden, as
if she feared she had forgot her self, and not had time enough left for the
rest of her Journey; and dissembling the horror she had conceived against the
Precepts of Herman, she left Conrard in great hopes she would become one of his
most zealous Disciples. But he was much deceived in his opinion: For the
Princess was no sooner returned to Rome, but she went to his Holiness
immediately, and assured him that the Fraticelles were impious Heretics, who
under the Disguise of an exterior Profession, concealed a most ungodly and
dissolute life, and therefore she humbly desired he would appoint some persons
to question them about their Doctrine, and to apply some remedy to the
disorders which would necessarily follow upon the Church, unless some sudden
stop were put to their Career. Hortensia's charge was considerable, and she had
great influence upon the Pope, but he was so prepossest in favor to the
Fraticelles, that the Reputation of the Princess had like to have been split
upon that Rock. Two of the Popes Officers, and of the Principal of his Household
(of which one was Brother-in-law to Anthony) had married two Women, but of Ages
quite contrary to their own. The Sister of Anthony was young, handsome, and
airy, and her Husband was about sixty years old, grave, Philosophical, and
melancholy: he had a Sister almost of his own humor and age, who was married
to a Roman Cavalier, who having taken her for her money, made no great
reckoning of her Person: The young Lady complained highly of the reservedness
of her Husband, and the old complained as much of the levity of hers. The
Fraticelles had found a way to reconcile these differences, and to restore
peace to their Families, which before was scarce to be hoped for during their
lives. This great point of prudence having gained them a particular esteem from
both these persons, they had persuaded the Pope clearly in their favor. He
rebuked Hortensia with some kind of eagerness, for being so easy in receiving
impressions to their prejudice, and commanding her never to speak to him of
them hereafter but with respect, he put her into so high a passion, to see her
Authority affronted, that she resolved never to be quiet till she had quite
rooted out the whole brood of the Fraticelles: she redoubled her diligence at
their Prayers, and Assemblies. Though Friar Conrard had not had the confidence
to impart all the Arcana of their Society, especially in their nocturnal
Conferences, yet she thought she had enough already to give her sufficient
suspicion of the rest: she gave an exact account of what she saw and observed
to Friar Anthony, and receiving Advertisements from Valantina besides, which
confirmed her in her doubts, she attended only one proof more to declare her
self publicly an Enemy to the Fraticelles, with which Friar Conrard supplied
her in a short time. It was then that time of the year in which according to
the Custom in Rome they wish many years to the Persons of Quality in that Town,
and accompany their good wishes with some small Present or other. Friar Conrard
as the most regular, and most active amongst them, was one of the first at
acquitting himself of this duty: He sent to make his Complement to the
Princess, and presented her by the same Messenger with a Picture of Herman, the
Frame made with great Workmanship, and enriched with precious Stones. This new
Saint of Epicurus his Paradise was (in the Habit of the Fraticelles) drawn upon
his knees before a Crucifix, his Forehead crowned with Thorns, a Deaths-head in
his hand, and these words in Capital Letters at the bottom: LET THEM THAT
APPROVE, IMITATE.

Anthony was with Hortensia at the same time when this Present was brought her,
and looking upon him very angrily, see Anthony, said she, how these Hypocrites
abuse the Pictures of Penitence; to what persons they present them, and what
Examples they propose to our imitation. Marry such, Madam, replied Friar
Anthony, as they would gladly you should follow; but you must not leave them
any longer in that liberty of proposing them to you, you must press the
destruction of a sort of people so pernicious to the common Interest of the
Church, and every moment that it is deferred, are so many favorable
opportunities which we give them to do mischief. I dare not tell your Highness
what abominations I discover every day in these Vermin: I will not imitate
their indiscretion in telling you such of their Crimes as perhaps you have not
heard of: But believe me, Madam, there is no more moderation to be used in this
affair, and you must answer to God for the Souls of all they corrupt from the
hour it was in your power to have destroyed them, till they be actually
destroyed. But, good Anthony, replied the Princess, can I do any more than I
have done already? I have inveigled them to tell me their Errors, I have
carried them to the Pope, and I have justified the Charge by my own Testimony.
You must do more than all this, Madam, replied Anthony, you must pretend great
confidence in them, and act so as to give them as great a one in you; if I
might persuade you, you should write to Conrard upon this occasion, and give
him thanks for the Present he sent you, this might possibly oblige him to
answer you with some kind of Gallantry, and conduct him insensibly into that
pit, into which we must endeavor with all our power to tumble him. This
Proposition made Hortensia tremble, it savoured of a kind of Treachery (which
she abhorred at her Soul) besides she could not resolve upon any motive
whatever, that any of her Letters should come into the Clutches of Conrard. But
Anthony represented so well to her the necessity of stopping the course of so
dangerous a Sect, and (though his Charity would not permit him to let her know
all that he knew of their Assemblies) yet he gave her so horrible an Idea
thereof, that she called for Pen and Ink immediately, and writ to Friar Conrard
in these words.

Whence comes it, my dear Brother Conrard, you propose Mortifications, and
Examples of Penitence to my imitation? Is this the way to that happiness which
your Hermanus does promise us? ought not I to complain of your disingenuity,
when I see the visible marks of your Esteem, so little conformable to what I
already know of your Doctrine.

Who can express the Rape the receipt of this Letter committed upon Friar
Conrards Soul? He fell into such Extravagances, as the most worldly men would
have been ashamed of; and not willing to lose so fair an opportunity to declare
himself, he returned the Princess this Answer.

You judge but ill, Madam, of the sentiments of my Soul, if you believe they
can be dissembled to your Highness. Penetrate the appearances which abuse you,
and you will find my heart delineated in the Picture you have received.

He that brought this Ticket to the Princess, had instruction to tell her, that
she should take a wet Sponge, and wipe over the face of Hermanus with it: and
Anthony being desirous to understand the meaning of Conrards Answer, the
Princess and he followed his directions with the Sponge, but were much
surprised to observe as they rubbed the old, a new Picture to appear. Hermanus
was done only in Watercolors, but under it was the figure of Cupid lying upon
the green, his head crowned with Roses, and instead of the Deaths-head, he held
a Basket of all kind of Flowers, and about the border were written in great
Letters these words:

Not from the Garden so much, as from my Heart.

The word Hortensia in Italian signifies the Goddess of Gardens, and so this
Basket of Flowers alluding to the Princesses Name, expressed a most just and
intelligible declaration of his Love. Without jesting, Madam, cried the pious
Anthony when he had seen all: This is a subtle Contrivance for a Monk; one may
easily see he has past his Apprentiship: But alas, continued he (with
something a more serious Tone) he spoke truer than he intended, when he said
that this Picture was the Portraiture of his Heart. When we look upon the
actions of Hypocrites, they are in Watercolors, and appear nothing but
Crosses and Mortificationa; but pass the Sponge of severe scruting upon them,
and you discover under them the most detestable vices in the World. After which
words he took the Picture and Ticket into his hands, and begged of the Princess
he might be permitted to carry them to his Brother-in-law, that he might by
beginning with him, undeceive the rest of the World. The zeal of Hortensia
would not suffer that any body should see the Picture before the Pope, it being
he that was to punish the false Brothers for their Hypocrisy; but besides that
Anthony believed that the Picture sufficient alone to rectify his Holiness, he
thought he should disoblige his Sisters Husband, if he declared Conrards Error
before he had given him time to defend him. This precaution was useful more
than one way: for the good Brother-in-law found so many plausible reasons to
excuse Conrard, that he had frustrated this Complaint as he had done the
former, had he spoke in the presence of the Pope. What Hortensia intends to
publish about he impiety of the Fraticelles, said he, is only about points of
Doctrine, which she does not well understand. The Picture was a pious Emblem,
signifying that true Penitents do find flowers of Comfort in their most severe
Mortifications. The words about the Basket troubled him a little, but he was
confident Friar Conrard would give him an innocent interpretation, if he
desired it; and by this obstinacy of his, he pusht forward Anthonies impatience
to have him discovered. But what will you say, Brother, replied Anthony, if I
let you hear Conrard make Love to the Princess Hortensia, and speak things
directly contrary to the Doctrine of the Church? It is impossible, replied the
Brother-in-law, you can never do it, the Superior of the Fraticelles is too
pious and too discreet to be guilty of such a fault. But in short, said
Anthony, if I do as I propose, what will you say then? I will say, said the
other, my senses deceive me, or if they do not deceive me (and indeed I believe
it is scarce possible they should) I shall say I was enchanted for that time;
for to tell you the truth, I shall sooner believe I am not what I am, than that
Friar Conrard is otherwise than he ought to be. It is enough, replied Anthony,
leave this affair to my Conduct and be contented to keep what I shall tell you,
as a Secret. I did at first make great scruple of publishing any thing to the
disparagement of this Society. The Habit they wore obliged me to more respect
for them; so that my first design was to charge them only with the Errors of
the Doctrine, without discovering any thing of the Exorbitance of their
Manners, but seeing your Eyes are not to be opened but by a way I did hope I
might have shunned, and that contrary to the respect you owe to his Holinesses
Niece, you declare your self the Protector of those she would justly suppress,
I must convince you by your own proper knowledge. The Princess is discreet, and
charitable, and by all the other motives besides that of Charity, I should
never have prevailed with her to oppose her self against so much clutter and
noise as you do create; but when I shall have acquainted her how far I am
concerned in their disorders, I do not despair but she will think nothing
troublesome or difficult to relieve me. Anthony observed his promise very
religiously with his Brother-in-law. He came to wait upon the Princess the next
morning, he assured her the Fraticelles increased hourly in their Reputation,
and that they had corrupted a great part of the most illustrious Ladies in
Rome; that in their nocturnal Devotions, pretending to teach them the Art of
Praying more exactly than ordinary, they took them into private places, where
they seduced them by all sorts of flattery, and Heretical Precepts; and then
concluding his Discourse with this, That she was the only Person qualified by
God himself to purge the World from the infection of those Hypocrites; he
conjured her not to desert the Interest of God and his Church any longer, but
to draw Conrard into some Rendez-vous by some means or other, that by watching
him, they might take him in the act, and convict him of all his Crimes at a
blow. This request frighted the Modesty of the Princess at first, but Anthony
supported it with so many Arguments, that Hortensia was overcome, and promised
to do it. She signified to Friar Conrard, that she well understood the sense of
his Ticket, if it were suitable to the sentiments of his Soul, it was no less
conformable to hers; and cajoling the Error of the poor Friar with a thousand
protestations of kindness (which would have deluded even prudence it self) she
obtained of him a promise that he would come to her Chamber one night in the
Disguise of a Roman Matron. She put him upon this Disguise, as well because it
would make the iniquity of the Friar the more remarkable, as also out of a
remnant of the respect she had still left for a Religious habit, which would
not suffer her to scandalize them with so irreligious an interview. This
Mascarade was a little suspected by Friar Conrard at first: it was a long time
before he could be brought to part with his Habit: A desire to understand the
last will of a dying man, or the consolation of an afflicted Family might
furnish a Pilgrim with pretenses to go abroad when he pleased; but for going in
that Dress, he could give himself no reason: The Princess however managed the
business so well, representing that her Family was too numerous to conceal one
in a Religious Habit a whole night in her Palace, without being discovered,
unless in some such Disguise as might take away the occasion to suspect: upon
these persuasion he was overcome. He might have been more secure a great deal
to have had the Princess to his Covent, and he wanted not conveniences to have
entertained her at what time she pleased to have come; but she pretended a
soreness in her leg, which stopped his mouth as to that Proposition. In this
manner the day of the assignation was appointed, and arrived. Anthonies
Brother-in-law was slipped into a Closet by Hortensia's Bed, from whence they
could hear whatever was spoken by the Beds-side, and he was accompanied by his
Camarade. The Princess would receive the Friar in her Bed, the better to
persuade him of the sore leg she pretended, and Conrard being as glad to find
her in that posture, magnified his Love for so favorable a Conjuncture.
Welcome good Conrard, said Hortensia, what will you say of this piece of my
kindness toward you? will you not confess it is extreme? Madam, replied
Conrard, bowing his body most humbly, I expected no less than extraordinary
goodness from a Person of your Divinity. But if it be lawful for your most
zealous and most humble Servant Conrard, to declare a truth to you, which
perhaps you knew before: you are not the only Lady which has placed those
confidences in me. Those who vouchfased me that honor, were not indeed of your
Quality, or perfection; but they were Persons of Honor, whose Beauties and
Worth might have made an insatiable Courtier, the happiest man living. This is
no more than what I have heard from other people, replied Hortensia, and let me
tell you, that this consideration has contributed much to your obtaining of
this Rend^z-vous. Had I been the only Person had granted you this Privilege, I
should have scrupled very much more to have done what I have; but Valantina
has assured me I had many Companions, and her assurance has given me this
confidence. The Princess spoke truth, though Conrard did not perceive it. It
was indeed no more than what Anthony had told her of the debauchery of the
Fraticelles, which had put her upon a resolution of destroying them, contrary
to her own inclination, but because we should not discover the Name of so pious
a Person, she made use of Valantina's; and the conscientious Friar knowing
Valantina, could discover much of his Intrigues, he made no difficulty to
acknowledge it. True it is, Madam, said he, whether it be only the indulgence
of my Stars, or whether it be any little Merit in me, I cannot tell; but this I
must say, there is scarce any person, I think, worthy to be retained, that
escapes me. But what strange way is it that you take to oblige them? replied
Hortensia: for my part I have been captivated with your cares, and the
expressions of your kindness, but I suppose it is not possible you should have
done as much for every Lady in Rome, as you have done for me. The whole time of
your life would not have been sufficient, nor your Revenues able to have
supplied you, for the very Presents you would have made. Madam you say right,
replied the Friar, we do not treat all persons alike, nor indeed any body, as
we do the Great and most Illustrious Princess Hortensia: But, Madam, these
little Mysteries of our Society may well be put off to another time. No, no,
good Conrard, replied the Princess (who understood his design) tell me, I beg
of you, all your artifices, and measures you take with the good men; and the
securities you require against the imprudencies, and natural levity of the
greatest part of our Sex. I have a great desire to understand these things, and
you cannot give me a greater testimony of your kindness, than by this
confidence in me. If the Princess Hortensia, replied the Friar, had been a
private Lady, in vain should she have aspired to the knowledge of the
Fraticelles Intrigues, Friar Conrard would have constrained her to have
deferred that Conversation; but he will not proceed with the Sister of the
present Pope, as with a private person; her orders must be obeyed, let the a
version be never so great. Madam, continued he, our general Maxim is, to cure
Ladies of their Errors in Christianity, by the Precepts of our Hermanus, and
to take off their apprehension of losing their Reputations, by reffecting how
much it is our interest to preserve them. If we can but expunge out of Women
the two considerations of God, and of Honor, our business is done, there is
scarce one of them but becomes loving immediately; and if still they remain
obdurate, we in that case betake our selves to more subtle Expedients. And
here the vile Fraticel stretching his confidence to the highest, and
acquainting her with the most profound Mysteries of their Amors, there was not
a neat way of writing a Note, but he taught the Princess how to do it better,
no zealous or superstitious Present, but he show her the Art how to convert it
into a Mystery of Love, no color of piety, but which way it was to be
perverted, and turned into debauchery; and passing before he was aware from
numbering his Expedients, he came at length to instance in the persons upon whom
they had made their Experiments, and put the Wives of the two persons who were
listening to his discourse in the front of his Catalogue, as the most zealous
for their Society of the whole City. The Princess cried out at the naming of
those two Ladies, had she known they had been in the List of their Penitents,
she woulod have had a care of putting Conrard upon that imprudence: but Anthony
being too cunning to give her any such intimation, she knew not that
inconvenience, till it was too late to repair it. Conrard observing her in that
trouble, you seem, Madam, said he, to be surprised, did you take those two
Ladies for Vestals, that you skreek as it were at the very hearing of their
Names? I do assure you, Madam, tey gave us less trouble than any of the rest.
One, she complained of the tediousness of an old Husband, and we appointed her
a Director: the other could not endure the neglects of her young one, and we
assigned her another more complacent that her Cuckoldly Husband. Hortensia (who
was heartily displeased at this discovery, as well in consideration of Anthony,
as for the disorders she foresaw in those two Familes) replied, interrupting
him, I beseech you, Friar Conrard, forbear this discourse, it makes me tremble
to hear you; you cannot say true, you boast of things you never did: the two
Ladies you speak of, are both of them discreet, I dare swear for them, and I
look upon the occasion I have given you to run out into this language, as an
unpardonable offense. This return was not at all pleasing to Conrard, and he
had a mind to prevent what might follow. Come Madam, says he, Let us leave our
Divinity upon the Altar, and in the hearts of his Elect, and not mingle the
discourse of it with our amorous Mysteries:

Altri tempi, Altri Curi: There is a Time for all things. And then to apply the
Italian Proverb the more close, he was about to have forgot himself quite, and
lost all respect for Hortensia: But the two Husbands in the Closet (not able
longer to endure the impudence of the Friar) came suddenly forth, and
apprehended him: Ah, ah, Friar Conrard, said the Old man to him, is this your
way of making the Roman Ladies practice the Virtue you preach to their
Husbands. The Fraticel was amazed at the sight of them, and at their manner of
proceeding; so that he stood gaping, as if he had been Thunderstruck. He opened
his eyes, without believing what he saw, he was seized all over with a
trembling, his legs and his voice failed him, and not being able to say a word
in his own defense, nor make the least attempt to escape (...) suffered himself
to be haled, like a Log into the next Chamber, where they kept strick guard
upon him till the hour came he was looked for. It would be in vain to report the
melancholy reflections of the good Friar; I suppose there is scarce any Reader
but imagines it, without my description: he saw himself delivered up by a
Princess to whom he had discovered such impieties as were worthy the cruellest
punishment. The persons he judged would appear in Evidence against him, were
the two Husbands, whom he had wounded in the most tender and sensible part of a
Husband; and this reverse of Fortune happened at a time the expected to have
been most happy. Whilst he was in this uncomfortable contemplation, and
transported with a rage that relished more of the beast than the man; the
Princess Hortensia (accompanied by the Learned Anthony, and the two Persons who
before had declared themselves the Protectors of the Fraticelles) went to his
Holiness to justify those Crimes he was so unwilling to believe: Conrards
iniquities were as good as proved, as soon as they were discovered; the knew
them upon his own Declaration, and the Witnesses which charged him, were of
unquestionable Repute. He was sent for therefore immediately to come and give
an account of his Doctrine and Manners. He had like to have fallen down dead
with fear at the delivery of that Complement; and knowing that in those
affairs, he is a great gainer, who gains any time, he begged of the Popes
Messengers in the most submissive terms he could use, that they would permit
him to sent to his Covent for his own Habit; but besides that the Dress of a
Matron was a great aggravation of his offense, they though it so pleasant to
see how he managed it, they could not be persuaded from giving his Holiness a
view of him. In this Equipage therefore they conducted him to the Popes Palace.
It was a pretty piece of Grotesque to see this famous Fraticel (who never show
himself in public but in Sackcloth, and his head covered with Ashes)
traversing the Grand Piazza in Rome in this Metrmorphosis. Those which carried
him along, took delight in manifesting his shame, by not suffering him to hid
his face, and the people which past by, seeing the Beard of a Monk peep out of
an old Woman's Coife, Is this the new Apostle? cried one, who boasted that he
practiced Christiantity in perfection: Do you see that Hypocrite, says another,
who plays the Anchoret all day, and goes the Rounds at night in Mascarade, to
play the amorous Gallant? I always thought, said one, (who pretended to be a
man of understanding) there was nothing but ostentation and outside in the
piety of these Friars. Forbear your Judgment, replied another, more easy of
belief, perhaps it is upon some charitable instigation he has taken up this
Habit: and these kind of Conjectures and Ejaculations accompanied the poor
Friar to the Tribunal, where he was no sooner arrived, and examined, but he was
convict and condemned of most horrid impieties, he was delivered over to
Execution four days after he was apprehended; the Sect of the Fraticelles
declared Heretics, all their Followers excommunicated, and Herman, the happy
Herman, as they styled him, was by his Holinesses Decree dig'd up out of his
Grave, and his bones publicly burnt. This Act of Justice pleased Hortensia and
Anthony very well: but it was not so grateful to all the rest of the World.
Those who were of the Faction of the Fraticelles, gave relief to a great number
of those kind of Libertines, who would have fallen from excess into necessity,
if vice and vicious people should have been utterly extermined. Some of this
sort of debaucht persons preserved a good Party of the Fraticelles, and
conveyed them to Lions, where they remained during the disorders in the Church:
and from this infected Fountain it is perhaps such Torrents of Bigotteries and
Phanaticisms do flow all the World over. The Libertines joined themselves to
their fellow-Libertines. The Penitents who had been really abused, were glad to
be brought out of their Errors, and were converted in carnest, in which number
the innocent Valantina was one. But such as pretended to believe, that they
might have a pretense to feed, were much troubled at the destruction of the
Fraticelles, and some of this sort of Fellow Sufferers it must be who took care
to provide Friar Conrard with an Epitaph, which with much ado we have
recovered, and could not possibly be composed but by some of them.

EPITAPH.
HEre rests a man, who one may say,
Never rested till his dying day:
And whether now, or no be rest,
I cannot tell, it is he knows best.
Whilst he was here, in parts outvied,
And Love-tricks, the whole World beside.
Ten Husbands in one night would be
Ease of their Nuptial Drudgery;
Which is so much, I fear none can,
Or will believe there rests a man.
THE ANNALS OF LOVE
THE FOURTH PART.
DEbauchery is an infernal seed, so marvellously fruitful. One dissolute
Example produces a thousand: and whereas Virtue makes its Conquests upon Vice
by degrees, and that with much labor and patience; Vice overruns Virtue like a
Torrent. The Sect of the Fraticelles appeared at first like the effect of an
Enchantment. Its progress imitated the suddenness of its beginning, and dilated
so fast, the continued care of five of Bonifaces Successors were scarce
sufficient to extinguish it. In imitation of the Fraticelles, every man set up
one Sect or other after his own Mode: But amongst all of them, no one carried
it so far, as Dulcinus King of the Lombards, an ingenious Prince, and fertile
in all witty Experiments. This Prince lived twelve or fifteen years after the
Condemnation of the Fraticelles; the Ecclesiastical State was at that time
infested with Wars, and those Wars hindered his Holinesses inspection into
Foreign disorders: The Seat of the Wars having lain so long upon Lombardy, it
was so exceedingly depopulated, that it took up all Dulcinus his care, to
repeople it. He published his Decrees, forbidding all persons upon pain of death
to live Bachelors past the age of fourteen. He contributed out of his own
Estate toward Marriages that were unequal: He granted great Privileges to
Foreigners to inveigle them thither; but Margaret his Wife (called in History
the Volupuous) perceiving this new way of repeopling his Country, did withal
diminish her Husbands Revenue, she bethought her self of a way, as effectual,
and not so pernicious to the Sovereign. She advised Dulcinus to grant a general
permission to his Subjects to change Husbands and Wives, as they should think
it convenient. The advice was judged to be good, and put in Execution
immediately, and the Prince being much pleased with the invention of the
Princess, not only exhibited an Edict of Divorce, as she had counseled him;
but promised Sanctuary and Protection to all Strangers which made use of that
Privilege. This Declaration being rumored in all the Kingdoms of Enrope,
there was nothing to be seen but Navies of people of all Sexes from all Nations
coming in daily to establish themselves in Lombardy, and enjoy the Liberty of
that Country: insomuch that in a short time there wanted Corn for the
Inhabitants, though of it self it is one of the most fertile Countries in the
World: And it being part of the Policy of a Sovereign to give Example in the
things he commands, the Prince and Princess were the first which began
themselves to reduce into practice, what they had preached to other people.
Being prudent and just, they desired to know how their Subjects would choose,
and upon what grounds they would change; and therefore they made themselves
Judges to examine all such as demanded Liberty of Divorce. Dulcinus, he
interrogated the men about the Complaints they made against their Wives, that
he might learn by them inclinations of her, whom he designed to take in the
place of his own Wife; and Margaret having the same project in her brains in
the Examination of the Women, she would needs be commissioned to hear their
Objections. Dulcinus was not a little troubled to determine, as to the
Accusations of the Husbands. He found all of them had so much reason of their
sides, and told their stories so smooth, he could not but suspect the sincerity
of their Informations; he thought it impossible there should have been so many
ill Wives in the whole World, as he found in his Muster-rolls; and thinking his
own Wife more tolerable than other peoples (though she was not without her
faults) he concluded he should be forced to stick to his first Wedding, how
strong soever his desire was to a second. Those which were handsome, were
either wanton, or proud; the ill-favored were jealous; the witty, imperious
and perverse; the sober were melancholy: and in short, not a Woman but had some
quality or other inconsistent with the sweetness of Society: He considered not
that none were accused before him but such as were defective, and that those
Husbands which were contented with their Wives, never came near him for the
benefit of his Proclamation. Margaret was not in such trouble with her
Jurisdiction; whether she was less difficult to please, or that Dulcinus his
qualities were so indifferent, every one she met with had better. But the
Princess found sufficient grounds for all the men to plead the Privilege,
though the Prince was resolved to keep her. He loved a new Wife better than an
old one; but he found Margaret much better than the rest. The first Woman which
was brought before the Princess, was a lively brown Lass, a good presence, and
a sprightly countenance, her habit was neat, and well contrived, her actions
pleasant, and easily discerned to be done one purpose to please. You may pass
Mistress, says Margaret as soon as she saw her, there is no necessity of
examining you to know your Complaint. You would have a Gallant, and your
Husband will not suffer you; you have reason indeed to change, Husbands of that
humor are troublesome, and you ought not to be contented till you meet with one
will allow you that liberty. Alas, Madam, replied the good Woman, my Husband is
none of those, and if I had though one must have had occasion of Complaint
against their Husband, before she could enjoy the Privilege of changing, I
should scarce have troubled your Majesty or your Kingdom at this time. My
Husband loves me, he is young, and handsome, not jealous in the least, and I
have what Jewels and fine Clothes I will ask. Why then will you be changing,
replied Margaret in a huff, for the bare pleasure of changing? Madam, replied
the Woman, do not think it an inconsiderable thing to break a Chain that must
otherwise hold me as long as I live: did you never observe the greatest
Epicures, and those which are used to the most delicate dishes, how they will
tower and plume themselves over a Ragoust of Beef? In earnest, replied
Margaret, I see we are not all Sots of our Sex, I did not believe the Capricio
of Change could have been carried so far; after which the Princess of Lombardy
decreed that this Woman should be placed at the head of the discontented Wives,
and that she should have her choice of all the men which should happen to be
divorced. From this Examination she proceeded to a second. This was a pale,
faint, languishing Creature, whose negligence in her March proclaimed her
naturally lazy. What complaint do you bring against your Husband? said Margaret
to her. Madam, replied poor Pale-face, he loves me too much, he is always
kissing, and caressing me, and I can never be at quiet. O cried Margaret, take
away this Woman from the rest, or she will be of very ill Example, and then
setting down her Husbands name in her Table Book, she would have sworn he was
the man with whom she was her self to put her new Law of Divorce in Execution.
She had scarce set led her self in that resolution, but in comes a third
discontent, the passion in whose face made her conclude her Complaint would be
quite contrary to the former. What, you are jealous I warrant you? said the
Princess to her, and you must be discharged of your Husband for his Courtship
to other Women. I wish, Madam, with all my heart, quoth the good Woman, your
Majesty had been a Prophet, I should not have been so miserable as I am; there
is nothing (in my Judgment) so convenient, as to have such a one for ones
Husband, he is always neat and perfumed: he is always abroad, and his fear lest
we should pry too far into his affairs, obliges him to leave the conduct of
ours to our selves: But alas, Madam, mine is not so well disposed, he never
stirs from home but at Christmas, Easter, or Whitsontide, and judging of my
temper by his own, he never suffers me one step out of doors, but when he is my
Gentleman Usher. This good Wife had liberty to change her Husband immediately.
This being adjudged one of the most lawful Causes of Divorce that could be
alleged. Margaret continuing her Office, a Woman crowded up into the soremost
Rank, the subject of whose Complaint was very new, and odd. Her Husband would
by all means have her in Love with some body else, and the poor Woman could not
be persuaded. It is then because the Gallant your Husband proposed to you, does
not please you? cried Margaret. No, Madam, not so, replied the Woman, for he
gives me my choice. He tells me, honest Women are such Dragons in a house, that
if I do but rid my self of that good quality, he cares not who it be that
destroys it. And I must confess, Madam, my honesty makes me a little fierce
sometimes; Honor is a Jewel, and when a Woman can once say she fears no body,
she is seldom to be vanquished in domestic Disputes. My Husband tells me
therefore he would have me like other Women, and that a Woman is more tractable
and complacent, when she has an amorous Intrigue in her head. But, Madam, I
had rather dye a thousand deaths, than gratify him in that, my honor is my
life, I will do nothing shall entrench upon that, and I will sooner renounce my
Marriage, than the Privilege of speaking loud in my own house, as all honest
Women may do. Margaret looked upon this Woman as mad, and made signs to have her
taken away, without vouchsafing her an Answer; and she had reason to dispatch
with her as fast as she could, for she had another attended with so much to
say, that her very story concluded that Audience. It was a French Woman,
originally of Languedoc, but so handsome, and charming, the Princess her self
could not look upon her without admiration. How is it possible, said she, any
man living should desire to part with you? The Stranger returned her no Answer
to that; but told her, her accusation consisted of so many heads, she humbly
begged leave to recite her whole story. She was not a person to be denied any
thing, Margaret therefore complied with her Request, and the unknown Lady
returning thanks for that favor, began her discourse in Italian (which she
spoke as it had been her Mother Tongue) in this following manner.

The History of Nogaret and Mariana
I Do not well know where I am to begin, the Description of the Knight and the
Lady (which is the usual beginning of all such Narrations) is improper for me;
in respect your Highness has me here in your presence, and my Husband being
but in the next Hall with Dulcinus, you may see him too, if you please. Nor
shall I commence with any impertinent Genealogy, it not being material to your
Highness who were my Ancestors, so you have but a true Relation of my Affair. I
am a Wife, and have a Complaint against my Husband: Hear it I beseech you with
patience, and judge of my Reasons. I was born in Montpellier (a Town very
famous for the handsome Women it produces) and my Name is Mariana Nogaret. A
Gentleman who lived not far off in the Country, having occasions at
Montpellier, happened to see me by chance, and liked me so well, he pretended
he loved me. This confidence, not being a thing so terrible in our Country, as
in other places, I must confess freely I thought my self very much obliged to
him: But the beginnings of our Amor, was of no long duration: for my Servant
was called to the Court of France upon an Affair not at all important to this
Story; and King Philip (surnamed le Bell) conceived so great kindness for him,
he kept him about his person. He gave me notice of the favor he was in, and
for some time I had reason to believe he would not force himself to forget me.
He writ to me often, and his Letters seemed to be passionate; but the Court
having this in propriety, to forget all former obligations, Nogaret by degrees
became lazy, and would not write often, and at length neglected it quite. I
past two whole years without hearing one word of him; but about the third year
afterward, being sent by the King, his Master, to Pope Boniface, passing
through Languedoc, either by accident or design he came to Montpellier. I may
say without vanity, had the Reputation of that time of being the handsomest
Woman in that Province; I was grown something fatter than when Nogaret first
saw me, my Neck, and proportions were better shaped, and Nogaret was grown also
the finest Gentleman in France. We had no great trouble to revive our old
flame, I saw nothing in all Languedoc to be compared to Nogaret, and he swore
as heartily he had seen nothing in all France or Italy so lovely as my self.
The trick of inconstancy which he had played me in his first Voyage, made me not
rely too much upon his protestations then. I remembered he had promised as
stoutly before, and forgot it almost as soon as out of sight, but he gave so
fair pretenses for his silence, and I had so great a desire they should be
true, that I assisted the cheat, and contributed to my own deception. His
Fortune and his Duty requiring his return, he staid not long at Montpellier,
but he gave me sufficient grounds to believe that what he left behind him this
time, was much dearer to him than it had been before: He writ to me from all
places upon the Road; there was not a fashion in the Court of France, but I had
the Pattern one of the first; and the kindness of King Philip having raised him
to a Rank in which he needed not fear being denied, if he demanded me of my
Parents, he did it with so much ardour, and advantage on my side, that he
easily obtained me. I was conducted to Lions, where Nogaret met me, and our
Marriage being celebrated there, my new Husband conducted me to Court with an
Equipage more like a Triumph, than a private Train. The King received Nogaret
with great demonstrations of Joy; the Queen honored me with Presents and
Caresses, and if I had the pleasure to see Nogaret outdo all the young Lords of
his Age, he had the satisfaction to hear his choice commended by every one that
saw me. Three or four months we continued at this rate, with so much felicity
and content both to the one and the other, that I cannot think upon that happy
time without being melancholy to think it lasted no longer. But, Madam, what I
am going to tell you is it to be believed? The first transports of our Joy was
scarce past, but the names of Husband and Wife became insupportable to us.
Nogaret increased daily in Esteem and Reputation, and I may say the air of the
Court was no diminution to my Beauty. Had not Nogaret been my Husband, I should
have had need of my whole stock of Virtue to have kept me from loving him more
than I ought; and he protested had not I been his Wife, he had dyed for Love of
me before that; but the indispensable necessity of loving one another, gave us
continual temptations to hate. We could not be alone together half an hour, but
it was troublesome; if Custom or Capricio put us upon any Caresses, they went
against the hair, and seemed done only to acquit our selves of an ungrateful
duty that lay upon us, without the least kindness or satisfaction in the World:
Not but that we had a foundation of respect one for another, which indeed
nothing could destroy. Nogaret lived with me very honorably, and I would have
dyed a thousand deaths before I would have been deficient in my duty to him.
But we looked upon one another as good friends, who being assured of one
another affection, love on, but in a quiet and serene kind of way, without the
least passion or transport. This sort of Civility gives the good Woman all the
Privileges her Rank requires of her Husband, and secures the good man against
all tempests at home. But this is not enough for young Hearts who expect
something further. They would have Love continue with the same fervor it
began, for (think they) when that which ought to be the effect of Love, is but
the effect of Policy and Complacence, Marriage becomes a heavy burden to those
who are any thing delicate. These considerations rendering us unquiet and
morose, Sara Colonne, one of Nogarets particular Friends, began to perceive it.
This man was famous over all Europe for his irreverences toward Pope Boniface;
Nogaret had made a Journey into Italy with him, and besides the familiarity
which Traveling produces among Travelers, Colonna was a lovely Person, and
very judicious; he pressed my Husband to let him know the occasion of his
Melancholy, and assuring him he should hold his friendship suspected for the
future, unless he vouchsafed him that mark of his affection, he ravished it from
him, that it was his disgust of me: How, says Colonna, disgusted with Madam
Nogaret? Tell me I beseech you, do you know any Woman living more handsome and
more worthy of your Love than she? It Is not of her Beauty I complain, replied
my Husband, I must confess that is great, and any man but a Husband might be
happy in it. But tell me, I pray you, of what use is that Beauty? of what use?
replied Colonna, for whose or for what use should your Wife be, but for yours?
do you make no difference then betwixt a handsome Woman and an ill-favored? and
if you restrain the pleasures of Matrimony only to the eye, is it not more
pleasant for a Husband when he comes home to find a young, a lively, and neat
Woman ready to embrace him, than to be received by a loose-bodied, moldy, old
Woman? Ha, my dear Friend, replied Nogaret, in a scornful way, a Wife is always
handsome enough, considering how little her Husband regards her. A Man of Honor
lives with an ugly Woman as with a handsome, and has the advantage of loving a
handsomer, if he can find her; whereas when a man has such a Wife as mine, he
seems to have lost his wits when he addresses to another. The Ladies send him
back again to his Wife, as one he must needs know to be handsomer, and so he
may call upon Saints, and swear as many oaths as he pleases that he loves her,
and not persuade her at the last. Ha, said he, were I but the Husband of such a
Woman (and named one of the ugliest about the Court) with what pleasure could I
tell Madam Nogaret she was the handsomest Person in the World? She would
believe me, because she would know it was true; she would think her self
obliged by my commendations, and perhaps recompense them by some favor or
other: but should I now make this Complement to any other Lady of the Court,
she would believe I did but railly; for she knows at her heart Madam Nogaret is
handsomer. This Dialogue happened in a Hall where we usually dined: and there
being a Grot on one side of it, into which after Dinner I had accidentally
retired to repose my self, it was my fortune to hear distinctly every word they
said. I was not at all surprised at the beginning of their Discourse, had my
Judgment been asked in the same case, I should have said as much of Nogaret, as
he said of me; but when I heard him wish himself married to the ugly person he
named, I could not for my life forbear blurting out into a laughter. Celonna
thrust his head into the Grot, to see who it was that laughed. He found me
fitting there alone with a Book in my hand, hearkening with great tranquillity
at what past betwixt us, as if I had not been concerned in the least; In
earnest, Madam, said he in his turn, this may be called the House of Miracles.
The man of all France who has the handsomest Wife, wishes he had the ugliest,
that he might have the pleasure of making Love to his own. The Lady of the
whole World, which deserves best of her Husband, receives the assurance of his
disgust with a laugh: What kind of Creatures are you two? You, says he to
Nogaret, seeing you acknowledge your Wife worthy of your Love, why do you not
love her? come into this Grot, and tell me your reasons? Alas, replied Nogaret
with a smiling disdain, I have so much liberty to say what I will to her, that
I have nothing to say. And you can hear this, and be merry, replied Colonna,
addressing himself to me. Why should I not be merry? replied I without any
disorder, is it not a thing pleasant enough to make my body laugh? Yes without
doubt, replied the Roman, your Husbands discourse would make any one laugh,
that was indifferent: but I could not have thought, Madam, you had been under
that Character. It is the best course I can take, replied I, for to speak truth
I am so much of Nogarets mind in all that he has said, that I cannot in
Justice condemn him. Come, come away, said my Husband to Colonna, taking him by
the Elbow, let us take a little Air, you have kept such a stir with the names
of Husband and Wife, that the very pronouncing them so often, has given me the
headache. As soon as he had spoke those words, they went forth together, and
immediately after my Tailor bringing me home an odd kind of Gown of mine own
particular invention, I was pleased with it so well, I would needs go wait upon
the Queen in it, and see how she liked it. I met her in the street, going upon
her Devotions, whether I had no mind to follow her, and not having found two or
three Ladies at home, which I went to visit, I resolved to attend her Majesty's
return, in the Garden belonging to the Palace. I had promised my Coach to a
Friend of mine that Evening; so that I dispatched that away as soon as I was in
the Garden; and choosing the most private Walks I could find, I entertained my
self with solitary thoughts. But, Madam, observe I beseech you, the strangeness
of my Destiny, I was alone, not so much as any of my Train at the Garden gate,
I was masqued (and in that year which was 1310) they wore their Masks very
little in France; by accident my Husband and Colonna past by the place where I
was, and seeing me a personable Woman, and walking alone in the Garden, my
Husband had a fancy to accost me; he had never seen that Gown I was in at that
time, and he had left me in another when he came out; so as not having the
least suspicion who I was, he began with a very high Complement about the
Excellence of my Shape. This Encounter seemed pretty, I had a mind to divert my
self with it a little, and dissembling my voice as much as I could, I pretended
to be a Lawyers Wife of the Country, who knew nothing of the Court, and
seconded Nogarets mistake so well, that it never came the least into his head,
that I was otherwise than I told him. He was in a mighty Rapture, nothing but
praises, and protestations in his mouth. He admired sometimes my shape,
sometimes my Neck, my Hair was the finest he ever had seen, my Eyes, my Motion,
that little he saw beneath my Masque, all excellent, and all enchanted him.
Colonna thought good to pull him away by the sleeve, and endeavor to break off
a Conversation which he began to be jealous of already; but he could not get
him from me, he would follow me to the end of the World he swore; and to be
short, when he did go away at last, he went away the most in Love of any man
living. Colonna looked upon this Frenzy with compassion, I heard him conjure
him in Italian (which your Ladyship perceives I understand in some measure) not
to concern himself with a Person, which for ought he knew might be nothing less
than what she pretended; that Paris was full of such kind of Cattle which
pretended highly to Innocence and prudence, though they knew more Roguery
perhaps than they that interrogated them; besides he would make himself
ridiculous to the whole Court, if it should be discovered he had only spoke to
the unknown Lady, the little time he had spoke to her indeed: but Nogarets.
Ears were deaf to all such admonishments. He would have sworn by my Fashion and
Mien I was as wise, as indeed I was; and being very importunate for liberty to
wait upon me home (that he might know where I lived) I had need of all the
Authority I began to have over him, to oblige him to excuse me. I told him I
had a jealous Husband at home, who would never suffer such persons as he to
enter within his doors; that I could not but judge of the effects I had
produced in his heart, by the respect he should pay to my desires; that he
should content himself with this, that I was not an ungrateful Woman, and that
I should find out a way some time or other of satisfying his Curiosity more
securely. He withdrew upon this, much pleased with that hope: and I having
found an opportunity to tread upon Colonna's Toe, I signed to him that I would
speak with him. He followed me to a place I had marked to him with my Eye; and
Nogaret being too apprehensive of my displeasure to follow him, he attended at
the end of an Alley, very impatient to know what it was I had to say to him.
When I saw my Husband at too great a distance to understand what I said,
Colonna said I, I am Madam Nogaret; he had like to have squeakt out at my
naming that name, but squeezing him by the hand, hold your peace, Colonna, said
I, this Intrigue is pleasant enough to be carried on a little further; do you
go and find out some unknown Coach that may carry me home, and come and fetch
me here as soon as you can: we will laugh at our leisure at what is past and to
come. Colonna returned to Nogaret with so great an inclination to laugh, he had
much ado to contain; he told my Husband I had inquired who he was, where his
House was, and what means I was to use to write to him; and having accompanied
him to the Kings Appartment, he slipped suddenly from him, and getting into the
first of his Friends Coaches he could see in the Court, he came to find me
where he had left me before. This Roman was a perfect Friend of my Husbands,
and upon any other occasion but this, I could not have prevailed with him to
have engaged in any Treachery against Nogaret: but he thought he should do him
a considerable piece of Service, to revive his passion for me, and he looked
upon this Intrigue as a way as likely and as innocent as could have possibly
been thought on. As soon as I was got home, I pulled off my new Gown, charged
my Women to let no body see it, nor to tell any body that ever I had worn it,
and having put on that again in which Nogaret had left me that morning, I fell
into consultation with Colonna, which way we might spin out this Comedy. As to
my Husbands neglect, I was absolutely insensible, and I had no design to cure
him of that by this Stratagem; but I found the story would be pleasant, and I
resolved to pursue it to the utmost. I had not wit enough to have invented it,
but since Fortune had been so ingenious, I resolved as much as I could to
improve it. Colonna encouraged my resolution, and returning to Nogaret, said as
many good things on me then, as he had done bad before he knew me. In earnest,
said he, the unknown Lady we say in the Garden, is very handsome, I see no body
at Court has a better presence, and if what her Mask hides, be as graceful as
what it discovered, believe me she is the compleatest Beauty in the World.
Nogaret embraced him for his News, as he had told him something had been
infinitely for his advantage, and then conjuring his assistance in the
discovery who she was, he confessed he had never been so much in Love in his
life. I fortified this passion by three or four Enterviews, where I must needs
say, I used the highest of my Skill to triumph over the Error of my
fantastical Husband. It was then Carnaval time in France, in which the French
run in Companies up and down the streets in Mascarade; and a Peace being
concluded about the same time betwixt his Holiness and the King of France, that
year was fuller of Divertisements than several others before it. The manner in
which Nogaret and I lived, permitted us not to be often in the same design, we
had each of us our Society, and when he was gone abroad with his Clan, I dressed
my self in Clothes he did not know, and taking only one or two of my Women
(whom I had enjoined strictly to make no mention of my name) I followed him
from one Company to another, to add new smart to his old Wound, if it were
possible, The alteration a Mask gives to the voice, desguised mine so well,
that Nogaret never suspected me for any body, but the unknown Lady in the
Garden, and under that quality I could not speak one word but enchanted him. He
conjured me by all that he could imagine might prevail, to give him an
opportunity of waiting upon me at home, but he remembered the jealous Husband I
had mentioned in our first Conference, and that brought me off there; and when
from his Proposition of Visits, he was come so low, as to be contented with the
bare sight of me now and then: I told him I had no great confidence in
Courtiers, and I would have a little further Experience, before I would
discover my self, that if he persisted in his earnestness to see me, or
attempted to have me dogged, I would leave my House the next day, and conceal
my self so well for the future, he should give me over for lost. This fear kept
him in the temper I would have him; but to requite his Compliance, I sent him
several Letters, which Colonna caused to be transcribed, and I received several
of his Answers. I remember these Letters were the production of a very pretty
Adventure. Nogaret had lost one of mine, and what I had said to him of the
Jealousy of my Husband, making him apprehensive, lest it should be found by
any body that knew the Hand, he contrived a pleasant way to evade that
inconvenience. He caused several Notes to be written in several Characters, and
when he had done, stole them into the Pockets of the most considerable
Courtiers; I cannot tell you, Madam, what trouble this Whimsey brought into the
Court; all these Tickets were of Love, some calm and smooth, others high and
outrageous; some were full of Jealousy, others of Thanks, but all of them
Assignations; so that there was nothing to be seen in the Walks but Gallants
with Tickets in their hands, attending their Mistresses, and this produced many
Quarrels and several Divorces. There was a great stir made to discover from
whence they came, whether such a Ticket came from such a man, or from such a
Woman, and the most expert persons in Characters were sent to resolve them. To
say the truth, had this Intrigue betwixt Nogaret and me had any thing of
reality, that Artifice would have been useful, for the Note he lost was found
by one of his young Coxcombs, who (having seen it fall out of Nogarets Pocket,
and finding it treated of Love) brought it to me, in hopes (as I suppose) to
have drawn some advantage to himself, by my Husbands indiscretion. I laughed
heartily when I saw the Note, and his action who brought it: I thanked him for
his Service, pretending it very important, and running to Nogarets Chamber,
Here, my Lord, said I, tendering him the Note, and counterfeiting my self
mightily jealous, have a better care of your Love Letters another time: So here
is one fell out of your Pocket in very good Company, and it is not like a
person of your discretion, suffer such Letters as these to run up and down the
World. Nogaret blushed at the sight of that Letter, but the Trick he had played
supplied him readily with an excuse, I Will lay my life, says he, this is one of
the Letters, have been so slyly stolen into all the Pockets at Court, and then
opening it as he had never seen it before, he read these words.

Yes, Brave Sir, I believe I may be beloved, my Beauty is sufficient to
convince me of that, without other Arguments, my Charms I am better acquainted
with than you, and therefore cannot but doubt whether one can love what he has
never seen. As for you, it is no extraordinary thing that I should love you, I
know who you are, I see you undisguised every day; but how can you tell but
that which is concealed by my Mask, may put you out of conceit again with all
you have seen. Women are the greatest Impostures in the World, and perhaps in
the same moment you love me so ardently without knowing me, I may become the
Person the most indifferent to you of all the Sex, if you did know me.

Without dissembling, Madam, cried Nogaret, after he had read it, this is a
pleasant Letter, and whether it be real or counterfeit, the Person who writ it
has a great deal of Wit. I had like to have burst out a laughing at Nogarets
Character, but not being as yet weary of so pretty a Divertisement, I forced my
self, and replied without any emotion; What is it you see so extraordinary in
this Letter? What is it do you ask? replied my Husband, why is it all, Madam,
the sense, the model, the expression, the neatness of the thoughts. Certainly,
said I, (with as much eagerness as he) I see nothing in it but very common. I
do not pretend to be an excellent Secretary, yet I dare lay a Wager I will
write as well as that when I please. Nogaret looked upon me with a disdain, had
like to have put me out of Countenance, and lifting up his eyes and shoulders,
as if he pitied my vanity, he judged it so idle that I had said, he vouchsafed
me not an Answer. He went forth immediately (without speaking a word) in quest
of his dear Colonna to give him an account of what had past. I had many of
these Regales from him while the Carnaval lasted; but that growing near to an
end, and Nogaret pressing daily for some ease of his Martyrdom, as he called
it, I resolved to put an end to this Comedy, and give him a sight of me; I
appointed him a meeting at a Country House about a League out of the City,
where I told him I had got leave of my Husband to retire for some days. He had
like to have dyed with Joy at the News, he gript my hand with so great
transportation, he forgot he hurt me, and from the night in which I gave him
that assignation, to the day he was to meet, he took so little rest, I began to
pity him. He was in a perpetual trouble, changed his place every quarter of an
hour, and I understood by his Servants he slept not a wink: but at length the
desired day arrived. Nogaret by agreement was not to come to the Rendez-vous
till after Sunset, and yet he came into my Chamber in the morning before day
ready dressed. I pretended to admire his diligence, and asked him what might be
the cause. He told me he was to receive an Order from the King to be executed
by him, and that in expectation of that, he was to be ready all day. This
invention made me smile, and being willing to put my Prevaricator to it, as
much as I could, I asked him, Will this Order hinder you from supping to night
with a certain Friend of ours, to whose House I have engaged to bring you along
with me. Yes doubtless, replied Nogaret a little hastily, it will hinder me;
for perhaps it will be night before I can execute it. Alas, said I, and how
comes it to pass you dress your self before day, for an Affair which you
believe cannot be dispatched before night. You know my exactness, replied my
Dissembler, in what relates to my duty to my Master, I had rather be ready
twelve hours too soon, than have his business stay for me one moment. Good my
Lord, replied I, taking him by the hand, be of my Company to night, let me
conjure you, I do not often trouble you with importunities, but I must needs
tell you, you will disoblige me exceedingly, if you refuse me this time.
Nogaret had always carried himself with great respect toward me, when under
the name of the Country Lawyers Wife, I desired to know his opinion of his own,
he still stopped my mouth, and told me, that was Sacred, and not to be
discovered. I confess I have no great passion for her my self; but I have so
much esteem for her, I would dye a thousand deaths before any body should speak
ill of her, and for me to speak well of her, I suppose is none of your design.
This moderate Husband of mine having denied me a thing I had so instantly
requested, he disguised his refusal with the best reasons he could think on;
but all that would not discourage me, I kissed him, I caressed him, I upbraided
him, and desired this Compliance as the only thing I would ever ask him again.
Alas, I expected not he should promise me, I knew as well as he what obliged
him to the contrary, but it pleased me not a little, to give him this disquiet
as a punishment for his contempt of me. To be short, in spite of my
Complaints, in spite of my Reproaches, away he went in order to his
assignation, and that no man might take notice of his Journey, he would not
have a Horse of his own, but took a Hackney in a by-place of the City, and
without any of his Servants with him, away he went toward the House where I
had appointed him to meet. I was got thither some hours before him: for besides
that he was not to come before night, and I went from home presently after
Dinner; he had an unluckly Accident by the way, which gave him a stop. He was
very ill mounted, and the hopes he was in, employing his thoughts so much, he
regarded not which way his Horse went, it was late, as I have observed, and
about the beginning of Lent: so that the darkness, and dust concurring, his
Horse lead him fairly into a Slough, from whence he had much ado to disengage
himself. Had this Accident happened to an ordinary Lover, there had been no
great matter in it, Love takes delight many times to sport it self with the
impatience of Lovers: but to have it happen to a Husband, going to an
Appointment with his own Wife, and this Lady he solicited with so much zeal
(without knowing her) and went to meet in despite of so many dangers and
impediments, to be daily at his disposing in his own house, was so pleasant a
thing, perhaps the like never happened before. Poor Nogaret finding himself in
a stinking Bog, upon an insensible Jade, which despised the correction both of
his hand and his heel, made a thousand vows and obsecrations to Love to deliver
him out of so villainous a place. He thought once to have alighted off his
Horse, and tried to have disengaged himself on foot, but besides that the
Slough was deep and muddy, he had but one pair of Breeches about him, and was
unwilling to defile them in such an Adventure. He kicked, he spurred, he swore,
he repined, but he might have kicked, and swore, and repined long enough, had
not the officious Colonna come in luckily to his assistance. This good man
(imagining very discreetly, that this Intrigue betwixt Nogaret and me could not
probably be discovered without some kind of displeasure) came to prevent by his
presence any ill consequence that might arise. The Moon was up, and Nogaret
knew him by the light of it, he cried out to have him come to him, and being
come; Ah, my dear Friend, said he to him (with a voice trembling betwixt choler
and cold) help me, I beseech you, I can do no more, I have been two long hours
in this Slough, and without your assistance I am like to be here all night.
Colonna knew him, and seeing him in such a condition for an Enterprise which
deserved better luck, as so pleased with the Adventure, that he could not
answer him for laughing. How, said Nogaret to him in a rage, is it thus you
relieve your Friend at a time when he has so much need of your assistance?
What assistance would you have? replied Colonna, laughing all the while: I am
neither Ploughman, nor Mariner, and it would require all the Altars both of the
one and the other to fetch you off where you are: What in Gods name do you
there? who conducted you? and how came you to march alone in the night, without
any Servants, and upon an ugly Jade that is none of your own? We will satisfy
you to those questions hereafter, replied Nogaret, much discomposed both with
anger and shame: this is no time for such Narratives as those, but do what you
can to deliver me, I beseech you. Colonna alighted, took his Hackney by the
Bridle, spoke to him, and battered the Beast, till at last with much ado he got
him to a place where Nogaret might throw himself off on his back upon the
ground. When he was landed, they marched together to the next Village, where my
poor Husband was scraped and made clean, and Colonna sent out to get another
Horse for him, for his old Hackney was dying. But my Husbands impatience not
giving him leave to attend the hiring of a new one, he leapt up upon Colonna's,
and rid away full speed to the place of the Assignation. I was in Bed when he
arrived, foreseeing the hour past, and not daring to venture back to Paris in
the night, I resolved to lie where I was, being assured I could justify my
absence, if it should be required. Nogarets transport was so great, when he
found himself alone in my Chamber, that he did not think of bringing the Candle
with him to my Bedside. He threw himself upon his knees, and taking me by the
hand, he kissed it with so much joy and affection, I was afraid he had been
mad. I confess I began to be troubled at his mistake, and should have thought
my self much indebted to Fortune, had she done that in my favor, which she had
done in his. I would not have committed a Crime, but I could have wished some
Enchantment like my Husbands had communicated to me as much pleasure in his
Caresses, as he received in bestowing them. He threw himself upon the Bed,
embraced my knees through the Counterpane, and gave me a thousand thanks for my
goodness in the best Language his Love could suggest. But when after his first
motions of trouble and transport, he came to draw the Curtains quite and in the
unknown Person he so tenderly loved, he discovered the same Woman he so long
had despised. He swore a great oath, I think in my Conscience it is my Wife, and
stepping a little back to inform himself better, he fell down under the Chairs,
so amazed at his Adventure, I feared he would never have recovered. No, Sir,
said I, it is none but your Wife, you see how dangerous it is to commit your
self to the conduct of your heart, you would never have suspected yours to have
been guilty of this mistake: Mariana is so indifferent to you under the Name of
Madam Nogaret, that you could not think she could charm you in another shape. I
am nevertheless the Lady in the Mask you were so taken with in the Garden
belonging to the Palace. This Shape, these Eyes, this Neck: in short, all this
Person you so passionately desired when unknown, is the very same you looked
upon so disdainfully now you know me. I sent you word in the Letter you lost,
that your passion would be over as soon as you saw me. I know not whether
nogaret, overlaid with these reproache, was not able to endure them any longer,
or whether there his indignation for being deceived, augmented the horror he
expressed at the sight of me, but he ran down stairs as fast as he could, and
calling for his Horse, away he went for Paris with all speed, as ill satisfied
now with his Assignation, as he ever had been pleased. He was scarce gone a
moment, but Colonna came in, I told him what had past at our Enterview, and I
understood from him what had befallen Nogaret by the way. I could not forbear
laughing for my heart, when I fancied him in the Puddle; but my kindness
returning after a time, I dispatched Colonna after him, lest some new Accident
might befall him. I looked upon all this Accident as a JesT, and I did hope
Nogaret would have looked upon it no otherwise, but I was mistaken in my
opinion. He was so much enraged at the fallacy, that he has not forgiven me to
this day. Colonna thought good to let him know, that it was Fortune which began
it, and that if either of us had reason to complain of the Consequence, it was
certainly I. He replied to his remonstrances, that I was an Imposture, and that
a Woman which could disguise her self so well, would act the greatest and most
horrible disloyalties, whenever she had a mind to it. Seeing then I could not
mollife him by any means, I caused it to be proposed to him to come hither and
implore that Privilege you so graciously are pleased to afford all such
Husbands as are dissatisfied with their Wives. The Coundition he stood in, in
France, made him averse at first, but the good men which think themselves
burdened with their Wives, fancy nothing imp^^lible that may ease them. We have
left our Country upon these terms, and are now present in your Court. But see,
Madam, and admire the unconstancy of my Stars, the liberty I now enjoy of
parting with Nogaret, makes me begin to think our separation insupportable. I
beseech you therefore, most Excellent Princess, continued Mariana (throwing her
self at Margarets feet) obtain of Duleinus in my behalf, that Nogaret may not
have that permission, which I know he demands. As I imitated him in his
disgust, it is possible he may do as much for me in my return. The necessity of
our Loves begat our Antipathy, and who knows but the liberty to hate may revive
our affections.

Mariana was not out of the way, when she dissed in this manner. She had scarce
ended her Petition, but Dulcinus came in to desire Margaret, in the behalf of
Nogaret, to grant to such permission to Mariana. In short, this Couple took one
another again, and loved one another as entirely, as when they were married at
first. Their Example was so good, that being followed by several others, it
carried many a good man and his Wife back again into France, who renounced the
Privilege of Divorce, and demonstrated to the World, That liberty to change
takes away the desire to do it. That did well, and like wise men to carry
themselves so, they would have been constrained otherwise by force, to what
they did willingly: for Pope Clement the Fifth (having intelligence of what
past in Lombardy, and finding this new Law inconformable to the Laws of
Christianity) raised a strong Army, and sent it against Dulcinus, under the
Command of a Legate, his Nephew. The Legate overcame him, forced him to renounce
his Error, and rescued his Subjects from that Libertinism in which they began
to be plunged.

Unhappy days! unhappy War, whose rage
Swallowed whole Countries, cost so many lives!
Were to be fought again in this our Age,
We'd pull down Pope, rather than keep our Wives.
Whilst Margaret was bewailing the success of the Legate, and some Husbands
(apprehending the Consequences of that War) hasted very prudently to gain the
benefit of that Privilege. Don Pedro King of Castile applied himself to the
Establishment of that Custom in his Kingdom, which was so unfortunately
suppressed in Lombardy. He had sent Ambassadors into France to negotiate a
Marriage for him with Blanch, the Daughter of Peter Duke of Bourbon, a near
Kinsman to Philip of Valois, the first King of France of that Race. The
Castillians are a phlegmatic people in matters of Negotiation, and those whom
Don Pedro had employed about this, driving at the advantage of the Kingdom,
more than the particular interest of the King, they were so tedious in
concluding upon their Conditions, that Don Pedro began to be weary of their
delay. He was as violent as they were cautious, when he sent to make that
Overture about Blanch, he had prepared his patience for no longer expectation
than was necessary for a Journey betwixt Burgos and Paris, and finding that
elapsed, and no intimation when the Wife was to come, he began to think of
easing his impatience by some gentle diversion, (for by that name it is all
beginnings of Love are Christened) that which makes oftentimes the greatest
affair of a man's life, is looked upon at first but as a transitory fancy, and
whilst one thinks but to play and dally with Love as with a Child, the least of
his scratches become incurable and mortal. At this rate it happened to our
young Monarch. He discovered his inclinations to Nugnez de Prade Grand Master
of the Order of Callatrava, and the chief of his Favorites. Such kind of
Confidences as these, are not very honorable in themselves, but the favor
ennobles them. It is always good to be employed in the Secrets of ones Master,
let the part he be to act be what it will. Nugnez thought himself much honored
that the King of Castile had made choice of him to serve him in his Amors, and
to acquit himself honorably of his Trust, he gave himself up entirely to the
finding out a Mistress for Don Pedro. This is an employment which requires no
great trouble, Ladies are generally very well inclined, when they are desired
for a Prince: but Nugnez could not accommodate with all that was offered him.
He was as dutiful a Subject, as he was a dextrous Solicitor; and not being
willing give the King any more than a bare diversion, it cost him some trouble
to find out a Person handsome enough to please him, and yet not so complete as
to work him into a passion. He thought he had met with one according to his
mind, in the person of Maria de Padilla, one of the Maids of Honor to the
Duchess of Albuquerque. This young Lady was witty and lively, she was young
and handsome, and though she was neither of Beauty nor Quality sufficient to
give any obstruction to the Marriage intended; yet she was well enough to
satisfy his impatience till the Princess arrived. To relate the Formalities of
our Monarch toward this Virgin, or the Virgins to the King, would be to charge
our Annals with an impertinent Circumstance. Lovers of Don Pedro's Rank, are
not subject to the Punctilioes of a Romance. They carry their Mistresses by
absolute Power, and it is not for them the Loveforms were devised. Nugnez told
Padilla, the King likes you very well; and Padilla replied, What will his
Majesty command me? but this bargain made with so much expedition, and
consummated with so much ease, had not a conclusion suitable to its beginning.
Padilla had athousand qualities capable of making a Lover happy, more than
indifferent persons could discern. The vivacity of her Wit animated all her
actions, her humor and complacency supplied the defects of her Beauty; and the
Kings Magnificence making her eminent for a natural inclination to neatness;
Don Pedro at the very first found that his Mistress, which the Grand Master
hoped he would never have discovered. He pressed his Ambassadors no more to
dispatch; and the little concern he had for her return, making him think it
precipitate when they did, he scarce believed the Princess was come out of
Paris, when advice was brought that some body was to be Deputed to receive her
upon the Frontiers. These tidings both surprised and afflicted him. He could
have wished never to have heard it whilst he lived; but the Marriage of Kings
being no jesting matter, there was a necessity that Don Pedro should pretend to
be content. He dispatched Nugnez de Prade to attend the new Queen, and advancing
himself some three days Journey from Burgos, in order to meet her, he resolved
to content himself in this business as well as he could; but his Love for
Padilla would by no means concur: her absence, though but for three days,
seemed an Age to him. He must needs return to her, he could not endure the
thoughts of marrying Blanch, and looking upon his lawful duty, as a desertion
of his Mistress, he left the new Queen to shift for her self, and returned to
his Padilla for consolation. When Nugnez understood the King had given Order
for his Equipage to march back toward Burgos, he thought he had been
misinformed, replied immediately to his Majesty, and finding him ready to take
Horse, Why Sir, said he, in great astonishment, will you quit our new Queen
before you see her? Consider I beseech you, you are but a days Journey from
her? I know not, replied Don Pedro, whether that be enough for her, but I am
sure it is too much for me. Is it, Sir, replied the Grand Master, that you have
not found her as you had reason to have hoped, or that ill instructed in the
obedience she owes you, she has? -- No, Nugnez, replied Don Pedro interrupting
him, it is nothing of all that; it is only this, Don Pedro of Castile is not born
for Blanch de Bourbon: Those who contrived this Meeting, knew neither of us
both; and tob e short, she may return to France as she came, if her design be
to be Queen of Castile: for she is nothing to me now, and never will be more.
The faithful Nugnez discomposed exceedingly with this resolution, did what he
could to make Don Pedro consider of what importance it might be: he represented
the Power of the Duke of Bourbon by the accession of the Family of Valois to
the Crown of France, the general interest of all Princes to vindicate an
Affront to a Princess, so nearly related to the most Puissant of all the
Christian Kings, the dissatisfaction of the Apoll stolick See, the murmures of
the people, and the injury he would do to his own Honor and Renown; but all
these remonstances were in vain. Don Pedro departed without vouchsafing the
Grand Master an Answer, leaving him to repent at leisure whatever e had
recommended Padilla to be Mistress to the King. This faithful Favorite
beholding at one Prospect the evils which this action would bring upon Castile,
resolved as much as he could to divert it, by cajolling the new Queen. He
prepared an eloquent Discourse to excuse her Entertainment, and after he had
perused it, and was well satisfied with the Contents, he desired Audience of
Blanch, and endeavored what he could to justify Don Pedro. He pretended
indisposition of body, and some imaginary Affairs of State to apologize for his
departure; but there was no need he should trouble himself so far. Blanch was
a Princess but of small Experience in the World, she had been brought up in a
Monastery, where they make a scruple of opening their very Eyes, and she
believed it was sufficient to have been married by Don Pedro's Ambassadors to
make her Queen of Castile. When Nugnez perceived this Error, he was very much
surprised. The King had given him to understand the Marriage was not
consummate, he attended to see the Princess, mortally dissatisfied with her
mistaken, and upon this point it was his Harangue was principally to insist:
but whatever he could say to explain himself, and what address soever he used
to eradicate that opinion out of Blanch (reserving the respect he ought to her
Person) he found her invincibly persuaded she was Don Pedro's Wife already, and
she blushed when she said it, as much as another Woman would have blushed at a
far greater Crime. So profound an ignorance is rare in a Person of her Age;
Nugnez could not contemplate it without astonishment, and adding pity to his
wonder, by degrees both the one and the other produced sparkles of Love, which
brake out at length into a most pernicious flame. Blanch was young, and of an
excellent humor, and to be handsome, she wanted nothing but a desireto please,
insomuch as our Grand Master fell in Love at a time when it was least
suspected, and with the Person in the World he had the least design upon. In
brief, his fidelity to his Master seemedto have shut up all the avenues of his
heart against so criminal a passion: never was Subject more zealous for his
Prince, and he had given a thousand instances of his affection. But what is it
that Love cannot do? nugnez found Charms in the Innocence of Blanch, which Don
Pedro looked upon as faults; he took no pleasurebut in the Company of the
Princess, and the pretense of persuading his Majestyto his duty, giving him
opportunity of frequent and long Conferences with the King, his passion
increasedso fast by occasion of those Enterviews, he had scarce power to
dissemble it. Had he consulted his own heart about the successof his
Negotiation, he would have done what he could possibly to have caused it to
miscarry. Which way soever he looked upon the Kings aversion for Blanch, it
could not be but advantageous to nugnez. First it threatened Castile with a
dangerous War, and the Grand Master being chief Minister, that Menace must
needs be grateful to him. Moreover it furnished the Courtiers with an
opportunity of flattery, of which a Favorite may make a mavelous use, and if
his Policy accommodated with this Divorce, the Reader may easily believe his
Love would not be against it. But this generous Castillian (being in reality
more a Person of Honor than a Lover, or interested Subject) did as much to
reduce his Master to what was just, as he had been to have received no
advantage by his pertinacity. He conferred with the Duke of Albuquerque,
Husband to Phidilla's old Mistress, and Nugnez particular Friend. The
misfortune this Duke conceived it to have brought up the Person in his House,
who was like to be the destruction of the Royal Family of Castile, made him
more passionate for the interests of Blanch, than any other of the Grandees in
that Kingdom. They went together to Padilla, they desired her (as Friends) that
she wouldimploy all her Wit and Capacity with the King, to prevail with him to
use Blanch as he was in duty obliged; but perceiving that under the Title of
Friends they were not regarded, they changed their Character, they began to
speak with authority, and threatened her with the resentment of the whole
Kingdom, if she stopped not the course of an injustice, of which she was looked
upon as the Author. Padilla was proud and witty, she discovered by the
consequence how much she was nettled at this threat; but thinking that no time
to hint her displeasure, she promised the Duke and the Grand Master she would
contribute her utmost to Blanches satisfaction. But she had a care of being as
good as her word; she had too much pride and ambition to make any serious
prayers so contrary to her vanity and her hopes. Nevertheless the Castillians
(not being able to endure such an injury to their Nation, as the violation of
their Faith solemnly engaged by public Authority, and the most confident
persons amongst them) murmured highly against the injustice of it. The Grandees
fell into Cabals, the Common People into Factions, all things were tending to a
Revolt. Leonora Queen Dowager of Arragon, Don Pedro's Aunt, apprehending the
danger he was in, took the liberty to admonish her Nephew. She was eminent for
her Courage, and is commended in History for her Eloquence above the rest of
her Sex. She represented to this Monarch the deplorable Estate into which his
Crown was running, unless he would observe at least some appearances of Honor
and Justice with his Wife; and the property of Rhetoric being to give the
strongest and most specious colors one can invent, to the evils he would
avert, Leonora knew so well to delineate the misfortunes which threatened Don
Pedro, that he thought them already upon his shoulders. He was a violent
Prince, of a natural ferocity, to whom Posterity afterward gave the firname of
Cruel. As soon as the Queen his Aunt was departed, he sent immediately for
Nugnez and having intimated his resentment against the Rebels, he told him that
he found there was a necessity of preventing the Rebellion, and that the most
probable was was by taking away the pretense, and removing Blanch into another
World: that he was resolved to have her poisoned, and that knowing the zeal and
fidelity the Grand Master had for his Service, he had pitched upon him for that
Execution. If ever any Favorite in Love has received from his Master
Commission to murder his Mistress, he will easily comprehend how much Nugnez
was delighted with this Discourse. He loved the King so entirely, he would
rather have dyed a thousand deaths than have betrayed him; and he loved Blanch
with a passion as violent as pure, and he loved only for Loves sake. When he
considered Don Pedro as a most puissant Monarch, who honored him hourly with
his particular favors, he thought he could not obey his Orders too soon. When
he reflected upon Blanch as an innocent Princess, deserving none of her
misfortunes, and one he loved as his soul, he knew nothing so Sacred which he
would not immolate to her safety. This perplexity having taken away his speech,
the King asked him in an anger, if he was grown dumb since he came into his
Closet. I wish, Sir, with all my heart, replied Nugnez, I were dumb indeed, I
should then be excused for not answering the most strange, and to me the most
cruel discourse I ever heard in my life. Why Sir? said he with his eyes fast
fixed upon the King, will you take away the life of a Princess, who is guilty of
no Crime, but not being so happy as to please you, and supports that misfortune
with so much submission, her very patience ought to make your Majesty kinder!
Do you call that submission, replied the King, interrupting him hastily, to
form parties and publish remonstrances against me every day. I can no sooner
stir out of my Palace, but I am assaulted by the Clamours of my people, crying
out mutinously for their Queen. The Grandees of my Kingdom solicit me
perpetually. The Queen my Aunt could not forbear denouncing of mischief. Would
you have me sit still, and expect the Rebellion of my Subject with patience,
and imprudently exposing my self to the indignation of the French, give my self
up to the fury of my incensed Wife. No, Sir, replied Nugnez, I would have none
of that: I would sooner dye than entertain one thought into my Soul, contrary
to your safety and your Kingdoms; and though I would spend every drop of my
own, for the preservation of the Queens blood, yet I am ready to let out that
too, if your Majesty commands it. But I beseech you, Sir, continued the Grand
Master, throwing himself at the Kings feet, look upon the Consequences before
you command me. Blanch is not one of your Majesty's Subjects, which you have
advanced to your Throne by the mere motion of your goodness: she is illustrious
for her Birth, for her Virtue, and nearly related to one of the greatest Kings
in Europe. What does your Majesty think this great Monarch and his Allies will
do, if he suspects you have made away a Princess of his own Blood, which upon
your solemn solicitation he had given you for a Wife? Again, Sir, had not all
formal Complacencies been denied, it had been possible a violent death might
have past for natural; but who do you think, I beseech you, will doubt of the
truth, after the Treatment the unhappy Princess has received from you. They
would believe you, Sir, in great favor with Destiny, should they see you
delivered so seasonably from a Wife you abhorred, without contributing any more
to her death, than your bare desires. No, Sir, believe me, I beseech you, there
will not be a person living but will conclude you joined your endeavors to
your good wishes; and this opinion being once settled (as settled it will
doubtless be) I leave it with all humility to your Judgment to consider what
consequences it will produce. But what would you have me do then, replied Don
Pedro, to secure my self against the perils to which our Divorce will expose
me: for to live honorably with Blanch is more than I can do; I have an
Antipathy against her which I cannot master, all her actions displease me, and
I love Padilla even to adoration. Had I but either my Love or aversion to
contend with, I might perhaps overcome one of them; but to combat them both at
a time, and not content to tear a violent passion out of my heart, but I must
undertake to put a person I hate naturally into its place, is a thing, my good
Nugnez, I am not able to do. This, Sir, replied Nugnez, would not perhaps be so
difficult to another, as it is to you. The Formalities which Hymen requires of
a wise Husband, are not so incompatible with a foreign Amor; but seeing an
accommodation which so many Husbands find easy, seems so impossible to your
Majesty, enjoy your Padilla, and no other, your will ought to be our Law, and
it is not for Subjects to expostulate against the desires of their Sovereigns.
But, Sir, content your self, I beseech you, with that liberty, and be not so
far transported, as to dispose of a life the Heavens have not subjected to your
power. Don Pedro replied, if I do not immolate her life to the security of my
own, I am in danger of having mine sacrificed to the indignation of the French.
Can you think so warlike and so potent a Nation can digest my treatment of
Blanch, without attempting some thing to revenge it? And will they be more
backward, think you, Sir, replied Nugnez, when they suspect you have destroyed
her? The manner of her death will be doubtful, replied Don Pedro, which my
aversion for her is not. Besides they may have hopes of forcing me to marry her
whilst the Princess is living, of which she being dead, they must be desperate
of course. To maladies that are curable, remedies are properly to be applied,
but no body inquires after any for a man that is irrecoverable. In short,
Nugnez, it is to no purpose to argue in a thing that is resolved. I will rid my
self of Blanch, and if you deny me your assistance, I shall find others of my
Subjects more zealous for my Service, and not so scrupulous, who will think it
an honor to receive that Commission from my own mouth. Nugnez perceiving the
King to be angry, and apprehending lest he should be really as good as his
word, and give his Orders to some other person who would be more readily
disposed to execute them than he: he pretended to be overcome with his reasons,
and promised him to rid him of the Queen. But, Sir said he, suffer me, I
beseech you, to do it my own way, and at my own leisure; do not precipitate an
affair so well worthy of deliberation. We must first drive the French out of
your Country, before we attempt any thing against a Princess of that Kingdom;
we must pretend Plots and Machinations they were contriving in the State,
thereby to lessen the esteem the people have for her; and by degrees we may
give so great an appearance of Justice to her death, that though your Majesty
should be suspected to have caused it, you could not be reproacht with it. Don
Pedro approved this last advice very well, and committing the whole care of
that affair to Nugnez, he gave himself wholly over to his Recreations with
Padilla. The amorous Nugnez, trembling with horror and fear for the discourse
he had had with the King, and judging with reason, that if he did not pretend
to execute his Orders severely, his Master would employ some body else, who
would observe them more strictly, he began his hypocrisy by a general
Banishment of all the French which attended the Queen: he pretended secret
practices on their part, inconsistent with his Majesty's indulgence, or the
security of the Queen: he clapped Guards about the unfortunate Princess, who
under color of securing her from Don Pedro, had private Orders to have a care
of her safety; and fearing perpetually lest the King should repent himself of
his patience, and hasten her death some other way than by him, he commanded her
Guards to let no person whatever come near her, unless a Ticket was produced
under Nugnez's hand. These charitable cares, appearing contrary to their
particular motion, produced as much hatred in the heart of Blanch, as they
ought to have done kindness and obligation. What have I done to you? Nugnez,
said she to him one day, to be made the object of an injustice I could never
hear you have exercised upon any but me. All Castile speaks of you as the most
honorable Person it ever brought forth. Your compassion for the afflicted, and
your respect for my Sex has forced an esteem for you, even from your Enemies;
and will you divest your self of these qualities, to become the Persecutor of a
poor Princess who never did you wrong, and had a great esteem for you, before
you declared your self the greatest Enemy she had. I, Madam, replied Nugnez, am
I the greatest Enemy you have? And what other name, replied the Princess, can I
give the man who keeps me in Prison, who banishes my own Country-Servants out
of the Nation, and carries his Tyranny so high, my very Women are not suffered
to come near me, but by his special permission. You will tell me perhaps the
King has commanded you to use me at that rate, but I cannot believe he can be
guilty of so much injustice. It is you, Cruel you, who abuse his Authority,
inverting it against a Princess devoid of all succor, and forcing her to
Captivity, where she expected a Crown. But once again, what is it I have done?
if I have given you any offense against my knowledge (which yet I cannot
imagine) the pitifulness of my Condition ought to satisfy your Vengeance; and
if I have never offended you, how can you be so cruel to treat me as you do?
These words pierced poor Nugnez to the heart, he opened his mouth a hundred
times to have told Blanch the truth, but his fidelity to his Master not
suffering him to betray his Confidence, he contented himself with some
particular actions which might undeceive the Princess, and rectify the false
Ideas she had conceived, from the outward appearance of her affairs. There past
not a day but he sent her some little Present of Flowers, of Fruits, or of
Essences: he provided her Voices and Music in some private part of her
Appartment, to divert the tediousness of her Imprisonment. He got a Collection
of fine Pictures, and rare Birds to furnish her Chambers, and speaking the
French Language very well, he made Verses many times in that Tongue, which he
presented her for her diversion. These little Civilities could not be kept so
secret but these came to the Ears of Padilla. The Queen had a young Virgin
attending her at that time, called Jane de Castro, with whom Fernandez de
Hyvestrosa (one of Padilla's Uncles) was most desperately in Love. By her means
this subtle Mistress had Intelligence of all that passed in Blanches Prison,
and judging (by what she knew of the Kings animosity) that he would be ill
satisfied with Nugnez's Generosity, she believed she had now found a way of
being revenged for the threats he formerly gave her. She conjured her Uncle to
use all his Art for the discovery of the Intrigue betwixt the Princess and the
Grand Master: for, said she to Fernandez, you may easily conceive Nugnez, who
by the favor of the King is advanced to one of the chief Dignities of the
Kingdom, would not by the disobeying of so good a Master expose himself, were
he not tempted to that disobedience by some considerable design: he must
doubtless have Intelligences with the French to the prejudice of the State, and
we are so much bound to his Majesty's Bounty, I think we are obliged to prevent
him any mischief we are able. Fernandez acting upon his Nieces Memoires, pressed
Jane by his Letters, and his Discourse, to do as Padilla desired; and when she
failed her expectation but a day, he would complain of his unkindness, in not
returning her Answers; and at length having employed all the influence he had
upon the affections of this Maid, to debauch the fidelity she ought to her
Princess, he managed his affairs so well, he cajoled her out of these Verses
which Nugnez had made (without her knowledge) and Jane de Castro had found in
her Pocket, as she was putting her to Bed.

Weak man not to adore a thing
Whose every action, word, and glance
Discovers naught but innocence,
To the mst rigid and sagacious King.
Cupid upon his Mothers knee,
Tells not so harmlesly his Tale,
Nor so effectually does prevail
To make her love him, as she works on me.
Rouse then unworthy man, and where
Virtue for thy assistance calls;
Beat off her fetters, and beat down her walls:
Justice excites, and it is base to fear.
Padilla had like to have killed her self with joy at the sight of these
Verses, Fernandez explained them as he delivered them to her, and she running
with them immediately to the King, possessed him highly against their innocent
Love, and blackned his passion with such formidable Colors, that had the King
followed the first motions of his anger, he had sent to have had Nugnez put
immediately to death. But as he loved him very well, and could not easily
forget the Services he had done him, he restrained himself in spite of his
natural impetuosity. The Queen was at that time in the Castle of Maqueda, where
Nugnez to remove her out of the sight of her Enemies, had caused her to be shut
up. The Governor of the Castle had been put in by the Grand Master, and he had
reason to believe he would be faithful to him, but there is no friendship nor
acknowledgment proof against the Authority of ones natural Prince. Don Pedro
sent for the Governor to him, he ordered him to receive certain Troops
privately into the Castle, to be sure Nugnez knew nothing of them; and
flattering his fidelity with as many fair promises, as he threatened his
indiscretion with punishments if he refused, he caused the Garrison to be
insensibly changed, and no Soldiers left of whom he was not secure. When he
had used all this preliminary precaution, he ordered word to be brought him,
when the Grand Master was with the Queen, and being desirous to evict him by
his own Eyes, he repaired privately to Maqueda, forbad the Governor upon
penalty of his life, to give the Grand Master any notice, and being conducted
by Jane de Castro into a Closet near the Princesses Chamber, where that young
Virgin was used to listen to their discourses, the King heard Blanch tell him,
Were there yet in these Flowers you send me any Serpent concealed, or were they
impregnated with any poisonous quality, that might put a speedy end to my
miseries, I should say your heart began to mollify toward me: But I see well
enough this Present is but a politic piece of Civility wherewith you season
the injuries you do me, and which you would not practice, without doubt, were
it not to rob me of the feeble consolation of complaining on you in all things.
Nugnez was so much affected with a reproach he merited so little, that his
patience was overcome: Why, Madam, said he to the Princess with his voice quite
changed, would you more willingly receive poison from my hands, than these
small Presents wherewith I endeavor to divert your sad thoughts? Yes without
doubt, replied the Queen, I should look upon the poison as a token of your
sincerity, whereas I consider all now but as so many tokens of your
dissimulation. Certainly, Madam, replied Nugnez transported with sorrow, I have
then complied very ill with your desires; for I have exposed my life and
fortune, and do expose them every day in not giving you that poison, you are so
earnest to have: and then his Love overflowing his fidelity and resolution, he
began to discover to the Queen the discourse he had had with the King, the
secret of his Conduct, which she had not perceived; and finding himself
insensibly engaged to speak of his affection, be began to make a perfect
declaration. But Don Pedro prevented him for that, giving him no leisure to go
through, he cried out Arm, Arm, and entering into Blanches Chamber with the
Officers of his Guards, he caused Nugnez to be stabbed in his own presence
immediately. The Queen would have run the same Destiny, if his opinion that he
could convict her of Amors betwixt Nugnez and her, had not made him reserve
her for more public Justice. He caused her to be removed and kept close in the
Castle of Siquenca, and resolving to cut her off with more formalities than her
Gallant, he returned to Burgos, as well satisfied with his Journey, as if he
had gainned some considerable Victory. The mischievous Padilla heapt her
Congratulations upon him, for so noble an action: Fernandez flattering himself
with the hopes of the Grand Masters place in the favor of the King, could not
satisfy his expectation with less than some eminent Dignity. But see the
vanity of humane designs: Don Pedro, who had never looked upon Jane de Castro
but with eyes prepossest by Padilla, being at that time disposed to a change,
he became enamored of her when he saw her in the Castle of Maqueda. His heart
was tender, Jane was amiable, and what had past lately in Castile, having given
Don Pedro a relish of injustice and impunity, he regarded not his Marriage with
Blanch as an obstruction to his new desires: he gained two of the Bishops of
his Kingdom to declare that his Marriage with the Queen not being consummate,
it was lawful for him to take another as he pleased, and upon their bare
Authority he married Jane de Castro publicly without any scruple. It is easy
to judge Padilla and Fernandez de Hyvestrosa were nettled to the quick by this
sudden Wedding. This ambitious Mistress, who could not endure so much as the
shadow of a Queen upon the Throne of Castile, found it now in the full
possession of an absolute Queen beloved by the King; and Fernandez, who
flattered by the promises of his Niece, had been the secret Instrument of
Nugnez's death, received no other fruit of his inhumanity, than a Banishment
from the Court, and the loss of his Mistress, which he loved above the World.
Had that Mistress of his been as sensible of Fernandez despair as he had reason
to hope, she would have refused the Crown which was offered her; but that Age
was like ours, they stood not much upon Constancy, the Glory of being a Queen
outweighed the shame of infidelity, and let Lovers say what they will, a Crown
is better than a Garland. In the mean time the unfortunate Blanch was alone in
the Castle condoling the loss of her Grand Master, she understood then (but it
was too late) the difference betwixt her past and her present Captivity: and
the Image of Nugnez stabbed in her presence for her sake, caused such bitter
remorses in her mind, she had much ado to keep her self alive. But we will
leave her to mode her Complaints as she please, and prepare her self for that
Poison which was given her some few days after, to give some relaxation to our
Pen. The principal parts of these Annals having been mentioned before, it ought
to be allowed us to repose after so rapid a Carieer: The rest of the Reign of
Pedro de Castile is so repleat with Murders and Cruelties of all sorts, that I
could not describe them without falling into a Tragical recitation, which I
have always carefully avoided.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE.
THE FIFTH PART.
JOhn Paleologus, Emperor of Greece, surnamed Calos (which in that Language
signifies Fair) lived about two hundred years since. His Son Emanuel being gone
with Supplies to the Emperor of Trebisonde his Ally, whom Mammomas Prince of
Peloponesius had invaded with a formidable Army, fell in Love with the said
Emperors Daughter, and signified his Love to Calo-John. The Father loving his
Son even to Idolatry, was so far from opposing his design, that he sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor of Trebisonde to demand his Daughter for him, and
it was granted; Emanuel was contracted to her, and took her away with him to
Constantinople, where the Ceremony was to be consummate. This Princess was
beloved by the same Mammomas who made War upon her Father; he had likewise
demanded her in Marriage, but was refused, and upon that refusal he betook
himself to his Arms. When he understood that to that rejection they had added
the preference of another, he addressed himself to Amurah II. whose Ally he was,
and who he knew watched for an occasion of making War upon the Greeks: he
conjured him for his assistance, and Amurahs Policy accommodating with the
request, he had a favorable Answer. He dispatched an Envoye to Calo-John to let
him know, that Mammomas had demanded the Infanta, which was contracted to his
Son; that Mammomas being an Ally of the Ottoman Empire, he was obliged to
assist him, and to look upon all such as Enemies that opposed his Designs. This
Declaration was as unjust as unseasonable. Emanuel was to be preferred before
his Rival, in respect of his Dignity; besides the Infanta was within two days
Journey of Constantinople: But the Power of the Turk being so terrible, that
the Emperor of Greece judged it his best way to treat him with all imaginable
Civility. He suspended the Marriage, sent an Ambassador to Amurahs to
represent the pretenses of his Son; and the Infanta being too far advanced to
go back, was conducted to Constantinople, where she remained, as in deposito,
till the Negotiation was ended. Emanuel was much troubled at the protraction of
his happiness; nothing would satisfy him, but he must have Troops assigned him
to go and fight with Armurah; he accused his Father of a compliance and
condescension beneath his degree. But his desires and his murmures were in
vain, there was no remedy but patience. The Infanta (who loved him as ardently
as he loved her) omitted nothing she could think of to comfort him in so
tedious an attendance. She discovered to him in her Eye the extreme tenderness
of her Heart: She studied his looks, and indulged his desires as soon as she
discryed them.

Of all the remedies Nature e're found,
Or Art, to cure a pining Lovers pain;
None cures so well, and closes up the wound
So quick and safe, as to be loved again.
Scorn or suspense to an inflamed desire,
Throw fresh supplies of fuel on it is fire.
He who being loved, does happ' imself confess,
Ceases to love, and spoils his happiness.
Just so it was with the young Prince Emanuel, he began to be so accustomed to
his felicity, and so familiarly with her, she became indifferent to him; there
must be playing at Cards, a great deal of Company, or some other diversion, or
he could not be kept a day together in his Mistresses Chamber; when in the
public Walks the Princess according to her usual manner applied her self
particularly to him, Love had less share in his discourse than the fall of a
Cascade, or the form of a Statue. The Infanta was not long before she
discovered this Change; but those who love exceedingly, are apt to flatter
themselves with the thought that they are beloved again, though never so
little. The Prince having been one day two hours together with the Princess in
the Gardens belonging to the Palace, without speaking one word to her, but of
Flowers and Plants: How long, Sir, said she smiling, is it since you have been
a Florist? have you no other discourse to entertain me with but of them? How
would you have me entertain you, Madam, replied the Prince, all my stock of
Complements and Protestations are exhaust? The Princess blushed at his answer;
but imagining the Prince said it only to sound her, she replied, I shall not
run, Sir, into all the Traps that are laid for me, and you may feign your self
indifferent long enough, before I shall believe it is possible. I am not
indifferent indeed, replied the Prince, I love you as much as I am capable of
loving; but all things, Madam, have their season: the fears and the passions of
other Lovers belong not to us; you ought to believe I love you, and I am very
well satisfied you have no hatred for me; you give me no occasion to be
jealous, and I do few things you are not witness to your self. What is it then
I should discourse of? what have I else to say to you? or what have you else to
demand? Why, Sir, said the Infanta, interrupting him, is it possible you should
speak from your heart? do not you find in your affections an inexhaustible bank
of obliging things to say to me? and can you who have triumphed and boasted of
your great skill in loving well, be ignorant that whatever is spoken by Lovers
to their Mistresses, is always accompanied with some new grace or other to
recommend it? You speak, Madam, like a Lady in a Romance, replied the Prince;
and I should take great pleasure to read your Highnesses Maxims in a Book; but
to practice them, I find very incommodious. Believe me, Madam, we ought to love
like rational Creatures, take that part of it that is agreeable, and leave the
troublesome behind; Fears, and Jealousies, and Emotions have had their time:
it is but reasonable now that Confidence and Tranquillity should have theirs.
Ha! Sir, said the Princess, with tears in her Eyes, then I see you love me no
longer, that confidence and that tranquillity you speak of are incompatible
with true Love. Alas! Sir, continued she, if you be already come to the
indifference and luke-warmness of a Husband, before I am your Wife, what am I
to hope for when our Marriage is consummate? Whether the Prince was not yet
hardened enough to see the tears of the Infanta running down her Cheeks without
compassion; or whether the Title of unconstant gave him some kind of regret,
but he did what he could to pacify his Mistress: He conjured her not to frame
Chymaeras to her self so repugnant to her repose; he protested he loved her
with as much ardour as she could desire. But he being perfectly cured, and Love
having the only power to delineate it self, there was not one action he did,
but gave his protestations the lie. He became gallant and frolic among the
Ladies; he commended them for Beauties before his Mistress, and as the highest
instance of his tranquillity, he neither observed the troubles which he caused,
nor apprehended what he did that could cause them. The Emperors eye was not so
dull, it was not for nothing Nature had made him worthy of the surname of Fair,
he had been always as subject to be in Love with other people as other people
were to be in Love with him, and though History represents him at that time
sixty years old, yet Age undertakes in vain to make defense,
Where Custom has betrayed the Fort before.
Love's an ill habit seizing on the sense,
And the more we'ave loved, making us love the more.


The Emperor sent for his Son, and having remonstrated to him, and rebuked him
for his coldness to the Infanta, he demanded, if he had discovered any new
fault in her, which he perceived not before; if she had betrayed him in any
thing already; or if he apprehended she would do for the future. No, Sir,
replied the Prince, the Infanta is as wise as she is fair, and I have no cause
at all to complain of her proceedings. Why then, said the Emperor, do not you
love her as well as you have dose. It is; Sir, replied the Prince, because
there is nothing eternal here below; do you know, Sir, any thing upon the Earth
but has an end? or can any man instance in an Amor that lasted as long as the
Lover lived? I confess, says the Emperor, there is nothing more common than
variation in Love; but those variations have their Causes, either in the
possession of the thing they love, or in the attraction of some new Mistress:
Can you pretend either of the two? what new Lady is it has captivated you, or
has the Infanta's good Nature permitted your Love to advance so far, that it is
at its achme, and must of necessity decline? No, Sir, replied the Prince, I
have neither of those reasons to pretend; the Infanta is virtuous, and I must
needs say deserves to be better beloved: but, Sir, no man is master of his own
sentiments, and it is as vain as unjust for a Mistress to call her Servant to
an account for inconstancy; as we love many times in spite of our teeths, so
we cool and abate in our Loves, and sometimes give quite over without any
reasonable cause. However, replied the Emperor, for a passion to stop in the
middle of its Cariere, as yours has done, is a thing I have not heard of
before: whether it be more, or whether it be less, you love the Infanta still,
though but indifferently, and that indifference is but the effect of some
extraordinary kindness she has shown you which has satiated your desires. I
beseech you, Sir, replied Emanuel, do not trouble your self with those
apprehensions, I am nothing at all of what you think, and nothing else but what
I tell you; I have not those violent passions and inquietudes I formerly have
had, but it is only because I fancy them unseasonable; I look upon my self now
as the Master of the Infanta's affections, she has no Intrigue, nor Jealousy,
I tell her what I please, I see her when I please, and I am assured I shall
possess her: whence then should I derive my apprehensions? what reason have I
to lie sobbing, and counting the minutes, when I can speak to her when ever I
desire? why should I be jealous, when I am satisfied I have no Rival? Take away
these emotions from Love, the case will be mine, and nothing remaining but what
is in me. The Emperor was transported to hear his discourse; yet it was not
without regret for fear he should return: This coolness of yours, Son, replied
the Emperor very slyly, can never last long; those who are accustomed to the
pleasures of Love, cannot so easily renounce them, it is hard for one to clear
himself of the secret transports, the amorous disquiets, the fears, the
impatiences; and in a word, the whole train of indispensable consequences which
attend upon that passion; they do so pleasantly possess the Soul they inhabit,
the very want of them is troublesome, when the passion ceases. On the contrary,
Sir, replied Emanuel interrupting him, I must tell you (if it be lawful for me
to be of an opinion opposite to yours) that the Effects of Love which create
that violence in the beginning, hastens, may precipitate the Cure; when a Lover
is but once arrived at this, that he can look soberly upon his Love, I cannot
imagine how it was possible my reason could dispense with the extravagancies I
have committed: I am ashamed of my former Errors, and I do now find them a
great corroboration to my Philosophy. Not, Sir, but I am resolved to marry the
Infanta of Trebisonde, because I have promised it, and I dare promise you to
live with her as you will desire: But I beseech you, Sir, oblige me no farther
than the Civilties and Formalities of a Husband; the ardencies and violences of
Love are not to be expected from me. This was a point the Emperor had no
design to press upon his Son, and therefore he left him without expostulating
farther, and forming his hopes upon what he had told him, he clapped such persons
about the Infanta, as were buzzing perpetually into her Ears, That the Emperor
was not troubled with any of the incommodities of old age; That in Activity and
Courtship he out-did all the rest of his Court, and, That doubtless he was so
vigorous and strong, his Son was like to languish a long time, before he could
expect to arrive at the Empire. To these discourses (which were delivered as it
were by accident) they added more positive. The Prince gave no tokens of his
indifference to the Infanta, but the Emperor made her sensible of them; if he
left her, as it happened often, to speak to another Lady; What an Age do we
live in, Madam, would he cry: in my time it was esteemed a Crime to lose the
least moment a man could dedicate to his Mistress, we thought we had never time
enough to speak our affections: and when Emanuel contradicted his Mistress in
any thing, Do you believe, would he say, that when I was a young man, it would
have been permitted a Servant should have been of one mind, and his Mistress on
another? no certainly, their Love or their Breeding was better than so, and
when I was at the age of Emanuel, if I should have been guilty of doing that
once, which he practices continually, I should have been thought the most giddy
and inconstant Lover in the World. How! said he another time, does Emanuel
converse with other Ladies in your presence, and I not find his Eye upon you
all the time of his discourse? Believe me, Madam, said he, you must discipline
this young man, and teach him his duty a little better, his felicity besots
him, and you will lose him in time, if you give him not now and then a quarter
of an hours experience of your rigor. The Princess made use several times of
Calo-Johns advice, but without any success: The Prince was never the more fond
for those kind of Artifices; he found the Infanta always sweet enough upon him
to serve his turn, and when she was angry, it concerned him less than when she
was kind. As he was in this disposition, the Emperor had advice that Mammomas
having insinuated with certain Lords of a Province belonging to the Empire, not
far from Peloponessus, had debauched them to a Revolt: He sent the Prince
Emanuel with an Army to reduce them, and in his absence declaring to the
Princess what he understood of the indifferencies of his Son, he knew so well
how to represent to her the resentment a discreet Woman ought to conceive, when
she finds her self despised by her Husband, and described all the Discourses he
had held with his Son, so exactly, that he found he had stirred up her
indignation before he was aware. The Letters she received from Emanuel, did not
a little confirm the suggestions of his Father: They contained nothing but
indifferent relations; and if indispensable Civility caused him to mention any
thing of Love, it was so flat and insipid, it was easily to be discerned he did
it by constraint. One would have thought he had apprehended the vigilance of
some jealous person; he expressed his desires so indifferently, one would have
thought his prudence had retained the best half of his mind. He forgot himself
one day so far in his tranquillities, that he gave a most excellent Character
of Mammomas to the Infanta, not considering he was his Rival, and such a Rival
as had been able to keep him from the possession of his Mistress. This is too
much, cried the Princess, when she read the Letter, the Prince at length tires
out my patience, and I shall be reproacht all Greece over as an insensible
person, if knowing how Emanuel uses me, I let him not understand again that I
am not ignorant of ways to revenge my self. And this resolution was no sooner
taken than executed. The Infanta told the Emperor, that she was at last grown
weary of the Princes neglects; that she would dye a thousand deaths before she
would marry him; and that she was come to acquaint him, she would sacrifice her
self, before she would submit to the Conditions of the Treaty. This was it the
Emperor designed: he commended her resentment, protested the deportment of his
Son was no less ungrateful to his Ears than to hers, and wishing with all his
heart he had been of an age to make her reparation himself, he solicited her
to vengeance so hard, that at length she listened to his Proposals. She writ a
Letter to the Emperor of Trebisonde by agreement with Calo-John; the Packet
was delivered into the hands of an Agent, very faithful to the Emperor, and of
a Wit as considerable as his fidelity. It would be requisite to delineate
Calo-John exactly as he was at that time, to make the Reader conceive all that
Love is able to make a man of his age do. He brake the brains of all the
Officers of his Chamber to invent him new dresses; he trusted none but his own
Eyes in the choice of the Colors he wore, and passing whole hours in
conversation with his Glass; What think thou, Calo-John, said he to himself,
how do thou like this Figure in the Glass? this Complexion, is it not fine?
these Eyes, are they not soft and well made? they are not so sparkling indeed,
as when I was young; but in Love the softness and sweetness of the Eye does
more execution many times, than the quickness and vivacity: What say you to
this Shape, this Leg, this whole Contexture? said he, marching two or three
steps with great magnificence. Ha! Calo-John, it is not for nothing the Infanta
of Trebisonde prefers you to your Son; thou art a thousand times handsomer and
more desirable than he, and this Election of the Princess is an effect of the
solidity of her Judgment, rather than a token of her anger. Whilst the Emperor
was pleasing himself in this manner in his own Efficacy and Merits, his Son had
reduced the Rebels to the Terms his Father desired, and there being nothing
left to detain him longer upon the Frontiers, he returned to Constantinople
with the same serenity he departed. He found the Princess much colder to him
than formerly, and the Emperor more spruce, but he did not concern himself for
either; he was glad to find the Princess no more troublesome, and did not dive
into the fineness of his Father. He recounted his Exploits to his Mistress in
the same style he had writ them; and she told him (Ironically) she was much
obliged to him for the description he had given her of Mammomas; that she had a
great honor for his qualities, and that she did not believe when she vanquished
his heart, she had had so illustrious a Captive. Our Lover being hardened, took
all in the literal sense, and justified every tittle he had mentioned in his
Letter: A good way to moderate the transport of a Mistress at the return of her
Servant. The Infanta's indignation increased every hour, and the affairs of the
Emperor went better and better. He failed not to ply her with thanks, both by
Letters, and word of Mouth; and supposing his acknowlegments would be more
eloquent in Verse than in Prose, he rubbed up his old fancy for a Paper of good
Verses. Our Memoires do not represent them in a style a la mode, as to their
Art or Invention, but his ardour and sincerity is conspicuous in them to this
day. One time when he had outdone himself in the expression of the felicity he
promised to himself, the Princess by ill Fortune dropped the Paper before the
Prince, who taking it up, had a Curiosity to read it contrary to his Custom,
but the Infanta discerning what it was; Do not read it, Sir, said she to him,
they are Love-Verses. Emanuel smiled, and not believing what she said, I am
sufficiently your Friend, Madam, replied he, to be entrusted with your Secrets;
and having said those words, opened the Paper. The Princess clapped her hand upon
it, and told him, you do not believe me, and yet I Will assure you I say true:
Yes, said the Prince, interrupting her a little angerly, I do believe you, it
may be some body makes Love to you: but I will see, by your favor, after what
manner he does it; who-ever it be, he is something audacious, and has chosen an
ill field to engage in; and then forcing the Paper from the Infanta, and
knowing it to be the Emperors hand; How, says he smiling, is it the Emperor
in truth? let us see if he can make Love as well now as of old.

When my poor heart's already laid
In dust, for Love of gentle Maid,
What boots it to call out for aid?
My blood burnt up, my vigor spent,
Mine Enemy omnipotent,
What boots it, boots it, to lament?
And yet methinks my hopes contend,
And still inculcate, mark the end,
Your enemy shall prove your friend.
Ah! gentle hopes don't flatter me,
I should (should I that minute see)
Happier than in my Empire be.
Emanuel thought the Emperor had but jested before, and looking upon it as a
design of the Infanta's to make him jealous, he laughed in his sleeve at the
innocence of the project. But when he perceived the Emperor was in earnest, he
began as seriously to be displeased; Sure, said he, the Affairs of the Empire
are but very few, when the Emperor can have leisure to employ himself about
such trifles. You did not formerly, replied the Infanta, call the marks you
gave me of your passion, Trifles? It is not the same case, replied the Prince,
I was in Love, Calo-John is not. He believes he is, more than you, and truly I
am of opinion it will last longer. Emanuel thought the Princess had jested, and
yet that kind of jesting he did not like; he went to wait upon the Emperor,
and showing him the Verses he had taken from the Princess; I beseech you, Sir,
said he, will you divert your self some other way, than by writing these
Love-things to the Infanta of Trebisonde; I know it is but in sport, and that
you have no intention to be serious; but they may accustom her to them, and she
be brought by degrees to receive them from some body else: and you know, Sir, a
man cannot be too cautious in things of that nature. That care, replied the
Emperor (without any emotion) belongs to me, I shall have such an eye over her
Conduct, you shall not need to trouble your self at all. I confess, Sir,
replied the Prince, as you are my Father, the deportment of her who is designed
to be my Wife, may concern you; yet that concern is but small, in comparison of
what a Husband ought to have. I know all those differences Emanuel, said the
Emperor, and therefore I tell you, you need not trouble your self. How
unlikely soever it was, the Emperor should be enamored of the Princess who
was contracted to his Son, the Prince knowing his Fathers temper, conceived
violent suspicions thereof. He returned immediately to the Princess, and
perceiving his old flames to rise out of this spark of Jealousy; Could it be
possible, Madam, said he to the Princess, that the Verses you let fall, and I
took up, should have been written in earnest? Why, Madam, and would you receive
Propositions of Love from my Father? Yes, Sir, replied the Infanta, I would do
any thing might rescue me from your disdain; you have made it, Sir, too
manifest, and my patience would not have been any longer the effect of my
fidelity, but of a baseness without excuse or example. Emanuel was startled at
these words, as if they had been Thunder. I did not believe, Madam, said he to
the Infanta, you could have taken the marks of right reason for disdain, they
being always the infallible consequences of a declared Love. I looked upon you
always as a discreet Lady, and thought it would be more acceptable to you, if I
behaved my self as a Husband before you were my Wife, than to have changed my
deportment afterward: But, Madam, since I see you are not of my mind, I must
hereafter serve you according to your own; return to me, and I shall return to
every thing that will please you, you have no more to do, but to make the Laws,
and it shall be my care to obey them all, Madam, but renouncing my interest in
you. Anger is a cheat, and seldom as good as its promise: The Infanta had
reason indeed, and was really angry with Emanuel; he had neglected her, he had
given her a thousand indications of the declension of his Love, and he had
added discourse to his actions; Nevertheless when she saw him submit, and
repent, and remembered that he was the same Prince she had loved so entirely
before, her Choler was dissipated, she forgot what she ought to the hopes of
the Emperor, and the declarations she had made to him, and she began to renew
her Commerce with the Prince upon new Conditions, when Calo-John entered into
her Chamber. He had Advertisement that Emanuel was gone to make the Infanta a
Visit, and was not ignorant that Love was capable of Reconciliation. Did not I
tell you this morning, said he very hastily to his Son, you need not trouble
your self any farther for any thing relating to the Princess, for I my self
would take that care upon me; How comes it then, Emanuel, your eye is still so
vigilant over her? I thought, Sir, replied the Prince, I had been obliged to
have a care over her, both by your order, and the Emperors her Fathers. Those
Orders were given long since, replied Calo-John, but now they are out of doors.
You told me your self you had no passion for the Princess, and that you would
not marry her for any other reason but because you had promised. I am so good a
Father, I will not hold you to that promise; I understand Marriage very well,
and I know it is as much as one can do to live contentedly with a Woman that he
loves, how then can you expect to live well with one you do not love at all?
The Prince would have replied, and protested he loved the Infanta as well as he
ever did in his life: but the Emperor who had no mind to those kind of
protestations, interrupted him, and commanded him to be gone. The Command
seemed something harsh, the Prince endeavored to disobey, and replies, growing
hot: the Prince let fall some words, which were not perhaps exactly according
to the Rules of Respect, whereupon the Emperor caused him to be seized: And
this point of rigor recalled all the kindness the Infanta had ever had for
him; she prayed, she pressed, and her importunity increased rather than
extenuated his Crime: Love took up his rest now in the heart of the Princess;
she repented she ever had repented, and would not endure to hear the Emperors
pretensions so much as mentioned any longer. In the mean time whilst things
were in this posture, an Envoye arrived from the Emperor of Trebisond: The
said Emperor, Father to the Infanta, had been much troubled to consent to the
Exchange; he was a severe Prince, and his resolutions immovable: Nevertheless
the dexterity of the Agent was such, he was overpowered, and consented that
the Princess should marry Calo-John, but it was with such express Order to
change no more, that the Princess durst never disobey: And to complete the
ruin of Emanuels Affairs, Mammomas being by Amurath suspected of an
Intelligence with a Prince of Transylvania, who refused to admit him for his
Sovereign; the Turkish Emperor deserted him, and left him to Calo-John to be
infested as he pleased. In short, he married the Infanta of Trebisond,
notwithstanding all the opposition she made; her Father commanded it, the
Emperor was absolute, and Princesses of her Rank are but Sacrifices to Policy
and Convenience, insomuch that Nature would have very much obliged the greatest
part of them, had she brought them into the World without hearts: It is not to
be expressed the rage Emanuel conceived at the News of this Wedding, but the
effects which insued may in some measure discover it. He escaped out of Prison,
implored the Assistance of Amurath, and conducting him as it were by the hand
to the Throne Imperial of Greece, he gave the fatal blow to that flourishing
Empire; for which Frenzy he was sufficiently punished himself by the
ingratitude of the Turk, who not keeping one tittle of all the promises he had
made him, caused him to end his days miserably without his eyes, and without
any other Dignity than a private place among his Janisaries: and the great
Grecian Empire escaped no better than he. But the Divine Justice which revenged
Calo-John for the evils his Sons fury had brought upon him, has not as yet
revenged the infidelity of their common Tyrant.

The Order we have observed hitherto in our Chronology, Amedy Duke of Savoye.
conducts us insensibly to the Occurrences in the Life of Amade Duke of Savoy,
whom some people call Ame, a Person so well known in History by the name of
Felix the Antipope. He was of an amorous Complexion, and (it frequently
happening that the Courtiers are the Apes of the Actions of their Princes)
those which were performed by this Duke, were immediately followed by the whole
Court: So that he being Voluptuous, his Court became a very School of Luxury
and Debauchedness. All Offices and Honors were conferred according to their
amorous Exploits, and Love becoming the Standard of Merit, such as were the
most susceptible of that passion, were most gracious with their Prince: For
these reasons and such other, the Marquess of Savona was in particular Favor:
He was not the Dukes Subject, but had so linked himself to him by his good
Services, that he was become the Depository of his Secrets, the Dispencer of
his Graces, and the Companion of his Debauches. One night as they were marched
together to visit a Lady (some few Leagues from Turin) for whom the Duke had a
great kindness, and the Marquess managed the affair, they lost themselves in a
Wood through which they were to pass, and at last found themselves at a House
belonging to the Count de la Moriene: This Count had several years before
banished himself voluntarily from the Court; he had received a wound at the
beginning of this Dukes Reign, which had almost taken away his Eyes, and having
not thought himself rewarded for so important a loss, he retired into the
Country where he lived very privately. Some indispensable Affairs having called
him to a House he had near Turin, he was obliged to make a Visit there, and was
returned some few hours before the Duke lost himself, and was brought thither:
When Amede and his Favorite discovered that House, they resolved to repose
themselves, it was late, they had wandered a long time, and were something wet
with the Rain. The Marquess clapped Spurs to inquire whose House, but when he was
told it belonged to the Marquess de la Moriene, and that he was at home, he
returned to the Duke to let him know they must march on, for that Count was an
old Stoic, who would not fail to wipe them for being abroad, and in that
Equipage so late: We must conceal my Name then, replied Amede, his sight is not
very good, he has not been this long time at the Court, I have but few of my
Guards about me, and they no Liveries or other Marks to discover them: Ha! Sir,
replied the Marquess, Sovereigns are not to be concealed in their own
Countries, a Picture, the meeting of a Servant that has seen you in the
streets of Turin, the respect your own Equipage will show you and in short, a
thousand little things will discover to the Count, that you are the Duke of
Savoye. Well, if he does, replied the Duke, that inconvenience is less than to
be drowned in the Rain, or break ones Neck off of ones Horse. If the Count
knows me, I will be even with him for some Censures I have heard of his; and if
he does not, reposing a while at his House, we shall be the better afterward
to proceed in our Journey; upon which the Duke spurred on to the Counts house,
and commanding his Retinue to take no notice who he was, he pretended to be one
of the little Princes of Italy, with which that Country swarms. It was not out
of Honor or Concernment for the Duke, that the Marquess of Savona had no mind
to repose at this place. The Count de la Moriene had a handsome Lady to his
Wife, which was related to the Marquess, and with whom, the History says, there
was more than one kind of proximity. By reason of the morosity of her Husband,
she never came to Court; but she pretended business now and then at her house
by Turin, where the Marquess would meet her. He doubted not but she was then
with her Husband, and knowing how ready the Duke was to take fire, he had a
strong apprehension he would be smitten with the Countess. Word was carried in
to the Count de Moriene, that a Person of Quality desired to see him, and that
the Marquess of Savona, his Wifes Cousin, was of the Company, he came forth
himself to receive them. He presented them with what the time of night, and the
small time the Count had been there, could afford, and whilst they were at
their Repast, Amedy having declared that he was making a Visit to the Duke of
Savoye, and had mistaken his way Turin, the Count interrupted him, and told
him, You had best, Sir, be sure the Duke be there, before you go thither your
self, for he is seldom to be found where he ought to be looked for; his
pleasures invite him to so many places, where one would never expect to find
him, that without good store of Scouts it is no easy matter to discover him.
You know the Duke, replied the Marquess something hastily, but by other peoples
report, you have seen him your self so little for these feveral years, you can
say nothing upon your own knowledge; were you better acquainted with him, you
would not speak at that rate. It is not necessary to see ones Sovereign, to
know him, replied the Count, we judge of them by their actions, of which they
have so many Witnesses, the report of them is not to be kept out of the most
remote or obscure part of their Dominions; and then thundering out a long
Declamation against Amedy and his Reign, there was not a Libel, or a mutinous
Expression that escaped him. The Marquess could give him no sign to restrain
him; for the Count had an infirmity in his Eyes, and could not perceive him.
The Regale was something rare for the Duke; and as is to be supposed wanted no
seasoning. People which are satiated with pleasures, are commonly very eloquent
in decrying them. The Countess entered as the Philosopher was in the midst of
his Ethics, and the Duke not being so much unknown to her, as to her purblind
Husband, there was not an Apology of which she made not use to excuse the
Error of the Count. The old Stoic could not without great difficulty be
brought to so much as to counterfeit Repentance, he declared that the Equipage
of the Duke of Savoye gave Authority to all he could say; that it would be well
for that Prince if he had such Adventures oftener, and applauded himself in what
he had done, as it had been the best action of his life; all the Remonstrances
of the Marquess, and all the entreaties of the Countess were little enough to
persuade him to ask pardon: and he did well to be so difficult, for all they
importuned him to, was to no purpose; the Duke found the Countess too handsome
to pardon her Husband. When he was departed, and found himself at liberty to
deliver his thoughts: Ha! Savona, cried he, how charming is this Countess? how
could you forbear boasting of her Beauty till now? and knowing my inclination
to handsome Ladies, why have you not solicited me to send for her to Court? I
did not perceive, Sir, there was any want of her there, replied the Marquess
something gravely: there were so many Ladies already handsomer than she, I
thought she would not be desired. Do you say, said the Duke to him a little
short, there is any thing in Savoye handsomer than the Countess? Yes, Sir,
without doubt, replied the Marquess, the Lady you are going to visit, is in my
Eye much handsomer. You know not what is Beauty then, replied the Duke, or you
do not consider what you say: there is nothing upon the Earth so amiable as the
Countess, I must have her to Turin, the temerity of her Husband has given me
occasion to cause him to be arrested; and his Wife will not fail to solicit
for his liberty: let us haste back again to put this Artifice in execution, I
have no further business with the Lady I was going to see, for the Countess de
la Moriene has at present the whole possession of my Soul. These words were as
so many mortal wounds in the heart of the amorous Marquess. He conjured the
Duke to remember that the Countess was his Kinswoman, and not to make such a
breach on the favors wherewith he had honored him; he alleged that it would
be believed at Court, his Credit and Influence upon his Highness was lost, when
it should be seen that the Husband of so near a Relation of his, was treated
with that rigor. What he has said of me, replied the Duke, ought to render
him odious to all that love me: and you ought to have been the first to have
demanded his punishment. Besides, Savona, the design I have imparted to you
ought not to alarm your punctilioes of Consanguinity, you may be sure I will do
your Kinswoman no harm, I will rescue her out of a Desert, where she cannot but
live with much trouble and reluctance; I will give her the choice of all things
a witty Woman ought to Ambition; and if she understands how to manage her own
Fortune, what you look upon as the unhappiness of the Count, will prove at last
the Establishment of his Family. As he resolved, so he did: he sent to the
Count de la Moriene's House to apprehend him; he caused him to be committed to
a Tower, where his greatest Prisoners were usually disposed; and that he might
he more commodiously enjoy the solicitations of the Countess, he retired for
some time to the Castle of Thonon, situate upon the Lake of Leman, it being a
Country House in which he principally delighted. The Imprisonment of the Count
de Moriene made a terrible noise in the Court of Savoy. Such as were rigid and
morose condemned it exceedingly, and called it no less than violence and
injustice. Some whose penetration was better than their Neighbors, suspected
the true cause, whilst others who were guided by their Interest, continued
their respect, alleging he did well to punish the insolence of that man, That
in the actions of Sovereigns all things were to be regarded as the Conduct of
Providence; that that which was ungrateful to their Subjects, might have a
higher cause than they could comprehend, and that God Almighty would not have
subjected so many to the power of one man, had not he resolved to take
particular care to direct him. In the mean time the Countess de la Moriene
repairs with all speed to Thonon, as the Duke had prudently foreseen. The
Marquess went out to receive her, and entreated she would be pleased to accept
of his Appartment. When she was arrived, Well, Madam, said he, you are now at
Thonon? the Court must be your ordinary Residence; the Deserts where my Love
found you out first, must have the honor of possessing you no longer, and the
effects of your Beauty has given you the same authority with the Duke, as you
had before with the Marquess of Savona only. What do you mean by effects of
Beauty, replied the Countess, and authority with the Duke? Are these the marks
of his kindness, which make you jealous? Ha! Madam, replied the Marquess, you
are not yet acquainted with the Intrigue, the Duke was in Love with you as soon
as ever he saw you; your Husbands offense is but a pretense to get you hither,
and the Count de la Moriene had never been a Prisoner, but that you might be
forced to solicit for his enlargement.

Whenever man does for himself intend,
And counts the minutes tedious till it fall.
Nature and sense gives warning of his friend,
And, above all things, bids not trust at all.
However easie't be, it is prudence still,
To make ones own design impossible.
The Countess gave no Credit at first to the Marquesses Discourse, she imagined
it nothing but the artificial terror of a prying Lover, to whom every thing
gives occasion of Jealousy; and not thinking of any thing but the business she
came about, she desired the Marquess to present her to the Duke. The Duke
received her very supercilliously, the better to play the part of an offended
Sovereign, and gave her just cause to tell the Marquess he was mistaken in his
Conjecture, and that an amorous Person as he had represented himself, could not
be capable of so much austery. But not long after meeting her at the Countess
of Geneva's, his Sisters House, he took her into a Terrace to show her the
Prospect: And to speak truth the pretense was well laid, for doubtless it is
one of the best and most pleasant in the World. The first Object which presents
it self is the Lake of Leman, with two or three Villages upon the side of it,
from whence expatiating upon certain Mountains, some of them barren, others
more beholden to Nature, but all covered with Snow; it begins to abate upon the
ruins of a Triumphal Arch, which seem as left there on purpose to make that
Prospect superlative. The Countess having observed all of them with a most
judicious discernment, gave the Duke an opportunity as he desired himself. A
Lady that could not so well have distinguished the pleasures of this Province,
as you have done, Madam, said he to her, would have preferred this Prospect
before the insociable Walks of a solitary Wood, and yet you, Madam, are not of
that opinion, for I dare lay a Wager, the Castles of the Count de la Moriene
please you much better, than the place where you are. I am contented, Sir,
wherever Fortune disposes me, replied the Countess, I have always been told
we must conform to her humor and Capricio, if we would live quietly without
agitation, and therefore, Sir, as she has hitherto given me to understand I am
born for the Castles of the Count de la Moriene, and not for Thonnon, I must
confess to your Higness one of my greatest Requests to her is, that I may
obtain a sudden dismission, and return to my old Deserts again. But, Madam,
replied the Prince, if this Fortune you speak of should cause you to change
your Deserts for the Court, would you appeal from her Decrees? and
notwithstanding your inclination and promptitude to live with the Count, could
you not be as happy with the Duke of Savoy? I never, Sir, create Chimeras to my
self, replied the Countess, I am ordained to live with the Count de la Moriene,
and not to such Honor as your Highness proposes: suffer me, I beseech you, to
bound my desires with my power. You know not your self how far your power
extends, Madam, replied the Duke, I know the effects of it much better than
you; and if your desires be accordingly, you shall have as much felicity in
having captivated the Duke of Savoy to your Charms, as you had power to do it:
You do but sport your self, Sir, with my misfortunes, replied the Countess, and
add your mirth to the calamity of my Husbands imprisonment. If, Madam, replied
the Prince, you believe not what I say, I must give you a Witness, and then
calling the Marquess of Savona to him, who was about four paces off, so mad and
transported with Jealousy, he was a hundred times ready to run in, and
interrupt them. He commanded him to tell the Countess what he knew of his
affection for her; If it was not true that he loved her at first sight, that
ever since it has daily increased, and that now it was at that height, there
was nothing in his power but she might promise her self from its violence. It
was a hard task for Savona to assure his Mistress of the Love of his Rival: He
did all that was possible to have evaded it; he told the Duke there was no need
of further evidence where he had affirmed, for his own assertion was above all
other Authority. No, no, replied the Prince; it is not an Elogy I desire at your
hands, tell me sincerely without these Prologues, what you know of my Love. His
Command was so positive, and incapable of delay, he was forced to speak and
tell whatever the Duke pleased the Couness should know. This Discourse was made
with so much constraint, the Marquess is to be excused in whatever he said; but
the Countess taking it in dudgeon, reproacht him by his Compliance in most
biting and acrimonious terms. You ought, said she to him Ironically, your self
have delivered me up to the desires of the Duke, there wanted nothing but that
excess of obedience, for you to have discharged your self honorably; you were
the first who brought me the News of Amedy's Love; your perpetual suspicions
assure me of its perseverance, and that he might be sure not to be ignorant
that you had told me, you confirm in his presence, what you told me in private,
Complete all, good Marquess of Savona, and go and tell him the ways you took to
surprise me your self, you owe that confidence to the benefits of so
incomparable a Master. The Marquess alleged several Arguments in his defense,
but he could not prevail with her to admit them: As one is always innocent,
whilst he pleases, so when he begins to displease, he is always to blame. The
Countess had taken up a fancy, that the Marquess was culpable; and to perfect
the ruin of his affairs, Amedy having Intelligence that the Emperor Sigismond
was at Lions, sent the Marquess of Savona thither, to make his Complements from
him. The Duke was obliged to him for the Erection of Savoy into a Duchy, which
carried the Title only of a County, till the said Emperors Journey into France
in the year 1416. and could not do less than testify his acknowledgments by
that Embassy; and this Commission being one of the most honorable in Amedy's
donation, he cast his eyes upon his Favorite as the most proper Person to
receive it. At another time he would have accepted it with thanks, but then he
looked upon it as the fatal period of his Amors. He would fain have expressed his
apprehensions to the Countess, and have conjured her to have opposed them; but
she cut him short still with this, Have you not promised the Duke, said she
smiling, to come and tell me from him, that he is resolved to take the
advantage of your absence, and that it is upon that design you are sent away? I
remember when first you told me of his Love, you did it with some pretenses of
fear, and I expect to see you called in for a Witness at your return, of all
you are pleased to communicate so slyly at your departure. Ha! Madam, cried the
Marquess of Savona, you know at your heart with what design I declared the Duke
of Savoys Love to you at first, and with what design I now desire you to be
cautious of its progress. I know no more, replied the Countess, but that very
imprudently you told me Amedy was in Love with me; that since you have
confirmed it before his face, and that now you prognosticate your destruction.
If I may judge of your Prophecy by what is past, this pretended destruction is
concluded already betwixt the Duke and you, and you do but prepare me as to an
infallible thing. A Farewell with so little kindness, ought not to leave the
heart of the Countess so well fortified, as to resist the Attaques of the Duke
of Savoy, and therefore she suffered her self to be vanquished without any
considerable resistance; the talk of the World was her greatest discouragement,
and the Duke wanting neither Examples nor Expedients to dissipate that scruple,
the Marquess found the Treaty very far advanced at his return. The Duke,
according to his custom, did him the honor to communicate even this Intrigue
with him; he told him the Countess has conjured me to say nothing of it to
you, and whether she fancies you severe as to the deportment of your Kindred,
or whether being oftener exposed to your sight, than other people, she is
unwilling to put her self upon a hazard of blushing every time she sees you,
but she seems to be more apprehensive of you, than of all the rest of the
Court: But, my dear Savona, you are much better known to me than to the
Countess, and I should rob you of a greater pleasure, I am sure, if I should
suffer you to be ignorant, that in three or four days time my desires will be
perfectly satisfied. The Marquess was so discomposed at this discourse, it had
like to have betrayed him. Do you say, Sir, replied he, that within three or
four days you shall enjoy the Countess de la Moriene? Yes, said the Duke, and I
had enjoyed her before this, had she not very prudently judged, that (to put
the better face upon my coming to visit her) it would be necessary to
counterfeit her self ill, and she pretends to be ill at this very moment; my
Physician has order to give out her life is in danger, and my Sister
commiserating the report, is to be the first that shall tell me the Countess is
sick with grief upon her Husbands Imprisonment, and that I owe so much to her
Quality and Sex, as to bestow one consolatory Visit upon her, to recompense in
some sort the affliction I have given her. Is it possible? just Heavens!
replied the Marquess, according to the sudden dictates of his thoughts. How
now! whence this astonishment, cried the Duke, interrupting him, did you
believe the Enterprise more difficult, or had the Countess reason, when she
suspected your niceness about the purity of your blood? No, Sir, replied
Savona, recollecting himself; but I believed the Conquest as troublesome as
glorious, and in the passion I have for your interests, cannot but admire the
Countess should be conquered so cheap. Nay, replied Amedy, I found her high
enough of her self; but a Prince of my Quality and Age, ought not to meet with
one moments resistance. When a Sovereign Prince is born, it is to command all
that are about him, and I am resolved for the future to put the Ladies of Savoy
into a more commodious posture, than they at present are in. Having spoke these
words, the Duke left him, and went to see the Countess of Geneva; the Marquess
retired to his own Appartment, so confused and transported with rage, I cannot
without crime repeat the flagitious designs he had at that time in his head. He
would go to the treacherous Countess, reproach her by her Treason, and if he
could not hinder the execution of her promise, he resolved to stab her, even
before the face of the Duke: Sometimes he would steal her away, sometimes kill
himself; and if any thing worse presented it self to his thoughts, he would do
it immediately: But his reason at length overcoming these effluctions, he
concluded to deliver the Count de la Moriene, if he could, and cause him to
carry away his Wife. The design is too large to be particularized here, but the
execution was not so difficult as might have been imagined. Since the Countess
became tractable, her Husband was not guarded with that strictness as before:
The Duke who understood himself well enough, and had caused the said Count to
be arrested upon a reason which was almost effected, considered he should not
keep him long in Prison: He loved only upon the common design, and it was with
him as with the greatest part of his Sex, his felicity was never at any great
distance from his disgust. The Countess lodged in the Marquesses Appartment,
and Thonnon was rather a House of Pleasure than Defense. The Marquess made an
excuse to Thurin; he visited the Count de la Moriene, acquainted him with what
had passed, and giving him a true notion of the danger his life and Fortune
were in, they agreed upon the ways, and what Refuge the Count was to take. The
Officer who guarded the Prisoner, was one of the Marquess his Creatures, to
whom (as many others did also) he ought both his place and his life. Things
being so well disposed at Thurin, the Marquess returned to Thonnon; he placed
more of his Creatures at the door of the Appartment where the Countess lay,
which opened into a Garden from whence they might easily make the Lake; he
ordered these people to open this door upon a Signal agreed betwixt the Count
and he; he had taken care to have a Boat provided, and lie ready till they
came. The business succeeded as well as they could desire, the Count was
delivered out of Prison, and brought privately one night into his Wifes
Chamber; he acquainted her that from very good hands he had Intelligence the
Duke had ill designs upon her Person; he pretended to be persuaded she knew not
of them her self. supposing a positive charge might have affrighted her too
much; and commanding her to follow, she saw so much in the old man's face that
he would be obeyed, that she durst neither cry out nor contest. He conveyed her
to the Bark, and from the Water, in a Coach well guarded; the Marquess having
placed fresh Guards at convenient distances. When he judged the Fugitives too
far off to be overtaken, he was the first that carried the News to the Prince:
I always thought, said he to him, the Conquest of the Countess was too cheap to
be certain; she has pretended to comply, to delude your Highness with the more
security; and would scarce have been so tractable, but to compass her designs
without suspicion: she has got her Husband out of Prison, and has so
contrived it, she has made him steal away her. It is not to be expressed the
trouble this relation gave Amedy; he caused all his Family to mount immediately
and pursue: Bring me, said he, alive or dead that impudent Fellow, who after he
had so highly offended me, durst be so audacious as to break Prison himself,
and out of my own House force away his Wife, whom I had kept there as a Hostage
for him, he shall perish, and all his Accomplices, though my own Son were in
the number. From these public discourses passing to private, Do not you think
me the unhappiest man alive, Savona, said the Prince to his Favorite, to lose
this Woman the very night before I was to enjoy her? To morrow, to morrow, my
dear Marquess, my desires should have been satisfied, she would have consented,
and the very moment was appointed for that blessed Enterview. Do you not
perceive, Sir, replied the Marquess, that she consented no further, but to make
her pretended consent ineffectual at last? Ha! Savona, Savona, cried the Duke,
she consented in good earnest, I know it by the motions and variations of her
countenance, she loved me entirely, and I date swear the poor Woman was carried
away in spite of her teeth, would you had seen with what kindness she received
the assurances of my passion; and what protestations she made me of her own.
These words touched the Marquess to the Soul, he had need of all his temper and
ambition, to restrain himself from breaking out; and had not the consideration
of the condition of his Rival qualified his anger, there had been nothing so
desperate but he would have attempted. In the mean time, those who were sent
after the Countess, contrary to the Marquesses presumption, overtook her: Their
Coach had been overturned; they had had some other disasters in their Equipage:
and the Countess leaving Thonnon much against her will, had counterfeited her
self ill so artificially, that all the Frontier were stopped, before the Count
could get at them They were arrested upon the Frontiers of Dauphin, where the
Count had designed his retreat. When he understood the Dukes Guards inquired
for him, he barricadoed himself in the Inn, resolved to perish before he would
surrender. The persons sent after him, having express Orders to bring him dead
or alive, never stood upon Complements, they pressed him so close, there was no
possibility of escaping: and those who are far gone in Stoicism, being not far
from Barbarity, the Count took up a resolution suitable to the fierceness of
his own Nature, and his hatred for Amedy. He killed the fair Countess, and
stabbed himself when he had done.

Let the Reader imagine, if he pleases, the transport the Duke was in at this
horrible News. He said, and he did things very inconsistent with his Dignity;
but that which gave the highest tincture to his despair, was, to understand
that it was his dear Favorite, the Marquess of Savona, had given him this bob.
The Count reproaching the Countess by the way, had let fall some words which
assured her of the truth, which words she had writ down in her Table Book
(found in her Pocket after she was dead) with design to send them by the first
opportunity to the Duke. The Prince, finding himself betrayed, to satisfy his
Revenge, used all the means a just indignation and an absolute power could
invent. He caused the Marquess to be stabbed, he confiscated the Count de la
Morienes Estate, and annexed it to his demeasness: and not being able ever after
to be reconciled to the World, he resigned the Government into the hands of his
Son Charles, whom he married to the Princess of Cyprus; and retiring to his
solitude of Ripaille, he remained there till he was made Antipope. During this
recess he composed his Memoires, out of which we have taken this Relation. The
general History says only this, that Amady retired upon some secret discontent,
but gives no account of particulars. Our Annals of Love supply that defect, as
they have done several other, and could have carried their disquisition much
further, if they might have been permitted: An Antipope of the Dukes humor is
very proper to furnish us with Rarities, but the Italian Proverb tells us.

Al negocio del Cielo,
Se bastava gli Angeli.
Let Angels sing the things above,
They are too high for Tales of Love.
We are in an humor of speaking of the strange Effects of Love, Agnes de
Castro.
and must satisfy the Capricio of our Genius. Don Pedro Prince of Portugal,
Son to Don Alphonso, was almost contemporary with Amedy, the King his Father
had a second Wife who governed him absolutely. The Prince obtained no favor
from the King, but what he ought to his Complacence for the Queen; and, as the
highest excess of her Tyranny, she would constrain him to marry a Daughter of
hers called Leonora, which she had had by her first Husband James of Arragon.
The Lady was handsome, and had not Don Pedro been under a necessity of loving
her, it is possible he would have loved her well enough; but Love is hardly to
be obtruded upon a generous Soul. Don Pedro's natural inclinations were great,
his Courage-high, he could not truckle to the Orders of the Queen; and the more
eager she was to force his affection for the Princess, he was the more
obstinate and averse. He had a Nurse (widow to the Marquess de Castro) who had
an influence upon him. In all the Countries on that side the Mountains, the
Nurses are chosen as chosen as much by their Extraction, as any other
Qualification whatever. They have an opinion, that the inclinations of ordinary
Women are transfused with their milk: and I am not certain whether it be
altogether irrational. The Queen accumultated her Caresses and Presents upon
this Lady, and conjured her to employ the utmost of her interest to dispose the
young Prince to what she desired; but who is it but knows how much Fortune
delights to defeat the designs of humane Prudence? The way the Queen proposed
to make her project successful, proved the greatest and most effectual
obstruction. This Marquesses Lady had a Daughter named Agnes, a sprightly and
handsome young Lady. The Prince had seen her without any Concernment, whilst he
had viewed her en passant, but the Commission her Mother had received from the
Queen, giving him more frequent occasions of entertaining her. the Prince
became enamored at last. What he had sucked from the breast of her Mother,
fermented in his heart in favor to the Daughter, and the Love which was
produced from so natural a Sympathy, was violent from its very beginning. The
Prince was not able to suffer without declaring it. The Terms in which he did
it, were not displeasing to the young Castro; and being a handsome man in his
person, it cost him no great trouble to insinuate into her affection; the
greatest discouragement she had, was their uncertainty of her Mother. She was a
Woman entirely devoted to the Interest of the Royal Family; she would not see
her own Daughter advanced to the Throne, at the expense of the least difference
betwixt the King and his Son; and being not of a Temper to be easily deluded,
Agnes was persuaded she would not endure the passion of the Prince. She
represented her Judgment to him, and though of her self she could have heard
them eternally, yet she conjured him for those reasons to give over that
discourse. But those kind of Conjurations are always in vain; a Lover is never
so furious, as where reasons are introduced to persuade him to the contrary.
The Princes passion was augmented by this difficulty; but to accommodate with
the prudence of Anges, which he could not deny to be upon very good grounds, he
resolved to counterfeit an affection for the Princess of Arragon, but with this
contrivance, that whatever he should be forced to say to Leonora; should be
received by Agnes as intended to her, and the progresses he made upon the heart
of the one, should be constantly placed upon the account of the other. This
resolution being taken, and the Conditions agreed, Don Pedro pretended to
comply with his Nurses advice. The King and the Queen overjoyed with this
change, advanced the whole Family of the Marchioness, and made a thousand
Presents to Agnes. It was a rare thing, and very much to the Reputation of
Love, of Lovers of that Age to delude the Dagacity of two wise and interested
Women, and a King accomplished in all the Mysteries of Government; but that
which was most pleasant of all, was the blindness of the Princess of Arragon,
who knowing her self handsome enough to be beloved, and receiving the
same-expressions, which the Prince, if he durst, would have made to the young
Castro, made many acknowledgments to her Rival for her assistance, without
suspecting the least. One night when in the presence of Agnes the Prince begged
a kiss of Leonora so earnestly, he was in a fair way to have prevailed: Not so
fast, Madam, if you pleased, cried the young Castro, you do not consider what
you are about to do; there are more persons concerned in your conduct, than
perhaps you imagine, and you must answer for my Virtue, if you expose your own
in things unworthy of your Modesty. The Princess, who knew nothing of the
agreement betwixt Agnes and the Prince, being surprised, asked her, how she
became responsable for her Virtue; Do you not know, Madam, replied Agnes, that
Persons of your Eminence and Extraction, are to be Examples to all their
Inferiors? I look upon you, Madam, as my Model, and had I a Servant, I should
think I might do any thing innocently, that I saw you do before me with the
Prince. Yes indeed, replied the Princess, you might do it innocently enough, I
never condemn that in another, which I practice my self, and I do not think I
had transgressed the bounds of Civility so far, but I might have been imitated
by all the Women in the World. The Prince durst not interpose in their
Converse; he did not at first discern what Agnes intended, and when he had, he
durst not contradict her for fear of discovering the Secret: But when he saw
the question dccided in his favor, and that by the mouth of the Princess, he
made a sudden acclamation, magnified her Equity, as he called it, and after
that day Leonora did nothing in obedience to the Orders of the Queen, but Don
Pedro exacted the same from the kindness of Agnes: If he received an obliging
Letter from Leonora, See, Madam, said he to the young Castro, the Princess
shows you what you are to do to your Servant. If the Princess gave him a
Brasselet, you may learn by this, said the Prince to Agnes, you are to gratify
your Servant, the Princess has given you an Example, and it will be injustice
in you not to follow it. The deluded Princess confirmed all the Prince did
already, and Don Pedro abusing her Error, made her most pitilesly pronounce
sentence many times against her self: But this kind of Recreation was too
pleasant to last long. Don Pedro had made a Paper of Verses for Agnes under the
Name of Leonora, and resolved to present them to the Princess in earnest when
Agnes had seen them, but Agnes having a desire to keep, and consider them a
while, unhappily the Verses dropped one day out of her Pocket, and were brought
to Leonora before the Prince could bring them himself. Leonora thought they had
been lost, and took great pains to remember what she had done with them, when
the Prince came in and presented them to her again. In searching for other
papers, he had found them in his Pockets; and thinking it never unseasonable to
make a Present, he brought them to Leonora in great haste, as if they had been
finished but just then. The Princess blushed when she knew them, and being told
by the person that found them, that they fello out of Agnes's Pocket; You will
do me a pleasure, Sir, said she to the Prince, not to give any thing to another
body that is intended for me. Don Pedro assured her he had obeyed her
beforehand, and that those Verses had never been shown but to her: and
persisting in that story, the Princess began to be angry, went into the Queens
Chamber, and gave her an account of what had past. The wise Queen found matters
of suspicion, which the unexperienced Leonora had not discovered: There was a
kind of a Love-knot in the Verses of Agnes, which were not in those presented
to Leonora, and the Name of the Princess writ in another Character. There
wanted no more to persuade the Queen of the truth: She sent for the Prince, and
told him, that he had placed his Hypocrisy very ill; that the Marchioness of
Castro and her Daughter, were too sensible to be accessory to his disobedience;
that it was by the Kings express Orders Agnes had pretended to hearken to his
protestations, and to testify what she said, she had presented to the King the
very same day the last Verses he had made for her. This fetch succeeded as the
Queen could desire, the Prince blushed, and saying only he could not have
thought young Agnes so perfidious, by his silence he seemed to consent to the
whole accusation. The Queen taking up an opinion the Marchioness had betrayed
her, gave the King notice of her ambitious designs; upon which she and her
Daughter both were forbidden the Court, and the Prince murmuring against that
prohibition; they doubled their rigor, and interdicted him the liberty of
seeing them at home. The Prince perceiving by that what a Trick they had played
him, swore he would be revenged, threatened the Queen in the Kings presence, and
forbore visiting Leonora any more. But all this would not satisife the
Marchioness, her Genius lay for the Court, and she could not live out of the
Verge of it. She writ to the Queen, and protested the two Lovers had deceived
her; and to make good what she affirmed, she promised to watch them more
narrowly for the future, and give her Majesty a faithful account of their
proceedings. In the mean time the Prince could not live without Agnes, he
wanted not such as carried his Letters, and returned him her Answers. This kind
of convenience would have been a great matter to one which had never been
happier, but in Love all descents are precipices, and all stumblings are falls.
He considered that the Marchioness house stood close by a Park-wall, which
joined to the Gardens of the Palace, and that Agnes's Appartment had the
prospect on that side. He gave Agnes notice of the commodity, and having
furnished himself with a Ladder of Cord, he went every night out of his Chamber
when his Servants were asleep, and without the company of any (but one of his
Officers who lay without in the Wardrobe) repaired under his Agnes's Window.
They had much and frequent discourse, and that so kind. The Confident of these
Enterviews imagining they might be further improved to his Masters
satisfaction, resolved what he could to drive them to the height. He was an old
Fornicator, and had had many an Intrigue past through his hands in his time, he
apprehended the Princes desires would be satiated with enjoying her, and
knowing that those desires were displeasing to the King, he concluded he should
do both King and Master good service, if he could put an end to these
Conferences. He provided himself of another Ladder, hid it in a Hedge near
Agnes's Windows, and observing one night by the Ladies discourse, that that was
a favorable conjecture for his designs: To what purpose, Sir, said he to the
Prince, is this spinning of time, when you may dispatch all, if you please?
Mount, mount, Sir, and go to her, and do what you have to do nearer hand, and
then set up his Ladder. This counsel was pleasing, and the Prince (the Window
being low) was at the upper end of the Ladder, as soon as his Confident had
proposed it; Agnes was discreet, and no having suspected such an Attaque, she
could not receive it without horror: she retired immediately to the next
Chamber, from thence into the Hall, and thence down the stairs. The Prince
followed her as close as he could; but not knowing the turnings of the House,
and the Fugitive being still some distance before, there was always a Chamber
betwixt them. Young Agnes without doubt could have wished he had been nearer,
and began already to fear lest he should hurt himself in the dark, and as if
the stairs had been the bounds of her apprehension, she was just thinking of
returning from whence she came; but she was prevented in that by her Mother and
the Princess of Arragon. Her Mother did not believe the Princes desires were
lawful, nor (if they had) that they could have ever-been executed, and
therefore had kept her Parole very punctually with the Queen. She had watched
the two Lovers so close, she had discovered their nocturnal Entertainments: she
had given faithful advertisement, and Leonora like an enraged Lover, delighting
to reproach his Treason to the Traitor himself, got leave of the Queen that she
might lie privately in the Marchionesses House, and if possible, catch her
Gallant in the fact. At so an unexpected apparition, Agnes gave a skreek, and
would have run to the Prince to have saved her, but her Mother stopped her, and
giving her a twirl by the Elbow, thrust her toward the next Chamber: As she
opened the door, there came so sudden a gust of wind out of it, as blew out the
Marquesses Candle; she was afraid her Daughter should have escaped in that
interval, and having a mind to surprise the Prince, whom nevertheless she
believed to be under the Window, she seized upon Agnes her self, and would not
let her stir, till a new light was brought. Leonora committing the care of
securing the young Castro to her Mother, slipped privately without any noise into
the Chamber from whence her Rival came out. The Prince by the glimmering of the
Moon (which was then rising) was just got thither, and taking Leonora for the
person he pursued, he threw himself upon her, and clipped her in his Arms with as
much ardour as could be expected from the affection of an amorous young man:
Dear Agnes, said he to the Princess, why do you withdraw from my affections?
are you not sensible of their purity? I swear, Agnes, and I call Heaven to
witness, my design is nothing else but to set the Crown of Portugal upon your
Head; sweeten this attempt of mine with some expression of your kindness, and
trust your self for once to the faith of a Person that adores you: You are not
ignorant of my passion, you are acquainted with all the fallacies I have put
upon Leonora, the indeed inhumane way I have taken to make her a blind and a
cover for my affection to you; and the little advantage I have made of her
Errors, have given you an entire prospect of my Soul. The innocence of the
Princes intentions made him a little bold, he interrupted his discourses with
some little exorbitances, and so resolute he was to make Agnes his Wife, that
doubtless he would have presumed to have anticipated in some points, had not
the Marchioness came into the Chamber with her Candle. It is no easy matter to
determine who was in the greatest Consternation, the Princess to have heard the
Princes Discourss, the Marchioness to find Don Pedro where he was, and the
Prince at the Apparition both of the one and the other. For some time they were
all of them amazed, and stood gazing one upon another without speaking a word;
but at length old Castro coming first to her tongue, she accosted him thus:
How! Sir, said she to the Prince, and is it true that you make no scruple of
sullying the Honor of a Person, which gave you your first nourishment? Is
this, Sir, my recompense for having born you so often, and with so much
tenderness, at my bosom? Ha! Sir, could I ever have expected this treatment
from Don Pedro, or from the Son of the Great King Alphonso? Was I then to be
the Victime of your secret passions, added the Princess, did I serve but as a
stale and pretense, and was it only for the Love of Agnes you pretended to love
me? The Prince at this second Charge, conceiving the Service too hot, quitted
the field, and having with great speed secured his Ladder, he rescued himself
from the reproaches of two outrageous Women. This Adventure made as much noise
in the Court as could be expected from the fury of the Queen, and the Authority
she had usurped over the Spirit of the King. The promises which Don Pedro made
by mistake to Leonora, interfering with the Power of the King, there was no
kind of reprehension but it drew upon the Prince; those appearances of Love
wherewith he had abused the Princess of Arragon, giving occasion of offense to
the Royal Family from whence she was descended, pusht on the Queen in her
murmurs and threats, even to an excess: she exclaimed against the consequences
of that insolence, and nothing could repair it but either the Prince must marry
her immediately, or else the King must give her leave to retire with her
Daughter into the Kingdom of Arragon. The Marchioness her self, who by
Leonora's condonation was become clearly of her side, and desired his Majesty
to assign her a Husband for her Daughter, declaring that after such contumacy
as she had committed, it was but reason she should expect one no where else but
from the bounty of the King. The Prince endeavored to dis-entangle himself as
well as he could; sometimes he stormed like a mad man, sometimes he submitted,
sometimes he threatened to attempt any thing for the vindication of his liberty,
and then again he would call for quarter to purchase a little repose. The King
observing his disorder to increase, and that the more violent it became, the
more it was opposed, he thought no way so sure to put an end to it, as to cause
Agnes to be killed. She dyed, as the Queen gave out, of the small Pox, but the
more learned Authors are of opinion it was by poison. It is easy to conceive
Don Pedro's distraction at so Tragical an accident, he resolved to revenge
himself upon whom ever he did but suspect to have an hand in it, and his Father
dying just in the nick, hence it was there arose an irreconciliable quarrel
betwixt the two Crowns of Arragon and Portugal. Don Pedro sacrificed ten years
War, and so much blood to the Ghost of his dear Agnes, as might well have given
him the addition of Cruel, had not the gentleness of the latter end attoned for
the beginning of his Reign.

THere was another Agnes living almost about the same time, The Countess of
Pontieuvre.
no less famous in the History of France, than Agnes de Castro in the History
of Portugal. She was Mistress to Charles VII. who governed the French Monarchy
from the year 1422, to the year 1461. The troubles which happened in his Reign,
are not my province in this place: There are Authors enough have related the
Invasion of the English, and the Exploits performed by the Pucelle in their
expulsion; I will concern my self no further than the Amors of this Agnes. The
Dauphin of France known since by the Name of Lewix XI. endured with great
impatience the Power this Woman had usurpt upon his Father. He acted nothing
but by her Counsels; he gave her the Barony of Pontieuvre '(which till then was
always an Appanage of the youngest Sons of the Royal Family) and all Favors
and Offices in the Kingdom past through her hands. A great part of her
Influence she employed in obliging the Prince, and omitted nothing which might
mitigate the animosity he had against her; but the Kings Presents passing
through her hands, were impregnated with poison. He had tried several ways to
destroy her, but none succeeded; however he would not give over, but resolved
upon another he believed more infaillible. He had a Favorite called
Chaubannes, Count of Dammartin, the handsomest young Lord in all the Court; he
proposed it to him to make Love to her, and knowing his Fathers Jealousy, he
doubted not but he should ruin the Countess, if he could convince her of the
least infidelity. He imparted his design to the Count, and conjured his
concurrence. The Proposition at first appeared to be dangerous* he demanded of
the Dauphin what Expedient he had thought of to secure him against his Fathers
indignation, if his design should happen to be suspected. The real Service you
will do him thereby, replied the Prince: We will tell him that she had
solicited you a long time, that the fear of being the Author of such ill News,
had hindered you from discovering it, and that you did hope in time to have
tired out her importunities by your aversion? but that perceiving what you
designed to extinguish those flames, did but kindle and augment them, you
believe it your duty now to give him notice of all. Possessed, as he is, of the
fidelity of Agnes, he will perhaps question the report; you will ask him what
proof he desires, and then whatever is past, or whatever you hope for the
future, will be but the consequences of his Orders. Upon. these Arguments
Chabannes complied: He had a Valet de Chamber called S. Colombe, of whose
fidelity he had had ample experience; he caused him to open Scene with Mortaing
the Countesses Woman, who was privy to all her Mistresses Secrets. S. Colombe
counterfeited a passion immediately, as having that Lesson by heart, and
Mortaing was naturally very compassionate of other peoples sufferings. They
came presently to their protestations and promises, and the Confidencies of the
Mistress were not long behind the assurances of the Servant. When S. Colombe
found things in the posture he desired, he declared the affection his Master
had for the Countess, and to sweeten the proposition he made to her to be
serviceable to his Master; See, dear Mortaing, said he to her, besides the
utility which will accure to us both by that Commerce, it is the only way to
continue our own, sooner or later all things are discovered; and if our Lady
comes once to discern our Amors (as how can it otherwise be) she will never
forgive you that, which she looks upon at present as a Crime, for, Mortaing, it
is none to love a King, that makes one the more honorable among men, and I am
persuaded is venial even before the Gods. Kings are so dear to them, I fancy
every thing is grateful to them they do; but we that are of a more common
Constitution, are not to expect the Privilege of Princes, and can never obtain
the Countesses indulgence, unless we can reduce her to a condition of having
need of it her self. Mortaing liked S. Colombes reasons very well, and the same
night as her Mistress was undressing, she put her upon a discourse of all the
people at Court. There was not one of them could escape her censure: But when
they came to Chabannes; Ha! Madam, for him, cried Mortaing, we cannot but speak
well; I never saw any man so complete, and if I should wish my self handsome or
great, it should be on purpose to love him without being ridiculous. Agnes was
well enough persuaded her Damoiselle was in the right, the Excellence of his
Qualities had not escapt her observation, and she had long since in her heart
had a hankering after him; but the Favorites of the Daulphin having but little
Commerce with the Mistress of the King, the Count of Dammartin had observed
none of the Simperings and Allurements she made use of to ensnare him:
Whereupon our Countess had conceived such displeasure, she almost abhorred him,
and turning away her head at the name of Chabannes, she interrupted poor
Mortaing in the midst of her Elogium. Never name that man to me, said she to
her, I hate him worse than death or old age. These words put the Damoiselle
into a most profound silence; she withdrew into her Chamber in great confusion,
and was impatient next day to see S. Colombe, to advise him to employ her no
more in such desperate Commissions. S. Colombe went immediately to his Master
to acquaint him with the success of his Embassy; the Count was surprised at
the News, he did not remember any thing he had done to disoblige the Countess;
he ordered S. Colombe to set his Mortaing a work to fish out the cause of her
aversion. At the entreaty of her Gallant, Mrtaing makes a second attempt, but
with as little satisfaction as before; the Countess could not forget the many
glances she had lost, and could not pardon the Count of Dammartin that he had
never observed them. This obstinacy in the Countess nettled the poor Count, and
not being accustomed to the hatred of fair Ladies, he began to do that out of
vanity, which he was unwilling to have undertaken at the solicitation of the
Prince. The King was at that time at Tours, where he resolved to pass the whole
Winter. The happy way he was in, of recovering the whole Kingdom, put the Court
into a disposition to mirth; insomuch as there was nothing spoke of but
pleasure and entertainments: The Dauphins Wife, who was the King of Scots
Daughter, young and beautiful, loved her diversions exceedingly; the Queen was
complacent, positive in nothing, but complied with whatever she and the rest
were inclined to; and the Dauphin himself (having given relaxation to his many
distractions, in hopes his revenge was at hand) was at that time more addicted
to be merry, than he had been accustomed to be. Chabannes made his advantage of
those favorable opportunities; he danced well, did every thing well, and
attaqued the hatred Agnes pretended with so much address, made her quickly
discern that what she interpreted as a real aversion, was but the obliging
effect of his modesty and bashfulness. The Count perceived how things went
almost as soon as the Countess, and being an old Sophister at that trade, he
seemed as fast to retire, as she seemed to advance. He knew the frailty of her
Sex, that they desire nothing so furiously, as what is refused them: When he
observed the Countesses Eye fixed upon him, he turned his face another way; if
she entertained him with discourse, and turned it upon Love, to give her self
opportunity to represent the disposition on of hers, he talked of nothing but
the indifference of his temper; and the pain it would be to him to love any
thing long. At length his wiles had their intended effect; for one night when
the whole Court was at the Appartment of Madam la Dauphine, and Chabannes in
his old way had shifted off the oeillades of Madam la Countess, she took him
aside toward a Table where there was a Glass, and pretending to rectify her
Hood, she asked him why it was he avoided the looks of the Ladies so much; I am
afraid, Madam, replied he, to show you the object of your disdain, and I cannot
but respect you, even where you are unjust. Agnes blushed at his answer, and
remembering what she had said to Mortating, she was impatient to be home, to
know upon what grounds that Wench discovered to the Count what she had
discoursed to her in private. She caused her to be called as soon as she was
got to her Chamber, and reproaching her by the lightness of her tongue, in the
bitterest language the could think of, she commanded her to tell her truly what
it was prevailed with her to be so foolish. Mortaing supposing her Mistresses
hatred for the Count as violent and immortal as she pretended, concluded she
had committed a great Crime in entertaining the Propositions of his Love: She
threw her self down at her feet, told all S. Colombe had said to her, conjured
her to pardon what was past, and wished a thousand imprecations, if ever she
were guilty again in that nature for the future. There is no great hurt in the
bufiness neither, said Madam Agnes, sweetning her again, the Crime was that you
concealed it from me, do not you make such Secrets another time, for I will
have nothing pass in my House, but I will know it my self: Alas! Madam, replied
the trembling Mortaing, I durst not tell you for my life; for you told me you
hated the Count Dammartin perfectly. Yes, says she, and I do hate him without
doubt, but that hinders not but I may be well enough pleased to hear he has a
kindness for me; it is a way to exercise my Revenge: do you ask his Valet de
Chamber the progress of his Love, and when he tells you, give me an account,
but be sure do not let him know I desire to hear it, for it concerns me much he
should be ignorant. Mortaing promised to keep it most sacredly; but she had no
Secret she could conceal from her Colombe. Chabannes had intelligence of all;
and being a while after at a Pastime in the Queens Appartment, where the men
demand a Secret of the Ladies, and give them their answer in some
pretty-conceited Verse, it fell to his share to ask a Secret from the Countess
de Pontieuvre; when one has so much concern for the hatred of people, replied
the Countess, it is but reason they should endeavor to remove it. A wise man,
replied Chabannes, does nothing without Orders; I conceive I have yours at this
time, and in that opinion he made his Verses, which the King (though ignorant
of the true meaning) caused to be set, and he and the whole Court sung nothing
else for some time: and thus have I have rendered them for the satisfaction of
the Reader.

The SONG.
I am no Pilot that defies the Seas,
And launches spite of Winds he cannot appease;
He that despairs to merit with his Love,
Vainly attempts those Charms will mortal prove.
As Rocks, Winds, Seas, the wise man will avoid
Those perils which so many have destroyed.
The prudent Labourer never manures a field,
But what he hopes some recompense will yield.
The Dauphin perceiving Madam Agnes whispering with the Count, was impatient to
know what she had said, he took him out therefore into the Garden by
Moonlight, to demand what it was. We triumph, dear Prince, we triumph, said
the Count to him smiling, the Lady is reduced to a Parley already, and it is
now our business to give her an Answer: Haste then and do it, replied the
Prince, I shall own all my tranquillity to you, if you ruin that Woman; but
have a care, show not too much respect to her, tell her, that after such
declaration of her hatted as she made, it will be requisite you should have
good proofs to assure you of the contrary: demand some kind Letters from her,
tell her you delight in such things, and drive on the business with all speed
to an Assignation. You may tell her you desire that favor but as a fign of her
confidence, and, if you will, swear stoutly you will never abuse it. He
concerned himself not much whether he had the real enjoyment of the Lady, so he
had but a manifest assurance to obtain it. To the instructions he had given
him, the Dauphin added all opportunity imaginable, he obliged Madam Dauphin to
be more frequently with the Countess, to please the King as he pretended, and
taking Chabannes along with him, he invented so many specious ways to separate
the Company, that there was few days but he ordered things so, there was a
particular Entertainment betwixt Madam Agnes and the Count. But these
opportunities produced an effect which neither Prince nor Dammartin did ever
expect: The Countess was one of the handsomest Ladies in the World, and the
Count was of an age that is seldom indifferent: He found there was no dallying
with Love, without being punished at last, and what he intended hypocritically,
proved really true. This Experiment produced great alterations in his
Politics, he became discreet when he was most guilty of indiscretion, and the
Prince could get nothing out of him now, but relations of Madam Agnes's
cruelty. Whence comes this sudden turn? said the Dauphin to him, I thought she
had been running headlong upon the Precipice we had prepared for her; who is
it has stopped her? She has doubtless some intelligence of our design, replied
the Count; Ladies which have had any such affairs in the World, can easily
discriminate betwixt true Love and pretended. It is strange, said the Prince,
that this Woman should never be faithful, but now when I should make my
advantage of her infidelity; I knew ten persons belonging to the Court (none of
them comparable to you) with whom she has communicated in that time: They had
more Merit, or more Love than I then, replied the Count smiling; But, Sir, said
he very subtly, if you have already so many assurances of the Countesses
infidelity, what need is there that I constrain my self any longer to make Love
to her? the Intrigues she has had with another, are not they as criminal
toward the King, as if I were the Gallant my self? No, says the Prince, they
are idle, timorous Fellows, and dread the falling under Agnes's displeasure;
besides there is no man in the World so proper for my Confidence as you, you
are the man alive I can trust without danger: You must not therefore be
discouraged, Chabannes, this Whimsie of hers will be brought off at last. The
Count promised the Prince to redouble his endeavors: and indeed though Agnes
spoke no more to him before Company, he plied her sufficiently when they were
alone. He had caused Pages Clothes to be made, of all the considerable Liveries
of the Court, and pretending Messages sometimes from one, and sometimes
another, there was scarce a morning but he brought her a Letter from himself.
Under the Reign of Charles VII. the people which wore Liveries, were not such
Striplings as now a days they are; no body took a Lacquay, till he had a
substantial beard. Trouses were taken up afterward upon Command, as is
mentioned in several Histories, so that Dammartins bonne mine was not
incompatible with the Dress of a Footman. One day when he had put himself into
Madam la Dauphins Colors, and according to his Custom, pretended a fictitious
Errand from her; he was sent for up into her Chamber, and being in Discourse
with Agnes by her Bedside, he forgot himself, and spun out his time longer
than he ought. The King entered unexpectedly into the Room, and the Prince with
him. The Countess lay always in the same Appartment with the King, never any
thing but some Gallery or Antichamber betwixt their Lodgings: and to prevent
any Conspiracies, his Guards stood always at her door. By a Courier from
Guyenne the King had received News, that the Principal Towns of that Province
were reduced to his Obedience: He ran immediately to impart it to the Countess,
and the Dauphin, being in a good humor at that time, accompanied him in his
Visit: The Chamber was dark, and Chabannes had no great difficulty to get out
of the Kings sight; but the Dauphin having a glance of his Livery, and having a
Message from the Queen to deliver to his Wife, obliging her to a Visit after
Dinner, he called the Page to him, and bid him tell his Lady. Agnes was in a
bodily fear, and indeed had the day been clearer, or the Dauphins Message
required an Answer, the Countess and Page both had been utterly undone, but by
good Luck he came off with his Congy. He ran home as fast as he could to change
his Robes, and returning immediately to the Kings Lodgings, he made a great
noise of two or three extraordinary things he had done that day, on purpose to
take off the suspicion of his real occupation. The Dauphin took him home with
him to Dinner, and giving him an account of the Visit he had made to the Kings
Mistress, it came into his mind that he found his Wife undrest when he came
back: He sent to her to demand, if she intended to wait upon the Queen in that
posture. She was ignorant what he meant, and sent him word she had received no
such Orders from her Majesty; whereupon he went to her Chamber himself, and
having given her an account of the Message he sent her by the Page, he caused
him to be called, and gave Order he should be corrected for his neglect. But he
could not be so readily obeyed, for none of her Pages had been with Madam de
Pontieuvre, and his Lady assured him it was not in her thoughts to send thither
that day. The Prince was never so amazed in his life; he saw a Page in his own
Livery talking to the Countess, he thought he heard him tell her, it was Madam
la Dauphine which inquired of her health, and yet this Page was not to be
found. Chabannes did what he could to satisfy his Curiosity; he told him there
could be no mystery in a Page who suffered himself to be seen both to the King
and him, and that it must needs be he mistook the Colors, and thought another
Livery his own: But the Prince had a better opinion of his Eyes, than to be
persuaded to that. He sent his Scouts abroad, and it was not long before he had
some confused light of the truth: One morning when Chabannes was locked up with
the Prince, and endeavoring to pacifice his suspicion, one of the Gentlemen he
had employed in the discovery, having been let into his Closet; The Page, Sir,
said he to the Prince, is no longer a Page, he is now become a Merchant of
Laces, and not above two hours since he was with Madam de Pontieuvre in that
Equipage. It may be a Merchant indeed, replied the Count, who was not a little
concerned in the story. Pardon me, Monsieur le Comte, replied the Gentleman, it
is the same Page the Dauphin saw in his Livery the other day in the Countesses
Chamber. One of the Scotch Guard that I know very well, and one that is no
Fool, was Sentinel at Madam Agnes's door that day the Page entered, he found him
so handsome, he took particular notice of him; and being upon the Guard again to
day at the same Post, he perceived the Page and the Merchant were both one.
But, said the Prince, interrupting him, this Scotch-man that knew the face of
the Page and the Merchant so well, does not he know any person about the Court
which resembles them? No, Sir, replied the Gentleman, he is a Stranger, and has
not been long in his Majesty's Service; but he has promised me to examine all
people so strictly for the future, that without doubt it will not be long
before he discovers him. This Prophecy made Chabannes to tremble, he thought it
was upon too probable foundations. He was very remarkable for the Excellence of
his presence, and was the most illustrious Object in the Court. He discoursed
at large with the Prince about the business, and having cunningly informed
himself of the Scotch-mans name, he came to S. Colombe to give him notice of
what had passed, and told him he would spare no cost or pains that might
prevent the ill Consequences he dreaded. S. Colombe was no Changling; he need
speak but one word, to make him know what was to be done. He went to the
Guard-Chamber to find out the Scot. He invented a Scotch Genealogy which made
them Cousin Germans, he pretended to be overjoyed to see him, and the first
expression of it, being to give him a glass of Wine, he drilled him into a
Cabaret, where he had disposed certain Soldiers to quarrel with him. The thing
happened as S. Colombe had projected, the Guard was killed, and the Contriver
of the Enterprise withdrew himself so cleanlily, there was not the least
mention of his name. When Fortune sets her self to be favorable, she does
nothing by halves: One of the Soldiers S. Colombe employed in this business,
had been formerly a Servant to Monsieur de Trimouille, a Favorite of the
Kings. Some persons of his Family who had been his Fellow Servants, passing
through the street where that Murder was committed, and observing several other
of the Guards running in to rescue their Camarade, they thought themselves
obliged to defend their old Companion: This Rencontre cast the scandal of that
Act upon the Servants of Monsieur de la Trimouille, and gave the Prince
occasion to suspect that his Master was the principal in the Intrigue. He was
almost of the same stature with Chabannes; he had black hair, and curled like
his; and though the Features of the Count Dammartin were better than the
others, and his Complexion more lively, yet the Room being duskish, they might
well be mistaken. Monsieur le Dauphin concluded from hence, it was Monsieur
Trimouille he had seen in the Habit of a Page in Madam Agnes's Lodgings; he
hated him before, out of a general hatred he had for all the Kings Favorites,
and was glad at his heart of this occasion to ruin him, and his Fathers
Mistress together; It Is Trimouille, it is he, said the Prince to Chabannes, I
have a confused remembrance of his very face; and the Murder of the Scotch-man
by his Servants, is an inexpugnable confirmation. The poor man without doubt
would have told, and Tremouille having so many opposite interests to reconcile,
wanted not his Spies; he knew he was in danger of being discovered, and
therefore caused him that could do it to be killed. Chabannes seemed to be of
the same Judgment, he seemed to admire with the Prince, that a Favorite of the
Kings should commit so great an insolence. It Is common, replied the Dauphin,
Great men are frequently exposed to the Treachery of their Creatures; for not
being able to discern whether they love them for themselves, or for their
beneficence, they look upon that as the effect of their Love, which indeed is
but the product of their own Interest. The Dauphin was naturally violent, and
his hatred to the Kings Favorites, rash, and impetuous: he thought he needed
no other Evidence to accuse Trimouille, and notwithstanding all Chabannes could
say to advise him to the contrary, he went forthwith to the King, to advertise
him of what he thought he had been sure. But that accusation came to nothing;
it happened the same time the Prince affirmed Trimouille to have been in
Disguise with the Countess, he had been at the same time shut up in Conference
with the King about affairs of importance. The King being assured of this
Circumstance, made him believe the whole story but a practice invented for the
destruction of the Innocent; there was not a reproach nor reprehension but the
Prince was forced to endure: and that ill success did but augment and
exstimulate his Curiosity. He doubled his vigilance, and spent whole nights
petrolling about Agnes's Lodgings. One night among the rest as he was upon the
Watch by a private pair of stairs (which he was informed was the way by which
the two Lovers corresponded) he perceived a man to ascend in the Habit of
Citizen, with a parcel of Books under his Arm, and by the light of a Flambeau,
which he caused to pass by on purpose, he discryed it was Chabannes. It is not
easy to determine which of the two was in the greatest surprise; the Prince
started back two steps, and Chabannes had like to fallen into a swound; but
remembering that he had need of the greatest presence of Spirit to bring himself
off out of that dangerous condition, he recollected himself, and Silence, dear
Sir, said he softly to the Dauphin, let me alone with my Stratagem, I have
begun, and do thus, pursue it for your interest, let me proceed, and I will
tell you the whole Mystery when we have more leisure. Chabannes thought to have
qualified the Princes heat by that Proposition; and supposing the time too
short for so specious an invention, he thought to gain more to make it more
plausible: But the Prince was not to be wheedled at that rate, he had naturally
an aptitude to be jealous. It was not many moments before that Chabannes had
left him, and no mention of his design, besides his discomposure at first
betrayed him. The Princes Eyes opened both in an instant, he was highly
transported; but the desire of Revenge following close upon his suspicion of
the Treason, he restrained himself, and pretended to be caught in that snare
which Chabannes had laid. Chabannes was admitted into the Countesses Chamber,
and persuaded himself his Wits had brought him off; he gave her a relation of
all that was past, and the good Lady was almost distracted, for she could see
no way possible to get out of that Labyrinth. The Dauphin in the mean time ran
to his Fathers Chamber, he had a thousand fancies in his head in a moment which
persuaded him Chabannes was the Traitor: I beseech you, Sir, said he to the
King, will you be pleased to go along with me into Madam Agnes's Chamber, and
you shall see irrefragable proofs of her infidelity to you. The King had that
night supped in his Bed, he had been a hunting, was weary, and no body with him
to entertain him but Trimouille. Is it not Trimouille again, said he to the
Prince, pointing to him with his finger, who is in such favor with the
Countess? No, Sir, replied the Dauphin, it is not Trimouille, and I beg his
pardon for suspecting him; but vouchsafe, Sir, I beseech you to discover the
Mystery with your own Eyes, and you shall find it extraordinary: The Prince
would not name Chabannes but in his presence; he had entrusted him with so many
flagitious Secrets in his time, he was afraid of his indiscretion, and was
resolved to destroy him before his accusation. His reservedness in that point
made the King give little credit to the rest; he would not disturb his
Mistress, he told him he was sufficiently assured of her Virtue: but Trimouille
who had a long time desired to be right with the Prince, and found himself
obliged to him for the Apology he had made, added his instances to the Princes,
and together they prevailed upon his Majesty to go; he called for his
Nightgown, and giving Order no body should follow but the Prince and
Trimouille, he went into a little Gallery which past betwixt his Lodgings and
the Countesses. The two Lovers had been so long in consultation about the
Course they were to steer, that the debate was not ended, when Mortaing (who
was all the while upon the Guard) came in running with the New that the King
was at hand. The Countess was extremely surprised at the Alarm; but being
resolved (let what would happen) Chabannes should not be found disguised in her
Chamber, she caused him to step in betwixt the Papers, and the glass of the
Window, and Mortaing having put to the Shuts, and drawn the Curtains, the King
found the Countess without any Company, but a few Books which she pretended to
be reading with great intention. What have you done, Madam, said the Prince to
her with something an angry Tone, with the man that brought you these Books?
Have you occasion for him, Sir, replied the Countess with a smile as quiet and
unconcerned, as it had been natural? Yes, Madam, replied the Prince, I have
occasion for him, and it is for him the King comes hither to search; you must
command him to be called then, Sir, said she to the Prince, it is not long
since he was here, and he cannot be gone far. The Prince had placed his
Sentinels at all passages to the Countesses Appartment, he sent to inquire of
them, if any such person had gone by, and they assured him not. We shall not go
far then sure, said the Prince, taking the Candle in his own hand, to find out
what we look for, the Bird is not yet out of its Nest; and then searching in
all the corners of the Chamber, he put the poor Countess into a miserable
fright; but perceiving he did not think of looking where he ought, she
recollected her self, and taking the advantage of her good Fortune; See, Sir,
said she to the King, the effects of that hatred Monsieur Dauphin has always
had for me, which I could never overcome: It is not many days since he
suspected me for Tremouille, now he would charge me with another, and I do
expect some time or other he will foist some body into my Chamber, on purpose
he may be found there. Shall I be any longer exposed to these dangers, Sir?
said she to the King, suffer me I beseech you to retire (and with that word she
burst out into tears) I conjure you suffer me, by all the bounty wherewith your
Majesty has honored me: I am not able any longer to hold out against the Power
and Malevolence of the Prince; I respect him as much as he hates me, and a
thousand deaths I would endure before I would divert your kindness from him;
suffer me therefore, for God sake suffer me to retire. No, Madam, replied the
King (touched to the very heart to see his Mistresses tears) you shall not
retire, my Son shall learn to pay better respect to what is so dear to me; and
thereupon he commanded him out of his sight, and to appear no more before him
till he was sent for. The Dauphin thought that Command very unjust, and the
History tells that he dispensed with many things which were inconsistent with
the respect he ought to his Father; but Tremouille pacified the disorder, and
prevailed with the Prince to go out of the Chamber. To comfort the Countess
after so many crosses, the King told her he would take up his Quarters with her
that night. She used all the Arguments she could to moderate that excess of
Commiseration; she pretended she had cried till her head aked, and the injuries
she had received had put her into a very ill capacity of that Honor: But the
King admitting no excuses, there was a necessity she must obey, and Chabannes
continued all that cold night in the Window, whilst the King was luxuriating in
the Arms of his Mistress. I leave the Reader to judge how the poor Stationer
entertained himself; he durst neither breathe, nor stir, and the least sneeze
in the world might have cost him his life. The compassionate Countess did what
she could to shorten his pain: she counterfeited her self ill so cunningly, the
King left her very early in the morning. As soon as he was gone, Mortaing came
to take her Count out of the Press, where he had past away his time so sadly
betwixt apprehension and cold, that he was in appearance more than half dead.

But there is no cold so rigid to the sense,
But yields to the ardour of Loves influence.
In vain, in vain, the Frost and Snow conspire,
TO asswace the fury of a Lovers fire.
If Love but interposes on his score,
One moments happiness elates him more
Than years of sorrow could depress before.
When the Count was sufficiently chafft, and come to himself, it was agreed
betwixt them that he should pretend to the Dauphin, that having found a Letter
which appointed a Rendez-vous in Madam Agnes's Lodgings, to a certain person
who was to be admitted in the Habit of a Citizen carrying his Books; he had
taken that Disguise upon him to discover the Intrigue: but that he found it was
nothing but from one of her Women to a Gentleman, and therefore he went back
again without further attempt, when he perceived it was a Mystery of so
inferior Contrivance. Chabannes had but little hopes the Dauphin would swallow
this story; but he was to make the best of a bad Market, and if the worst came
to the worst, it was but losing his friendship: The greatest difficulty
remaining was, which way to make his retreat without being perceived, for they
doubted not but Scouts were laid at all passages about her House. Mortaing
remembered her self of a certain English Woman of an extraordinary stature, who
was one of Madam Agnes's Laundry-Maids, she went up, and fetched down one of her
Gowns, pretending to see the fashion of it: She put it upon Chabannes as well
as she could; and giving him a kind of a Hood they wore in those days, which
covered half their bodies, she past him through the Wardrobe, as if it had been
she whom he did represent. The Spies having Orders to stop no body but such a
one as was described to them, they examined not the Laundry-Maid, but let her
pass out of the Palace without any obstruction, but as he was marching to a
House in the Town where S. Colombe managed his Disguises, Chabannes was
perceived by a person, who having a while considered his motion and his habit,
cried out on a sudden, Ah marry! this is he I look for. Upon which Alarm two or
three armed men that were by, threw themselves upon the Count, who was then in
no posture to defend himself; they seized upon him, clapped him into a Boat upon
the Loire, and commanded the Water-man to pass over to the other side as fast
as he could. Our Lover in Mascarade knew not whether he was arrested as
Chabannes, or as the English Woman, and not daring to tell them who he was,
left they should take him for who he was not, he would not turn up his Hood.
One of Madam Agnes's Servants having seen this Attachment, and knowing the
Laundresses Gown very well, she came thundering with the News to the Countesses
Appartment. The story seemed false to the Family, for the English Woman was at
that time in the Wardrobe; but Madam Agnes imagining the worst, believed it was
the Dauphin had caused him to be apprehended. She doubted not but the whole
Intrigue was discovered, and not being able to outface the first reproaches of
the King, she got into her Coach, accompanied only by Mortaing, and without
more ado betook her self to a Monastery. The King hearing of her Retirement,
concluded it the effect of the last nights perquisition, and fell into a most
outrageous passion against the Prince. The Dauphin protested he was in the
right, and not guilty of any thing that was false; but it was in vain, the more
he labored to justify himself, the more he exasperated his Father. His
Friends advised him to withdraw till the storm was over, and accordingly he
retired into the Province of Dauphine, as some say much better satisfied with
Trimouille than they could have imagined. Chabannes in the mean time returned
peeceably to his own House; the man that had run away with him, was the English
Woman's Husband, in whose Clothes the Count was escapt: This Woman had run away
from her good man upon pretense of ill usage; and he being not at all
consenting to the Divorce, and not daring to offer any violence to the
Sanctuary she had chosen, he watched her perpetually in the streets, resolved to
secure her whenever he met her, as he thought he had done in the person of
Chabannes. When by the reproaches he made him, the Count perceived his mistake,
he pulled up his Hood, and the man being undeceived, he begged his pardon, and
reconducted him to the Citizens house, whither he was going before when he
stopped him. Chabannes changed his Clothes, and came immediately to Court to see
how things past. He was exceedingly surprised to understand their proceedings,
and dispatched S. Colombe to Madam Agnes in Post-haste: he prevailed upon her
more by that one Message, than the King had done with all his importunities:
She took her leave of her Covent, and returned to Court illustrious, and more
pleasant than ever: But she enjoyed not long the advantages of her
restoration, for she dyed not many days after. The causes of her death were
found to be unnatural, and Monsieur Tremouille's sudden Retreat to the Dauphin
at the same time, made it too probable he was instrumental in the business. The
good King Charles was so passionately afflicted therewith, he would admit of no
consolation: Chabannes had like to have dyed with sorrow, but the Kings favor
supported him. He had Tremouilles place (vacant by his absenting himself)
conferred upon him by the King, during whose life he quickly enjoyed it. It is
not to be imagined he was in such favor when the Prince came to the Crown; he
was arrested before he could escape, and the Dauphin being now Lewis XI. would
have sacrificed him to his new Dignity, had not he evaded his indignation by
escaping out of the Bastille. I refer the Reader to the History it self to be
informed of all the Occurrences. The Annals of Love observe only the more
remarkable Passages, and represents them without any regular Order.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE.
THE SIXTH PART.
ABout the same time we have spoken of before, Feliciane.
the Wife of a Spanish Merchant who traded into the Levant, being taken
Prisoner by the Corsaires, and her Husband slain in the fight, she was sold to
one of the principal African Lords, whose ordinary Residence was in Tunis. The
African Lord became enamored of his Slave, and finding her too virtuous to
make a bare advantage of his passion, he was constrained to marry her. He had
one Daughter by her, which he called Feliciane, after the name of her Mother.
The Mother and the Daughter begat a kindness in him to the Spanish Nation: He
suffered his Wife to teach his Daughter that Language, as her Mother Tongue;
and when any Spaniard of Quality came into Barbary, he lodged them usually at
his own House, and performed all the good offices to them he was able. Alphonso
Ribiero, Son to Don Garcias Ribiero, born in Alcantara, came to Tunis, to treat
about the Ransom of his Elder Brother, who sailing into Greece, was taken by
the Pirates, and exchanged with certain Slaves of Barbary. Alphonso was too
young to be entrusted alone with so great a Negotiation; he was appointed only
to the Ceremonial part; for there was an old Servant of his Fathers sent along
with him to manage the Bargain. He was received by the Father of Feliciane, not
only as a Spaniard, but as a person particularly related to his Wife: She had
been at his birth, and passed the prime of her years in Don Garcias House. The
young Feliciana and he were presently surprised with a violent inclination one
for the other; Nature had, it seems, delighted her self to prepare ways for
their affection. Alphonso resembled the young African so exactly, and the
African Alphonso, that they might well have been mistaken, had not their Habits
distinguished both their Sexes and Persons.

But Love's no need of likeness, he desplays
A thousand Arts, contrives a thousand ways.
To bedge in peoples hearts, by secret turns,
The most unlike, and the most cold he burns:
Nought's incombustible, when he conspires,
No humane temper can withstand his fires.
Feliciana seeing her own Picture in Alphonso, as he did in Feliciana, she fell
in Love almost at first sight; their looks, their manners, their motions, every
thing in them prevented the office of their Tongue: so that they were
immediately advanced to their reciprocal promises. Simpathy is a great promoter
of such Adventures, and makes a great deal of ground in a little time. Great
was the joy for their Love: he performed his Honorary part very well, he was
the Priest and the Deity both; But the liberty of his elder Brother was an
unseasonable impediment to the Mystery. Alphonso used all the Arts he could
invent not to return into Castille; there was not a Curiosity a man of his age
could be capable of pretending, but he made use of to stay; but his Brother was
inexorable, and he must go along: yet this was not without solemn promises from
Alphonso to come back again in a short time, if he lived, and as fincere
assurances from Feliciana, never to falsify that faith which she had given
him. Their Adieu was sorrowful and kind: excess of Love was at that time in
season (for Love has its seasons as well as other things, and is as troublesome
to those whose desires are satisfied, as it is agreeable where they are in
their spring) Alphonso being departed, and Feliciana very impatient of his
return, many months passed, and no News of her Castillan. There were several
Spanish Ships arrived upon the Coast of Barbary, and in them some Alcantara
Merchants, with Presents from Don Garcias for Feliciana's Mother; but no
Letter, nor no private Message for her. This negligence startled her, she was
afraid she was betrayed, and the first effect of that opinion being a
resolution to reproach the crime to the Criminal himself, she insinuated with a
Master of Biscay, and persuading him she would go over into Spain to turn
Christian, she made him promise her to land her in the Port of Carthagena. The
bargain made, and the hour of her Embarkment arrived, Feliciana put on a Suit
of Clothes of Alphonso's, which he had left by accident behind him, and
providing her self with certain Chains of Gold, away she went to meet with her
Biscayen. The Seas and the Winds were so favorable to her designs, that she
landed at Carthagena without any accident: she brought a Horse there
immediately, and taking a Guide, put herself upon the Road for Alcantara. She
inquired of Alphonso wherever she came; in some place they knew not where he
was, in others they knew him not at all; but at length there was an old Hostess
of Toledo who told our disguised African there was to be a Meeting of all the
Ribieros in that Town within a few days, that she understood so much from a
Neighbor of hers, at whose House that Family used to lodge; and that the same
Neighbor told her withal, that Don Garcias came to be present at the Marriage
of his younger Son with one Hypolita de Cueva, which was reckoned the
handsomest young Maid in Castille. This News struck Feliciana to the heart, she
wondered not now her Lover had been so lazy as never to write to her; she found
he had other affairs upon his hands: she resolved however to attend him at
Toledo, and causing her self to be called Felician, her shape and her legs
concurred so well with her design, she was not suspected in the least. She was
handsome, and the Sex she pretended to in her Disguise, made her Beauty more
rare. She never stirred out of her Inn but the received some Complement or
other: One Evening as she was walking in one of the Walks in Toledo, and
according to her old custom had been interrupted by several idle Propositions,
a certain Lady in a Vail came to her, pulled her privately by the Arm, and made
signs to her to follow her: Feliciana, or Felician, as you please, thought this
also was another of his Mistresses, whose hopes she was constrained to betray;
and in that opinion would have steered her course another way, but the Lady
laying hold on her; Follow me, thou perfidious Alphonso, said she to her,
follow me, or I Will be thy destruction. The Name of Alphonso awakening the
Curiosity of Feliciane, she followed the Lady into a Chamber where there were
several Candles lighted. The Spanish Lady as soon as she was entered, turned up
her Vail, and discovering a singular Beauty; Whence is it, Alphonse, said she
to her, that you constrain me to these Stratagems to gain a little of your
Converse? what reason have you to change your Name, and call your self
Felician? why do you conceal your self from Hypolita de Cueva? in short, what
is this Mystery, and what grounds have you for it? Feliciane perceived by her
discourse it was her Rival whom Fortune had delivered into her hands, and being
firmly resolved to give her no quarter; This Mystery is greater than I can tell
you, Madam, replied she, I would spare my self the hardship of telling you my
self, and that is the true reason I have declined you for some days: But,
Madam, since you will force me, I must needs confess I am not capable of
accomplishing our Marriage. Don Garcias Journey to Toledo will be in vain, for
the faith you expect so impatiently from me, is, alas, engaged to another a
long while ago. How! cried Hypolita in a mighty surprise, your faith engaged to
another? Yes, Madam, continued Felician, an African Lady, inferior to your self
neither in Birth nor in Love, and (to one that was in Love with her) not much
behind you in Beauty, has received that faith which you challenge. Ha! why
then, thou perjured Person, replied Hypolita, have thou been so audacious as to
promise me? I am a man, replied Feliciana, and he that names Man, names
Unconstancy; your Beauty made me forget for a while what I ought to my African;
but I am returned to my first Love, and since I must be free with you, let me
tell you I will dye a thousand deaths before I will betray her: Ha! Traitor,
cried the disconsolate Hypolita, I always pierced into your heart through all
your Disguises, I observed always a force upon your actions, which me-thought,
gave your Language the lie; and you know, vile man, I have told you so often.
But, said she pursuing her transport, you shall never boast you have captivated
Hypolita, unpanisht, what my kindness cannot expect, my vengeance must obtain:
And then calling up people to seize upon Feliciana, whom she mistook all this
while for Alphonso, she ran to her Fathers Chamber to give him an account what
she had done. The old Castillan applauded the indignation of his Daughter; he
commanded Feliciana should be kept safe that night, and the next day he sent
her to Prison. A Magistrate of no small Authority in that Town, was desired to
examine her: She began to relent, would have changed her story, and pretended
she was mistaken for another; but Hypolita's allegation, and the testimony of
several other persons which assured him it was Alphonso, prevailed so far above
all that she could say, that she was almost brought to the miserable Election
of marrying Hypolita, or losing her head. She had rather have dyed, than have
cured the Jealousy she had created in her Rival; but considering that what she
was unwilling to do her self, Alphonso would do of course; she writ Hypolita
word, that she was so far from being Alphonso, she was the African Lady she had
told her of, and that if she would take the pains to come to the Prison, the
should satisfy her own eyes with the truth of it. This Letter was delivered to
the Keeper, and he desired to see it conveyed to Hypolita. He received it
without any difficulty, looked upon it as a Recantation, and knew the whole
Family of the Cuevas desired nothing more than that Alphonso would do as he was
obliged, without further compulsion. But by accident the Count de Atrevalo,
Confident to this Alphonso of Castille, and one who disputed the Crown with
King Henry, made his Entry that day into Toledo, as Covernour of the Town. The
Keeper must needs be a Spectator of this Ceremony, and engaging himself too far
in the Crowd, he lost his Letter. It was taken up by one of the Counts
Officers, who finding the Contents a little odd and unusual, would needs show
it his Master. The Governor was as much surprised with the Adventure as his
Man, and had a great Curiosity to understand the Particulars. He sent word to
old Seigneur Cueva, he desired to know the difference betwixt him and Alphonso
Ribiero; and upon that pretense sending for the Prisoner, he told her what he
knew of her affairs already, and desired her to inform him of the rest. She
satisfied his Curiosity; she was resolved to oppose the Marriage betwixt
Alphonso and Hypolita, and she believed it so near a conclusion, that she
thought she ought not to make a Secret any longer of that which the whole World
would know in a very short time. But it fell out otherwise however. The Count
de Atrevano, who by the ntural propensity of his Nation, was inclinable to
impressions of love, took a great liking to the African; he thought he should
do great Service to the Families both of the Cuevas and Ribieros, to keep this
Lady out of their sight, and fancying great pleasure besides in having so fair
a Mistress in his Chamber, without any Parents or Relations to call him to an
account; he caused Feliciana to be removed to a Castle a few days Journey from
Toledo. The carrying her away made a strange noise in the Town ^ Hypolita's
Friends believed Don Garcias had caused it. Don Garcias on the contrary, who
expected to find Alphonso in good Intelligence with Hypolita, and was come
thither to see her married, was much surprised to hear News so contrary to his
expectation; he demanded his Son of Seigneur Cueva, and old Cueva demanded him
of him: To explain the Intrigue, the Governor attended for Alphonso, but
Alphonso did not appear; considering therefore that he could not declare what
he knew, without discovering what he had a mind to conceal, he resolved to say
nothing, and therefore leaving the Parents to dispute it among themselves, he
went himself to the Castle, whither he had caused Feliciana to be conducted. He
had ordered her Women's Clothes, and Women to attend her, and the Count found
her as handsome a Lady as he had been a Cavalier. He acquainted her with his
intentions, and telling her it was unreasonable so excellent a Person should be
served only by a Lover that had been false, he offered himself to repair the
injury she had received from young Alphonso. Feliciana trembled at his tidings,
but returned him this answer, That she gave him many thanks for the Civility of
his Offer; but being come into Spain only in quest of her Alphonso, she begged
of him the liberty to pursue her design. The Governor would not openly contend
with her obstinacy, he had a mind to be happy with as little trouble as he
could. He made several rich Presents to the African, and she accepted them with
scorn, he showed her the Rarities of the Castle, and she seemed not to regard
them; he resolved to have a little patience, and see how that would work: and
therefore returned to his new Government, and leaving one of his Nephews,
called Don Ferdinand in Command he gave him express charge to have a care of
her Person, and so to prepare her with his Counsels, that he might find her
tractable at his Return. He put his affairs into safe hands to succeed. Don
Fernand had been no less smitten with the sight of Feliciana, than his Uncle
the Count: When he found himself Master of his Destiny, he began to pay her
such respects as were not at all compatible with his Commission, he sighed, he
raved, flew out so far as to make ridiculous Pictures of his Uncle, and by
degrees fell into expressions to this purpose, that if he were in Love with
Feliciana, his thoughts were more innocent than his; it was not long before he
blurted quite out, and told the African the whole bottom of his heart. All
Lovers in the World but Alphonso were indifferent to her, the legitimacy of
Fernandos desires were no advantage to him at all, and she had no more
inclination to be married to him, than to be Mistress to his Uncle; but judging
very prudently notwithstanding, that by opposing one of them against the other,
she might secure her self against both, she pretended to hearken to Don
Fernands Propositions, and let fall some trisling Complacences on purpose. A
witty Woman is at no great expense to please a man that is in Love with her.
Fernand was extremely well satisfied with his good Fortune; Feliciana prevailed
with him to let her escape, but upon promise to stay for him upon the Frontiers
of Arragon, where in a few days he engaged to wait upon her, and conduct her
into France. He had a great mind to have gone away with her from the first, but
she persuaded it would be more convenient for him to stay with the Count, and
to facilitate her Escape, by perverting the Hue and Cries, and sending them the
wrong way. The Project being laid with all possible deliberation, and all
things prepared that were necessary for its execution, Feliciana resumed the
Habit of her Cavalier, mounted upon a Horse Don Fernand had given her, and
deluding the vigilance of her Women, stole away one morning from her second
Imprisonment, to seek out a refuge for the innocence of her Love. Don Fernand
fastened a Cord to her Bedchamber Window, that it might be presumed she had
escapt that way; he pretended to be infinitely concerned for her escape; and
for his better dissimulation, he put himself in pursuit of her, as if he had
had an unsatiable desire to have recovered her. He was but just gone out, when
Alphouso came to repose himself an hour or two in the Castle. He had his
reasons not to venture himself in the Towns, and knowing the Magnificence of
the Count d' Atrevalo, he doubted not but a Stranger of his Garb would be well
received in any place belonging to him; nor was he deceived: They entertained
him very civilly, appointed him to eat, and Feliciana's Appartment being open,
and lying most conveniently, the Steward attended the new Guest into her
Champber. There was a Picture of Feliciana's hung up in the Room, exceedingly
like her, which Don Fernand had begged of her one time when his Uncle had sent
Painters to adorn a Gallery in the Castle. Alphonso was surprised at the sight
of that Picture, as is easily to be imagined. Feliciana was dressed in the
Spanish Mode, and that Dress disguised her a little; but however she was
discernable to Eyes less penetrating than a Lovers. He was going out to inquire
of some body whose that Picture was, and how it came thither; but in his
perplexities he took one door for another, and instead of going into the
Antichamber, which led to the stairs, he found himself in a little Closet
adorned with Pictures, whose Frames of Wainscot were all covered over with
Love-knots, wounded Hearts, and double FF. these fancies augmented his
astonishment; and to carry it on to the highest degree, he found a little
Table Book lying open upon the Table, and written as he conceived with
Feliciana's own hand: he took it up, and read these Verses ensuing.

Ungrateful Wretch, and perjured, what can be
Equal to the guilt of infidelity?
What more transgressive to Loves laws? what more
Against Nature, than t'forget what you have swore?
But hold! fond Heart, let not his present state
Expunge the kindness he expressed of late,
Betrayed, I ought, but loving, cannot hate.
And at the bottom of these Verses there was writ in great Characters,

THE PROFESSION OF AN AMOROVS FAITH.
This Title promised some rare and divertising Articles; but Feliciana had not
had time to write them, and if she had, Alphonso was in such trouble, he could
not have had the power to have read them. He went down the first stairs he
could meet with, which stairs went directly to her Maids Chamber, where by
accident having taken Physic that day, the Governess was in Bed. She was an
old Woman truckling under the burden of her age, and yet seeing but a man come
into the Room, she skreekt out, and hid her face under the Coverlet, as if she
had been but fifteen, and her virtue in the greatest danger imaginable.
Alphonso excused himself, told her he was a Stranger, who knew not whither the
stairs would carry him, begged her pardon for surprising her in that condition,
and desired her to inform him, if she could, where the Count d' Atrevalo had
got the Picture which hung in a Chamber hard by. Is it Feliciana's Picture you
mean? said the old Woman, with her head in the Bed all the while. Yes, replied
Alphonso, it is she I speak of. Don Fernand, that Governors Nephew, replied the
old Woman, caused it to be drawn by the life. And where is that Lady? cried
Alphonso in haste. The Governess was much offended with Feliciana's escape: she
found her employment very good, could not pardon the African for making it
cease, and the disgusts of such kind of persons go seldom without a touch of
ill language. She is rambling about the World, said the malicious old Woman;
she was two months together in this House, where the Cont d' Atrevalo caused
her to be treated, as she had been the best Lady in Castille; but not being
willing to be restrained, and, as it seems not accustomed to be contented with
one Servant, she got away this very night out of her Chamber Window by the
fidelity of a Bed-cord. I am damned, if jealous Don Fernand had not a hand in
it: I observed kibg since there was a kindness betwixt them; and when she sat
for her Picture, I durst have sworn by their gloating, the poor Count would be
betrayed. The old Matron had scarce finished these words, but two or three of
her other Women hearing a noise from the next Chamber where they were, came in
to see what was the matter. They no sooner cast their eyes upon Alphonso, but
they took him for Feliciana; one could not forbear expressing her joy to see
her returned; another upbraided her by the fright into which she had been put.
Alphonso perceived their mistake, and told them they took him for another
person; but they observing him to be preparing to be gone, and not being able
to believe but this was Feliciana, they threw themselves upon him cried out for
more help; and in short, seized upon him in spite of all his protestations,
that he was none of Feliciana. Whilst these things were in transaction, the
Count d' Atrevalo arrived; he had been told of Feliciana's escape by the first
he met, and understanding afterward what had passed in the Governesses
Chamber, he repaired thither with all speed to see what was the matter. Which
way have I disobliged you, Feliciana, said he to Alphonso whom he took at first
for his African, what have I done that should cause you to disguise your self
to escape from me? I love you, I confess, Feliciana, but I appeal to your self
whether that passion had ever any effects that might constrain you to this
Metamorphosis. Submissive Representations have hitherto been to only
Interpreters of my Heart: I have not left you any thing to suspect me of that
was unworthy, I have required nothing of you but what was lawful; I have kept
you two months together in my House, without abusing my power, and you have
restrained my affections t the severe bounds of Civility: why then, Feliciana,
do you fly from me? or what one thing have I done to disoblige you? Had it not
been for the Conference he had had with the old Governess, this Discourse
coming out of the Rivals own mouth would have amply resolved his suspicions;
but it was not now, the Count he was jealous of so much as Don Fernand. I am
not she you take me for, Sir, said he to the Count; I know my resemblance is
great enough to authorize your mistake; but though Nature has created that
resemblance in our faces, Heaven has formed our mind of different
Constitutions; hers is as disloyal as mine is faithful, and the perjury of
which she is guilty, betrays me with as much ingratitude, as I am charged with
for not betraying of her. The Count having had leisure whilst Alphonso was
speaking, to examine him more strictly, discerned some difference betwixt him,
and his African. His stature was the larger of the two, his Features more
remarkable, and he perceived some glimmerings of a beard, he began to think it
must be Alphonso, and therefore looking upon him now rather as his Rival than
his Mistress; he caused him to be shut up close, sent to give notice to old
Cueva of his detention, and swore he would dye but he would make young Ribiero
marry Hypolita. In the mean time Feliciana was making her escape, not knowing
whither she was going, nor in what place she could find any protection. She
durst not continue in Castille, she could not resolve to go back into Barbary,
much less would she go to the place where she had appointed Don Fernand to meet
her. She took the right hand way, where she had promised to take the left, and
the left where she was to have taken the right; and being equally fearful of
losing, and not losing her way, she marched on in a most unutterable perplexity.
It is not to be questioned whether she made use of any imprecations against the
ungrateful person, had run her upon these difficulties, whether she resolved to
hate his person as much as she detested his infidelity, and whether in
repenting she had loved him, she did not resolve to love him no longer; all
these confusions were the common effects of jealousy and anger, and never was
Lover in Feliciana's condition but was sensible of them. Being in the highest
of these sorrowful reflections, and entered into a Wood she knew not which was
the way out of; she was in great danger of passing not only the rest of the
day, but the whole night in that solitude, when by accident she met with a
Cavaliere, who having looked wishly upon her once or twice, made up to her with
design to accost her. The poor Feliciana was so prepossest with fear, that
forgetting her Disguise, she apprehended this Gallant would prove some new
Amouroso, and clapped Spurs to her Horse to escape him, if she could: But the
Cavalier crying out after her, Hold, Seigneur Alphouso, it is your most faithful
Mandoce, she recollected her self, and became so curious as to look back. She
resolved to make advantage of this accident, and replied, I did not know you
indeed as I was passing, but well, how does the fair Hypolita? Hypolita, Sir,
said Mandoce, would not receive your Letter; she told me you were a Traitor,
and that she abhorred your very Name, that she would not prosecute your death,
that she was so generous as to rejoice that you were safe; but that you should
not presume for the future to abuse her integrity, unless you desired to
provoke her fury again. I entreated her to explain her Discourse, and assured
her I knew nothing of it; but my ignorance was taken for an artifice, and she
threatened to have me apprehended, and your retreat, and the place I was to meet
you, extorted from me by torments. I had no directions to inform her, and
me-though she looked as if she would have been as good as her word: Her
threatening me so, made me get out of Toledo as fast as I could, and my advice
is, that you would get as far off as you can also; for knowing how things stand
in your own conscience, my opinion, Sir, is it will be no place for you. And
having given his Judgment, Mandoce supposing Feliciana to be his Master, put
the Letter into her hands. Feliciana took it, and stepping two or three paces
aside, that Mandoce might not perceive the trouble it gave her, she opened it,
and read as follows.

Madam,
Your desert is too great to be made the object of (...) counterfeit passion.
My heart is entirely another bodies, and I cannot obtain from its veritable
sentiments, that it should constrain it self any longer. Y^^ will call me
treacherous, and perjured, but, Madam, it is to avoid those Epithets, I expose
my self to them. The suspicions of Don Garcias made me guilty of a procedeur
contrary to my nature. I could not disentangle my self from his vigilance, but
by pretending Love unto you, and I could wish with all my heart my pretenses
were in earnest, that I might do Justice to your Charms: But, Madam, the
affections of a man's heart depend not upon himself; pardon mine then I beseech
you, a Crime it could not but commit, and if you be generous, complain, but do
not abhor me.


There was not a word in this Letter but was a wholesome Antidote against
Feliciana's Jealousy; and as if her good Genius had apprehended that the
forgetting of names might have yet left some poison behind it: Mandoce
beginning where he left; There is no room now, Sir, said he, for unseasonable
Contemplations, your time is but short; and seeing you are resolved at last to
return into Africa, why will you not take this opportunity, and away to the
next Port. There is a Vessel ready, and you have no more to do but to go
aboard, and set Sail; besides let me tell you, I heard a Whispering among some
people who baited at my Inn, which makes me jealous of your person. They said
that you were apprehended, and that the Count d'Atrevalo had sworn to make you
marry Hypolita: I see well enough those Fellows were mistaken, and I know well
enough those rumors are vain; but believe me, Sir, let us save our selves, if
we can, Hypolita is highly offended, and will play you some scurvy ^rick or
other, if she be not prevented. Feliciana could not contain her self at this
last assurance of her Servants fidelity, she gave thanks to her Stars which had
drawn her out of her error, and pronouncing her self a thousand times happy,
thrice happy Feliciana; she conjured Mandoce to tell her where she might find
Alphonso. Mandoce was so frighted at that question, he had like to have run
away from her; he looked upon Feliciana as he was utterly undone, and taking her
still for his Master, he asked her (shivering) if she were out of her Wits: No,
Mandoce, replied Feliciana, I am not out of my Wits; on the contrary, I have
recovered them. Then she told him her Name, and that she was come into Spain on
purpose to seek him. What Mandoce had heard talked to his Master formerly, of
the exact resemblance betwixt Feliciana and him, persuaded him presently all
was true that she said. He fell down upon his knees, and gave thanks that their
Journey was shortened, and conducting the African where his Master had appointed
to meet him that night; he gave her an account as they traveled, that
Alphonso's Brother had conceived a suspicion of their Amor before his
departure from Africa; that he had advertised his Father of it at his return,
and that the old man having intercepted Letters, by which Alphonso assured
Feliciana he would be with her ere long; he caused him to be so narrowly
watched, he could not make one step but Don Garcias had notice; that being weary
of that persecution, and persuaded he could not (without collusion) disingage
himself from his vigilance, he had pretended Love to Hypolita de Cueva, who was
gone to see one of her Aunts at Alcantara; that Don Garcias believing he had
been in earnest, had concluded the Articles with Hypolita's Father, and
constrained Alphonso to sign them: But that a few days after he had escapt, and
got off to a Friends house, who furnished him with money for his Voyage into
Africa, whither he was then ready to go, and had been there before that time,
had the season of the year been proper for his designs. This Discourse, and
such others entertained Feliciana to the place where she expected her Alphonso,
and where she found him in effect; but alas! not in the condition she desired.
The Count d'Atrevalo having News that the Count de Benevent (a great Lord in
Castille) and some other of his best friends were coming to his House, and
apprehending that Alphonso might take advantage to escape by the disorder so
much company was like to produce; and being absolutely resolved to secure the
possession of Feliciana, by forcing his Rival to marry Hypolita, he caused him
to be conveyed to a Fort upon the Frontier of Murcia, not above a days Journey
from thence. The Prisoner went away late from the Counts House, and could not
reach his Giste; he was forced to lie by the way, and it fell out his Quarters
were taken up for him in the same place where he had appointed Mandoce to come
to him: The same Fortune contrived it, that Don Fernand returning from the
search he pretended, was come to the same House. Feliciana saw him come into
the Court, through the Windows of her Chamber, and the very sight of him had
like to have made her betake her self to her heels; but a new fancy coming into
her head in the instant, she sent Mandoce to let him know Feliciana would speak
with him, and ordered one of Alphonso's Servants to conduct him into a little
Court into which she had observed one of her Windows did look. Mandoce
discharged himself of his Commission, and Don Fernand came overjoyed to the
Window where Feliciana expected him: My dear Don Fernand, said she to him, and
as softly as she could speak, Heaven has sent you once more to my relief; I am
taken again, it is I that am conducting to the Frontiers of Murcia, the Count
d'Atrevalo takes me for Alphonso; but do not you suffer your self to be
deceived with our resemblance; I am Feliciana, and to convince you, See there,
said she, throwing her Table Book to him, see what you gave me when I took my
leave of you at the Counts Castle, you shall find there the Roads you directed
me to take, and set them down with your own hand, save me once more, if you can
possibly. After this Proposition she pulled in her head, and retired, as she
had been afraid to be overheard; and Don Fernand returning as fast, he fell
upon contriving which way he should rescue the Prisoner which he took to be
Feliciana; he went to the Officer which commanded the Convoy, and told him the
Count having occasion to employ him with all speed at the Castle, had sent him
to execute his place. The Officer knowing him to be his Nephew, and in good
esteem with the Count, made no scruple to resign, and mounting in the morning
by break of day, away he went Post where Fernand directed him. His back was no
sooner turned, but Don Fernand commanded his Convoy to horse, and dispersed
them, some he placed in one post, some in another, some he sent to secure such
a Pass, others to possess such a Bridge, and when they were far enough asunder,
running to Alphonso's Bed, Come let us save our selves now, Feliciana, said he,
all things are ready for our escape: We will go to Carthagena, which is no
great distance from hence, and from thence pass into Barbary; but you must make
haste, for time is precious. Alphonso understood immediately who he took him
for; but he had no mind to rectify an error was like to procure him his
liberty. He dressed himself out of hand, and followed the Count. They took Horse
without any noise, and marched directly for Carthagena. The Sun was not quite up
when they departed, and they passed upon a Causway that would not permit them
to discourse. But as soon as Don Fernand found himself out of danger, my dear
Feliciana, said he to his Rival, putting one of his Arms about her Neck, see
now, at length we are delivered from the Tyranny of the Count d'Atrevalo: he
shall disturb our felicity no more, and thanks to the good counsel you gave, we
shall find in Barbary that repose, which we durst not so much as hope for in
Castille; But tell me, my dear, how came you to be re-taken, how came you to
deceive my Uncle, and by what good Fortune did you find the way of speaking to
me yesterday? Alphonso understood but one part of his Discourse; but that was
sufficient to inform him, that he who talked to him was his Rival, and the
Counts Nephew who rescued Feliciana from the hands of his Uncle the first time.
This consideration transported him with jealousy and fury: he clapped his hand
upon one of Don Fernands Pistols, and clapping Spurs to his Horse to disingage
himself a little, he turned short, and told him, thou shall dye, vile man, thou
shall dye, and thy blood revenge the persidiousness of my ungrateful Mistress.
Don Fernand was so surprised at this action, he took it at first for a dream.
He looked upon himself, he stared upon Alphonso, he knew he was Don Fernand; but
he took his Rival for his Mistress, and not being able to accommodate these
inconsistencies, being clearly transported, he demanded of Alphonso, if he had
lost his senses, or whether he knew him or not: I know you too well, replied
the young Bibiero; but it is you that does not know me: defend your self while
you may, or I shall spoil your fencing. Feliciana and Mandoce came in just as
Alphonso had spoke those words: They had watched when Don Fernand departed, and
traced him all the way; Hold, Alphonso, cried the African, forcing her self
betwixt them, do not attempt the life of a person, to whom you are indebted for
your Feliciana. These words and the sight of Feliciana, opened Don Fernands
Eyes, and he became sensible of his mistake: he remembered he had heard talk of
the resemblance betwixt Alphonso and his African, and concluding it was his
Rival he had delivered, he would have fallen upon him; but Feliciana and
Mandoce opposed: Be patient, Don Fernand, said the African to him, be patient,
your fury at this time will be in vain: I do not doubt but it troubles you,
that you have rescued your Rival, instead of your Mistress, and that it must be
great regret to you to have twice betrayed your Uncle, when you consider the
effects of that Treason were nothing else but the delivering up Feliciana to
her Alphonso; but there is a Destiny in Love, as in other things; you were not
born to be more happy in yours, I am sorry for it with all my heart, and will
pray heartily to Cupid to comfort you. As for my self, it is not in my power, I
am young Ribieros, and can be no bodies else: And having ended her Speech, she
whipped on her Horse, and Alphonso and Mandoce followed: Alphonso had like to
have run away at the very sight of Feliciana, so strange an impression had the
opinion of her inconstancy made in him: But Mandoce perceiving it, got up to
him, and conjured him not to be so fierce, for he could assure him his Mistress
was innocent. What she said to Don Fernand confirmed his report, so that
Alphonso followed her much better satisfied than when she fell first upon
Fernand. Don Fernand endeavored to have opposed their flight, at least not to
leave them; but the first was impossible, and as to the second, the trouble
which was upon him not permitting him the prudent management of his Horse, he
ran him upon a Rock before he was aware, and down he came with all four. The
two Lovers did not hold it any part of their Charity to relieve him; they rid
as fast as they could to Carthagena, and from thence past with all speed into
Africa, where the sincerity of Alphonso's intentions, made the Father and
Mother of Feliciana forget what their Daughter had done. And all the Family of
the Ribieros were glad to follow their Example. The fury of the Count
d'Atrevalo was so great upon the News that the two Lovers were arrived safely
in Barbary, that not content to exercise his rage upon his Nephew (who was
pursued and slain by his Orders) he extended it to all such as had any intimacy
or relation to Alphonso. He persecuted Don Garcias severely, for having taken
away the best part of his Estate, and caused his elder Son to be executed, he
forced the old man to seek Sanctuary with his youngest: and this was the Source
of all the Divisions in the Kingdom of Castille, which in less than thirty
years time caused the change of so many Masters, and at length pulled down his
Holinesses Excommunication upon the Head of the Count d'Atrevalo; but we will
leave him to his penitences, and continue our Remarks upon the most amorous
Passages in History.

Love is a thing hereditary falls
Like Land, unto the Children; Parents free,
And gay, produce the like, no spleens, no galls,
But streams of Love run down the family.
The mother which before was soft and kind,
But seldom leaves a dogged Girl behind.
There is no Reader I suppose so ignorant, Jane supposed of Castille.
but he knows what the Spanish History reports of Leonora, the Wife of Henry
the Fourth, King of Castille, surnamed the Impotent. This Princess having a
private Amor with the Count de Cueva, chief of the Family we have mentioned so
lately, and since created Duke of Albuquerque, would not trouble her self, as
other Ladies do, to conceal it from her Husband, she made her Love an Affair of
State; and King Henry, persuaded that it was by his fault his Wife had no
Children, and being passionately desirous of them, he entreated Leonora very
civilly that she would contrive some way or other to provide him one. She
pretended great horror at the first Proposition, that she might have the
pleasure of being pressed; and the King did her that kindness, he pressed, he
entreated, and his Election concurring with the Queens, the good Monarch
conducted the Count de Cueva to the Royal Bed with his own hand. The business
was executed with full liberty, and of this admirable Conjunction that Jane was
born who was owned by Henry, and for a long time after disputed the Crown with
the famous Isabella, Grandmother to the Emperor Charles V. It would be to
invert the Laws of Nature and Gallantry, to ascribe rigid and severe Virtue to
a Daughter of so spurious Extraction, we must endeavor to represent her
conformable to the Birth wherewith her Mother had honored her. She was not
above sixteen or seventeen years of age, when Lewis XI. King of France (the
same we have spoken of before as Dauphin in the Gallanteries of Agnes) sent the
Bishop of Alby to demand her in Marriage for his Brother the Count de Guyenne.
The Count de Boulogne was employed particularly from the Count de Guyenne with
full power in his Name to do what he thought requisite in the Affair, and he
thought good to fall in Love with her himself. He was handsome, and a^ery, and
the French are never so transcendantly illustrious as in foreign Countries. The
Infanta of Castille saw nothing at King Henry's Court so magnificently spruce
as the French Count: She could not forbear running into an admiration of their
Manners and Deportment, and the Count, like a good Politician, persuading
Monsieur d'Alby, that to render their Embassy successful, it would be
convenient to gain upon the inclinations of the Princess, in respect of the
power she had over her Mother, and her Mother over the King; he entertained her
with continual Discourses about the liberty with which they made Love in
France. It had not been long since Charles VII. was dead, and the severity of
Lewis's Regiment was not established as yet: He talked of nothing but the
wonderful freedoms of the last Reign, to have heard him, one would have sworn
the good qualities of the Ladies were denominated by their Conquests, and he
assured her that in France one would pass for either simple, or deformed, if at
her age she had not had two or three Amors. The Princess was jealous of the
reputation of her Charms, gave the Count to understand she liked the French
fashion very well, and according to his description, would be very glad to be
in it. For her first Lesson, he caused her Picture to be taken in little, by
the permission of the Queen, to send it as he pretended, to the Count de
Guyenne; but when it was finished, he caused a Copy to be taken, and sending
that to the Count, he kept the Original for himself; See, Madam, said he to the
Princess, how ingenious men demean themselves in our Court; their pretenses are
honorable and fair in every thing they do. Their outward professions are
always above censure; but the secret intention they reserve to themselves; and
it would be a sign of a very barren invention to circumscribe it within the
bounds of a single design. Such solid Lessons as these meeting with a Nature
apt and disposed, made so great a progress in a few months, that the Princess
was able to have commented upon his Text. Castille was then in great Troubles
by the pretensions of the Infant Alphonso, Brother of Isabella, and the Nephew
of Henry, who (as Historians say) without any lawful Right made Claim to the
Crown. The Grandees of the Country endeavored to accommodate the difference.
The Marquess de Villena supporting Alphonso's, and the Duke of Albuquerque
Henry's pretensions. The young Princess had a mind to bring over the Marquess
to the Interests of Henry, in which she was engaged; and to that purpose
bethought her self of putting the Count of Boulognes Documents in practice: The
Marquess de Villena hoping to draw some advantage from the Conversation of the
Princess, which might be profitable to Alphonso, prevented the obliging designs
she had upon his Heart. They began their first Commerce with their Eyes: if he
thought he understood the meaning of her glances, his were no less intelligible
to her; so that there needed no further explication of that Language. There was
a Garden belonging to the Palace, reserved only for the Queen and her Daughter
to walk in, into which no man was ever admitted: The Princess took the Air
there every night without any Attendance but an old Governess (the Count de
Boulogne had corrupted) and her Maids who never came near her but when they
were called. The Marquess found a way to introduce himself into this Garden; he
attended the hour in which the Princess was accustomed to walk, and following
her with his Eye into a Grove of Cypress-trees which formed themselves into a
Labyrinth, he discovered himself to her when he judged it convenient. The
Princess was surprised to see a man in that place, and the first impression
made her retire: but the Marquess conjuring her to hear him one word, the
Infanta was flexible and yielded. And for as much as the Daughters of Kings are
not to be courted as common persons are, reasons of State being always the
pretense of an ingenious Lover among them; he began first with a Declaration of
the absolute Power he had to negotiate in the difference betwixt Alphonso and
Henry; he next represented how easy it would be for him to propose in the
Treaty her Marriage with Alphonso, and observing the effect that Overture had
upon the Princess, he began to infinuate the Love he had for her himself, and
declared that by her indulgence and affection, she might engage him in her
Interests. The Princess took a resolution worthy of the Doctrine the French
Count had preached to her: she pretended great severity, but yet without
shifting the Marquesses hopes; My heart, says she, prefers the love of Virtue
to all the Dignities in the World, nevertheless it is not so ungrateful, but a
considerable service may have an influence upon it. In the midst of this
Conference the Princess apprehended she heard some body walk behind the
Palissade, against which she was leaning, and she trembled at the Alarm. Though
the Queen had made no profession of austerity her self, yet she exacted it in
others, and according to the Maxim of Court Ladies, was a declared Enemy to
all other peoples Courtship. The Princess fearing therefore to be surprised
alone in discourse with a man, made but one leap betwixt the place where she
was, and the door into her Appartment; and in imitation of her, the Marquess
made as much haste away as he could. He that put them to the rout, saw nothing
but their shadow: it was the Count of Boulogne, who observing her walk, had got
in at one of the Gates, and was watching upon the same design as had tempted
his Rival. He was in as much fear of being discovered as they. When he heard
them he hid himself, and suspecting nothing of the truth, he gave them as much
leisure to escape as they could wish. When by the profound silence after they
were fled, he judged he might come forth without danger, he stole to the
Princesses Window (which he knew looked into the Garden) resolved to knock
gently, and if it were possible, prevail for some moments Converse; but he was
surprised with a violent shower of rain, which made him apprehend the Princess,
could neither come out her self, nor put her head out of the Window, so that he
was glad to retire very melancholy upon the illness of his success. As he was
marching off, he perceived something under his feet, which he took up, and
found it like a Woman's Pantoffle or high Shoe; and indeed it was one of the
Infanta's, which she lost as she was running away, and durst not stoop to take
it up again. The Count seized upon it, and imagining the Lady which lost it,
must needs have been in great haste to leave it behind her, he concluded the
noise he had heard could not be without Mystery; and had a great curiosity in
himself to find out the bottom of it. The Pantoffle being in his Judgment
necessary to his design, he put it up carefully in his Pocket, and went home to
his Quarters. Being there, he began to examine it particularly, and found it to
be richly embroidred, and the form very handsome; he sent one of his Servants
(who w^nting no cunning) to inquire of all the Workmen in the City, for whom
that Pantoffle was made, and it proved to be made for a young Castellane,
called Elvira, who was one of the Princesses Maids of Honor, and having
excellent invention in all kind of Trimmings, the Princess her self wore many
times of her Work. The Count de Boulogne being ignorant of the second Destiny
of the Pantoffle, contented himself with the first; and (his Intrigue with the
Princess carrying more of honor than profit along with it) he thought it not
incompatible, if he had made a little Love to the Castillane. She had appeared
to him very pretty from his very Arrival, and if the honor of having the
first fruits of a Royal Heart, joined with some secret designs upon the score
of the Count de Guyenne, had not solicited his desires for the Infanta, Elvira
had had the first of his devotions. He was heartily glad to find his way so
well prepared: Lovers by the by, do not insist so much upon Quality and
Greatness; the Conquests that are most easy, are most acceptable with them. He
built upon the foundation of a former Rendez-vous, and judging of Elviras
Complexion by what he thought he knew of her already, the first occasion he met
with, he fancied would be favorable enough. Being at a Comedy in the Queens
Appartment, and a Collation afterward, to which the Ambassadors were invited,
he took Elvira aside toward a Balister, and pretending to desire her
explication of some Paintings upon the Wainscot, which he liked very well: It Is
not these Paintings is the business, Elvira, said he, as softly as he could
speak, that is but the pretense of our discourse: I love you, and could never
be happy in an opportunity of telling you before. I know I attempt a Fort, has
been taken already, but it is the custom among the French to dispossess all
Usurpers: I am not ignorant of your affairs, it was I routed you the Queens
Garden the other night: it was I made you run in such haste, and it is I have
the Pantoffle in my custody, which you lost by the way. I have not told any
thing of all this to any but your self, and will dye a thousand deaths before
ever I will tell it, But, fair Elvira, let me remember you, such discretion as
this deserves some kind of favor, recompense it therefore, if you please.
Elvira was young, high-spirited, one that would not admit of an Intrigue, and
for whom Nature had liberally done, what the Laws, and Education do many times
find great difficulty to do. You address your self very ill, Monsieur, said she
to the Count something angrily, you must seek a new Object for your Romances,
such trifles will not relish with me: And what she said, she spoke with that
Emphasis, as bold as the Monsieur was, she put him out of Countenance.
Neverteless being assured, as he thought, Elvira was not so terrible as she
desired to appear, this sally did but redouble the ardour of his Attaque; he
watched Elviras Eyes whenever he was permitted to see her: He took all lawful
occasions to make her little Presents, he gave many Bills to the Princesses
Maids, and found a way to insinuate, they were intended only for her. But (...)
more he concerned himself, the less notice she took. When he talked to her of
the Garden, the Rendez-vous, and the Pantoffle, she looked upon him as
distracted, and he (not to drive a thing too far, when he perceived she
delighted not to hear) took himself up, and pretending to believe her heart as
yet undisposed of, beseeched her he might have it in that quality rather than
fail: She told him very snappingly, she would do nothing in that nature, and
that she was a professed Enemy to those kind of Intrigues; but let her say what
she would he would have been sworn to the contrary, and that it was her
caution, not her humor deceived him. Well, he must needs know which of the two
spoke truth: He had made but one of the Gardiners before, he made them all now;
he understood the Marquess de Villena entered into the Garden that night he
found the Pantoffle. He sent for the Workman that made it, and examined it
himself; he assured him he made it for Elvira, so that the obstinacy she had
expressed, began to lose that credit it had almost acquired. The Count suspected
it an artifice, and believing it would be meritorious to convince her of her
juggling, he resolved to take her in the act. Though he had all these designs
in his head, his Intrigues with the Princess went on nevertheless: He accosted
her as often as he could, he writ Letters to her every day, and invented an
hundred ways to convey them; sometimes he sent them wrapped up in dried
Sweetmeats (and I suppose it was he brought up that custom at his return, for
it is still practiced in France at this day) otherwhiles he brought Verses and
Songs according to the way of the French Court, and then stole in a Letter
amongst those the Princess seemed to like. He was so ingenious likewise to
cause a Busk of Leaf-gold to be made upon blue Enamel, all hollow within, and
the Princess pretending to show him the Workmanship, or playing at some kind of
Sport where that would be necessary, she received his Notes many times, and
many times answered them. They were as kind as at the beginning, and (except
certain degrees of benevolence which he reserved till after his Embassy was
concluded) he thought himself in as much favor as he could wish; but he was
very much mistaken. The Marquess had satisfied the Infanta, that her Marriage
with Alphonso would be more honorable and advantageous, than the Count de
Guyenne; and the Princess treating the Ambassadors according to the quality of
their Proposals, the Prince of Castilles Ambassadors had the precedence in her
heart. The Marquess had met her by her order in the Garden, where he had found
her the first time without it; and as his designs of marrying her to Alphonso,
were not so sincere as the Count de Boulognes were to marry her to the Count de
Guyenne; the story says, the Marquess was much bolder with the pretenses of the
Prince of Castille, than the Count was with those of the French Prince. One
evening when he was in the Queens Garden attending the Princess who had
promised to meet him without any Equipage but her Governante; the Count de
Boulogne, who had his Scouts abroad, had notice where he was: he hasted
privately into the Garden by the Gate that was at his disposing, and expecting
at least to take Elvira in a lie, he stole gently behind an Arbor, where the
Gardener he had made, assured him the Marquess was entered. The evening was
dark, and the Princess, and Villena spoke very low, nevertheless the Count
could here the Whispering they made. He went round about the Arbor, and
throwing himself into it suddenly; How now! Madam, said he to the Princess, you
will have no Amors not you? your Rendez vous, and the story of the Pantoffles
are but Romances and Fables? you have no kindness for the Marquess of Villena
at all? and you are naturally, what the most virtuous are by Education? Part of
this charge was properly enough upon the Princess, and had the Count been
assured to whom he had addressed his Discourse, his public and private Interests
would have authorized him to have expressed himself in that manner: But the
haughtiness and quality of the Infanta would not permit her to return him any
milder reply. She told the Count he was very bold to intrude himself into a
Conversation where he was not invited; that she had her reasons for the secrecy
of her discourse with the Marquess, wherewith the King was already contented,
and (besides the Queen) she thought her self not accomptable to any body else;
that he would be gone immediately, unless he desired she should forget the
respect she had for his Dignity, as he had forgot what was due unto her. It is
not easy to express the astonishment the Count de Boulogne was in when he
heard it was the Infanta; he thought he had been mistaken, and interrupting her
in a fright; Why, Madam, said he to her, is it you that is in this Arbor? Yes,
replied the Infanta in a passion, it is I: And this Cavalier with me is the
Marquess de Villena? Yes, said the Marquess, I am the Marquess de Villena, and
I am in discourse with the Infanta about matters of State. I ask your pardon,
Madam, replied the Count out of countenance, I did not expect to have found the
Marquess in so good Company, I shall take my measures better another time, and
seeing the respect I owe you is exposed by such accidents undesigned, I shall
keep a better guard upon it for the future. Having finished these words, he
withdrew, and left the Infanta in a most inexpressible disquiet. The true cause
she concealed from the Marquess; that piece of sincerity is never in use; but
the scrupulous virtue wherewith the Queen did seem to embellish her older
years, supplied the Princess with pretenses enough for her disorder. As soon as
she was got to her Chamber, she writ a Letter to the Count, and though she
fathered her Rendez-vous upon the troubles of Castile, yet she expressed so
sensible a sorrow for the suspicions he had conceived, that one must have been
the Infanta her self to have discovered the fallacy. This Letter by ill Fortune
fell into the hands of the Marquess de Villena. The Princess had the Names of
her Gallants so ready in her memory, that she confounded them, and thinking to
name the Count de Boulogne, she directed her Messenger to the Marquess. The
Messenger understanding no further than what he received from her mouth for
there was no Superscription) carried it directly as the Princess had commanded
before she was aware. Such Messages as those are usually great interruptions to
Gallants repose. The Marquess spent the best part of the night in contemplation
of that gracious Letter, he was immediately satisfied of the mistake. The Count
was so exactly described, he needed not have been his Rival to discover it was
to him. This made the Marquess as jealous as angry: He considered in what
manner the Count accosted the Princess, and judged her answer, though
apparently angry, yet upon second thoughts more than ordinary familiar; he
deduced two or three melancholy Consequences, and resolved to second them with
Conference with the Count, he went to speak with him as soon as he was dressed.
The Count had received a Ticket from the Princess, addressed to the Marquess, as
the Marquess had received one the night before intended to the Count. She had
discovered the Destiny of her Letter, upon the return of her Messenger; and
would fain have rectified it, if it were possible; with this design, she
conjured the Marquess to meet her in a Monastery, where she was to dine that
day, and where she hoped to have the liberty to discourse with him. The faults
of Servants have such a successive concatenation, they are neither to be
justified nor prevented. The Princess had given so severe a Lecture to him that
carried the Letter, for having delivered it to Marquess de Villena, and
reitered with so confused a transport, that what she writ, was for the Count de
Boulogne, that his name ran still in his head, insomuch as he mistook again and
carried the Ticket to the Count. He was just reading it when the Marquess came
in, and Villena seeing him go out who brought the Note, and knowing him to be
the same person who had brought him the Letter the evening before; This Officer
of the Princess, said he to the Count, has prevented my zeal but a moment, I
am come to deliver you the Letter which without doubt he has told you did
belong to you. He told me but one thing (and that I am not much concerned to
know) replied the Count; which is, that the Princess goes this day to dinner in
a Monastery in this City; you who have more affairs to treat with her than I
have, and who chooses such private places for your transactions, may, if you
please, make your advantage of this; and giving him the Ticket, he bade him
look where it was. The Marquess was named in it, so the Count made no scruple
to deliver it to him. Ha! truly, said the Marquess smiling when he had read it,
this Adventure is pretty; the Princess I preceive would not leave us any thing
wherewith to reproach one another, and I should have had the advantage too
much, should I have given you the Letter she writ to you, unless you had had
the same Present for me. Having said those words, he thrust it into his hands.
The Count read it, and going on afterward in his Discourse; The Princess, said
he, takes more pains than she needs, I am too wise to do her any injury, and
too incredulous to be deceived. But, Sir, said he to the Marquess, may I ask
you, how long is it since you have been in possession of the Princesses
favors? for knowing so much as I do, I suppose you will not be desirous to
make it a secret; I believe, Sir, we are both guilty of the same indiscretion,
replied the Marquess, I am no more ignorant of your affairs, than you are of
mine, and I think the Princess is not worthy of your Cautions, when we reflect
upon the way she has treated us. The two Lovers being strangely irritated, but
possess with a passion too indifferent to produce any Tragical effects, entered
into an entire intimacy upon the score of their Adventures, and resolved to be
revenged by defeating her Marriage with either of the Princes from whom they
were employed. But they had not the pleasure of that revenge, Alphonso and the
Count de Guyenne dying about the same time, and the King of Castille following
not long after, the Princesses Destiny conducted her into Portugal, where she
failed not without doubt to put her old Maxims in practice. But I could never
get the true Memoires of the rest of her Intrigues. All I could learn was only
this, that after several Adventures, a Ray of Grace confined her to a Monastery
of Saint Clares, where she ended her life with most exemplary devotion. The
Count de Boulogne (who knowing her humor, looked upon her retirement but as
some amorous discontent) communicated his thoughts to so many people, that the
Tradition is come down as far as us, and I have related, as I received it: and
thus finding the third, Tome of our Annals sufficiently large, I make haste to
acquit my self of my fourth.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE.
THE SEVENTH PART.
ISmael (who by Usurpation had wrested the Persian Empire out of the hands of
Prince Imerse, Grandchild to Vsun-Cassan) had two Sons which were Twins, the
eldest was called Scach-Caly, and the other Chasan-Helif: the Sophy designed
the first of these two Princes for a Sister of Imerses, named Imerselle, to
whom from her Infancy he had given Education suitable to his design, and this
Marriage being like to corroborate his Usurpations, he resolved it in one of
his Royal Feasts, so famous in that Country, where it is reckoned a crime no
less than mortal to appeal from the Decrees pronounced at such times. The
Grandees of that Empire having been long prepared for that Alliance, had
approved it before, and the pain annexed to the infringement of that Law,
transcending any repugnancy the Princess could conserve against the Family of
that Tyrant; there was nothing expected but the Conclusion of that Negotiation,
and the delivering up certain Provinces which as yet remained faithful to their
lawful Prince; but in such cases the suffrage of the people is not so
nenessary, as a concurrence of Love: Which admitting no Laws but its own;
Prince Caly understood those of his Country in vain, and could not bring his
heart to a compliance therewith. He was desperately enamored of a Kinswoman of
his, called Zuria, and his passion being secret, was the more violent. He did
what he could to resist this inclination; but finding it grow higher by
depression, he sent for his Brother, and made him his Confident both of his
Love, and despair. Nor indeed could he have chosen one more sincere, for
besides the perfect amity betwixt them, Chasan had an ardent affection for
Imerselle: he never durst declare it to her, because he thought her too worthy
of the Empire, and so too high for any Subject to marry; besides he knew the
Order of Nature had designed her for his Brother. How! Sir, said he, when the
Prince told him he could not love Imerselle, is the Princess of Persia offered
to you, and you will not accept? I know her Excellencies well enough, replied
the Prince; but I am obliged by so strong ligaments to Zuria, that I am not
able to break them. I must confess Imerselle is beautiful, I must confess she
is virtuous, and I know in prudence I should look no further. But, dear
Brother, I have no sooner made this reflection, but I find I know not what
ebullition in my mind that opposes it immediately. My mind will not be subdued
by the dictates of my reason, the Beauty of Imerselle affects my Eye, but makes
no impression at my heart; and whatever I endeavor for her to no purpose; I
feel naturally for Zuria without any constraint. Ha! Sir, replied Chasan, you
shall find more people with the same passion for Imerselle, which you have for
Zuria, than you shall find on the contrary: Nothing in this World is so perfect
as Imerselle, nor nothing in this World so desirable. Ha! dear Brother, cried
the Prince embracing him, if I be not mistaken, I discern you, you love
Imerselle without doubt, and though Fortune has done me a displeasure, I see
she has provided me a remedy: Is it possible that in robbing my self of a
thing I abhor, I should be serviceable to a Brother I love so entirely? It is
but too possible that I love Imerselle, replied Chasan, for my passion for her
is as ancient as my reason. But, Sir, which way will that be a remedy to you?
you must resolve to dye, or marry the Princess. Our Father is severe, he
apprehends the Revolt of a people he has conquered, who do still retain an
inclination to their natural Prince: He will never encourage their
disobedience, by dispensing with yours; and (I cannot speak it but with
horror). I have too much reason to believe he will punish it in you as
severely as in the meanest of his Subjects; What advantage to you then, if I
admire Imerselle? will my misfortune be a diminution to yours? and will you
think your self the less miserable for my being so too? We must try what we can
to be neither of us so, replied Scach Caly, the Sophy is old, and I cannot
think will make overmuch haste to consummate our Marriage: He has a
troublesome War upon his hands will give him impediment for a while; let us make
use of the present, and leave futurity to the disposition of the Heavens.
Having said thus, he proposed that Prince Chasan should make Love to Imerselle
in his Name. We shall have no great task to obtain conveniences, continued
Prince Caly, we are of the same stature, and have the same voice, let us commit
the rest to the Conduct of Love. It was not many days after this resolution was
taken, before the Princes met an occasion for an Essay: The Prince Imerse was
retired to the Court of Bajazet II. Emperor of the Turks, who had given hopes
of restoring him to the Throne of his Fathers. Campson, Sultan of Egypt,
declared Enmity to Bajazet, being glad to divert those Troops which might
otherwise be employed against him, sent Thoman Bey (who succeeded him in that
Monarchy) to the Sophy, to offer him Alliance, and conjure him to an Union.
This Overture was too much to Ismaels advantage to be refused; he received the
Ambassador very honorably, and to do something the Egyptian might more
particularly apply to his own esteem and his Country's, the Court of Persia
invented Dances a l' Egyptienne, in which they danced masked, and habited after
the manner of Egypt. This Disguise furnishing the Princes with the opportunity
they wanted, they caused their Habits to be made exactly alike, and Caly giving
place to his Brother, and paying him all the respects that might signify him
to be elder Brother, he got the liberty to be with Zuria, whilst Chasan
supplied his place next Imerselle. The Princess Imerselle found her false Caly
much more passionate than her true one: he expressed himself so zealously, and in
such terms, as the sincerity of her old Caly could not dispense with: one of
the conditions of this Ball was, that they should have liberty to steal little
discourses whilst it lasted, and Chasan received those his good Fortune gave
him with the Princess, with so great transportation, the Princess was
surprised. I believe, Sir, said she to him smiling, the Habit you wear has
some secret propriety to make you amorous, you never appeared so much to me
before, and it is no longer ago than last night, I was telling the Princess
Zuria, your Cousin, that if your coolness continued, I should be the first
would expose my self to the rigor of the Law, rather than see you obey the
Sophy with so much reluctance. Disguise, Madam, replied Chasan, is many times
so necessary to Love, Lovers can speak nothing passionately without it; It is
not the Command of the Sophy that brings me thus near you, it is the desire of
my own heart; I might be another, not Caly, without yours or my Fathers
perceiving it: But my heart acting by peculiar Principles of its own, without
any foreign constraint, it is Love which speaks by my mouth, and not the
Sophy's Decree that excites me. But this Love, is it more constrained in my
Closet, replied Imerselle, or in another place you please to choose, than in the
confusion of so great an Assembly? Were we of those kind of Lovers to whom all
occasions of Converse were interdicted, or whose actions were exposed to the
eyes of our Enemies, I should not wonder you should want a Disguise to declare
your affection; but by his direction, to whom Nature and Fortune has obliged
us both, you may impart it how, where, and as often as you please; all places
are proper, and all expressions allowed you; how comes it then you have been so
indifferent before, and are so vehement now? The Prince would have been put to
some trouble to have answered this second question, had not the Company broke
up, and relieved them. His Brother and he ran to the Window, as it had been to
take a little air, and returning without their Masks, Scach Caly was obliged to
give Imerselle his hand, and to wait upon her to her Appartment; but it was
done with a coldness so unconformable to the Discourse she had had before, that
she could not but admire the difference. The Sophy believing it had been his
eldest Son that entertained Imerselle all the while, and perceiving him whom he
took to be his second, to keep close to Zuria, he fancied he was in Love with
her, and was not displeased; Chasan, said he to him next morning, I am sensible
of the secret inclinations of your heart; fatherly Love is full of observation,
and I have discovered that which perhaps you never intended I should see. I
might complain that you consulted me not; but I am a good Father, and will
impute that want of respect, to the impetuosity of a passion, which by my own
experience I know is not to be mastered by persons of your age. Chasan could
not at first recollect what should cause this Error in the Sophy; he suspected
he had discovered him by some or other of his gestures, whilst he was in
Conference with Imerselle, and that preferring the satisfaction of his Children
to the rigor of his Laws, he would not constrain their inclinations. Is it
possible, Sir, your paternal Love should have so excellent an efficacy? replied
Chasan; Yes, dear Son, it has, replied Ismael, and I give you my inviolable
word; the same day your elder Brother marries the Princess of Persia, the same
day you shall marry your Cousin Zuria; His Cousin, Sir? replied Caly, who was
present at the promise. Yes, his Cousin, replied the Sophy, I observed him
discoursing with her last night, as with a person not indifferent to him, and
though I might well dispose of him otherwise, yet such is my indulgence, I
shall gratify his desires. It was very lucky that the Sophy went into his
Closet as soon as he had spoke these words: the Princes discomposure had
discovered that which they intended to conceal: They retired to their
Appartments so afflicted and confused, they had scarce power to contain
themselves from murmuring. How! said Chasan, is it not sufficient to satisfy
the rigor of my Destiny, that I have loved a Princess from my Childhood, and
dare not hope to enjoy it? But I must marry one I neither can, nor ought to
love, Is it nothing, said Caly, that I must be deprived of Zuria, but I must be
forced to marry Imerselle? and my Brother whom I love as my self, must he
become the only Person in the World I ought to hate? How! Zuria must be married
to Chasan? then Chasan it is I must esteem the only ruin and supplanter of my
happiness. It shall never be, Sir, replied the young Prince, I can love no body
but Imerselle, and therefore will never be married to Zuria. You would marry
her, replied the disconsolate Caly, could you but conceive the secret Charms
wherewith she effacinates the hearts of all that approach her, could you but
discern the sweetness of her Wit, the excellence of her Soul, and the obliging
way she has in all her actions. Ha! dear Brother, it is impossible you should
see that Princess with the least assiduity, but you must needs be in Love with
her. I am afraid rather, replied Chasan, you will not be able to defend your
self against the transcendencies of Imerselle, when you come to observe her
with more intention. No, you are secure against that danger, replied Prince
Caly, interrupting him, I have had trial already of the Charms of Imerselle,
and I find they can do nothing upon me; but you having as yet had no conflict
with Zuria, your first must of necessity be mortal. After they had a long time
tormented one another in this manner, they went together to Imerselles
Lodgings, and found the Princess Zuria with her; had Love been to have disposed
of their places, the Princes had known how to have chosen them well enough. But
Zuria being fearful of the life of her Prince, would not suffer him to speak
privately with her in the presence of the Princess of Persia; and Chasan
apprehending Imerselles severity, durst not own his passion without his
Disguise. The constraint they suffered in not having the liberty of their own
inclinations, was conspicuously visible in their faces. Zuria took notice of
Caly's distraction, and applied all the consolation the kindness of her glances
could contribute; and the more she applied, the more his disquiet was
increased. The Princess of Persia imagining the Prince at that time so
melancholy and dejected, was the same who the night before was so vigorous, and
brave, she upbraided him by his pusillanimity, and he knew not how to defend
himself. They spent all the afternoon in this doleful employment, but the
evening being come, the Princes hoping for more favors from its obscurity,
than from the clearness of the day. They proposed to the Princesses to take a
Walk; they accepted of the motion, and all four went down into the Garden
together: Scach-Caly led Imerselle, and Chasan Zuria; the Prince looked back
every step he went, to see if Zuria's Beauty had not produced the effects he
presaged. By the actions of his Brother, it seemed to him his Prophecy was
false, and whilst they were in the light, his suspicions were tolerable, but
when they came into the dark Alley, and he could not see what passed betwixt
them, he lost all consideration, and cried out, without knowing what he said,
he will be in Love withher, doubtless he will be in Love with her; it is
impossible for him to defend himself: Who do you speak of? said Imerselle
interrupting him, and griping him by the hand. The Prince was troubled to find
he had betrayed himself, and doing what he could to recollect; It is my
Brother, Madam, I speak to, replied he. He has often told me he is
Beauty-proof, and that no Woman living was able to make any impression upon
him; I was unwilling he should have that advantage of me, and therefore I
entreated my Cousin to use what Art she could to subdue him. Will you please,
Madam, and we will listen to hear how she succeeds? The word was no sooner out
of his mouth, but he ran the Princess up into a Hedge, and thrust himself by
her: It was dark in that Alley in the day time, and was not to be expected it
should be lighter, when it was dark every where else. Chasan and his Cousin
past just by Imerselle and the Prince without perceiving them in the least, and
Caly heard what his Brother discoursed; It is that, said he, will be one day
the greatest of our pleasures. A deelared Intrigue is but flat and insipid;
Love is never so well settled, as where no body suspects its residence. Chasan
spoke these words upon the score of his passion for the Princess of Persia; but
Caly's Jealousy would not admit of that interpretation; he understood all
according to the depravity of his own sense, and that imagination over-powring
his Judgment, he ran immediately to his Brother, and left his Princess without
her Gentleman Usher. Chasan heard one behind him, and demanding who was there,
Caly quickly informed him, by thrusting him hastily from Zuria, and telling him
he had supplied that place long enough; he intimated thereby that his place
with Imerselle was vacant. Chasan ran to the Princess to propagate the Mystery
of the Egyptian; he found her highly disgusted with the manner in which Caly
had quitted her, she was got as far as the end of the Alley, to have called her
Women, and gone back to her Lodgings: But Chasan stopped her by the Gown, and
desired the reason of her retreat. Here is no need of me, Sir, said she
twitching her Gown out of his hand, and doubling her pace. The young Prince
imagined presently Caly had discovered something of his Love to Zuria, and
being defirous, if possible, to repair it: But, fair Princess, said he to
Imerselle, holding her still by the Gown, do not use me so severely, I beseech
you, I am not capable of any desire that may offend you; if before I was aware
I have done any thing has displeased you; See, Madam, I am ready to dye in
expiation. This submission of Chasan, whom she took all the while for Caly, did
in some measure qualify her anger: she loved not that Prince, but as one he
thought designed to be her Husband; but she was high, knew well she deserved
all the respects of a Lover, and could not brook the indifferencies of Caly.
She made her reproaches therefore to Chasan, mistaking him for Caly, which he
found by their fierceness to proceed from a real displeasure. You indulge my
affection perhaps more than you intend, when you let me fee so much of your
indignation: it is too violent to be the effect of an ordinary cause: You love
doubtless, for so immoderate an anger goes seldom unaccompanied with a
proportion of the other. Do not you flatter your self with that imagination,
replied Imerselle, if I love you, it is only so far as I am forced by the
Commands of the Sophy. Before I was obliged to marry you by that irrevocable
Decree, I looked upon you as there had been no such man, and (by a blind
instinct from I know not what cause) had I consulted my own heart, I should
have found there Prince Chasans interest much greater than yours. Chasans,
Madam? replied the Prince. Yes Chasans, replied Imerselle, his deportment
accommodates much more with my humor than yours: he has more Complacency for
me than you, and I find a secret propensity in me to do him what service I can.
Ha! Madam, cried Chasan, interrupting her, do not suppress that propensity, I
beseech you. Chasan is equally dear to me with my self, his advantages are
mine, I feel all his desires, I participate of his joys, and I cannot be happy
but in his good Fortune. I said not what I did, replied the Princess, to put
you upon that declaration: I am sensible how I am engaged by the Laws of the
Persians, and the Sympathy I have for your Brother, will not make me hazard my
life by making him my Husband; nor indeed do I know whether he would desire it,
we have never discoursed of any such thing, but I am glad I have this
opportunity to let you know that it is my Honor, and nothing else, is
exasperated by your slights. Find but a way of enfranchizing me from the
penalty of the Decree; restore me but once freely to my self, and dispose of
your self afterward as you please, I Will assure you I shall not be concerned,
but whilst I continue under the engagement that is upon me, I expect it should
be reciprocal, and you sensible of your obligation as well as my self. This
Discourse drawing on Chasan into a Conversation he did not like, he was
constrained to personate Caly all the rest of the Walk: he begged her pardon for
what he had not done, and made a thousand prayers and protestations: They had
the true Character of Love, that passion is never more prodigal of its favors
than at the time of reconciliation. Chasan had a Ring given him by the Princess
off of her finger upon this condition, that whenever she was required by that
Signal to perform her engagement, she would cheerfully receive him for her
Husband. The Prince Caly had almost the same assurances from Zuria; she could
not (whatever she said) resolve to expose a person she loved so entirely, to
the severity of his Father: But Love having inspired him with thoughts of
running to some Sanctuary, she consented, and obliged her self that whenever
they found themselves reduced to that necessity, she would readily submit.
These favorable hopes quieted the disorders of the two Brothers; they past
that night with more tranquillity than they had done five or six before; but
their sleep was a Cheat, which enchanted them for some hours, only to make
their sorrows the more sensible when they waked. The Prine Imerse having
advertisement of Ismaels designs upon the person of his Sister, being averse to
that Alliance, and retaining a just hatred to the Usurper of his Throne, he
resolved to attempt any thing might obstruct the accomplishment of the
Marriage. The Sophy held his Court at that time at Xiras, the Capital City of
that Province in Persia. This City preserved a fidelity for its Prince, which
all Ismaels Authority could never eradicate; Imerse sent private Agents to the
principal Inhabitants, remonstrated the trouble it would be to him to see his
blood confounded with the blood of his implacable Enemy; and conjured them, if
they could possibly, to prevent that disparagement by stealing Imerselle away:
His Agents acquitted themselves so well of their Commission, that the very
night after the Walk we have mentioned, the Princess of Persia was surprised,
and the Princess Zuria with her, who unfortunately for Caly, lay that night
with Imerselle. The Enterprise was performed without any great noise; the
Princesses Lodging in a quarter of the Palace, a good distance from the Sophys
Appartment; the Instruments of the design were let in by the Princesses Women,
who were most of them related some way or other to the heads of the Party, and
the Prince Imerse having charged them with express Order under his Hand, that
his Sister might not mistake, there was only Zurias skreeks to be prevented,
which were stopped before she was well awake. They clapped the Princesses into a
Coach which attended on purpose, conveyed them out of a Gate they had secured,
and following the Road to Texel with all speed, they were received into that
Town by Imerse, and the Sultan Selim, the Son of Bajazet II. who in the name of
his Father had the Command of all Phrygia. It is easy to imagine the
affliction of the two Princes at this sorrowful News; they mounted immediately,
and being followed by the whole Court they endeavored to discover which way
these Ravishers were gone; but they could have no information, till it was too
late to overtake them: They seemed to be inconsolable, and their Love not being
to be confined within the bounds of simple grief, they resolved to get to their
Princesses, if they could, and try all ways possible, for their relief. They
took upon them the Habit of certain new Dervises of the Sect of Scaydar, who
was a famous Commentator upon the Alcoran, and from whom they were descended,
and alluding the Cautions of their old Father, they took their way toward
Phrygia. They had not marched far before they had News of what they sought
after: The Sultan Selim was fallen in Love with Imerselle at first sight, and
Imerse had as great a passion for Zuria; their Loves were so conspieuous by
their public magnificences, there was scarce one person ignorant of it in the
whole Country. Our loving Dervises were almost distracted at the Report, they
hastened their march, and in a short time were advanced within half a days
Journey of Cibotis, called otherwise Apamia, where the Sultan Selim held his
Court. They took up their habitations in a Desert near the River Meandre; a
Grot with two or three murmuring Fountains were presented to them by Chance, as
it had been by Command. Such persons as they had been constrained to bring
along with them, they sent into the City, to supply such things as they wanted,
and to diffuse the noise of their extraordinary Virtue among the people, which
was so effectually performed, they were not long before they were visited by
all the Bigots and Fanatics in Mahumetism. They entertained their devout
Visitants with Discourses only of the Vanity of this World, and the solid
pleasure in the Contemplation of the next. It is a general Maxim, the
hypocritical Devout is always more eloquent than the true, their soul is full
of nothing but it self, the humility of good men, and meditation upon what they
are to treat, and this Evangelical simplicity (which is the imitable Character
of true piety) adding much to the riches of their expression, they become very
strong and powerful in their persuasions. Our pretended Dervises joining to
their Hypocrisy, a high natural Wit, made so great a progress among the
Inhabitants of Texel, that in a short time the News of them came to the ears of
Sultan Selim. The new Scaydars were not mentioned but as the eldest Sons of
Prophets, and (by an usual Hyperbole in such occasions) several persons
affirmed they had seen them do Miracles, who never heard of them but from the
mouth of some fantastical Enthusiast, or the relation of some private
Emissaries of their own. This high reputation drawing upon them the esteem of
the Sultan, he sent Presents to the pretended Dervises, and conjuring them to
recommend him to their Prophet. They promised him their intercession, but his
Presents they returned, pretending they renounced all things belonging to this
World; and had now no Commerce but with the Angles. This Answer moved the
Curiosity of Selim, he made an agreement with the Prince Imerse, to make them a
Visit: The two Princes had advertisement of their design; they had their Spies
in the Town, who observed and gave notice of the motions of their Rivals: They
studied gravity for some time wherewith they might receive them; and Selim
being arrived at their Cave, they knew so well how to furnish it with such
things as might persuade him of their Sanctity, that the best piece of
Household Stuff to be seen, was the instrument they kept to mortify their
flesh. The Inventory almost frighted the two Curiosoes, they were afraid of
profaning so holy a place, and the Dervises seconding their Error; Most dear
Children of our great Prophet, said Caly to them, be not fearful to approach
the most humble Servants of the Eternal, it is for your sakes only we are sent
into this Province, and it is the charitable care the Heavens take of your
Conduct, that has put it into your hearts to visit us. Hark, you Sultan Selim;
Hark, you Prince Imerse, the Stars do look upon you with a malevolent Aspect,
and you have a strong disposition to follow their malign Influence: Our Divine
Prophet has thought you worthy of his own direction in so perilous a passage,
and we are the sacred Interpreters of his adorable intentions. At these words
adorable, sacred Interpreters, delegated to them from so venerable a Prophet;
the Sultan Selim and Prince Imerse, made a most profound Reverence, and
protesting they would receive with as much submission as says, the divine
Decrees it should please those Scaydars to pronounce, they humbly entreated
they would vouchsafe to begin the Exercise of their Mission. The counterfeit
Dervises concluded it best to pretend as much difficulty as they could, to
confirm their Rivals in their credulity. The Mysteries of Heaven are neither
explained, nor received with so little preparation, said Chasan, there must be
prayers, and austerities to open the sacred Repositiories of the Celestial
graces: You have a heart repleat with mundane desires, how can you believe,
till they be expelled, there should be room for divine Inspirations? Purge,
purge away the pollutions wherewith that is defiled, and then our great Prophet
will replenish you with such salutriferous emanations as he has reserved for
you: Love, hatred, and ambition are like so many Tempests in your Soul, force
your selves what you can to calm them, excite your selves what you can to
tranquillity, deprive your selves of the sight of such objects, as produce
those turbulencies in your soul; we do not name them, because our revelation
tell us, you will divine even that, of which we think not convenient to
remember you. But, dear Princes, let us acquaint you, we are not ignorant of
the most secret of your thoughts; and when you shall be worthily prepared for
our instructions, shall tell you such things as will surprise you: God then,
and put your selves into a condition to merit that bounty wherewith the Heavens
are pleased to favor you; and when you judge your souls in such a posture as
is required, repair to us again, and be further informed. These cunning
Dervises referred the Rivals to a second Conference, as well to agree upon what
they were to say, as not to render themselves suspected of a premeditated
design; and this adjournment producing the effect they expected, the Sultan
calculated the importance of their advice, by the difficulty they made of
giving it: he thought he might from these Holy persons draw such wholesome
instructions as might direct him in the conduct of his whole life. These
Fathers have a strict Communication with Heaven, said he to Prince Imerse, the
brightness of their virtue blazing in their actions, and there is a Character
of piety so visible in their faces, it seems to be expanded by the divine hands
of that great Prophet himself: Imerse concurred exactly in Selims observations,
and both of them projecting to make their advantage of the Present Heaven had
made them of these wonderful men, they sent to give them an account of the
preparations they had made for a second Visit, and to desire their opinions,
whether they were sufficient. The Princes sent them word, no: They had sent out
their Scouts for more news; and from the people which came to see them,
wheedled out such Intelligence as was necessary for their design, they had a
mind to gain more time to complete their informations, and contented themselves
to send them this single Injunction, that above all things they should forbear
the Conversation of Women, lest they should abuse the authority their Director
had given them; there was no sort of penance but they exacted from their
Rivals; they made them fast, they made them watch; and their subtleties
extended to greater trials than those: But at length, supposing themselves
sufficiently inlighted, they let fall their secret persecution; and the day for
their second Visit being appointed, the abused Princes came again to their
Grot. The anger of Heaven, said Chasan to them as soon as he saw them, begins
to dispel, the instance of your prayers, and the piety of your works, have
mollified the rigor of that sentence Stars seemed to pronounce against you:
And that you may believe we speak not of our selves, you shall hear what our
great Prophet has revealed to us; You, Sultan Selim, said he to the Turkish
Prince, taking him afide, you have drawn down the divine displeasure upon your
head, by a secret animosity you had against your Brother Mahumet; you would
have been preserred before him to the Government of Amasia, and not succeeding
in your design, the despite you conceived prevailed with you to excite the
people of that Province to complain of him so vigorously, their complaints cost
him his life. Do not I tell you true, Sir, said Chasan? The Sultan was forced
to confess, he had actually committed all he was charged with, and having added
something of his own, he confirmed the Dervis in whatever their perquisition
had caused them to suspect. The Heavens, justly incensed against you for so
detestable a crime, continued he, has provoked you to the Love of a Princess of
Persia, which will be certainly your ruin: It is decreed, and our great
Prophet has sent us on purpose to give you advice; but your, and our prayers
begin to incline him. He was a man, as you are, and though his humanity was
sustained by divine Qualifications, he knows nevertheless how far the frailties
of your Nature may carry you: Let that Princess be brought hither, let her
Attendants be as few as they can, for we delight not to converse with more in
this World than is necessary for your preservation; and for no other reason,
but for the accomplishment of our Prophets designs, could we be induced to any
private Entertainment with Womankind: But we know our instructions, and it is
for the execution of them only we are come into this Province. The Sultan was
so respectful, and so serious in his attention, the counterfeit Dervis had much
ado to compose himself, and retain the gravity required: nor was Caly in the
mean time under lesser temptation; he was gotten into the particulars of all
Imerses affairs. That Prince had ingenuously confessed all the Circumstances of
the stealing the Princesses, named the persons with whom he had Intelligence in
Xiras, and discovered several other Secrets of importance, which the Dervis
fisht out of him by pretending he knew all before, and demanded his
recapitulation, as a mark only of his submission to the will of the Prophet,
and passing from matters of State, to matters of Love; You are in Love, Sir,
said he, with the Princess Zuria, the prescience where with we are endued, gave
us information of that Love, even before it was conceived: But, Sir, let me
tell you, you will meet with great difficulties in that Enterprise, it is not
at all pleasing to our divine Prophet, and you will make him a Sacrifice
infinitely grateful, if you surmount that passion, and desist: Ha: holy Father,
replied Imerse, it is not possible to surmount it; if any thing could have
prevailed, the Princesses severity would have done it: she is insensible of all
my pains, and recieved my offers with most insufferable neglect. Without doubt,
replied Caly, her heart is prepossest in favor of some other person. Has not
the Sultan Selim, think you, made no impression there; he is young, he is
handsome, has his just expectation of the Ottoman Throne, and I am afraid (by
what I observe in the Constellations) that Prince will betray the confidence
you have in him. If he must betray me, replied Imerse, it is not upon this
occasion; he is extravagantly in Love with my Sister, and the Princess for whom
my passion is so violent, has no less indifference for all the World than for
me: Yet I cannot but think her of an amorous temper, replied the Dervis, she is
born under a Planet not guilty of such indifferent Influences, and I dare
promise I could find out a place in her heart capable of those impressions, had
I but discoursed with her as long as I have done with you. How! I beseech you,
said Imerse interrupting him, will you vouchsafe to discourse with her, and I
will bring her to you whenever you please; she will make no scruple of coming,
she has already an extreme curiosity to see you, and when the other day I gave
her a description of your person, I observed an emotion in her countenance so
great, as I thought she had not been capable of. I commend her zeal, replied
Caly, the desire of seeing persons eminent for their piety, is a happy
preparative to their imitation. Heaven does not grant those graces to all the
World, and I know by that, Zuria is a Darling of the divine Prophet, upon which
assurance you shall obtain that act of charity from me when you please. But it
must be speedily, for the time that was assigned us for our conversation of
men, is now almost expired; and we must ere long leave our association with
profane persons, to renew our Commerce with the Angels. The credulous Imerse
knocked his knees with a holy trepidation at the Dervises news, and making the
bargain as strong as he could, for the next day, Selim obtained of Chasan, that
Imerselle might bear her Company. The Dervises slept but little the night
before that blessed Enterview; Caly's joy produced transports incompatible with
his repose, and his Brothers apprehensions kept him as watchful on the other
side. He was afraid to find Imerselle prepossest with kindness for the Sultan,
he was handsome, and the little Love the Princess had for Caly, made him afaird
Selim would not meet any considerable defense. He durst not mention it in the
least to his Rival, lest he should not be able to master his confusion in so
subtle a point; reserving himself therefore to be informed from the Princesses
own mouth, he prepared himself for those informations with inexpressible
commotion. The deluded Lovers were in no less anxiety. Hope is an unquiet
passion, which gives the mind more agitation many times, than a real despair.
They proposed the business to the Princesses at their return; they approved it,
especially Zuria, who finding the description of the Dervises not much
differing from Ismaels two Sons, had a violent imagination of the truth. She
was got up and ready before day, and pressing Imerselle to make as much haste,
they were got to the Grot before they were expected. Their new Lovers would
accopany them by all means (which was foreseen by the Dervises) but they
thought that obstacle would be removed by the respect they would show them.
They had shrouded themselves each of them under a Hat with a long tail pulled
down in such sort, it covered most of their faces. That kind of Dress they
pretended, was the Habit of their Piety, when they were forced upon any
Conference with Women: Chasan made signs to Imerselle to follow him to the foot
of a Rock, where he designed his Communication; and Caly took Zuria aside to
walk under the Trees; and that the Turkish Prince and his Camarade might give
no interruption, they gave them certain prayers in the Turkish Language with
injunction to go into the Grotto, and say them over there for their happy
success. The Rivals were flexible, and obeyed: They were so possessed of the
Dervises Sanctity, they would have extended their conformity much further, if
it had been desired. Chasan having placed Imerselle upon a part of the Rock,
which was covered with moss, keeping himself just before her upon his feet,
that the Sultans Equipage (who stood round about the Grot) might have no
prospect of his face. I have great things to relate to you, young Princess,
said he, dissembling his voice as much as he could; I know things of you, you
do not know of your self; but as the ingenuous declaration of our most secret
sentiments is the ordinary Channel of Celestial graces, do you merit by that
act of submission the good things which are in my power to impart; tell me
sincerely what was your thoughts of Seach Caly, what of Chasan Helif, and what
is your present opinion of the Sultan. Observing her to change color, you are
surprised, Princess, said he, to find me so skilful in your affairs; but let me
tell you, those persons who are honored with a familiar Conversation with
Heaven, are ignorant of nothing that passes upon Earth. I know you have a
secret inclination to Chasan; you discovered as much to Caly himself that night
you were walking in the Palace Garden at Xiras, which, if my memory fails not,
was the night before you were carried away; judge now if I be not acquainted
with your affairs, and save me the labor of telling you any more. Alas!
replied Imerselle in a great surprise, I can say no more to you, having
discovered my affection for Chasan, you have discovered the greatest secret of
my soul. I confess that Sympathy was born with me; yet when I thought it my
duty to resist it, I did it with some kind of success, he never had the least
inclination of it from me, as you have had now: But if I must confess the true
state of my heart, I must acknowledge that inclination increases every day upon
me; I love Chasan much better in Phrygia, than I did in Persia, and by I know
not what Capricio of Love, absence augments that in me, which it destroys in
all other persons in the World. You have no kindness then for Selim? said the
happy Chasan, and the Princess replying only with a contemptuous shrug, gave
him more satisfaction than an eloquent Discourse. I am fully satisfied, fair
Princess, of your sincerity, said Chasan, and to recompense it by an
information as grateful, know Imerselle, that Chasan loves you a thousand times
better than you love him. It was he entertained you at the Egyptian Ball under
the name of his Brother; it was he who leaving Caly with his Cousin Zuria that
night you were walking in the Garden, appeased your indignation with those
mollifying words: To him it was you gave that Ring which engaged your faith to
him by those sacred protestations; and in a word, it is he who (renouncing all
the pleasures of his Fathers Court, and despising all the dangers he should be
exposed to, were he known) speaks to you at this present under the Name and
Figure you see. The Prince might trust Imerselle without scruple, the
confession she had made secured him against any indiscretion. It was not
without reason he had taken care the Princesses face should be covered: the
alterations this discourse made there, could not have been provided against but
by that precaution: She blushed, she was disturbed, she had like to have cried
out, and run away; but the danger the least noise would bring upon Chasan,
restraining that impetus, she remained as immovable in the place where she
sat: Chasan taking advantage of her perplexity, drew out the Ring, and
discovering his face, the Princess found so much Love there, that though her
Eyes, and the sight of her Ring had not convinced her, she would have concluded
no body but the counterfeit Egyptian, and he that made Love to her in the Walk,
could have looked upon her with such passionate glances. She blamed the Prince
for the perils to which he had exposed himself, she conjured him to clear
himself as soon as he could, and then inquired very earnestly how he had done
to delude the Sultan and Prince Imerse so handsomely. He gave her an account in
few words of whatever she asked him; he told her the Love Caly retained for
Zuria, their adventures as Princes of Persia, their adventures as Dervises, and
concluded all with a request to her to cajol the imaginations of Selim, that by
that Complacence persuading him of the interests the Dervises had in Heaven, he
might be induced to permit the Princesses to visit them oftener. The
Conversation of Caly and Zuria was neither so serious, nor sincere at first:
she knew the Prince as soon as she see him, his shape, his voice, but above all
the secret emotion of a heart truly affected, assured her it was none but her
dear Caly that spoke to her; however resolving to punish him for that he had so
well mastered his transport: It was not necessary, devout Father, said she to
him, that the Prince Imerse should bring me hither upon the design he
pretended; for whether by the miraculous efficacy of your prayers, or whether
that there is a period for anger, as for other things; so it is, that sensible
part of my heart which you promised to find, is perfectly discovered. I love
the Prince of Persia, and am ready to act whatever his Love can reasonably
expect from me. I am amazed, replied Caly in some kind of disturbance, that
this change should be so sudden; I have some secret Revelations which assured
me that your passion for the Prince Scach-Caly, would have made a better
defense against the attaques of the Prince Imerse. It did indeed make defense
for a while, replied the sly Zuria, and since you know all, I need not scruple
to confess, I did love the Prince you speak of very well; but the absence of
one Lover, and the assiduities of another make strange Metamorphoses sometimes
in the affections of a Woman. The disguised Prince began to rave at this
discourse, which made the Princess judge she had carried her hypocrisy too far.
She smiled, and looking upon the Prince with an air sufficient to despel a
thousand suspicions; Recollect your self, Seigneur Dervis, said she to him, you
have but little Communication with Heaven, if you have no better notion of what
happens below: Call in your good Genius to your relief, and she will tell you
Zuria will never love any thing but her dear Caly, whom the disguise of a
Dervis cannot conceal from her heart, and that in all Habits, as in all places,
he shall find her always the same. The Prince perceiving his Error by those
words, reproacht her a thousand times for the perplexities she had put him to:
It was resolved by agreement they should contrive as many Conferences as they
could. He told her designs, which the proximity betwixt Imerselle and Imerse
would not permit Chasan to discover to that Princess; and then passing all of
them together to interrupt the two Lovers meditations in the Grot, the abused
Princes found their prayers so effectual in appearance, they thought they could
not sufficiently admire the Celestial power wherewith the Dervises were endued.
The Princesses flattered their hopes with a thousand frivolous assurances;
Zurias greatest care was to make peace betwixt Ismael and Imerse; Selim
promised to dispose hi^ Father Bajazet to mediate in the affair, upon condition
he might have Imerselle for his labor; the Princess pretended to consent, and
frequent Journies were made to the Dervises to recommend their success to the
Divine Prophet. The abused Lover were employed always in Pilgrimages, and it
was admirable Entertainment for their Rivals to se^ them besotted with their
credulity, whilst they good Fathers, were making Love to their Mistresses.
Their discourse grew more passionate by degrees; and doubtless had the
circumstances of ti^^ and place been a little more favorable, a kindness upon
that occasion would have had a singular relish: The counterfeit Dervises
sustained their Character with incomparable address; they never fed but in the
night, to persuade such as would be so simple, they kept perpetual fast. The
Turkish Prince looked upon them as sent down from Heaven, and gave the Sultan
his Father such an Elogy of them, he sent a person on purpose to visit them
from himself: They refused to see his Envoy, pretending that was a day in which
they were not allowed to admit of any humane Conversation; and the Princesses
themselves coming to see them that day, were sent back with the same excuse.
But it was not for nothing they denied themselves so great a happiness; they
had seduced some of the principal Inhabitants of the Town of Antalia (which was
the Residence of Caragose Beglierbey of Natolia) he had infused into them, that
he had received a mavelous Sword from Heaven, by virtue of which a new
Government should be established in Turkey, that Bajazet was but an
unprofitable Trunk, and that the crimes of Selim had provokt Heaven against his
whole Race: The crimes wherewith he charged him, had been told from his own
mouth, he declared them to the Natolians with advantage, and promising them no
less than inestimable riches in this life, and eternal felicity in the next, if
they assisted toward the erection of that new Dominion; they concurred,
engaged to receive him into their City, and take Arms under his Conduct to
maintain the Sect of the Scaydars. This Treaty was managed in the most obscure
part of the Desert, at the same time the Dervises gave so great a testimony of
their Sanctity, by refusing Bajazets Envoy. The day set for the Enterprise, and
all things prepared for its execution, they sent word to Sultan Selim, that at
length the moment was come in which the Divine Prophet commiserating the
violence they had done to themselves in conversing so long among sinners, had
given them leave to withdraw from that slavery, and retire into a Desert
unknown to all persons affected with the pleasures of this World, and that when
they were once gone, they should be heard of no more till they were dead, that
before their departure they had obtained by singular favor a liberty of
revealing all their secrets to them effectually, which they had done hitherto
but in part; that if he pleased he might come to them to the Grot, and bring
the two Princesses with him, to whom likewise they would declare the last
pleasure of their Prophet; but that they should have as few of their Attendants
as possible, in respect of the horror they conceived at the sight of the
people of this World. The Sultan ran headlong into the Trap he had laid for
him; he went to the Grot with the Princesses, and Prince Imerse, and not above
eight or ten armed men in their Company. The Persian Princes lay in Ambuscade
upon a pass, at the head of three or four hundred new Sectaries, which they had
divided into several Squadrons, and disposed privately up and down to prevent
the danger of an Alarm, but with directions upon a Signal, agreed to draw into
a Body, which they did, and fell upon the Sultan when he least expected such
entertainment. The Princesses were secured, and carried away by their true
Lovers to the City Antalia, where the Princes were received. They drove away
the Beglierbey, and put all that opposed to the Sword; after which, they got so
many men together, by their false predictions, and possessed themselves of so
many Towns, that by the assistance of Ismael, they maintained War several years
against all the Disciples of Osman, and mist narrowly of extinguishing them
quite. They gained three great Battles, killed three Bashaws, and which was
more to their satisfaction, enjoyed their Princesses quietly, whom the death of
Ismael and Imerse, who lived not long after, left entirely to their disposition.

Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, Don Sebastian.
animated against the Mores, rather by his Christian zeal, than his prudence,
passed into Africa at the Head of a puissant Army, in the year 1580. The
pretense of this War, was the oppression of Muly Mahomet, King of Marocco and
Fez, whom his Uncle Muley Moluc, called otherwise Abdelmelec, would dispossess
of his Kingdom, as belonging to him. Equity and Justice were of Abdelmelecs
side; but the Christians for Muley Mahomet. He had passed his word to them,
that if they secured him in his Throne, he would embrace the Catholic Faith;
and that engagement outweigh'd all other considerations: Sebastian armed
himself, solicited all Christian Princes, past with his Army into Africa; and
I am apt to believe with many grave Authors, the interest of Religion was the
only motive that carried him: But Love insinuates many times, where it is not
desired.

Muley had a Daughter called Xerina, who being born of a Greek, was not so
black as your ordinary Africans: She was as well proportioned as was possible,
and the Courtship of Granada was not worn out of the Manners of the Mores at
that time. Don Sebastian could not defend himself against her Charms, though he
was contracted to Mary of Portugal, his Cousin, was to marry her at his return,
and loved her exceedingly before he was acquainted with Xerina; this Marriage
was of great importance to the repose of Portugal.

But obstacles in Love do but allure,
And tempt the indifferent Lover to desire,
That God delights in difficulties sure,
Who will not suffer soft and gentle fire.
What reason prompts is but esteem, not Love,
And to pursue it, civil, and no more;
What passion, nonsense will, and humor prove,
And run the desperate Lover out of door.
Let reason then triumph, let passion fall,
Be wise and civil, but not fond at all.
Don Sebastian being of too great Eminence and Quality to apprehend a repulse,
it was not long before he acquainted Xerina with his affections. The Princess
approved of him well enough, and her ambition increased her approbation. She
received the declaration of his Love without any difficulty, and promising Don
Sebastian to turn Christian, as he promised to relinquish the Princess of
Portugal; Love was so witty as to prevent the remorse for his inconstancy, by
persuading him he did a meritorious act in quitting his first Mistress, to make
his second a Proselyte: and thus were these new Lovers united in a quiet and
firm union. Don Sebastian entrusted Xerina with his most secret thoughts, and
the Princess to recompense that confidence, showed him all the kindness
imaginable: In this posture they lived whilst the War was in suspense; but
Abdelmelec having forced Muley to a Battle in the Plains of Tamista, the Kings
of Morocco and Portugal were slain, and with them so great a number of the
Portugal Nobless, there was scarce one left to return with the sad news. Xerina
losing at that defeat the Crowns of Morocco and Fez, and her hopes of Portugal
with them, was transported with a most inconsolable sorrow: A little before day
she ran her self into the Plain of Tamista (attended by only one Christian
Slave called Laura, who was privy to all her secrets) resolving with her own
hands to have sacrificed her self upon the Corpse of her beloved King; she
searched for him among the dismal numbers of the dead and the dying, with which
that Plain was covered at that time. Some of the wounded who had yet so much
sense left them as to know her, directed her to that part of the Battle where
he fought; she ran thither with great fury, and supposing she had met with her
Monarch in the person of a young Portuguez, who resembled him very much, she
fetched a sad shreek, and prepared her self to execute her dire resolution; but
the poor man opening his eyes at her Cry, and it being by that time clear day,
she perceived he was not dead. From an unmeasurable sorrow, she past to so
immoderate a joy, it had almost cost her her life, but recollecting her self,
and calling Laura to her assistance, her Love reinforced her natural strength
so well, she drew her beloved from amongst the dead, and haled him to the Bank
of the River Mucazen, which runs along by the Plain where the Battle was
fought: Having got him so far, she examined his wounds, bound them up as well
as she could, and sending Laura to a house she discryed not far from the River,
she caused people to come and help to carry him to some place of security.
Indeed there were but few of that Nature in that Kingdom, for the success of
that Battle gave Abdelmelec possession of all his pretensions, and the
Engagement of Don Sebastian with his Enemy Muley, rendered his death necessary
to that new Kings repose; Xerina was as well fearful of the life of her Lover,
as of his liberty, if he fell into the hands of the Conqueror. She put him
therefore into a Bark, and rowing down with him to the mouth of the River
(which was not very far) she landed him in a little Island where there were
some few habitations. She had many Jewels about her; the Ladies of her Quality
among the Mores, are usually covered with them; she distributed some of them
amongst those who had assisted, and conjuring them to fetch her Chirurgions
from some of the neighboring Towns, they brought her such relief as his
condition required. His wounds being searched, were not found to be dangerous,
their greatest apprehension was from his great loss of blood; the sight of what
was done for him, surprised him exceedingly, he saw himself lamented, and
relieved by one of the fairest persons in the World, whose Quality was
proclaimed by her Habit, but could not satisfy himself for what reason a Lady
he had never seen before to his knowledge, should concern her self so far in
his recovery. He would have inquired, but she stopped his mouth, telling him in
Portuguese (which she had learnt to please Don Sebastian) that he was not yet
strong enough for a discourse, and that she would give him an account of all
when his health did permit. These cares augmented his astonishment more and
more, and he called out many times to have his Destiny cleared. The first
moment it might be done without danger, Xerina sat down by his Pillow, and
told him; At length, Sir, I begin to conceive hopes of your recovery; the
Heavens would not deprive the Portugals of their King, and have been pleased to
make use of the Ministry of your Xerina, for the preservation of the life of
her dear Don Sebastian. The wounded person found the Princesses mistake by her
discourse, but thought it no prudence to convert her, on the contrary he used
all his Art to confirm it: he foresaw too many good consequences, to manage
them ill. He returned a thousand passionate acknowledgments to the Princess,
and conjured her to tell him which way it was possible she should get him off
the field. She gave him an account, and by that account he discovered Xerinas
Birth, and engagements with the King of Portugal. He did his utmost to
personate Don Sebastian; and he might do it the more securely, because the
people whom Xerina had sent out in quest of Don Sebastian, had brought her
word, that endeavoring to save himself by swimming the River, he was drowned,
and his body not to be found. She believed this truth to be an error, as
confidently as her own error to be a truth; and promising no less to her self
than in a short time to be made Queen of Portugal, there was no care, nor no
promise but (in her opinion) she ought to so just a pretension. The wounded
Portugal had Courage and Wit enough to make his advantage of his Fortune. He
learnt by the Princesses discourse, that Muley Boabdelin, a Prince of the Blood
Royal of Morocco, had had particular friendship with the true King of Portugal.
She caused advertisement to be sent to him, that her Friend Don Sebastian was
not dead according to Report, but that if he pleased to repair to the Isle of
Mucazen, he should hear further. Muley departed with all speed from the
remotest part of the Province of Hoscore (whither he was retired from the
Tyranny of Abdelmelec) and causing himself to be conducted by Xerinas Envoy, to
the place where he assured he should find him, he was deceived by the
resemblance, as Xerina had been before him. In the Histories of all Ages and
all Countries, there is nothing more strange than the perfection of this
resemblance: It extended even to the natural marks Don Sebastian had in certain
places of his body. Muley not doubting therefore but the person he saw was the
true King of Portugal, he expressed extreme joy at his preservation, and
acquainted him that his Uncle Henry, Cardinal of Portugal, and Brother to Don
John who died last, was by the consent of the people, chosen to succeed him.
This news startled the ambition of our counterfeit Sebastian; he was afraid it
would be no easy matter to dispossess Henry of a Throne he was established in
already; Muley was of his opinion: it was agreed they should negotiate with
some of the principal of that Kingdom, to assert the Interest of their Monarch,
and not suffer it to be invaded by the artifice of an upstart King. Muley
offered Xerina and her Lover a retreat in the mean time into his Province of
Hoscore, where he was too well fortified to apprehend a pursuit. They concluded
amongst them, that it should not be published Don Sebastian was alive, till he
should be in a condition to be restored to the Crown; but to authorize what
kindness the Princess had shown him, Muley acquainted them that above all
things it would be necessary for him to marry Xerina immediately. This was one
of the effects of that resemblance of which the false Sebastian hoped to reap
the benefit. He was enamored of the Princesses Beauty and Behavior: he
satisfied Muley's desires with as much joy as readiness, and till his
possession had mastered his appetite, reckoned himself among the happiest of
his Sex; but when once he was married, and had quenched the ardour of his
desires, the private Negotiation in Portugal began to go on but slowly; no body
was vigorous enough in his affairs, and nothing would serve but he must go
over, and manage them himself. Poor Xerina dissuaded him from that resolution
with the most fervent Caresses Love could possibly inspire: I love you as well
without your Crown, said she to him, as with it, and why then is it necessary?
let it be your felicity to be beloved by me, as it is mine to be beloved by
you, and you will have no need of such hazardous desires. Why! Madam, replied
the false Monarch, do you think it possible for a Prince born to wear a Crown,
and who has already tasted the sweetness of Dominion, to condescend and debase
himself to the condition of a private person? Ha! Madam, either you have not
considered what it is to be a King, or you have not any regard to my
satisfaction, seeing the Propositions you make, are so unacceptable to me.
Pardon, Sir, what is past, replied Xerina, and I shall disoblige you no more in
that nature; I must acknowledge your soul to be too large to be bounded with
ordinary employments: But let mine have the same Justice, suffer me to
contribute my assistance toward the recovery of your Crown, and vouchsafe me
my share in all the difficulties you shall meet. Africa, Asia, Europe, and all
places are alike to me in your Company, refuse me not then that pleasure of
following you, which you owe to my Love; and were I so unhappy to find any
thing more potent upon your soul than that passion, yet it ought to be my glory
to cooperate toward the establishment of an Authority, to which you have no
pretension but for me. These kind considerations past for reproaches in the
Spirit of the disgusted Sebastian, he was offended therewith, and his Capricio
provokt Xerina as much. They fell into some extravagant expressions, and those
pretenses furnished him with his desired pretense. Xerina had news he was
preparing for Europe, and she made Verses to dissuade him so kind and
importunate, nothing but a satiated Lover could have read them without being
moved. He scarce vouchsafed to cast an eye upon them, and some of them were not
opened till he came into Portugal. He had found Love so favorable to him in
Africa, he presumed it would be his Conductor in all his other Enterprises. He
understood the secrets of Sebastian as well as he had been he; That Prince had
discovered all to Xerina, and this false Sebastian had wheedled them
artificially out of the Princess, in pretending to take delight in the
relations she made of the expressions of his Love. Tell me I beseech you,
Madam, said he, what was it you were most affected with in all my proceedings,
I would willingly know what it was satisfied you most, that I might do the same
thing often, which I did before with such success. The Princess ingenuously
confessed the thing by which she thought her self most obliged, was his
desertion of Mary of Portugal; and that the rather, said she, because that
Princess is fair, loved you very well, and (as you told me your self) was
beloved entirely by you, before your acquaintance with me: And, Madam, the
secrets of State which I imparted to you, replied the Impostor, were not you
well pleased with them; that piece of confidence is the highest and most
obliging a Monarch can express. Xerina acknowledged her engagement for them
also; and then falling into a recapitulation of whatever Don Sebastian had told
her (that was of importance) she discovered to her false Prince all the
Intrigues of that State. Furnished with a precaution so necessary, he took his
Journey for Italy, as knowing the Princess of Portugal contracted to Don
Sebastian, was married since his death to Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, and
was at that time a Widow. Persons of the Quality he pretended are not ignorant
of those kind of affairs. He arrived at Parma, and having caused the Duchess
to be acquainted, there was a Portugal Gentleman which had brought her tidings
he could not communicate to any but her self, he was by her order introduced
into her Closet. By an Express from Lisbon, she had lately received news that
Cardinal Henry was dead; and was preparing her Claim to the Crown for Ranuccio
Farnese her Son, who being by the Mother side descended from Prince Edward,
derived his Original from Emanuel, the Chief of that Royal Line. Several other
Pretenders did the same: Catharine, the Sister of Mary, set up the Interest of
Theodor de Braganza her Son: Emanuel Philbert, Duke of Savoy, pretended to it
in right of his Mother Beatrix of Portugal; and so large was the Competition,
Catharine de Medicis (though of a Branch far remoter than the rest) was not
wanting with her Claim; but above all Paul IV. was most sollicitous, pretending
that Crown to be a Fief to the Papal See, and endeavoring zealously in his own
person to defeat the pretenses of his Competitors. To regulate so great a
difference, the States of that Kingdom were convened; and the Duchess of Parma
having her head full of those affairs, looked upon her false Sebastian as the
Ghost of her true one, came on purpose at that time to direct her in her
distractions. She fetched a great skreek as soon as she saw him, and running to
the other end of the Closet in an amaze, she told her new King she took him for
a Spirit. How! Madam, said he without any visible commotion, does Don Sebastian
fright you? he expected a better reception for the pains he has suffered
coming in to see you. The Dutchesses trouble increased at the hearing of his
voice, so as she could neither speak, nor stir out of her place. Dear Cousin,
continued her false Sebastian in a most passionate tone, I am no Phantosm, I am
the same Don Sebastian you formerly honored with your favor, and I am
returned as full of your fair Idea, as when I went first into Africa. The
Duchess recovered her self a little, and permitting Don Sebastian to come
nearer, she put forth her hand, though tremblingly, toward the hand of the
Monarch, she touched him, she considered him, and her senses assured her that
what she saw and what she felt, was certainly Don Sebastian. Ha! Sir, said she
with a most pitiful voice, whence do you come? where have you hid your self
thus long? by what miracle are you returned? When you shall be in a condition
to hear me, replied Sebastian, I will give you an account; in the mean time
recollect your self from your fright, believe me the real King of Portugal; and
if you do not know me by my shape, my voice, or the features of my face, at
least own me by the impression of Love you cannot but discover in my Eyes. I
am fully recollected, replied the Duchess, calling for a Chair for him, and
sitting by him her self: I confess the first sight of you put me into a
confusion I could not suddenly master; but now, Sir, it is dissipated, and
gone. Tell me therefore I beseech you, and do not delay me, to what miracle is
it we owe both your life, and return. To love, Madam, replied Sebastian, a
passion that was able to affect your heart, could not be less favorable than
to defend me against all other accidents. Then he gave her a relation how he
had been taken from amongst the dead by Xerina, how for some time he had
continued in the Isle of Mucazen, and afterward in Hoscore; but he concealed
very carefully from the Duchess, that ever Sebastian was in Love with Xerina
before the Battle. He told her that Princess was in Love with him indeed, but
without any expectation. I had no inclination in the world to have her so much
as think so, continued he, for having past my Parole to you, I would have dyed
before I would have broken it. He told her that by the assistance of Muley
Boabdelin, a Prince of the Royal Blood of Morocco, Xerina had given him all
imaginable persecution, to force him to a relinquishment of her, that she had
urged to him her Marriage with the Duke of Parma, and pressed him very hard to a
reprisal, but that understanding a while after, she was a Widow, he had escapt
out of Prison, and was come to throw that Prince at her feet, who had not only
loved her always himself, but flattered himself with the thoughts of being
beloved by her. The Duchess demanded, if he loved her so well, why he never
writ to her? I writ several times, Madam, replied he, but Xerina without doubt
(who expected that from my ruin, which she could not hope from my
restablishment) took such Orders to intercept them, as never any of them could
come to your hand. My Captivity was very severe, I was treated like one that
was beloved, but could get no liberty to free my self from the trouble of that
Character. The Duchess of Parma overjoyed with the relation of a Constancy so
well represented, made as many excuses as Congies to her mistaken Cousin. She
appointed him an Appartment according to his supposed Quality; assigned him a
suitable Equipage, and furnished him with grave men to send as his Deputies to
the Estates of Portugal. That Deputation caused a strange surprise, as may be
imagined. They selected six out of their Assembly, some of which had been
Ministers to Don Sebastian, and sent them into Italy, to survey their dear
Monarch: their Eyes persuaded them it was he; but not daring to rely wholly
upon them, they asked him certain questions they would have sworn none but the
right Don Sebastian could have answered. But he was thoroughly instructed by
Xerina; Love had transported the soul of the King of Portugal, into that of the
Princess of Morocco, and by an effect of the same Love, the soul of Xerina was
transmigrated into the false Sebastian. The Ambassadors (convinced that no man
living could have resolved those questions but the true Sebastian) made their
Report to the Estates, he was undoubtedly their King: The Competitors accused
them of Treachery, protested they were corrupt, and demanded that Don Sebastian
might appear in person at the Assembly of the States General, to be formally
interrogated before them. Such as were affected to the memory of Don Sebastian,
could not be persuaded it could be done with security to him: the Assembly was
divided; such as were for the King, were called Royalists; such as were for the
Princes, were called the League. During which disorders, he that was the cause
of them, had his Residence at Parma, attending till there should be an Army
raised to vindicate his interest, at the Head of which he resolved to demand
Restoration. He ought his life to Xerina; he was loved entirely by her, and
had loved her as well: But the Princess of Parma engaged the Princes of Italy
in his quarrel, and when the design of being King interposes in an Intrigue,
reason of State rules the roast, and leaves all others in the lurch: He
sacrificed his gratitude to his ambition without any remorse, and employing
those Lessons of kindness he had received from Xerina, against her self, he
made them the foundations of that Complacence and artifice, to which the heart
of the Duchess was forced to submit. She loved him for his person, much more
for his quality; she began to be jealous without knowing any reasonable grounds
for her jealousy; such passions as hers are seldom without great curiosity.
One evening when her counterfeit Sebastian was leading her by the side of a
Canal, which is one of the greatest Ornaments to the Palace of Farnese, she
spied a Ribband hanging out of his Pocket, which she judged might be one of
those Letter-cases called in Italy Cartero's; she stole it out gently, and
having conveyed it into her own Pocket, without being perceived, she began to
be impatient to be peeping. She could not have had any thing more proper to
have justified her secret suspicions, than that. It was a parcel of Xerinas
Letters and Verses, which the false Sebastian had found that morning (in a
little Cabinet he brought with him out of Africa) and had put them in his
Pocket with resolution to have burnt them, but he was interrupted by the coming
in of the Duchess; and this Walk having followed immediately upon the Visit,
he was forced to keep them in his Pocket, till the curious Duchess thought
good to remove them. She read two or three Notes at first, which seemed to be
nothing but assurances of the Sacrifice her Monarch pretended to have made to
her, of the affections of Xerina. That Princess had complained of the
unconstancy of his Love, and reproacht him by his infidelity: But she not
having had always reason to complain, there were Letters of his, recriminating
upon her. They were all writ in Portuguese, but one among the rest was sealed
up, which the tender Xerina had sent to her Ingrate, some few days before his
departure from Hoscore, and contained a Paper of Verses upon their late
difference, so sensible and kind, I could not but insert them.

Is it decreed then, and pronounced above?
We must have no return, no mutual Love.
Cannot our old inclination and converse,
(Which seems ought to make our absence long and fierce,
And seems to assure me of your heart) cannot they
Contribute, and remove those blocks away?
My wrath never went so far, I never meant,
When my rash tougue to your voyage did consent,
You should have t a'ne the advantage, even when I
Felt my poor heart give my false tongue the lie.
In vain I seek thee now in places where.
So often in Love to me thou did appear.
In vain I seek thee where thou never were,
Since the day thou overcam'st my pride and heart.
No place escapes me, but I think on you,
No place occurs, but I expect you too.
Where-e're I come, on whatsoever I see,
I leave, methinks sweet images of thee,
Which at my next return (required) they
To my poor fancy as faithfully repay.
Each dream, each sudden noise, each thought in vain
Seems to return my Love, my King again.
I run where hope conducts (deluded) and
Whatever I see, I call Sebastian,
Come, come cry I, indulge my sweet desires,
Come where my Love, come where my faith requires.
Rouse up thy dying flames, try with what Art
Pretended wrath new ardour can impart,
Wrath, not allowed in Lovers breasts to burn;
But to endear, and sweeten their return.
Shall these complaints, shall these requests which were
But errors fruits, vanish in idle air?
No, without doubt, Love will convey them so,
They Will have access, and influence on you.
Methinks I feel the agreement of our souls,
And your kind Love your negligence controuls;
Methinks you are weary too of our debate;
Let Love alone, how to accommodate,
He Will rectify our quarrels, let you see
A thousand new complacencies in me.
Mine eyes, I fancy, will appear more bright,
Than when they first discovered my delight:
And to consummate all, you will love me too,
As well and long, dear Prince, as I love you.
All this shall do you no good, cried the Duchess of Parma; when she had read
them through, I shall take such Orders, your hopes shall evaporate. But alas!
said she (casting her Eyes upon such places as gave the strongest insinuations
of Xerinas being beloved) I fear it is too late; and reading them again, she
stopped when she came at these.

In vain I seek thee now in places where
So often, in Love to me, thou did appear.
This, said she, is not the expression of a despised Lover; if it be true thou
art so now, it is no less true, that thou have not been so always; that
consideration representing Don Sebastian light, and unconstant, and
apprehending the same levity of which she saw such fatal marks in the Princess
of Morocco, she suffered her self to be surprised by the most violent fit of
sorrow, she had ever been sensible of in her life. As she was in the midst of
these melancholy reflections, her false Don Sebastian entered into her Chamber,
he had perceived he had lost his Letters; and suspecting what had really
happened, was come to make his Apology. The first thing he saw when he came in,
was Xerinas Letters upon the Table, and the Paper of Verses on the top, and
clapping his hand upon them, Your charity sure is very small, Madam, said he to
the Duchess, to expose the follies of a Princess, whose Quality and Innocence
deserved more compassion: Conceal her extravagances, I beseech you, Madam, I am
much troubled they should fall into your hands, I put them into my Pocket, with
design to have burnt them, and kept them not only from your Eyes, but from the
sight of the whole World. They have not been always so odious to you, Sir,
replied the Duchess, and if I may conjecture from them, I owe that to your
Highness, which I ascribed before to your constancy; it is not to the Love of
me, you sacrifice the Princess of Morocco, it is to the fickleness of that which
you pretended to her; and then showing him the Verses she had marked, Read, Sir,
said she, read here in what manner Xerina expresses her self, and then
vouchsafe to tell me how your return is to be called. The Verses were exceeding
tender and kind, and must needs renew the impressions of sensibility in a heart
which had been sensible before; but nothing is so obdurately impenetrable as
the heart which follows after a violent passion. Sebastian concerned himself
not one jot at what Xerina had written; but applying his thoughts wholly to
pacify the Duchess: I never loved the Princess of Morocco in my life, Madam,
said he to her; if she fancied so her self, and that imagination brake into
these Verses, it is but a vanity common to the greatest part of her Sex, to
which I have contributed no more than by an indispensable Civility. But, Madam,
in the case of your Marriage with the Duke of Parma, it is not possible for me
to flatter my self with that opinion, it is a thing palpable and constant, and
can never be excused. Do not you upbraid me by my Marriage, to justify your
own Levity, replied the Duchess: Women of my Quality are subject to such
Formalities, as no passion can exempt us from. I believed you to be dead, and
all Portugal bear me witness I never saw Duke Alexander till I married him: But
you, Sir, knew I was alive, you knew where to address your self; yet you did
that by Election, which I did out of obedience and constraint; and if your
heart has been touched for Xerina, you are guilty not only of one single act,
but of a habit of infidelity. Don Sebastian did what he could to expunge that
fancy out of her mind; he endeavored to persuade the Duchess, that if people
be found at their return, as they were when they departed, they ought never to
be questioned about the interval. The Duchess did not relish that Doctrine,
she proceeded in her Jealousy, multiplying her Chimera's, till at last to
rectify all, Xerina arrived at Lisbon. This Princess receiving no tokens of
her Servants remembrance, and understanding by report how things proceeded in
Portugal, she obtained liberty of Muley to go thither her self to clear up
those doubts which the Portuguez lay under: And indeed she did clear them; but
(in giving her reasons (which seemed to be satisfactory) that the false was the
true Sebastian) she discovered withal, that her mighty Monarch was married to
her. It was happy for him he was departed from Parma when these tidings
arrived; had he been there, the fury of the Duchess would too probably have
found out some fatal way of Revenge; but by good luck he was gone to head those
Troops his Friends had raised for the assertion of his interest. Xerinas Title
was indisputable; she was contracted to Don Sebastian by the King of Morocco,
before the Battle of Tamista; it was not to his gratitude to Xerina only the
Duchess of Parma ought to attribute his Treason, for he had loved her Rival
before she had saved his life; and he which she mistook for Sebastian, had
married her afterward in the Province of Hoscore, with all requisite
Formalities; nor could the difference of their Religions be any obstruction,
for Xerina had promised to turn Christian, and performed, as soon as she was
landed in Portugal. How could the Duchess of Parma's fury be expressed when she
understood all these circumstances? Had he had but one fault to have been
pardoned, it is possible Love might have obtained it: But all ways of
reconciliation were interdicted; and that which rendered her indignation most
just, was, that this false Sebastian had received a thousand innocent favors
from her, which this unlucky news converted into crimes. Love effected that in
her which it produces in most of her Sex; she ran from one extremity to
another, and her anger being augmented by the consideration of her past
kindness, she sent on purpose to the States of Portugal, to remonstrate that
her new Sebastian was an Impostor, that she had discovered it by several
contradictions, wherein she had surprised him; and pretending a Voyage into
Portugal, with design to procure that Crown for the young Farnese, her Son, she
came in person to Lisbon to incite Enemies against that Traitor. Her fury was
better sighted than her Love; for it is clear, he demanded a Crown to which he
could make no pretense: but the Duchess acted not upon that foundation, it was
Jealousy alone which infused her revenge; and as the highest motive to her
animosity, she found the Princess of Morocco so exquisitely beautiful, she
could not but excuse in private that crime, which publicly she endeavored to
punish. This consideration excited her the more; she was in a rage, because she
had no more reason to be so. The Princess of Morocco discovered all her
confusions; and being together one day, I see, Madam, said she to the Duchess
of Parma, you will not have Don Sebastian true King of Portugal, because he
cannot make you participate of the Crown; but, Madam, I will expiate the
infidelity wherewith you charge him, by giving you the true Character of my
Soul. Employ your interest to restore him, retract those reproaches your unjust
resentment has diffused, and I am content the Prince shall perform that
promise he made to you formerly; for I had rather see him in the Throne, and
flatter my self in private, that owing me his life and his Crown, he loves me
at his heart better than her who would deprive him, then to possess it quietly
my self, and apprehend whilst he is even in my arms, his inclinations are
somewhere else. These generous resolutions being by public Fame carried into
his Camp, the false Don Sebastian could not but resume in some measure that
Love which his ambition had expelled. He was advanced with his confederate
Troops to that part of the Frontier which separates Portugal from the Territory
of Oviedo: he was forced to an Engagement at that pass, where fighting to make
Xerina Queen, as well as himself King, his zeal made his Valor so
inconsiderate, he was taken Prisoner in the Combat; and being conducted to
Lisbon, there was nothing discoursed of among his Competitors but chastising
his temerity by some ignominious punishment: The defeat of Tannista had not
been so mortal, but there remained some considerable persons who could give an
account of the destiny of their King; all of them affirmed they had followed
him to the River Mucazen; some that they saw him drowned, and some that they
ran great hazard of the same Fate, in endeavoring to save him. This report was
nor according to what Xerina believed; she had found her pretended Sebastian in
the midst of the Battle; and that which made most against him, was, that the
habit by which the Princess described him, did not agree with what the Portugal
Officers assured he had on that day. Nevertheless Nature had been pleased to
put such a resemblance betwixt them, and it was seconded so well by their Wit
and their Courage, it was not known which way to resolve; the more this
accident was examined, the more intricate it appeared. To deny the Crown to
their lawful Prince, was an unpardonable offense; to prostitute it, on the
other side, to an Impostor, was no less unjustifiable. But death fixed their
resolutions; for whether Policy of State looked upon Don Sebastians Alliance
with the Mores as dangerous to that Kingdom; or that the Duchess of Parma
perceiving the States inclining to Don Sebastian, found out some unlawful way
of preventing the Triumph of her Rival, so it was the counterfeit King dyed in
Prison, and left no small suspicion that his death was unnatural. It Is reported
before he expired, he desired to speak with Xerina, and (the last moment being
an admirable Touchstone to try the jugglings of a man's life) he declared to
the Princess of Morocco (as is reported) that he was not King of Portugal, and
conjured her not to enterprise any thing against him whom they should choose
after he was deceased. This Declaration was no more than what was necessary,
for Xerina had a Son by him, who would have been the occasion of very great
disorders, nor could he do all this without great testimony of remorse: It Is
not one way alone, Madam, said he to the Princess, in which I have deceived
you; for that part of my fallacy, which made me your Husband, I reproach my
self not much, I should have blamed my self much more (had I neglected it,
being in my power as it was) than I think my self culpable, in accepting that
honor: But, Madam, that which sticks closest, and gives me greatest regret,
is, that for some time I have discontinued my affection, and (in hopes of a
Crown which I never obtained, and which by a thousand accidents might have been
ravished from me, if I had) have forsaken a heart all the Crowns in the World
were not able to recompense. Do not afflict your self with unnecessary
compunction, replied the generous Princess, I loved the person of my Sebastian,
above the Dignities which surrounded him: I thought to have found his person in
you, and those Charms wherewith I was surprised, lost nothing of their Energy
for not proceeding from a King. I confess I should not have observed them in an
ordinary person, my Spirit and my Birth would not have permitted to have fixed
my Eyes upon any less than a King. But at length I became delighted with my
error, for to a virtuous Woman the name of a Husband is so sacred, it wipes
away all spots that can possibly accompany it. Let us strive to overcome your
distemper my dear Prince? Pardon me, Fortune, for giving him that Title, said
she with her Eyes up to Heaven, thou ought to have given it, though thou
did not; and then turning again to her Beloved, she cried, Force your self,
dear Sir, out of the jaws of death, if it be possible, perhaps our Destiny may
be kinder in Africa than in Portugal. The supposed Prince was so strangely
affected with this excess of Generosity, his very transport was sufficient to
have killed him: He expired in the Arms of his over-passionate Xerina, and her
soul was in no small danger of bearing his company. This man had abused her by
a deceit insupportable to the Quality of a Princess, and his subsequent
inconstancy was more offensive than the other; but Xerina had loved him
entirely, and (let vindicative Ladies say what they please) that person is
never hated, which was beloved heartily before. They complain of their Stars,
they abominate their Influence, and hate themselves many times for having so
little discretion; but this hatred indeed, is but a Copy of their Countenance,
and never goes so deep as they would seem to pretend: The Ideas of a man who
has been perfectly beloved, ought always to be sacred: No resentment can
attaque them without Sacrilege; and if any fury could be found so violent, as
to violate that Law, she never was capable of true affection, she loved to
satisfy her own appetite, and not only for Love, Xerina observed the last
orders of her counterfeit Sebastian, with exceeding punctuality, as soon as her
sorrow permitted, she retired into Africa, and gave not the least opposition to
Theodore Braganza, who was elected King of Portugal. I do not think the Reader
requires further light in this Adventure, I have enlarged it much to what it is
represented in my History, and I assure my self there are many who believe they
have perused all the Memoires of that Age, to whom this Princess of Morocco is
every where a stranger, except in the Annals of Love.

THE ANNALS OF LOVE.
THE EIGHTH PART.
MAhomet III. had three Sons by three different Sultanesses: Mustapha, whom he
caused to be slain in his own time; Jacaya, whose History I am writing; and
Achmet, who succeeded his Father in the Empire: Jacaya's Mother was a
Christian; the Magnificences of the Seraglio were not able to eradicate the
sentiments of her Religion. She pretended her self sick, and a Physician,
indulging her designs, advised her for change of Air to remove to Magnesia. She
obtained leave to carry her Son along with her, and having dispersed it abroad,
that he dyed of the small Pox (which had raged violently about that time) she
caused another to be buried publicly in his stead, and committed the care of
her Son to an Eunuch, one of her Confidents. The Eunuch transported him to
Greece, and recommended him to the Tuition of the Bishop of Thessalonia: The
good Bishop baptized him, and gave him careful Education till he was fifteen or
sixteen years old. At that age the Eunuch, who was privy to the Mystery of his
Affairs, had a great desire to impart them to him. The weight of a secret is
too ponderous for persons of his Character; and to speak Poetically, would have
been a troublesome bundle in the Ferry-Boat of Charon. See then the Prince
informed of his Extraction, and very desirous to know what they talked of him in
the World. He disguised himself as a Dervis, and stealing from the Tutelage of
his Bishop, he directed his Course privately toward the chief Cities in
Greece. Many people were offended at the prematurity of his Profession, and
believing him what his Habit represented, It Is pity, said the Ladies, this
young man should have been so early devoted to Heaven. Being arrived at Scopea,
he understood the death of his Father; he knew likewise that Mustapha being out
of the World, the Ottoman Crown would have fallen upon his head, had not the
false news of his death diverted it upon his younger Brother. His Mothers zeal
to preserve him, began then to appear indiscreet: He was of an age in which
they are more sensible of earthly than celestial Dignity. He past into Asia,
where his Intelligence told him certain Bashaws were in Revolt against their
new Emperor: He discovered himself to be the Son of Mahomet, put himself in
the Head of their rebellious Troops, and marched against Achmets Lieutenants. A
Romantic Author would not fail to have made him conquer his Enemy, and given
the Empire to the Exploits of his victorious Arm; and not without reason, for
right being on his side, why should Fortune be against him? however he
performed what a man of Courage could possibly do in defense of his Title; but
in despite of his Bravery and diligence, he was wounded, defeated, and had
much ado to escape the pursuit of his Enemies; I take the liberty
notwithstanding to enlarge, and intersperse his Adventures with such Accidents
as are least incompatible with the History. Though this reverse of Fortune was
a most sensible affliction to our young Sultan, it did not quite ruin his
hopes. Right of Blood never wants Protectors, no Kingdom being so empty of
seditious and turbulent Spirits, but there will always be some will embrace
with both Arms the pretense of a Revolt, if gilded with the least appearance
of Justice. The Bashaw Dervis (who was very potent at the Port, and had a
secret amity with the Bashaws of Asia) had a great inclination to assist them:
He caused Jacaya to come to Constantinople privately in the Habit of a Persian
Priest; the Conferences of the Confederates are frequent and open; Plots are
laid for deposing Achmet, and advancing Jacaya to the Throne, and so probably,
and forward were their designs, his foot might have been said to have been upon
the first step; but the very same day all things were to have been put in
execution, the Bashaw Protector was discovered, and all the Princes hopes
reduced to the single attempt of an escape. He put himself into the Train of a
Polish Ambassador who was returning to his Master, and rebaptizing himself with
a new name (Hope) he followed his Ambassador to Cracovia: This young Princes
defign was to discover himself to the King of Poland, and to desire Sanctuary
in his Court; but by the discouragements he heard by the way, he was diverted
from that resolution. His Affairs being great, and his History singular, they
were the subject of all Conversations; some said Jacaya was dead, others he was
retired to the Emperor of Germany. Every one playing the Politician according
to his own fancy, and arguing the ill consequences his retreat might bring upon
them who received him, they gave the disguised Prince to consider his Refuge
was to be chosen with all possible Caution. Before he would hazard himself, he
concluded to take the secret advice of his friends; continuing therefore in his
present condition, till he could receive their opinions; by his diligence and
dexterity he had rendered himself so grateful to his Master, he was grown the
greatest Favorite he had in his Family. In this quality he became his
Confident in an Intrigue he held with a Transilvanian Lady called Metzala, whom
the Wars of her Country had driven for protection into the Polish Court. This
Metzala was very fair; the obligations betwixt them depended more upon utility
than inclination; but she was of so equitable a temper, she did Justice to the
favors of Nature, in what object soever she met them. The outward condition of
Jacaya could not disguise, much less efface, the goodness of his Mien; and the
Beauty of Metzala was of a degree which would have staggered the Loyalty of a
more religious person than Mahomets Son. The Lady and this counterfeit Hope
began to despise the obstruction of their different Relations to the Polish
Ambassador. Metzala permitted the disguised Prince to droll in her presence,
and to play upon the Age and Courtship of his Master: He took the boldness to
make her several mysterious Presents as new years gifts, or offerings upon her
Birthday; and (having given and received oelliades both on one side and the
other) Jacaya presuming he was advanced so far, as that he might speak his mind
without danger of reprehension, he writ a Letter imparting his thoughts, and
carrying it himself, he delivered it to Metzala instead of another he was to
have presented from his Master. Metzala was at that time taking the air in her
Balcony, when she pretended Hope brought her the Letter. See, Madam, said he
accosting her, a Present which perhaps you expected not: If it be welcome, I
expect great reward from your Magnificence; if otherwise, your rejection will
be punishment sufficient. Metzala took the Paper, and opening it, found these
words.

Madam,
I am a Messenger of Love, and you ought not to be surprised with that Title;
for it is a long time. I have been so with you, hitherto I have only offered
such vows as their age rendered, but lukewarm, and unfit to be presented to
you. Now, Madam, I tender you a passion as ardent as sincere, and as violent as
solid; the hand from whence this Offering comes, you may possibly at first
think guilty of Sacrilege; but suffer not your self to be deluded by
appearance, I Will assure you she is a Cheat, and if you please to trouble your
self with a stricter disquisition, you will find no Rank or Quality so high, to
which Hope may not justly aspire.


The trouble which was but too visible in the face of Metzala, whilst she was
reading this Letter, she gave the disguised Prince sufficient conviction how
she was agitated within: She changed color every time, and her heart forcing
her to desire what her reason hindered her to hope; she was preparing for great
questions, but had not leisure to propose them; for a Lady of remarkable
Quality came into her Chamber at the same time. She composed her self as well
she could, and passing out of the Balcony to meet the Lady, You may tell your
Master, said she to Jacaya, when I have examined the Diamond his Letter speaks
of, I will give him my opinion; as far as I have yet perceived, it does not
answer his Character. That, Madam, replied Jacaya, is no wonder, the stone is
ill set; and the Merchant said, as perhaps you may have observed, you must look
further than ordinary to give it the true value. Well, we will see what it is,
replied Metzala; making him a sign to be gone; I shall not be abroad all day to
morrow, bring it to me again after dinner. Jacaya withdrew after this
Conference, and the Polish Lady which came in, being acquainted with the Amors
betwixt the Ambassador and Metzala, she concluded the Diamond they talked of,
was some new Present from him. She took no notice of her stispicion to Metzala;
the friendishp betwixt them was not arrived at so high a confidence. Their
discourse were of the fashions, of the times, and such indifferent things; but
as the greatest part of that Sex are less frank and open among themselves, than
among men, she was not so reserved with the Ambassador, as she was with his
Mistress; she went that very day to a Walk where she met with him; she caused
her Coach to drive as near him as she could, and thrusting her self out of the
Boot, What do you do here? said she smiling, you are expected, to recompense
your late liberality. Your Turkish Officer has done his best to make her prize
it; had he been the Merchant himself, he could not have said more of the
Diamond. The Polish Lord could make nothing of that Aenigma, he would fain have
had her explained it; but several Coaches having interposed, he could get to
her no more: He drove immediately to Metzala to inquire of her, and very
earnest he was to be resolved. The Transilvanian smiled at his request,
pretending greater tranquillity than in justice he ought. This Droll Hope
brought me one of your Letters after dinner, he makes always the pleasantest
sport when he speaks of your passion; he said your heart is a precious Stone,
with which a Queen would think her self honored. This Lady came just in as he
was in the Panegyric, and heard that expression: See, I beseech you how fools
may put wiser people into disorder, and how unhappy we are that are forced to
entertain them? But the Polish Lord was not to be coak'st; he did not take this
shift of Metzala's as she expected; it was a long time since he had been
displeased with her courtesy to his man Hope. I beg of you, Madam, said he, do
not use that Boy to so much familiarity. Those kind of people are not born to
be the objects of so much Generosity; and what among us is but a natural
Civility, passes among them for a preference, will make them insolent: How can
you admit such a Fellow as he into the particulars of your affairs? If he
brings you my Letters, and returns your Answers, I have taken care he shall do
that faithfully, but do not you, Madam, enlarge his Commission. Metzala could
not hear him speak so contemptibly of a person for whom she began to have a
kindness, without saying something in his defense. She told the Ambassador, he
did not know the treasure he had in Hope; that he was a Servant he could not
value sufficiently: This discourse confirmed the suspicion of her Gallant, and
he could not conceal it for his heart. Metzala found him injurious in his
language, his conversation angered her, and some smart Reparties did pass
betwixt the Lovers. The Ambassador was an old Fornicator, had had more than
one Love-quarrel in his time; he understood the difference betwixt Choler and
Choler. He doubted not but Metzala's anger had a touch of infidelity in it. He
turned away Hope when he came home, and caused it to be told him by way of
charitable advice, that if ever he came within Metzala's doors again, he would
meet with very ill Complements before he went away. This way the true course to
fortify the inclination of Metzala's. She apprehended (by an excuse Jacaya
fent her, for not waiting on her any more) what the Jealousy of the
Ambassador had done, and what would otherwise have been a blameable
condescension, becoming now but a laudable compassion; she was forced to make
use of an undecent hour to inquire into affairs. He was brought privately into
her Chamber, when she thought all her Family was in bed: There was not an
obliging word but her kindness dictated it to her Generosity; she was in bed,
and Women which are naturally handsome, are much better in that posture than
dressed. Jacaya was importuned to explain what Metzala found obscure in her
Letter; he told her his Birth, his Love to her, and the desires of his Soul in
words extremely suitable to his passion; but his narration was interrupted when
it was just at the best, The jealous Polander had conceived shrewd suspicions
of the truth: All Metzala's Servants were at his disposition, he caused them to
be informed what it was he desired of their zeal. Those who were thought
fastest asleep, were broadest awake; and scarce was Jacaya got into the Chamber
of his Mistress, but the Ambassador had notice, and ran immediately with two
or three of his Servants, whither the Alarm invited: At the sight of all that
Company, Metzala was strangely surprised, she demanded of the Polander, what it
was gave him the confidence to come to her at that time a night, and how long
he had been accustomed to such Visits as those. Do not you justify your self
to your new Gallant, replied the Ambassador with a tone of contempt, my design
is not to let him see your gate is open to me at all hours in the night, I
scorn to boast of a Conquest in which my Valet participates. At that word he
ordered those who came along with him to seize upon Jacaya, whom he took for no
better than his man Hope; but he proved to be Mahomets own Son. For catching
hold of the Polanders Cimeterre, wresting it out of the Scabbard, and putting
himself upon his guard, he satisfied his Master it would be no easy matter to
have his Orders obeyed. Metzala, affrighted at the action, and apprehending for
a man whose Extraction excused her resentment, she leapt in a rage out of bed,
and cried out for help: An Envoy from the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who lodged not
far from her House, and came usually very late home, hearing of her Cry, ran in
to see what was the matter: Jacaya knew the Tuscan Envoy, having seen him many
times in the streets: He desired his protections, and in few words told him, he
was that Ottoman Prince which made so much noise in the World. The Tuscan had
received private Letters before, that Jacaya was in Poland in disguise. The
Prince endeavored to persuade him to a belief; and though the Polander looked
upon the relation as fabulous, and conjured the Tuscan to receive it no
otherwise; yet he did not think fit to be persuaded by one who was so much
concerned. He took the person of Jacaya into his protection till the morning,
resolving to carry him to the King to have the truth more strictly examined;
and he was found to be as he pretended: He had all the declarations of the
Sultaness his Mother, of the Eunuch, and the Bishop of Thessalonica; he had
Letters from some of the Bashaws of Asia, which they had lately writ to him
under the name of Hope; and to dash all scruples that might be pretended, there
was a Chaous from Achmet at that time in the Court (who had been sent to the
revolted Bashaws when he was amongst them) which knew him. The testimony of
this Chaous was irrefragable, and had not the malice of his offended Master,
diverted his Majesty's inclinations, Jacaya had found the refuge and security
he wanted, in the Court of that Monarch; but that incensed person laid so many
impediments in his way, and contrived so many Plots against him, the Turkish
Prince thought it not prudent nor safe to stay there, and expose himself any
longer. He tried to have him assasinated, he misrepresented him to the King,
and he had no sooner cleared himself of one calumny, but he was aspersed with
another. He conjured the Tuscan Envoy to deliver him from this persecution, and
procure him a Retreat to the great Dukes Court: and the Tuscan acquitted
himself of that generous Act with zeal and success. Jacaya departed for
Florence, not without great trouble to Metzala; but she must of necessity be
patient. The Grand Duke received him with great kindness, and assigned him
considerable Pensions; the secret differences in the Turkish Empire, seconded
the liberality of the Duke; and the person of Jacaya being every way complete,
he became immediately the Love and Admiration of the whole Tuscan Court; which
though it be not altogether so great as other Courts of Europe, yet the Ladies
are naturally handsome in that Climate: not a Florentine Woman he saw, but could
easily expunge the memory of Metzala. At firsthe played the generous Gallant;
but not finding that kind of Courtship so agreeable with his mind, he
restrained his desires to the person of a young Lady called Angelicadi Strozzi,
who was reputed the handsomest young Woman in Tuscany. Her Mother was dead, and
the Marquess de Strozzi her Father, having been happy enough in his former
Amors, to suspect the virtue of all the Women in the World, he was a continual
Watch upon his Daughter; so as she never went abroad but to Church, or some
other Festivals where her quality did indispensably require her; and even on
those occasions she was attended by an old Widow her Kinswoman, who would never
trust her out of her sight. It cost Jacaya by that means many a sigh before he
could gain a favorable opportunity to explain himself; he endeavored to have
made his Eyes his Interpreters, but Angelica was at that time too young to
understand that language. One night when they were making great Fireworks in
the Grand Piazza at Florence, in joy for the Dutchesses being brought to bed of
a Son, and Angelica was among the rest of the Court-Ladies, looking out of the
Windows; the Duke having called aside the Marquess for his Judgment about the
Fireworks which he understood perfectly well: and the old Sentinel being
removed upon some other occasion, Jacaya thought best to take this opportunity,
as not being able to assure himself when he should have another. He got as near
his young Mistress as he could, and showing her a Squib thrown into the air,
which fell down with more than ordinary noise; So it is, Madam, said he, with
Lovers desires, the constraint and confinement makes them more impetuous when
they break forth; so that what ought not in strictness to be said under whole
years attendance, seems in some measure to be excused, as soon as occasion is
offered to speak it. I love you, Madam, and I do it exceedingly. I am sensible
of all the precautions Civility exacts of a Lover in order to this declaration:
But, Madam, should I employ as much time in attending a convenient opportunity,
as I have past already without meeting one, I should dye without doubt before
your Ladyship would understand my disease. The young Strozzi was so surprised
at the discourse, she knew not what to answer, besides she had no time; for the
old Scout perceiving their Converse, flew back like Lightning to disturb it.
The Prince cast many a glance upon his new Mistress all the rest of the night,
or (to speak more properly) he never took his Eyes off of her; he observed her
much discomposed, she looked down upon the ground as soon as she perceived him;
but he apprehended there was more of modesty than anger in her discomposure.
After the Fireworks were done, there was a magnificent Supper, and after that
a Ball. The Turkish Prince took out Angelica to dance, and gave her all the
intimations of his passion, that the vigilance of the old Marquess would permit
him to give: He did not perceive Angelica do it, and none else of the Company
came near enough to him, to convey any thing into his Pocket; nevertheless when
he came to his Chamber, he found a little Table Book there with certain Lines
in Italian to this purpose.

Impetuosity and ardour in fire which has been long constrained, is
pardonable; but the noise and cracking, is abominable. At the reading of these
words, the Turkish Prince was in as great a Transport, as a Lover could be. He
doubted not but it was in Answer to the Declaration he had made; and overjoyed
she had received it so favorably, he past that night in extraordinary hopes.
The next day he went to Mass to the Church where Angelica went ordinarily,
where he observed a grave Matron attending him, and making signs to him now and
then to follow him out of the Church: He submitted to the signal; and the
Matron demanding, if he had found nothing in his Pockets over night; he was
afraid at first to confess, lest he should do Angelica a mischief before he was
aware; but the old Woman observing his confusion; Tell me truly, said she to
him, for it was I that put the Table Book there, and the advice which is given
comes from me: I am Angelica's Nurse; I was behind her yesterday, when you had
your discourse, and I will promise to bring your affairs to a happy conclusion,
provided you be discreet, and your intentions sincere. Though it was great
satisfaction to Jacaya to find an Agent so proper, and so ready to his hand,
yet it could not but give him considerable regret to find Angelica had no share
in the Answer he had received; and he expressed it to the Matron. Do not trouble
your self, said the Matron to him, repose your self upon me, I will do you what
service I can, for it is a long time since I have been preparing to be revenged
upon the unjust severity of the Marquess. His Daughter was not born so fair, to
be locked up in a Chamber, and we that are Governesses of such Beauties as she,
have no way to make our selves considerable but by our address in ostentating
our Talents. Jacaya concurred with every word she said, and seconding his
approbation by a Ring he gave her off his finger, he made the Matron so firm to
his Interests, that that very day she carried him a Letter to his Mistress, and
returned him an Answer. The Contents of her Answer was only a request to him to
write to her no more; but let a Ladies request be what it will, she makes a
great advance when she is induced to write again. The Nurse inculcated her
cares very much, and promised faithfully to continue them, and their success
was accordingly; their Commerce by Letters was established, and there began to
be a conformity in their styles. Things being in this posture, the grand
Duchess would needs regale the Ladies of her Court at the Pratolin (which is
one of the most beautiful Houses of Pleasure the Duke of Tuscany has near
Florence) Angelica and her Convey were of the number of the Guests; by accident
the Marquess de Strozzi was fallen into discourse with Jacaya, who partly in
revenge, and partly to make his advantage thereby, past so artificially from
one story to another, and kept the old man in a perpetual motion all over the
Walks, that at length he tired him quiet. The Duchess was at that time in a
Salon of rustic work, built in the most solitary part of the Wood belonging to
that Palace; four little vaulted Arbors were (as it were) attending on that
great one: The Company weary of walking, was retired part into the Salon with
the Datchess, and part into the lesser Arbors by themselves. The Marquess was
of the last number; he entered into one of the little Arbors finding it empty,
and being weary with walking, he was no sooner sat down, but he fell asleep.
Jacaya left him very civilly asleep, and past to the Duchess, to see if he
could find out Angelica, and make any improvement of that opportunity:
Pretending to inquire by accident of some of the Court, he understood she was
with her Argus in one of the Cabinets: He sent a Gentleman of his Retinue to
the old Matron, to let her know the Marquess would speak with her on the other
side of the Wood; and perceiving his design had taken, he went into the Arbor
to supply her place till she came back. The young Lady blushed exceedingly when
she saw the Turkish Prince, and would immediately have been gone, but a secret
inclination which she could not overcome, prevailed with her to stay: Jacaya
perceived her propensity, and endeavored to fortify her, he prayed, he
promised, he pressed, his desires were violent, and his passion eloquent. The
Arbor in which this Scene was acted, answered exactly to the Arbor where the
old Marquess was asleep, and by the effect of an Art which is common in all the
grand Dukes Houses (and of which we have formerly seen an Experiment in the
Palace of Mary de Medicis built at Paris) that which was spoken in one of these
Arbors, was conveyed secretly into the other, without being perceived by those
who were in the body of the Vault. This transportation of the voice from the
Angle of one Vault to another, is not a Romantic invention of mine own to
discover my Intrigue, for there is no body has traveled into Italy, but will
assure you of several places in the Pratolin built after that manner; and
before one of the vaulted Chambers in the Palais d'Orleans was altered, it was
remarkable for the same piece of Architecture. The Marquess being so near, and
in a place where he could hear distinctly all the Turkish Prince said to his
Daughter, the cariosity of knowing who was the Mistress set him perfectly
awake: He listened attentively, and understanding the promises wherewith Jacaya
accompanied his Propositions; Yes, said he to himself, that is the Dialect of
all Lovers, I know that Lesson without Book, and have made use of it to six
several Ladies in my time, but the Women are mere Sots that believe a word of
it. Jacaya pressing hard, and Angelica not being disposed to grant him the
favors he desired, the Marquess heard her answer: No, Jacaya, I cannot comply
with the thing your desires would exact; I am sensible I love you as well as is
possible, and I must acknowledge there are certain minutes in which I wish my
self with you in the same liberty as now; but, Sir, the danger dismays me, and
it troubles me to think I am not able to do any thing for you now, but to
manage my self so as it may be in my power hereafter. But, Madam, replied the
Turkish Prince with some kind of impetuosity, the moments these considerations
make you lose, may perhaps be irrecoverable. The Stratagem I have used to send
your old Sentry away, cannot last long, and perhaps your Father may wake at the
very instant I am speaking: do not therefore, I beseech you, dear Angelica,
consume those minutes which are intended only for Love, in tedious
expostulations. The Prince encouraging himself by his own proper discourse,
would doubtless have been too hard for Angelica's scruples; but her Name which
Jacaya had mentioned, discovering the Intrigue to the Marquess, he fetched such
a cry, as put our poor Lover beyond all his designs. Angelica made but one leap
betwixt the place where she was, to the Dutchesses Salon and the Turkish
Prince, being ignorant of the artifice by which the Marquess his cry was
conveyed to his ears, believed he was discovered, and retired into the thickest
part of the Wood, outragiously mad for the miscarriage of his Enterprise. The
Marquess had cried out before he was aware, and durst have sworn almost he had
done no such thing; so that observing the profound silence which followed, and
not perceiving what had caused it, he attributed it to a quite contrary effect.
Persons of his humor and age do seldom interpret any thing for the best. The
old Marquess ascribing that to the excess of their Love, which was nothing but
their fear, he ran into their Cabinet in a fury; and if he had found them
employed, as he expected to find them, it is clear he would have out run into
desperate extremities; but by good luck he found no body there but the old
Matron, who having sought him all over the Wood to no purpose, was returned to
the Arbor where she had left Angelica, at the same instant the Marquess came in
also. The good man being in an anger, demanded very snappingly why she had left
his Daughter; and she demanded of him as short, why he took delight to make his
Traps about the Wood, and through all the Walks about the Palace to no purpose.
They gave account of their reasons on both sides; and the Marquesses suspicions
being augmented by what she related, nothing could serve his turn but he would
go and stab his Daughter before the Dutchesses face. But the reverend Matron
restrained him as to that: She represented to his consideration, that what was
past was irreparable, and impossible to undo; that he must leave those things
to Destiny, and apply himself to the prevention of such practices for the
future. I know very well, said she, Jacaya's Extraction places him above the
Laws, which might constrain particular persons; and though he would freely
submit, I am not ignorant that Princes are never without some reason of State
or other in their Pockets, to keep them from performing that in their
restablishment, which they promised in their affliction: But the most casual
Marriage will be better than that, what you believe is already consummate
betwixt the Turkish Prince and your Daughter: Employ your self seriously to
make one of the Marriages we speak of; and instead of ruining Angelica by an
ineffectual discovery, conceal your resentment, so that by a dissembled
confidence, you may hasten the moment of your satisfaction. The Marquess
approved of her advice very well; he forced his Choler as much as he could to
compose his Countenance, and entering into the room where the whole Court was,
he counterfeited that, and two or three days after so handsomely, the two Lovers
apprehensions were entirely laid aside. They began to write Letters, as they
had formerly done, and the Nurse which managed the Intrigue, observing by her
private discourse with Angelica, that fear was the only impediment which kept
her from satisfying the desires of the Prince, she thought she should do a
meritorious act, if she could betray the innocent Angelica to a Rendez-vous, to
which she would not otherwise consent. She saw her modesty made her reject all
allurements of Love; but she hoped time and accident might make her more happy.
This hope having long since been digested, and Jacaya well instructed in what
he had to do, our female Engeneer found occasion to have the Windows of a low
Hall under Angelica's Appartment, to be so altered, that the wooden Grilles or
Bars might be taken out, and put in again with ease. These Windows were no
higher than the Butresses, and looked into a by-street that was little
frequented. The Nurse complained that Angelicas Chamber was too hot, and the
old Matron was brought to consent she should change her Appartment. The other
being proposed and approved, the day was appointed for their removal, and the
Turkish Prince had advertisement not to lose so fair an occasion. He assured
the Nurse by a Ticket, he would not fail to be at the assignation; but by the
continual care the Marquess took to know how things passed, this Ticket fell
into his hands. It had no subscription, and imported only thus much, That
Jacaya would not fail to be at the place appointed that night at eleven of the
Clock. And now the old Marquess would have sworn he had them sure: He sent for
the Officers of the Town, and having disposed them into a room, and ordered
them to remain there ready to execute their Offices when required; the Marquess
not daring to trust any Scout but himself, clapped himself upon the Watch in a
little Closet, built in the form of a Watch-house, from whence he could see all
that went in or out of his house. The hour appointed by Jacaya's Billet being
come, the Marquess heard one while in the street, which he took at first for
the signal, and indeed at that whistle the Porter opened the Gate gently, and
let in a person covered all over from head to foot with a Cloak a l'Italienne.
The Marquess made no question but this was Jacaya, and lamenting the condition
of persons of Quality, to be exposed to the infidelity of their Servants, he
followed with his Eye to a Gallery corresponding to Angelica's Chamber, into
which none but her Women were permitted to enter. The Vision knocked, and the
door opened; there was not any place so secret in the house, into which that
whistle would not have given her admission. The old man thought he had seen
enough, he sent for his Judge and his Notary immediately, he put himself at the
head of them with a lamp in his hand, and making the least noise he could for
fear of losing his prey, by the secret orders he had given, he got presently to
his Daughters beds side. The kreaking of his shoes in going, and the light of
the lamp, having got before him to the Eyes and Ears of Angelica, she clapped her
head into the bed, and caused the party in bed with her to do the same. The
Marquess drew the Curtain, and seeing two persons in bed, he commanded the
Judge to do his Office; and pulling a Daggar out of his Pocket, which he had
brought with him on purpose, he swore a desperate oath he should marry his
Daughter, or dye upon the spot. At these words of Judge, Death, and Daggar,
Angelica threw her self out of the bed, in a great fright, and escaping into a
Closet on the inward side of her bed, she fell a barricadoing the door with
whatever she could find. The Marquess not having so much occasion for that part
of his prey, as for the other, suffered her to go as she would, and reserved
himself for what was behind. The Judge, the Notary, and some Servants selected
for that design, seize upon the remainder, and haling it violently out of bed,
the Marquess was strangely surprised to find it was only his Daughters Nurse:
He cried out it was none of she he looked for, he asked for Jacaya, and protested
he would kill them every mothers child, if they did not tell him where he was.
The old Nurse understanding by that demand, what was the occasion of this
disorder, she took heart, and with the grave and severe tone of a Matron, asked
him if Angelica's Chamber was a fit place to look for a man at that time of
night. True it was, as was mentioned in the Ticket, Jacaya was to have met that
night in Angelica's Appartment; but some Gentlemen from Provence having come to
see the Marquess of Strozzi, that day, he had disposed them that night into the
Chamber appointed for the Enterview, and put off the young Ladies removal till
the next. The Nurse went out before noon to give Jacaya advice; and for the
better disguising of her Sally, she went to see one of her Relations that was
sick, and had continued with her to the very hour in which the Marquess saw her
come in: For knowing the Jealousy of her Master, she thought it not best to
come home till she believed he was in bed, lest she should be troubled with the
impertinent questions he used to all people that had been abroad. She had
desired the Porter to open the Gate when she gave him the signal, as he did,
and it was she the Marquess had seen enter both into the Court and the Gallery
belonging to his Daughters Chamber. The cunning old Fox being assured the
Turkish Prince was not to be found where he was sought for, she laid about her,
and gave the Marquess all the reproaches she could have given him, had she been
really innocent. She caused the Porter to be called, to testify it was she
that came in: she would needs have him send to the sick person, where she had
been visiting, to satisfy himself, whether she was not newly come from thence;
and pursuing her confidence so far as to press him to send to Jacaya, he did,
and having found him in bed, she put the poor Marquess into such a confusion,
as he was never in before in his life. This story made a great noise in the
Duke of Tuscany's Court; some Ladies who emulated Angelica's Beauty, and
perhaps had their private designs upon the affections of Jacaya, began to talk
of it at their pleasure: Jacaya protested it was only the old Marquesses fancy,
and that he had never had any familiarity with his Daughter: But the good man,
to justify his senses, and demonstrate that his age had as yet done him no
prejudice in his judgment, gave a relation to all people of what he heard in
the Pratolin; and pretended he had done the part of a wise man, when he had
discovered upon what grounds he had done as he did. By this means was Angelica
become the whole discourse of the Court; and though she was really innocent her
self, yet she served for an eminent Example, that in matters of Reputation,
appearances are sometimes as dangerous, as real transgression. The Family of
the Strozzi was very considerable in Italy; the Relations of Angelica were
sensible of the injury the Turkish Prince had done her, and Jacaya's ambition
not suffering him to apply such public remedy, as would have been required,
the Counsel of the Grand Duke, after great division and debate, concluded at
last that the poor Prince should be put to seek his protection from the Pope.
But the malice of the Strozzi not regarding the Holiness of his Protector, they
laid so many secret practices against his life, that they forced him out of
Italy, and obliged him to pass into France with the Duke of Nevers, newly come
to the Dukedom of Mantua, whose Subjects refused to admit him into his State.
The Court of France was at that time the most splendid in the World: The
Marriage of of the young Lewis XIII. with the Infanta of Spain, supplied new
matter to the Magnificence of the Queen Mother Mary de Medicis; and that time
was so eminent for fair Ladies, that never was there so many Beauties together
in one Court, as in his Reign. The Duke of Mantua having brought the Turkish
Prince into France, he would needs be his Patron amongst them: He proposed to
him to accompany him in his Visits to the most beautiful, and most eminent in
Dignities; but the Prince stopping him at the first words of his Proposition; I
beseech your Highness, said he to the Duke, suffer me to forget there any such
Creatures in the World: I see the Ladies of this Court are transcendently
handsome, but it satisfies me to look upon them at Court as so many pieces of
good Painting; I will never pursue them to their own Houses, if you will please
to dispense. How! said the Duke, not see them, can you think to be in a Court
so illustrious as this, and never visit the Ladies? Ha! my dear Prince, Paris
is not Constantinople, you must visit them here, or be exposed to whatever
their scorn or indignation can inflict; and you cannot imagine how dangerous
the displeasure of that Sex is for a person of your Age and Extraction: You may
play the Turk in your own Country, but in France you must imitate the French. I
ought not any where to be looked upon as a Turk, replied Jacaya a little angry,
I came so young out of that Country, I have retained nothing of their Customs:
My first years I spent in Greece, where they live with liberty enough; the
Court of Poland is none of the strictest, and if one may believe the
imaginations of the Marquess de Strozzi, continued he smiling, I, of all the
World, have little reason to complain of the severity of Italy. But, Sir, I
desire to be excused from any Amors in this Kingdom; and to preserve my self
from the dangers which I have many times incurred, I tell you once again, I
have no inclination to visit any of your Ladies. I am too much your friend,
replied the Duke, not to root out that obstinate fancy; you will pass for some
pitiful Creature, if you do not visit the Ladies: And for the dangers you speak
of, they are not so great as you apprehend: the multitude of Beauties
obstructing the choice, one can scarce give his heart to one, but the next
fetches it again. That uncertainty preserves many souls from the torture of
Love; and if it so happens one should be caught, a French Ladies Gallant runs
no harder Risques than an ordinary Lover. And then not staying for the Princes
answer, he pulled him along with him by force, to two or three Ladies of his
Acquaintance, and among the rest the Duke of Savoys Ambassadors Wife, which
was a very pleasant Person, and spoke Italian excellently well. But whatever
these Ladies could do to signalize their Entertainment of Jacaya, they could
not get the least obliging Syllable from him: He fixed his Eyes upon the ground
like a Novice of two days old, and answered with nothing but monosyllables. The
Dukes friends laughed at him next day for bringing such a Spark into France: He
found them altogether in the Ambassadresses House, where they were at play,
till it was time to walk. What Innocent is that you have got? cried they to the
Duke, as soon as they perceived him: he is afraid to speak one word, and to
look a Woman in the face, is as much as his life is worth; what do you with
that poor Creature? or to what use do you design him? Ha! Ladies, replied the
Duke, he is nothing less, than what you take him for: He has been told the
French Ladies are much used to play upon Strangers; and not knowing the French
Tongue very well, nor being yet acquainted with the Intrigues of the Court, he
is afraid to expose his discretion till he be informed better in both: But such
as you see him, if you could fasten him to your Chariot, I question whether you
ever triumphed with a more illustrious Captive in your life. Alas! said one of
the Ladies in a jeering tone, certainly that Honor must be left to a Venus in
the Hangings, for whilst he was in my Chamber, he regarded nothing else. I am
of opinion, says another in the same sly way, the little Cupid by my beds side,
is Rival to your Venus, for the Turkish Prince was graciously pleased to
vouchsafe him many a favorable glance whilst he was with me. For my part, said
the Ambassadress smiling, I have neither Venus nor Cupid to employ the
contemplation of the Duke of Mantua's new friend; the Beds and Borders in my
Garden were the only things he thought worthy of his Eyesight; and though he
made me a large Visit, was a whole day in my Chamber, and I discoursed with him
in a Language he understood better than French; yet I dare lay a good Wager, he
cannot tell whether I be fair or brown, little or great, and that he scarce
remembers I was the Ambassadress of Savoy. You may proceed, Ladies, if you
please, replied the Duke smiling, and pass your Judgments upon the poor
Stranger; but let me assure you, you are in an Error at this time; that Sultan
Jacaya is one of the wittiest persons of this Age, and one of the greatest
Courtiers besides. Ha! Monsieur, cried the Ladies, as it were altogether, do us
the honor to let us know what days they are in which he shows. Every day in
the year, replied the Duke, provided he be not among Women. He knows you too
well to talk before you; but if you will agree upon a place where I may make
him speak without knowing any body hears him but my self, I do not question but
you will make his mistaken merit an honorable amends. The bargain was made,
and to be put in execution next day. They chose the House of the Mareshal
Bassompierre, where there were several places convenient to conceal themselves.
A Summer House at the end of a Terrace-walk, which looked upon the River, was
designed for the Rendez-vous, and the Ladies being met at the hour appointed,
the Duke of Mantua brought in his Monster into a place where they could all
hear him. After some preliminary discourse about the situation of the House (in
which those of them which were curious, confessed he did well) the Duke cutting
himself short, and looking upon Jacaya with a subtle sort of smile, Observe,
said he, this place, where in spite of the Beauty which you cannot but
discern, I believe you but seldom appear, because for the most part it is full
of Ladies: The Mareshal of Bassompierre, to whom it belongs, is a great Admirer
of that beautiful Sex, and will not have his door shut against any that has
but the shape of a Woman; therefore being so fine a House, and at the very Gate
of Paris, it is odds if at this very hour there be not five or six Ladies, which
conceal themselves in some of the solitary places. As to them, replied the
Prince smiling in his turn, my care is at an end: the Visits you forced me to
make some days since, will preserve me against their Charms; for after the rate
that I deported my self with those which I saw, I am mistaken if they will not
shun me as much as I can avoid them for my heart. It Is true enough, said the
Duke, you were very ridiculous (if you will give me the liberty to tell you so)
I thought so my self, more than they did, replied Jacaya, and when I think of
the person I have acted, I know not how I could have the power to do it. To
tell you the truth, replied the Duke, it was not at all natural. Alas! no,
persisted the Sultan with a sigh, I am nothing less than indifferent for
Ladies, or distracted in their Companies; on the contrary, I am born not only
inclinable, but passionate for that Sex. I cannot see a handsome Woman, but she
is ready to draw my Eyes out of my head, and gives me so pleasant a commotion I
am not able to define it. I love ardently, I love nicely, I devote my self
wholly to what I love; and am convinced in this life there is no pleasure so
great as to be beloved where one loves. But hitherto Love has seemed
incompatible with my safety, and with the just ambition of my mind: It disturbs
all my designs, it drives me from all my protestations, and no sooner can I
entertain the very shadow of an Intrigue, but the malignity of all the
Constellations do seem to declare against me. Make therefore no more
Combinations against my tranquillity, continued he smiling; for I am at length
resolved to love nothing for the future, and I am of opinion should sooner
break with you, than be prevailed upon by your persuasion to love any thing
again. You have cleared your self of their Ambuscadoes in very good health,
replied the Duke with a tone tending to Raillery. The Ambassadress yesterday
was saying in merriment, you knew not whether she was handsome or otherwise;
How! said the Prince with a little more red than ordinary in his Cheeks, she
was very much mistaken, never any Woman of her Excellence escapt my
observation; nor dare I confess all the impressions she made upon my heart.
Why! replied the Duke, being somewhat surprised, has the Ambassadress given
you any impression? I durst have sworn your Eye had not been long enough upon
her, to have known her from another Woman. Ha! good Sir, said Jacaya to the
Duke, you are too politic, you have a mind to inveigle my heart, and I am
afraid are engaged, if possible, to entangle it: Do not command me to give you
a description of the Ambassadress, we must always be tender of speaking of what
we would not keep constantly in our mind; let it suffice I know her proportions
very well, and that the luster of her comely black Hair, the vivacity of her
Eyes, the Majesty of her Shape, the sweet and obliging Air expanded all over
her body, her fine Mouth, and her incomparable Teeth, were never observed more
strictly, nor with more veneration than by me. I know further, that Nature has
seemed to please her self in giving her the Arms and Neck of a fat Woman, with
the shape and proportion of a lean: The Ladies who had no share in Jacaya's
Elogium, thought it high time to interrupt him; they sallied out of their
Reconditory, and crying out to the Duke of Mantua, Pardon us, Sir, we recant,
the Prince of Turkey is as gallant and courtly as you describe him; they
acquainted Jacaya with their Conspiracy against him, he reprehended the Duke by
a significative look, and to render their design ineffectual then, and
discourage his friend from such Plots for the future; he returned home to his
own Lodgings, in spite of all the Ladies importunities to the contrary. This
kind of deportment set them all into a loud laughter, Come back, Sir, come
back, cried they to the fugitive Prince, we will promise you Quarter; do not be
afraid of your heart, we know a way to secure it. But the Prince marched on to
his Coach without seeming to hear them: The Ambassadress, who was naturally
amorous, and according to the inclination of her Sex, could not but hold her
self obliged to the Turkish Prince for the Character he had given her, told her
Companions it was an affront to them to have a man run from them in that
manner; and that if she might advise, they should make him repent of his
insolence. They liked her counsel very well, they had none of them any design
upon the heart of Jacaya, they had already as many of those as they could tell
how to manage; but they thought it pleasant to torment the poor Prince. The
Duke of Mantua promised to assist them; he did not look upon it as any defect
of the friendship he had promised them, to deliver him up to three or four the
handsomest Ladies in the World, at their earnest request. Jacaya came not into
the Queens Appartment, but through twenty or thirty oeillades; the Ladies of
the League, gave the word to engage him by turns, every one in a particular
conversation; and the pretense they made use of, rendering their desire but
merriment, it was no strange thing for a person of quality to be seen walking
with the Sultan, or in entertaining him otherwise alone. Ha! Ladies, said he to
them one day, I am here in my Asylum, do not violate the Privileges of the
place, by endeavoring the Captivity of my heart. Alas if you had it, you knew
not how to use it; I know the humor of the French Ladies already, their
greatest weakness is their levity. In the Countries from whence I come, they
are constant; they speak nothing, but they think; and when they think a thing,
all their care is to put it honestly in execution: Those Ladies would be much
troubled to destroy a man; but in this Court, the Goddess most adored is
Pretense. Great liberty, great kindness: Society is not only permitted, but
commanded; and when of that, which in another Country would be all, we
endeavor to make our advantage in this; we find that all amounts to just
nothing. Quarter therefore, Quarter, fair Ladies, for a poor Stranger. The
French Ladies were generous, and conceiving they had diverted themselves long
enough with what they entertained at first only for their diversion, they began
to think of letting the poor Sultan alone, to enjoy himself after his own Mode.
But the Ambassadress was not so indulgent; in her judgment Jacaya demanded
Quarter in such a way as was not fit to be granted. She found him in the
Thuileries with the Duke of Mantua one day and accosted him; May one be so
bold, Sir, said she to the Sultan, passing near him, as to desire the honor of
your Ushership? No, Madam, replied Jacaya, you are too handsome at this time;
and having said so, he made a low Reverence with design to have been gone; but
the Duke of Mantua catching him by the Arm; It shall never be said, said he,
you made your friends blush for your incivility toward the Ladies. Sir, said
the Prince to the Duke, with some discontent in his countenance, I cannot
comport with your manner of usage; and if you anger me any further, I will fall
in Love with the Ambassadress. The Duke of Mantua blushed indeed at that menace,
without knowing the reason. He could not get it out of his head during the rest
of their Conversation; and taking the Sultan home with him to Supper, he
demanded of him very seriously if he were in earnest, when he said he would
love the Ambassadress of Savoy. It was not yet come to a resolution; but the
Sultan, who had a mind to be merry in his turn, and observed the Duke asked him
that question with some little commotion, he was glad of that occasion to
revenge himself. Yes, Sir, said he very gravely, I am most certainly in
earnest; do not you think her worthy of being beloved? It Is not of her worth I
speak, replied the Duke, the question is, whether she will love you again: What
would you say, said the Turkish Prince, if she be in Love with me already? I
will say you are a happy man, replied the Duke. Read these Verses then, said
Jacaya; and giving him a Table Book out of his Pocket, the Duke opened it, and
found these words.

Nothing's so deep below, so high above,
But feels the mighty influence of Love.
The rugged Earth, the inexorable Sea,
The Winds, the Stars, all own his Sovereignty;
Nothing's too far, too great, too good; he sways
All things at will, and every thing obeys.
What are these Verses to the purpose? continued the Duke. Turn the leaf,
replied the Sultan, and when you have read all, I Will satisfy your Curiosity.
The Duke followed Jacaya's directions, and found on the other side, as
follows.

The little Bird which claps his wings,
And hops from the Myrtle to the Thorn;
From thence to the Elm, and chirps, and sings,
What would it say (had it been born
With reason) in those warblings.
But oh! blessed Love, that do inspire
Such Anthems for my shady Quire.
The Bull that in the Pasture lies,
And stamps, and stares about, and lows,
Shows not his rage so much thereby,
As his affection for the Cows.
The gentle Brook which murmuring flies,
Why in such haste? but that it shows,
It loves, it longs, and would be there:
And would you (dear) be singular.
Now, Sir, said the Prince of Turkey to the Duke of Mantua, what is your
opinion? would not one resolve to love upon less solicitation? I confess,
replied the Duke, these are of importance; but tell me sincerely, is it the
Ambassadress who invites you from your indifference in this manner? You are
very strange in your questions, replied the Prince smiling, am I not indiscreet
enough of my self, but your affected incredulity must render me more so? Had
the Duke told the Sultan at the same time of his own affection for the
Ambassadress, it was then in time, and Jacaya had suppressed his natural
inclination: But the Duke dissembled as well as he, and told the Sultan he was
glad of his good Fortune. In the mean time it is not to be imagined, the effect
this Juggle of Jacaya's produced in the Duke of Mantua's mind: Till that very
minute he never perceived he loved the Ambassadress; but when he examined the
secret displeasure it was to him, to believe the Sultan in her affections, he
doubted not but that displeasure arose from an inkling of Love. He past away
that whole night in detesting the ignorance of his passion, and representing to
himself what he had done toward the making of that Intrigue, which disturbed
him, he could not sufficiently admire the oddness of his Destiny. As soon as
she was to be seen the next day, he made a Visit to the Ambassadress, and found
her translating a piece of Pastor Fido out of Italian into French. The Lady
being as courteous as witty took great pleasure in giving the Sultan
intelligence, of the French Language, by her Translations out of Italian, which
Jacaya understood perfectly well. With this design it was she gave the Prince
the first fragments in his Table Book; and had the Duke considered, he would
have remembered the sense was there exactly in the Scene of Silvio and Linco;
but he was so strongly perplexed with jealousy and anger, he had not time for
any such reflections. Is it Jacaya, Madam, said he in a biting way to the
Ambassadress, which imploys your Poetical Vein? Yes, replied the Ambassadress,
not observing the manner of his pronounciation, how do you know it is for him I
put my Wit upon the Tentars? Jacaya is not endued with so much discretion,
replied the Duke to let his friends be ignorant of any favors he receives from
the Ladies. Ha! Sir, replied the Ambassadress, the favors he receives from me
are common to all the persons of Worth which I know, if they be ignorant of the
French Tongue. I find at my arrival at this Court they did me an extreme
pleasure to make me perfect in that Language, and I am endeavoring to do the
same kindness to Jacaya: He does not receive the effects of your goodness,
Madam, replied the Duke, in that way; and then he gave her an account of all
that past betwixt Jacaya and him. He designed to have incensed her by that
information, and obliged her to have banished Jacaya from her Company. But his
intelligence produced a contrary effect. Jacaya was one of the most accomplished
Princes in the World, and our Savoyenne discerned too well, to be ignorant of
his perfections. Nevertheless, the less she observed the Punctilioes usual upon
such occasions, she complained highly of Jacaya's indiscretion, and affecting
to pass by him without any Salute, she persuaded the Duke of Mantua she was
really angry. In that opinion he was very well pleased, and his Love became so
violent, it was no easy matter for him to conceal it. The Sultan, who had
spoke truer than he intended, perceiving his threat was effectual in earnest,
spared not by all means to propagate his affairs. Tell me, Madam, I beseech
you, said he one day to the Ambassadress, what is it a man must do to deserve
your Esteem? The respect I bear you, savours too much of timidity: That
Character I know does not please you, you have been so often pleased to express
your self to that effect, that I might take another upon me. I endeavor to
obey you, I follow you wherever you go, I entertain you as often as I can,
and could I believe you would hearken graciously to what I should say, I could
tell you great things: But you seem to grow cold at the least signification of
my flame; and having no inclination to hear any body speak, but when they are
resolved to be silent, your Curiosity ceases as soon as I prepare my self to
speak. My Curiosity did not expect to have heard from the Duke of Mantua, that
you were my Gallant, replied the Ambassadress something tartly: Why? Madam,
said the Turkish Prince, did the Duke of Mantua inform you so? Yes, doubtless,
replied the Ambassadress, he is too much my friend not to give me notice of
your indiscretion. He is mine too very much, Madam, replied Jacaya, the
kindness he has done me is a sufficient testimony; I could not have expected
it from him, and (if I may have liberty to say so) it was but by chance I
discovered that secret to him. But he has made the best use of it for me, and
saved me many a Complement: You know now I love you, without my trouble of
swearing it; and I may employ all that time which would have been necessary to
have persuaded you to it, in using my best means to make you love me. The
Ambassadress found this Declaration so pretty and singular, she had not power
to keep her countenance any longer, but fell out into a laughter. Some Lovers,
continued the Turkish Prince, would have been offended at this effusion of
mirth; but I am not of their opinion, I hold it pleasant any ways to divert the
persons we love; and since you are so pleased with my assurances, it is an
Entertainment I shall give you as often as I may. As he promised, he performed;
When at any time he saw the Ambassadress serious: Resume your good humor,
Madam, said he, I love you no less at this instant, than when my assurances put
you into such a fit of laughter. When she was gay, and merry (as she generally
was) my affairs go on now very well, said Jacaya to her, you see without doubt
my passion written in my Eyes, being in the same humor in which I found you
the first time I professed it. The Ambassadress forced her self as much as she
could to be severe; but her severity would not hold against the insinuation of
the Sultan: She accustomed her self insensibly to hear him tell her he loved
her, till that custom became a habit, and produced a passion in her wherewith
the Sultan had good reason to be content. The Duke of Mantua was too much
affected with that Intrigue, not to pry into the bottom of it: He advanced so
far as to give the Ambassadress his judgment of it, without declaring the true
motive which impelled him. She received his advice as a piece of pleasantery,
and paying in counterfeit Coin what he delivered in true, she turned all en
ridicule. He would have spoke more intelligibly, and to the charitableness of
his advice, added another Epithet that belonged to it; but his Love was no
happier than his Jealousy. Ha! said the Ambassadress to him, you have not
taken a right Copy of Prince Jacaya. by your looks one would imagine your
discourse were serious. I intend it no otherwise, Madam, replied the Duke, the
passion wherewith you have inspired me, is (in my judgment) the seriousest
affair I can treat of. That part does not agree with you at all, Sir, replied
the Ambassadress, I know you are but merry, and should I take your pretenses
for truths, I should likewise desire you to remember who I am; but I am not so
easily deluded. Why do you now tell me you love me? are my Charms any greater
now, than they have been these two years that you have been exposed to them?
No, Sir, you do but railly, and (give me leave to say) not with the neatness
and dexterity, is to be expected from an ingenious man; and seeing the Prince
of Turkey come in at the same time, Come hither, Sir, said she smiling, come
hither, and let me hear some of your Amors before the Duke of Mantua, that he
may discern the difference, and begin a new Lesson; for two hours together he
has been endeavoring to imitate you, but could not attain. I am to day,
Madam, replied the Sultan, in no humor to make Love; you looked upon me this
morning at Mass, in such a way as has discomposed me for all this day: I could
not discover the least spark of kindness in your Eyes. Tell me, I beseech you,
is it enough for a Lover, that they be sparkling without kindness? or do you
think they have acquitted themselves of their duty, when they have dazzled a
poor Creature? I must see Love in them, or renounce their Empire; and when mine
declare I love more than ever, I expect yours should make answer, And I Will
assure you there is no Love lost. If that be all, replied the Ambassadress,
rather than the Duke shall want his Lesson, I Will look upon you as you please.
Do I look well now? continued she, fixing her Eye upon him with as much
tenderness as she could. Ha! I know you, dear Eyes, said the Sultan, I see now
you are disposed to hear me; and then he ran out into a thousand amorous
expressions, but the Duke of Mantua (who took no recreation in that kind of
divertisement) interrupted him, by departing hastily out of room. Jacaya
observed his Physiognomy so changed, he was afraid he had been ill, and desired
the Ambassadress she would permit him to follow him, which he did, but could
not overtake him till he came to his Lodgings. The Prince of Turkey desired to
know, what it was obliged him to retire so abruptly, and assured him the
Ambassadress was very unquiet till she could be satisfied of his health. The
Duke being brim full of passion, answered not the Sultans Complement; but
looking fiercely upon him with his Eyes, in which grief and rage were both
livelily delineated; Actum est, it is decreed, cried he, I love her; my Love
has not been thus long constrained, but to break out with the greatest
violence, and I will perish a thousand times before I will endure my Rival
shall be beloved. Jacaya thought him in a Frenzy, and taking him by the Arm
to feel his Pulse, What do you talk of a Mistress, and a Rival? you are in a
burning Fever, do you remember who it is that speaks to you? Yes, Prince,
replied the Duke, with somewhat more moderation, I know you too well, you are
the Ambassadresses Darling, but you must resolve to take away my life, or
renounce those addresses. Why, Sir, said the Sultan in a great surprise, do you
love the Ambassadress? To say I love her, replied the Duke, is too mean; I
admire, I adore her, and either you must resign, or one of us must dye. Jacaya,
confounded at this Alarm, as may well be imagined, fell down upon the Chair
that was next him, and leaning his Elbow upon the Table, fell into a
contemplation of his Destiny. He loved the Ambassadress entirely, and though
his passion was begun in sport, and continued in a Frolic; yet at the bottom
he was most absolutely serious. He was of an amorous Complexion, much subject
to Love, and in that respect it was no easy matter for him to renounce it; on
the other side, he had been infinitely obliged to the friendship of the Duke,
he had protected him against the Conspiracies of the Strozzi; he had given him
all necessary supplies, and he had never been admitted in France, but by his
means. Love! Ha, cruel Love, cried he with a sigh, will you be always mine
Enemy? Alas! Sir, said he, addressing himself to the Duke, I foresaw the misery
is befallen me; and had you left me in that liberty I desired, I had never
pulled it down upon me: Had you no other way of breaking with me, than by
making me your Rival: I suppose my friendship has tried you, and I do not
admire it; the unfortunate are often tedious to their friends; but had it not
been enough to let me have known so, without adding the consequences of an
infructuous passion? Do not call me to an account, said the Duke, for what I
have done; I knew nothing of it my self, and would have sworn I should never
have been in Love with the Ambassadress: The very moment before I knew she had
a kindness for you, my Love began to declare, by the approaches of my
Jealousy; the news of your being in Love set me also on fire; and that fire
having been a long time deprest secretly in my heart, that part of it which
appears but its beginning, is indeed the utmost extremity. It is not that I am
weary of your friendship, and I offer you mine as pure as you have found it;
But, dear Sultan, show me your compassion by your compliance; Ladies are
unconstant, and perhaps you will do that of your self one day, either out of
weariness or revenge, that I conjure you to do now in kindness to me. The
Turkish Prince could not relish that Proposition; all that his obligations and
Policy could get from him, was only a promise to endeavor to master himself.
In order to which he absented himself for some time, and pretending a Curiosity
to see the Kings Houses, and other Palaces about Paris, he had several
Entertainments with several Lords of the Court. Whether in some of those
Entertainments the Duke of Mantua laid any design for him; or whether the
consideration of his misfortune in his Love exstimulated him to retire into
some unknown part of the World, where that passion was a stranger, is not
known; but certain it is, he disappeared in an instant, and could never
afterward be heard on. The Duke of Mantua was not much happier; for the
Ambassador dying in France, and his Lady returning into Savoy, the Dukes
Affairs called him into Italy, and gave him no leisure to abandon himself to
the desires of his passion.

A TABLE of all the Histories contained in these Eight Parts.
THe Countess of Castile. page 1 The Pilgrim. page 4 Alfreda of England. page
14 Don Garcias of Spain. page 30 The Duke and Duchess of Modena. page 37 The
three Princesses of Castile. page 53 Constance the fair Nun. page 81 James King
of Arragon. page 106 The Fraticelles. page 113 Dulcinus King of Lombardy. page
156 Nogaret and Mariana. page 163 Don Pedro King of Castile. page 185 John
Paleogolus Emperor of Greece. page 205 Amedy Duke of Savoy. page 223 Agnes de
Castro. page 251 The Countess of Pontieuvre. page 262 Feliciane. page 286 Jane
supposed of Castile. page 310 The Persian Princes. page 325 Don Sebastian King
of Portugal. page 355 Jacaya a Turkish Prince. page 380
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for John Starkey Booker-seller, at the Mitre in
Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
Divinity.
Folio's.

THirty six Sermons preached by the Right Reverend Father in God Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln; the fifth Edition corrected, price
bound 18 s.

2. The Jesuits Morals, collected by a Doctor of the College of Sorbon in
Paris, who has faithfully extracted them out of the Jesuits own Books which
are Printed by the permission and approbation of the Superiors of their
Society. Written in French, and exactly translated into English, price bound 10
s.

Quarto.

3. Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the four chief places in Scripture, which
treat of Marriage, or nullities in Marriage. Wherein the Doctrine and
Discipline of Divorce is confirmed by explanation of Scripture, by testimony of
ancient Fathers, of Civil Laws in the Primitive Church, of famousest Reformed
Divines. And lastly, by an intended Act of the Parliament and Church of England
in the last year of Edward the sixth. By the Author J. Milton, price 1 s. 6 d.

Octavo.

4. A Confutation of the Millenarian Opinion, plainly demonstrating that Christ
will not reign visibly and personally upon Earth with the Saints for 1000
years, either before the day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it.
By Tho. Hall, B. D. price bound 1 s.

Physic.
1. Basilica Chymica and Praxis Chimiatricae, or Royal and Practical Chemistry;
augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To which is added his Treatise of
Signatures of internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and
lesser World. As also the Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M. D.
augmented and enlarged by his Son, with considerable Additions; all faithfully
Englished by a Lover of Chemistry, in Folio, price bound 10 s.

2. The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced. Written in French by P.
Thybault, Chemist to the French King, and Englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic,
and Fellow of the Royal Society, in Octavo. price bound 3 s.

3. Medicina Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles
of the Art of Physic; with the Insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing
Medicines, and the Excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation. By
Edward Bolnest, Med. Land. in Octavo, price bound 1 s.

Law.
Folio's.

1. An Abridgment of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Aphabetically digested under several Titles: By Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law;
published by the Lord Chief Baron Hales, and approved by all the Judges, price
bound 40 s.

2. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight, in three Volumes, in English:
Allowed of by all the Judges. The second Edition, carefully corrected by the
Original, price bound 45 s.

3. The second part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; containing the
Exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient and other Statutes: Written by the
Lord Chief Justice Coke. The third Edition, with an Alphabetical Table added,
price bound 14 s.

4. The third part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning High
Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal Causes. The fourth Edition;
written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, price bound 6 s.

5. The fourth part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts: Written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke. The fourth
Edition, with an Alphabetical Table not heretofore printed, price bound 9 s.

6. Brief Animadversions on Amendments of, and Additional Explanatory Records
to the fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts. By Will. Prynne Esquire; price bound 12 s.

Quarto.

7. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
Vindication of the Laws of England; together with a short History of William
the Conqueror. By Silas Tailor, price bound 3 s.

Octavo's.

8. An Exact Abridgment in English, of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor
Knight; with the Resolution of the Points of the Law therein by the Judges. By
W. Huges, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

9. An Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force and Use, made in the 16,
17, and 18. of King Charles the First, and the 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16. of King
Charles the Second. By William Hughes Esquire; price bound 2 s. 6 d.

10. The Touchstone of Wills, Testaments, and Administrations, being a
Compendium of Cases and Resolutions touching the same, carefully collected out
of the Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Canon Laws, as also out of the Customs,
Common Laws, and Statutes of this Kingdom. By G. Meriton, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

11. A Guide for Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors
of Highways, Treasurers of the County-stock, Masters of the House of
Correction, Bailiffs of Manors, Toll-takers in Fairs, etc. showing the extent
and power of the several Offices; the third Edition enlarged, collected by
George Meriton, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

History.
Folio's.

1. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holsteins Ambassadors into Muscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in 1639. containing a
complete History of those Countries; whereunto are added, the Travels of
Mandelslo, from Persia, into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and finished in
1640. The whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures. Written
Originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy; Englished by J. Davies
of Kidwelly. The second Edition, price bound 18 s.

2. The present State of the Ottoman Empire, in three Books; containing the
Maxims of the Turkish Polity, their Religion, and Military Discipline:
illustrated with diverse Figures. Written by Paul Ricaut Esquire; late Secretary to
the English Ambassador there, now Consul of Smyrna. The third Edition, price
bound 10 s.

3. The History of Barbados, St. Christophers-Mevis, St. Vincents, Antego,
Martinico, Monsarrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight;
in two Books, containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands:
Illustrated with diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable
Rarities therein described. Written by an ingenious Hand, price bound 10 s.

4. Il. Cardinalismo di Santa Chiesa, or the History of the Cardinals of the
Roman Church, from the time of their first Creation, to the Election of the
late Pope Clement IX. with a full account of his Conclave, in three Parts.
Written in Italian by the Author of the Nipotismo di Roma, and faithfully
Englished, price bound 8 s.

5. The World Surveyed, or the famous Voyages and Travels of Vincent le Blanc,
of Marsscilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu, Fez, Morocco,
Guinny, and through all Africa, and the principal Provinces of Europe, price
bound 10 s.

6. The History of the Life and Death of William Laud, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing the Ecclesiastical History of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, from his first rising, viz. 1621. to his death
1644. By P. Heylin, D.D. price bound 10 s.

Quarto.

7. A brief Account of Mr. Valentine Greatraks, the famous Stroker, and diverse
of the strange Cures by him lately performed. Written by himself to the
Honorable Robert Boil, price stitched 1 s.

Octavo's.

8. A Relation of Three Embassies, from his Majesty Charles the Second, to the
Great Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark, performed
by the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663. and 1664.
Written by an Attendant on the Embassies, price bound 4 s.

9. A Relation of the Siege of Candia, from the first Expedition of the French
Forces to its Surrender, the 27. of September 1669. Written in French by a
Gentleman who was a Voluntier in that Service, and faithfully Englished, price
bound 1 s.

10. The History of Algiers, and its Slavery, with an account of that City, and
many remarkable Particularities of Africa. Written by Sieur d'Aranda, sometime
a Slave there, Englished by J. Davies, price bound 3 s.

11. An Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country, and River
of the Amazons in America, with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French,
price bound 1 s. 6 d.

12. The Works of the Famous Mr. Fr. Rabelais, treating of the Lives of
Gargantua, and his Son Pantagruel; to which is newly added the life of the
Author. Translated out of French into English by Sir Tho. Vrchard Knight, price
bound 5 s.

13. The Novels of the Famous Don Francisco de Quevedo Villegas, Knight of the
Order of St. James; whereunto is added the Marriage of Belphegor, an Italian
Novel. Translated from Machiavel, faithfully Englished, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

14. The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol;
together with the most considerable passages for five years following, in that
Empire, with a new Map of it; to which is added an account of the extent of
Indoston, the Circulation of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it
self there, as also the Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same, and the
principal cause of the Decay of the States of Asia: by Monsieur F. Bernier,
Physician of the Faculty of Montpelier. Englished out of French by H.O.
Secretary to the Royal Society, price bound 4 s.

15. Deceptio Visus, or Seeing and Believing are two things, a pleasant Spanish
History, faithfully Translated, price bound 2 s.

16. The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. From
the death of King Lewis XIII. to the year 1664. wherein all the Affairs of
State to that time are exactly related. By Benjamin Priolo, and faithfully
Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. price bound 4 s.

17. The History of the twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
C. Suetonius Tranquillus, newly Translated into English, by T.B. Esquire;.

18. The Annals of Love, containing select Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts, pleasantly related. By a Person of Honor, in eight Parts,
price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Twelves.

19. The Present State of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue, and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W.A. Fellow of the Royal
Society, the second Edition, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

20. The Present State of France, containing the Orders, Dignities, and Charges
of that Kingdom: Newly corrected and put into a better Method than formerly.
Written in French, and faithfully Englished, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

21. The Present State of the Princes and Republics of Italy: The second
Edition enlarged, with the manner of Election of Popes, and a Character of
Spain. Written Originally in English by J. Gailhard, Gent. price bound 1 s. 6 d.

22. The Policy and Government of the Venetians, both in Civil and Military
affairs. Written in French by the Sieur de la Hay, and faithfully Englished,
price bound 1 s.

23. The Voyages of Italy, or a complete Journey through Italy, in two Parts,
with the Characters of the People, and the Description of the Chielf Towns,
Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statues, Antiquities; as also of
the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all the Princes, with
Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lessels, Gent. who traveled through
Italy five times as Tutor to several of the English Nobility, Opus Posthumum,
corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller, S.W. Never
before extant, price bound 4 s.

24. A Relation of the Coasts of Africa called Guinnee, with a Description of
the Countries, Manners, and Customs of the Inhabitants, of the Productions of
the Earth, and the Merchandise and Commodities it affords, with some Historical
Observations on the Coasts, being collected in a Voyage made by the Sieur
Villault Escuyer Sieur de Bellefond in the years 1666, and 1667. faithfully
Englished. The second Edition, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

25. A Relation of the French Kings late Expedition into the Spanish
Netherlands, in the years 1667, and 1668. with an Introduction discoursing his
Title thereunto, and an Account of the Peace between the two Crowns, made May
2. 1668. Englished by G.H. price bound 1 s.

Poetry and Plays.
1. Andromicus Comnenius, a Tragedy. By John Wilson, price stitched 1 s.

2. Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy. By Lodowick Carlel Esquire; price
stitched 1 s.

3. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral. By Walter Mountague Esquire; price bound 1
s. 6 d.

4. Aminta, the Famous Italian Pastoral. Translated into English, price bound 1
s. 6 d.

5. Paradise Regained, a Poem in four Books, to which is added Samson
Agonistes. The Author, John Milton, price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Miscellanies.
1. A general Collection of Discourses of the Vertuosi of France, upon
Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other Natural Knowledge, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris, by the most ingenious Persons of that
Nation. Englished by G. Havers, in two Volumes, Folio, price bound 30 s.

2. A Treatise of the Sybils, giving an account of the Names and Numbers of
them, of their Qualities the Form and Matter of their Verses, and of their
Books. Written in French by David Blundell. Englished by J. Davies, Folio,
price bound 7 s.

3. The Merchants Map of Commerce, wherein the universal manner and matter of
Trade is compendiously handled, the Standard and Current Coins of sundry
Princes observed, the Natural and Artificial Commodities of all Countries for
Transportation declared, the Weights and Measures of all places of Traffic
collected, and all reduced to the Practice of the City of London. By Lewis
Roberts, Merchant: The second Edition enlarged, in Folio, price bound 16 s.

4. The Golden Calf, in which is handled the most rare and incomparable wonder
of Nature, in transmuting Metals, viz. how the entire substance of Lead was in
one moment transmuted into Gold Obrizon, with an exceeding small Particle of
the true Philosophers Stone, at the Hague in the year 1666. Written in Latin
by John Frederick Helvetius, Doctor of Medicine at the Hague, and faithfully
Englished, in Twelves, price bound 1 s.

5. Accidence Commenced Grammar, and supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new
and easy Method for the learning of the Latin Tongue. The Author John Milton,
in Twelves, price bound 8 d.

6. Tho. Halls Translation of the Second Book of Ovids Metamorph.
Grammatically, in Octavo, price bound 1 s.

7. The Rules of Civility, or certain ways of Deportment observed in France
amongst all Persons of Quality upon several occasions, faithfully Englished, in
Twelves, price bound 1 s.


