EFFIGIES R. P. ^ ANDREWS QVONDAM EPISCOPI WINTONIENSIS Obyt 1626. AEtatis
suae 7^


If ever any merited to be
The Universal Bishop, this was He
Great ANDREWS who ye whole vast Sea did drain
Of Learning, and distilled it in his brain;
These pious dropps are of the purest kind
Which trickled from ye limbeck of his mind.
W.M. sculptit. ^

The Private DEVOTIONS Of the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews.

Late Bishop of Winchester.

Lord I have called daily upon ^hee; I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
Psalm. 88. 9.

London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Princes Arms in St Paul's Church yard. An. Dom. 1647.

THE STATIONER To the Christian Reader.
THe life of this Reverend Father, was a life of Prayer; Five hours in a day
he spent in his Devotions, and for diverse months before his dissolution he
gave himself wholly up to converse with God; It is most remarkable, and may
instruct Posterity, that when sickness had deprived him of his voice, yet his
eyes and hands prayed; and when both they failed, his heart still prayed, till
it pleased God to accept it as his last Sacrifice; This testimony and Character
of his holy Piety, we received from learned Bishop Buckeridge, who being well
acquainted with his life, commended his precious memory to posterity in a
funeral Sermon, one of the last offices which as men, and christians, we are
wont to pay to Honor and Virtue; In the evening of his life he was seldom
seen without these devotions in his hand; he penned them in Greek, and in
that language presented them to his God; the reason, it is not for me to
determine; whether it were for that the clearest evidences of our salvation are
delivered to us in that tongue, or whether amongst those fifteen he was Master
of, he chose this language as the most copious to express the fullness of his
soul. It appears not as yet who translated this manual of devotions, some of
his learned Friends, (to whom the world owes much for the benefit of of this
publication) informed me, that they found them written with his own hand, from
whence they had the happiness to transcribe them; it is not improbable that we
are indebted to the same hand for the translation, to whom we owe the
original; since I could never yet learn that any have laid claim thereunto;
it being no new thing in this ambitious age, for men to endeavor to translate
fames, as well as books, it may seem strange in these ex-tempore times, for
me, to send these Set forms to the press, since I am not ignorant, how of
late it has been hotly disputed, whether it be better to pray to God with
consideration, or without, against this wild fancy I conceived I could not
oppose any argument above the example of this learned Doctor of our Church.

Who though he was so universal in allholy dimensions, you may be pleased to
observe the reverentiall addresses of his soul, in these his approaches to the
highest Majesty; he well knew the distance betwixt heaven and earth, betwixt
God and himself, which I hope will be a motive to every pious Christian, as
Solomon says, not to be rash with his mouth, Ecles. 5. 2.

I must clearly confess, when these Copies came first to my hand, I resolved
to imprint them in my own heart; but considering with my self that no man
might better excuse the divulging of so usual a book, then one of my
profession, and withal that there were diverse manuscripts dispersed abroad,
and the Church might be deprived of this genuine Edition, and I of mine own
right, I thought this publication absolutely necessary, being confident that no
man could justly except against this Reverend Author, who both abroad and at
home was acknowledged for his Piety and learning, to have been one of the
Oracles of the church; much less against these his devotions, which are for the
most part selected out of the holy Scripture.

And whereas he freely wrote his controversies and Sermons for the benefit of
others, these pieces I suppose cannot be too well thought off, which he kept
peculiar to himself, having appropriated and consecrated them, to his private
use for the employment of his own soul.

This treasure, so piously laid up in his life time, I thought good not to keep
wrapped up in a napkin from the Public, enjoy it thankfully, to the glory of
that God, who kindled these holy fires in his soul, and let the memory of the
devout Author, in spite of ignorance and malice, be perpetuated and blessed by
after ages, as for me, I shall never desire any higher recompense, then to be
in some measure serviceable to the Church, and to be esteemed.

Your faithful servant HUM. MOSELEY.

An Index of the heads contained in this Book.
A Meditation at your entrance into the Churh before public worship. Page 1.
The Horolege or Dial of prayer 3 Morning prayer 17 The Hymn 20 A paraphrase
upon the Lords prayer. 25 A confession of sin 31 A prayer for the performance
of the Law 44 A confession of faith 50 A prayer f^r faith 53 A confession of
hope 56 Intercession 59 A deprecation or prayer against evil. 64 Prayers
against evils temporal 69 Against evils in the Church ibid. Against evils
political 71 Comprecation or Hosanna in the highest 73 Comprecation of
temporal blessings. Hosanna in Terrenis 77 A Thanksgiving 81 A thanksgiving in
particular 92 Praises 96 Praises in particular 105 Evening Prayer 109 A prayer
after divine service 119 At the approaching to the holy sacrament 122 In the
time of Receiving 124 After the receipt of the Eucharist 129 Mourning and
weeping 131 A prayer on the meditation of the great work of our redemption 132
A meditation on Canticles, 5. 10 134 A prayer after the holy Ordidinances on
Whitsunday 137 Light from heaven 138 An imprecation against the enemies of the
Church 142 Prayer for King James, after the Sermon of Gowries conspiracy 144
Thanksgiving after the deliverance from the gunpowder treason A prayer for
Magistrates Eccleciasticall and civil 150 Before Sermon 151 The form of
bidding of prayer used by Bishop Andrews after the opening of the Text 152
Another exhortation to prayer used by Bishop Andrews after his opening of his
Text.
EPHE. 6. 18. Pray always with all manner of Prayer and Supplication in the
Spirit.
Confessio.
In Prayer there are considered, The species or kinds, As confession of our
Sins, page 31 Demerits, ibid. Faith, p. 51. Hope, p. 56.

Deprecation, page 64.
Petition for the aversion of Evils Eternal. Internal, or Spiritual.
External.

Comprecation.
The conferring of blessings. Eternal, Hosanna, p. 73. Internal, In Altis, p.
69. External, In Terrenis. 77.
Retribution of thanks Eucharistica.
Praise, Conf. laudis page 87. The circumstance of persons, it being for Our
selves called Oration, page 25. Others also, Intercession. page 59.
Time, Place, Manner.
The time of Prayer.
In general, Always, Luke 18. 11. In particular, and that Most ordinary twice
a day, at Morn, Even, Numb. 18. 3.
More extraordinary,
Twice a day, at Morn, Noone and Night. Psalm 55. 1. Seven times a day. Dan.
6. 11.
The Horologe.
1 Before day, Mar. 1. 31. 2 At Sunrise, Psalm. 63. 1. 3 At the third hour,
Act. 2. 15. 3 At the sixth or noone, 10. 9. 4 At the ninth hour, 3. 1. 5 At
Sunset. P. 134 6 After it at night, P. 134 7 At Midnight, Ps. 139. 62
The place of Prayer.
In general in every place. Exodus 20. 24. In special for 1 Timothy 2. 8.
Public Prayer.
In the Congregation or Temple, Psalm. 111. 1. Acts 3. 1. and 22. 17.
Private Prayer.
At home. Esa. 26. 20. In the Chamber, Mat. 6. 6. On the house top or leads,
Acts 10. 9. Abroad. In the Garden, Joh. 18. 2. In the field, Genesis 29. 63. In
the Desert, Mar. 1. 35.
The manner of Prayer. in respect of
The Posture, Standing, Mar. 11. 25. Kneeling, Luke 22. 41. Falling on the
face, Mat. 26. 29.
The Gesture.
Lifting up the eyes, Psalm. 123. 1. Lifting up of the hands, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
Smiting the breast, Luke 18. 13. Uncovering the head, 1, Cor. 11. 4.
At your entrance into the Church before public service, say O LORD,
IN the multitude of thy mercies I will aproach thine house, and I will worship
toward thy holy Temple in the reverence of thee.

Lord, hear the voice of my prayer when I call unto thee, when I lift up my
hands toward thy Sanctuary.

Remember these my brethren also which stand about me and pray together with
me, remember their endeavors and their zeal.

Remember them likewise which for just causes are absent, and O Lord have mercy
upon them and us, according to the abundance of thy goodness.

I have loved the beauty of thine house, and the place where thy glory
dwells, that I might hear the voice of thy praises, and publish all thy
wonders.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will still entreat. That I may
dwell still in the house of the Lord, and visit his holy Temple.

To thee O Lord my heart has said, I will seek the Lord. Thee (o my God) have
I sought, and thy face. And thee will I seek.

The Horologe or Dial of Prayer.
THou which have put the times and seasons in thine own power, Acts 1. 7. Grant
that we may pray unto thee in a fit and acceptable time, and save us, Mar. 4.
38.

1.
Thou which for us men and for our salvation were borne at Midnight, Lu. 2. 7
Grant that we may be daily regenerate by the renewing of thy holy Spirit until
Christ be perfectly found in us, and save us, Lu. 3. 5.

2.
Thou which early in the morning whilst the Sun was rising did rise again,
Mar. 16. 2. Raise us up daily to newness of life, prompting us unto those
means of repentance which thou best know, and save us, Romans 6. 4.

3.
Thou which at the third hour did send thy holy Spirit upon thy Apostles,
Acts 2. 15. Take not thy Spirit from us, but renew it daily in us, and save us,
Psalm. 51. 10. 11.

4.
Thou which at the sixth hour, and on the sixth day did fasten the sins of
the world, and crucify them on the same Cross with thy self, Mat. 27. 45.
Col. 2. 14. Cancel the handwriting of our sins which is against us, and take
it clear away, and save us.

Thou which at the sixth hour did let down the great sheet from Heaven and
Earth as a type of thy Church, Acts 10. 11.

Receive us sinners of the Gentiles into the same, and with it take us up into
Heaven and save us, Gal. 2. 15. Acts 10. 16.

5.
Thou which at the ninth hour did for us sinners and our sins, take that
bitter and cursed death, Mar. 15. 34. Heb. 2. 9.

Mortify in us our earthly members, and whatsoever opposes thy will, and save
us. Col. 3. 5.

6.
Thou which at even would be taken down from the Cross, and laid in the
Sepulcher. Mar. 15. 42.

Bury our sins in thy grave and with thy righteousness cover the evil which
we have committed and save us. Romans 6. 4.

Thou which late at night gave to thine Apostles the power of remitting or
retaining sins. Jo. 2. 23.

Make us pertakers of that benefit unto remission good Lord, and not unto
retention, and save us.

Thou which at midnight did raise the Prophet David, and the Apostle Paul to
praise thee. Ps. 119. 62. Act. 16. 25.

O give us also Songs in the night, and make us mindful of thee upon our
Beds, and save us. Ps. 63. 6.

Thou which by thine own mouth have foretold, the coming of the Bridegroom at
midnight. Mat. 5. 6.

Grant that we may ever have that cry in our ears, the Bridegroom comes and
so be never unprepared to meet him, and save us.

Thou which by the Cock crowing did admonish thy Apostle Peter, and made
him return to repentance, Matt. 26. 74. 75.

Grant that we also weep bitterly for the things wherein we have sinned
against thee, and save us.

Thou which at the Seventh hour did cure the Rulers Son of a fever. Jo.
4. 52.

If any fever or sickness remain in our souls, take that away also, and
save us.

Thou which at the 10. hour would have thy Apostle (which found thy Son)
to cry with great joy, we have found the Messiah. Jo. 1. 41.

Make us find the Messiah likewise, and having found him to rejoice in like
manner, and save us. Jo. 1. 41.

Thou which vouchsafest to call those which stood al day idle and (with
promises of reward) to send them even at the 11. hour into thy Vinyard Matt.
20. 6.

Show us the same favor, and though we return late unto thee (as at the 11
hour) graciously yet deny not to entertain us, and save us.

Thou which at Supper time did institute the holy mysteries of thy body and
blood. Jo. 13. 3. Matt. 26. 20.

Make us mindful and pertakers of them, and not to our perdition, but to the
remission of sin, and our obtaining the legacies of the new Testament, and
save us.

Thou which have foretold thy coming to judgment, on a day which we expect
not, and in an hour which we knew not. Luke 12. 46. Matt. 24. 50.

Make us ready every day And hour that we may with joy attend thy comeing,
and save us.

Thou which sendest forth the light, which createst the morning, and make the
Sun to rise upon thee good, and bad, inlighten the blindness of our minds
with the knowledge of thy truth. Ps. 43. 3. 74. 16. Ephesians. 1. 18.

Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us, that in thy light we may see
light, in the light of grace, the light of glory, and save us. Ps. 4. 7. 36. 9.

Thou which give food to all flesh, which feedest the young Ravens which call
upon thee, and have nourished us from our Childe-hood. Fill our hearts with
food and gladness, and with thy grace establish our hearts, and save us, Ps.
136. 25. 147. 9. 71. 5. Acts 14. 17. Heb. 13. 9.

Thou which make the Evening an end to the day, that it may put us in mind of
the evening of our life. Psalm 104. 23.

Grant that we may ever consider that as the day, so our life vanishes, Eccl.
8. 13. Grant that we may ever remember the days of darkness which are many,
and that the night comes when we cannot work, that so we be not cast out
to utter darkness, And save us, Mat. 25. 3c.

O Lord my God,
WHose Essence is above all Essence, and whose Nature is uncreated; whose
handywork the whole World is. I set thee before mine eyes, Ps. 16. 9. I lift up
my soul unto thee, I worship thee, falling down upon my knees; I draw near unto
thee, and humble my self under thy mighty hand, I stretch sorth my hands unto
thee, my soul gapes to thee, as the thirsty land. I smite upon my Breast and
say with the Publican, O Lord be merciful to me a si^^er, To me more sinful
then the Publican, be merciful as to the Publican, o Father of Mercies, Psalm.
16. 9. 25. 1. 95. 6. 134. 2. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Psalm. 143. 6. Lake 18. 13.

I beseech thy paternall bowels of compassion despise me not (though I be an
unclean worm) a dead dog, a stinking carcass, Psalm. 216. 2 Kings 9.

Despise me not, the work of thine hands, Psalm. 138. 8. Despise me not the
likeness of thine own Image, though I bear the brands of mine iniquity, Genesis
1. 26. Col. 3. 10. Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean, Mat. 8. 2. O
Lord say but the word and I shall be cleansed, ver. 8.

And thou o Savior Christ, o Christ my Savior, Savior of sinners of whom I
am chief, despise me not, redeemed by the price of thy precious blood 1 Timothy
1. 15. Luke 22. 23.

Despise not o Lord, but look upon me, look upon me with thine eyes, such eyes
as thou did upon Mary Magdalen at the Feast, St. Peter in the high Priests
Hall, and the Thief on the Cross. That with the thief I may call upon thee,
saying, Remember me O Lord when thou art in thy kingdom, Luke 7. 44. 22. 55.
23. 43. 23. 42.

With Peter I now weep bitterly, ver. 22. 62. And o who will give my head a
fountain of tears, that therewith I may weep both day and night.

With Mary Magdalen I may hear thee say, thy sins are forgiven thee, Lu. 9. 48.
And with her I may love thee much, because my many and manifold misdeeds are
remitted, ver. 9. 47.

And thou all holy and gracious, and life-giving Spirit, dspise me not. But
turn thee again O Lord at the last, and repent thee concerning thy servant.

For those thy paternall bowels, the bleeding wounds of thy Son for the
unutterable groans of thy holy Spirit.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it, deferr not for thine
own sake, o my God. Dan. 9. 19.

Morning Prayer.
BLessed art thou O Lord our God, the God of our fathers which have turned the
shadow of death into the morning, and have renewed the face of the earth. Am.
5. 8. Ps. 104 30. Which have made sleep to depart from mine eyes, and slumber
from mine eyelids, Psalm 132. 4.

Which have lightened, mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Ps. 13. 4.

Which have delivered my soul from the night fears, from the pestilence which
walks in the dark. psalm. 91. 4, 5, 6.

Which makes the out goings of the morning and evening to praise thee. v. 65. 8.

For I laid me down and slept, and rose again, for it was thou O Lord which
did sustain me. psalm. 4. 5. For I waked and beheld and lo my sleep was
sweet. Ier. 31. 26.

O Lord do a way as the Night, so my sins, scatter my transgressions as the
morning cloud. Esa. 44. 22.

Make me a child of the light and of the day, cause me to walk soberly,
chastely and decently as in the day time. 1 These. 5. 5. Romans 13. 13.

O Lord uphold us when we are fallen into sin, and raise us up when we are
fallen. Ps. 145. 14.

That we harden not our hearts as in the provocation or with any
deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 8. 13.

Deliver us also from the snare of the hunter, evil alurements, cross words,
the Arrow which flies by day. Ps. 91. 3. 6.

From the evil of the day preserve me O Lord, and me from doing evil in it.
Mat. 6. 34.

The Hymn.
O Let me hear of thy loving kindness betime in the morning, for in thee is
my trust. Psalm 143. 8.

Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee,

Deliver me o Lord from mine enemies, for I fly unto thee for succor, verse. 9.

Teach me to do thy will for thou art my God; Let thy loving Spirit lead me
forth into the Land of righteousness, v. 10.

Quicken me o Lord for thy names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring my
soul out of trouble, v. 11.

Chase from my mind althoughts without understanding, Wisd. 1. 5.

Turn away mine eyes that they behold not vanity, Psalm. 119. 37.

Hedge in mine ears with thorns, that they listen not to foolish discourses,
Eccl. 23. 29.

Set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 14. 3.

Let me do nothing that may be scandalous or scrupulous to my soul, 1 Samuel
25. 31.

Let the meditation of mine heart be ever acceptable in thy sight, Ps. 19. last.

Let mine eyes behold, and let mine eyelids direct my way before me, Pro. 4.
25.

Awaken mine ears in the morning to hear the word of instruction, Esa. 50. 4.
5.

Let my speech be seasoned with salt, that it may edify and give grace to the
hearers, Ephesians. 4. 29. Col. 4. 6.

O Lord prepare thou some good way for me to walk in, Ephesians. 2. 16.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, my soul and body, thou have created, thou
have redeemed, thou have regenerated the^ o Lord thou God of truth, Ps. 31. 5.

With my self I commend to thee all that have any relation to me. And all that
is mine, thou o Lord have graciously lent them me in thy goodness, Genesis 33. 5.
O keep us all from all evil, keep our souls good Lord we beseech thee, Ps.
121. 7.

Keep them all spotless, and present them guiltless in that day.

Keep my outgoings and my commings in from this time forth for evermore, v. 8.

Prosper thou thy servant this day, and give him favor in their eyes with whom
he meets, Nehem. 1. 11.

O Lord be near at hand to save me, o God make have to help me, Ps. 90. 17.

The glorious Majesty of our God be upon us. Prosper thou-our work unto us,
yea prosper thou our handy work.

Let not my days be spent in vanity; let not my year wast in doing nothing,
but let one day teach another let one night add knowledge unto another.

Teach me good Lord so to number my days that I may apply my heart unto
wisdom.

From the morning watch until the evening let Israel trust in thee O Lord.

A Paraphrase upon the Lords Prayer.
O Lord,

I Have neither known thee as I ought and might have done, neither as I have
known thee, have I glorified thy name, or been thankful unto thee; and woe
is me that I have not.

But with sorrow I confess and humbly I crave pardon, and would to God I had
done it, nay would I might now hereafter so know thee, and live so holily, that
both in me and by me, and by others for my sake thy name might be hallowed.

O let me so serve and so promote thy Kingdom here upon earth in the state of
grace, that I may attain unto some place, though the lowest, even under the
feet of thy Saints in Heaven, in the state of glory.

Thy will which is holy and just and good be done by me; thy merciful and
gracious will be done with me (me earth as I am)

As it is in Heaven. Give us this day those things which may conduce to our
welfare, our quiet, and our contentment.

Forgive me my debts. That excessive score of my debts, my filthy slips and
falls, my frequent relapses, and my long, long wallowing in abominable
pollutions, even such as it is a shame to name or repeat these all, and those
other also which are not so sensible, and yet perhaps no less grievious, and
which sink me full as deep into perdition.

Out of these depths I cry out unto thee good Lord, I beseech thee deliver my
soul, deliver it from the nethermost hell.

One deep calls upon another, the depth of my misery, on the depth of thy
mercy. psalm. 42. 7.

O let thy mercy be exalted above thy justice, let thy goodness overcome my
wickedness, Jam. 2. 13.

Where sin has abounded, let thy grace much more abound, Romans 5. 20.

Take away my sins; take away the cause of my sins; my sins both those which
are scandalous and scrupulous to my heart, and those also which are not so, and
yet perhaps far more heinous, of which I desire thee o Lord that I may be
enlightened, that so I may be humbled for them.

In thy wrath remember mercy, and forgive me my sins, sins of mine own ends
with others sins secret and manifest, sins ancient and fresh, of the world or
of the flesh: As thou art most merciful, and indulgent, and compassionate.

O Lord forgive them all, even as we forgive our debtors, and grant us this
also that we may forgive them; and to that end infuse thy charity into our
hearts.

Lead me not, neither suffer me to be led, nor ^^ enter into temptation, but
remember and commiserate my frailty and weakness so often discovered.

But deliver me from evil, from the evil Spirit and his suggestion, from the
evil in my self that is in my flesh, and the inticement thereof, from the evil
in the world, and the contagion of it.

From all penal evils which most justly and worthily I have deserved, from
the evils of the world to come, and spare me there, and fear and lance me
here rather.

From the evils of this present world; ptty me Lord, for I am but feeble;
from the malice and evil of this day and of this disease (wherewith I now
struggle) and from the evil ensuing.

From all manner of evils past, present, and to come; from them all good Lord
deliver me and keep me thy servant for ever.

Amen.
Confession of sin.
TO thee ( O Lord) I confess, for if I would I cannot hide it from thee, that I
also am one of the number, for even my life discovers my guilt.

O Lord,

I am a Sinner, a branch of the wild Olive tree, arising from the root of
bitterness, Job 14. 4. For of unclean seed was I begotten, and in sin did
my mother conceive me, Psalm. 51. 1. And I have sinned, I have dealt unjustly, I
have done wickedly even in thy presence. Psa. 106. 6. 51. 2.

Impiously have I behaved my self in thy Covenant, and have cast off thy law,
1 King. 8. 34. And rejected thy correction, and oppressed thy spirit, and have
gone a whoring after mine own inventions and proceeded from bad to worse and
have not feared thee. Esa. 5. 24. Pro. 15. 3. Esa 63. 10. Ier. 18. 12. Lev. 25.
43. Nor yet returned. Luke 15. 18.

No, not when I was called back. Pro. 13. 10.

Not when I was afflicted. Heb. 3. 13.

But have waxed hard. 1 Kings. 16. 33.

And have provoked thee.

And all this thou have seen. Psa. 9. 33.

And yet have held thy peace. La. 2. 59. Sam. 49. 21.

O God.

Thou know my foolishness, and my transgresssions are not hid from thee; I
know it also, and my guilt is ever more before me. Ps. 69. 5. Ps. 51. 3. Job.
31. 33. Ps. 141. 4.

And I hide not (o Lord) Iincline not my heart to such wicked words, as to
excuse the accusations of my sins.

But against mine own self, I acknowledge mine iniquity and all that is
within me, and all my bones say that I have sinned, I have sinned, O Lord
against thee. Psa. 32. 5. and 103. 1. and 55. 10. and 106. 6. Dan. 9. 19.

Like a lost sheep I have gone astray, and have been as froward, as an untamed
Heifer; nay like a dog have I returned to my vomit, and like a washed Sow have
I wallowed in the mire again, and rushed into mine own destruction, like a
barbed steed into the battle. Psalm 119. vlt. Ier. 31. 18. Pro. 26. 11. 2
Pet. 2. 10. Ier. 8. 6.

And now (O Lord) all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hidden
from thee, thou know Lord my grief because I have thus sinned against thee,
that I am become tedious to mine own self, because my sorrow is not greater,
that earnestly desire of thee, a contrite heart unspeakable groans and tears
of blood. Psa. 38. 9. Job. 7. 20. Psalm. 51. 17. Romans 8. 26.

And woe is me for my leanesse, for the dryness of my eyes and the hardness of
my heart. Esa. 24. 16. Ier. 9. 1. Romans 12. 5. Mar. 9. 25.

Yet Lord, I repent, I repent O Lord, O do thou help my want of penitence and
still more and more bruise thou and rend, prick and smite this heart of mine.
Psa. 51. 17. Joel. 2. 13. Act 1. 2. 37.

Behold O Lord I am angry with my self for my foolish unprofittable, nay
hurtful and dangerous lust. 1 Cor. 7. Ps. 73. 22. Luc. 23. 34. 1 Cor. 6. 8. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Yea I even loath and abhor my self, for the absurdity the foolishness, the
baseness of it. Job 42. 6. 2 These. 3. 2

All the day long my shame is before mine eyes, and the confusion of face has
covered me. Ex. 5. 12. 13, 17. Psa. 44. 15

Alas, Alas.

That I have no more reverenced nor yet feared Ja. 1. 14.

Thy Incomprehensible glory Awful presence Dreadful power Exquisite Justice
Amiable goodness

How have I been drawn away by mine own conconcupiscence that I am become a
prey to the devil, to be taken of him at his will. 1 Timothy 2. last.

Behold now therefore O Lord, I adjudge and profess my self most guilty and
worthy of eternal punishment, yea and of all extreamities here in this world
also. Genesis 18. 19. Eze. 33. 9. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

Behold me O Lord already condemned by mine own Sentence. Tit. 3. 11. Psalm
143. 2.

Behold it, and O good Lord enter not thou into judgment with thy Servant.
Tit. 3. 11. Ps. 143. 2. Genesis 30. 20. I acknowledge that I am far less then
all, yea even the least of al thy mercies. Luke 15. 19.

That I am not worthy to be made one of thy Hyrelings, not the very meanest of
them. That I am not worthy of the scrapps that fall from thy Table. Mat. 15.
15. Nor so much as to touch the hem of thy garment. Mat. 9. 21.

And now O Lord humbled under thy mighty hand, I bend my knees unto thee and
fall prostrate on the earth, on my face. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Ephesians. 3. 14. Mat. 26. 29.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee, and my soul is as the land that wants
water before thee. Psalm 146. 6.

I dare not so much as lift an eye toward heaven but I smite my breast, and
from the depth of it does my soul call and cry out unto thee. Luke 18. 13.
Psalm. 35. and 79. 9.

O for thy names sake, for the glory of thy name be merciful to my sin for
it is very much, for it is exceeding great, and for thy mercies, thy sweet and
tender mercies. psalm. 25. 10, 11. Luke 1. 18.

For the greatness, the multitude, the vast multitude, the riches, the
abundance, the over abundance of them. ps. 69. 16. 119. 156 and 51. 1. and 130.
4. Ephesians. 1. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 14. Romans 5. 20.

Be merciful O Lord to me a sinner, o Lord be merfull to me the chief of all
sinners.

O remember and consider what my substance is, that I am but as grass or the
flower of grass, but flesh and a wind that passes away and comes not
again. Esaias 40. 6. Psalm. 73. 40. Job 17. 14.

But a worm and rottenness, but dust and ashes. Genesis 18. 27. psalm. 35. 13.
Job 4. 19. Genesis 41. 9. prove. 27. 1. Esa. 38. 13.

That I am a stranger and Pilgrim upon the earth, that I dwell in an house of
clay, that my days are few and evil, that I am here to day, and not tomorrow,
in the morning and not at night, now and not anon, that I live in a body of
sin and death, in a world of corruption and which is set upon mischief or
lies in wickedness. Romans 6. 6. 1 pet. 1. 4. 1 Jo. 15. 19. psalm. 74. 18.

Remember this O Lord and discharge, remitt and forgive me all those my
transgressions, which as a man bearing about me this flesh, and dwelling in
such a world, I have committed against thee.

Reprove me not o Lord in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure,
Psalm. 6. 1.

For unto thee I confess my wickedness, o pardon thou the ungodliness of my
heart, psalm. 6. 1. 32. 5, 6. 38. 9.

All my desire o Lord is before thee, and my groaning is not concealed from
thee.

Pity me therefore according to thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions do away all mine offenses, psalm. 51 1

Rise o God and have mercy upon me, for it is time to have mercy on me, yea the
time is come, psalm. 102. 13.

For if thou should strictly examine our iniquities o Lord what man were
able to subsist, psalm. 33. 3.

Enter not thou into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight no flesh can
be righteous, psalm. 14. 32.

O Lord, Thou which came into the world to save sinners, save me which am
the chiefest of all Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. 24.

Thou which take away the sins of the whole world, be pleased to take away
my sins also, 1 Job. 1. 24.

Thou that came to redeem that which was lost, Lu. 19. 10. Suffer not that
to be lost which thou have redeemed.

That which was so dear to redeem, suffer not to be lost as a thing of no value.

A Prayer for the performance of the Law.
I Lift my hand o Lord to thy Commandments which I have loved, open mine eyes
and I shall understand, incline my heart and I shall affect, direct my steps
and I shall walk in the path of thy precepts, Ps. 119. 48. 18. 36. 133.

1.
O Lord God. Grant that I May know thee for the true God, and knowing it, that
I may acknowledge thee and no other, nor any thing else with or beside thee,
John 17. Romans 1. 21.

2.
Grant that I may worship and adore thee in truth of spirit, Jo. 4. 14.

3.
In the decent habit and gesture of my body, 1 Cor. 14. 40.

4.
In the benediction of my mouth, Jam. 3. 9. in public and private, 1 Cor. 14.
26.

5.
Grant also that I may render honor to my Superiors. That I may be persuaded
and ruled by them, love to all those which belong to me, that I may be
careful and provident for them, Heb. 1. 13. 17. 1. Tim. 5. 8.

6.
That I may overcome malice with goodness, Romans 12. 21.

7.
That I may possess my Vessel in holiness and honor, 1 These. 4. 4.

8.
That being content with what I have, my conversation may be void of all
coveteousnesse, Hebr. 13. 5.

9.
That I may speak with charity, Ephesians. 4. 15.

10.
That I covet not inordinately, nor pursue any covetous desires, Romans 7. ult.
Col. 3. 5. Eccles. 8. 30.

Good Lord,
Remove from me all,

1.
Atheism and Hypocrisy.

2.
Idolatry and will worship.

3.
Perjury and Blasphemy.

4.
Superstition and profanesse in thy service.

5.
Stubbornness and carelessness.

6.
Strife and malice.

7.
Lust and uncleanenesse,

8.
Injury and Cosenage.

9.
Lying and slandering.

10.
And all wicked desires and base Concupiscence.

Grant me O Lord thy grace.

To remember the latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

To bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15.

To cut off occasions of sin.

To covenant with my sense, 2 Cor. 11. 13.

To prevent scandals Job. 31. 1.

To subdue my body. Ez. 14. 4.

Not to sit idle. 1 Cor. 9. 8.

To shun wicked company. Mat. 24. 6.

To consort with the righteous. Psalm. 26. 4.

To select times for prayer. 1 Cor. 7. 5.

Stopp up my paths with thorns that I find not the way to vanity. Hos. 2. 6.

Hold me in and rain me with bitt and bridle, when I keep not near thee. Psalm.
32. 9.

And constrain me to come to thee, If inviting will not serve. Luc. 14. 34.
39.

Vouchsafe (O Lord) to give me the knowledge and belief of thy justice, that
it may breed in me.

Fear, Humility, Repentance, Prayer, and Fasting, Hope, Charity, Thanksgiving,
Praise and Alms.
Confession of Faith.
Lord I believe in

the Father, one God. Word, Spirit.

In the Father.

THat by his infinite power all things were created.

In the Son.

That by his goodness and his love, Mankind was redeemed to which purpose the
world became flesh. And was Conceived and Borne, Suffered, and was Crucified
Dyed, and was buried, Descended, and rose again, Ascended, and sat at the
right hand of God, from whence he shall return and reward every one according
to his work.

In the Holy Ghost.

That by his illumination and his sacred inspiration, his elect people are
called out of the whole world, to the belief of the truth, and to holiness of
conversation.

In whom we are made partakers of the communion of Saints, and the remission
of sins, in this present world.

And in whom we faithfully expect, the resurrection of the flesh, and life
eeverlasting, in the world to come.

This I believe. Job. 11. 26

O Lord help thou my unbeleife. Mar. 9. 24.

But above and before all, I believe that thou were Christ the son of the
living God. Mat. 16. 16.

Prayer for Faith.
ANd o Lord grant that I may love thee as a Father, for thy indulgence, adore
thee as Almighty, for thy power, and by good works, commend my Soul unto thee,
as a faithful Creator. 1 Pet. 4.

Grant also that I may receive, From Jesus Salvation, Anointing, From Christ
From the only begotten Son. Adoption.

That I may worship and serve him in faith
For his conception,
For his Nativitie in humility.
For his sufferings, in patience.
For his Cross in my crucifying all occasions to sin.
For his death, in the mortification of my flesh.
For his Sepulture in burying my bad purposes by good works.
For his descent in my meditation upon hell.
For his resurrection, in newness of life.
For his ascension, in my contemplation of heavenly things.
For his Session, in my choice of the better part on the right hand.
For his return, in the fear of his second coming.
For his future judgment in the judging of my self, before I come to be
judged.
And grant me further the inspiration of saving grace, from thy most holy
Scepter, that I may participate of vocation, and Sanctification in the holy
Catholic Church.

And that I may have my Communion in The Mysteries, The grounds, The watchings,
The prayers, The Tears, The Fastings.
and all the sufferings of the Saints.

To my firm persuasion of the remission of my sins, and to the confident hope
of my Resurrection, and translation to life eternal.

Confession of Hope.
O Thou which art the Hope of all the ends of the Earth, and of them which
remain afar off in the Seas, Psalm. 65. 6.

Thou upon whom our Forefathers did depend, v. 22. 4.

And thou deliveredst them, upon whom they only relied, and were not
confounded, v. 5.

Thou which art my hope from my youth, from the breasts of my Mother, and to
whom I have been entrusted from the very womb, v. 9. 10.

Be thou my hope still and still, ever and ever, and my portion in the land of
the Living.

I hope on thy Nature, thy Name, thy Word, thy Practice.

O let me not be confounded by this hope of mine.

Tou Lord shall save both Man and Beast, Psalm. 36. 7.

How excellent is thy mercy o God, therefore the children of men put their
trust under the shadow dow of thy wings. v. 39. 8

And now Lord what is my hope, truly my hope is even in thee.

My soul faints with longing for thy salvation. Psalm. 119. 81. Yet have I
good hope because of thy Word.

O think upon thy Servant as concerning thy Word, wherein thou have caused me
to put my trust. v. 49.

Why art thou so full of heaviness o my soul, and why are thou so disquieted
within me; O put thy trust in God, for I will yet praise him which is the help
of my countenance and my God. Psalm. 42. 14, 15.

Against hope I will believe in hope, Romans 4. 18. And though he slay me, yet
will I trust in him, Job 13. 15.

Intercession.
HEar our prayers (good Lord we beseech) the for thy creatures, For healthful,
times and seasons. fruitful Peaceful

For mankind, for the succor and comfort of all that are in distraction of
mind, In sickness, in poverty, in perplexity.

For the sobriety and thankfulness of all that are in mind quiet, sound in
body, in estate wealthy, and free from all trouble.

For the conversion of all Turks, Jews, Pagans, Atheists.

For all Christians. They which continue in truth and grace, may be established.

That they which wander in error and sin, may be reduced into the right.

For all churches throughout the whole world, their unity and confirmation.

For this Church of ours, that the defects thereof may be supplied, that al
Heresies and scandals both public and private may be removed, that the Clergy
may deliver the Word sincerely, and walk in it uprightly.

For the Laity, that they be not overweined with their own understanding, but
rather be persuaded by the instruction and obedience to the authority of their
Superiors.

For all Commonwealths, their establishment and tranquillity; for this Realm of
ours, for all Incorporations in it; for this City, that they may be freed and
preserved from all danger and distress.

For our King and his Queen, and for their safety and prosperity.

For the Council and their prudence.

For the Judges and their uprightness.

For our forces and their fortitude.

For the Communalty and their temperance and holy simplicity.

For our Husbandmen, Merchants, Artificers, Even to the baser Tradesman, even
to the Beggars.

For our Posterity now springing up; for the good education of the Issue
Royal, the young Nobility and Gentry, of all Students and learners in the
Universities, in the Innes of court, in Schools and Trades; that as they grow
in years, so they may increase also in wisdom and in favor both with God and
men.

For all such as are recommended to our prayers.

By nearness of Kindred and affinity. By beneficense toward us.

Moral friendship.

Christian charity.

Familiar neighborhood.

Fellowship in Household.

Or mutual promise.

For those that are in their last extremity, or in any eminent danger.

For those which have undertaken any great work for the glory of thy Name, or
the peace of the Church.

For those which are bountiful toward any holy designs, or toward the poo

And lastly, but most especially for all those whom in word or in deed I have
any ways, at any time wronged.

Deprecation or Prayer against evils.
O Father of Heaven which have created us.

O Son of God which have redeemed us.

O sacred Spirit which have regenerated us.

Remember not our offenses, nor the transgressions of our Forefathers.

Neither take thou vengeance for their sins, and ^ine upon me.

But spare us, good Lord, spare thy people, and in thy people, thy servant whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Be merciful, be merciful O Lord and spare us, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Be merciful, be merciful o Lord and pity us, and be not angry with me to my
ruin.

Deal not with me o Lord according to my trangressions, neither reward thou me
according to my sins.

But according to thy mercy deal thou with me. And according to the multitude
of thy compassions reward me. According to that great mercy of thine, And
according to that exceeding multitude of thy compassions. By whatsoever is
dear and acceptable to thee. From all evil and misfortune at all times of
necessity.

Rise up Lord, defend, and save me, preserve me good Lord, and destroy me not.

But most especially in the time of extremity, in the hour of death, in the
day of judgment, in that fearful day, good Lord deliver me.

From beholding the stern countenance of the Judge. Apo. 6. 6.

From my standing on the left hand. Mat. 25. 41.

From hearing that terrible sentence depart from me you wicked. Mat. 8. 12.

From being bound in the chains of darkness. Jude. 5. 6.

From casting out into utter darkness. Mat. 8. 12.

From being thrust into the bottomless pit of fire, and Brimstone, where the
smoke of the fire ascends up for ever.

Be merciful O Lord and spare me,
Have pity O Lord and deliver me,
And confound me not for ever.
And to this end and purpose, from a blinded and a hardened heart, tending to
impenitence. Ephesians. 14. 19.

From a wanton and brazen face tending to impudence, Acts. 28. 27.

From a seered conscience. Pro. 7. 13.

From a reprobate mind, Esa. 48. 4.

From the sin unto death, Tit. 1. 16.

And against the holy Ghost. Jo. 5. 16. Mat. 12. 13. Be merciful good Lord,
and deliver me.

Prayers against Evils Temporal.
FRom all evil and misfortune, and all perrillous accidents in this world.

From the pestilence,
Famine, and War.
From great fires, inundations, and Earthquakes,
From excessive Rain, drought and mil-dew;
From al blastings, lightning and Thunder,
From Temptations, Storms, infectious diseases, and sudden death
Be merciful good Lord and deliver us.
Against evils in the Church.
FRom all Innovations, private interpretations difference in doctrine,
contending about vain and fruitles questions; endless desputations, and
controversies.

Heresies both public and private. Schisms Scandalls

From the pernicious flattering of Princes. Acts. 12. 22.

The partiality of Saul. 1 Samuel 14. 18.

The contempt of Michal. 2 Samuel 6. 16.

The Preisthood of Micha. Judge. 17. 10.

The flesh-hook of Hophni. 1 Samuel 2. 16.

The fraternity of Simon Magus, and Judas Iscariot. Act. 8. 17. Mat. 26. 17.

From such as are corrupted in mind, unstable and unlearned. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2
Pet. 3. 16.

From the arrogance of young Scholars. 1 Timothy 36.

And from People that contradict their Minister, speaking according to the word
of God, Be merciful good Lord and deliver us. Hos. 4. 4.

Against evils Political.
FRom Anarchie or want of Kings.

From the multitude of Princes.

From Tyranny, From Princes, like Ashur. Jeroboham. Roboam.


From the cruel insolency of Hamon. 2 Samuel 15. 31.

From the counselors of Zoan. Esa. 14. 11.

From the perilous counsel of Achitophel. 1 Kings. 21. 13.

From the Judges of Jesrael.

From the Laws of Omri. Micha. 6. 16.

From the Torrents of Belial. Psa. 18. 4.

The plague of Per^. Number. 25. 5.

The vale of Achor. Josh. 7. 26.

From effussion of blood, deadly feind.

Treason, Foreign invasion, Civil War.
For the displaceing of good Magistrates and the raising of evil, be merciful
good Lord and deliver us.

From whatsoever may make against the tranquillity of our Souls.

The health of our bodies, our estates, our liberty, or our credit.

Be merciful good Lord and deliver us.

Comprecation or Hosanna in the highest.
REmember me O Lord in the favor which thou bear to thy People, and visit
me with thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy chosen.

And rejoice with the gladness of the Saints.

And give thanks with thine Inheritance.

For certainly there is a glory to be revealed hereafter.

And when the judge comes, some shall behold his joyful countenance. Job. 33.
16.

And be placed on his right hand. Mat. 25. 32.

And here that most sweet voice, come ye blessed. v. 34.

And be taken up to meet Christ in the Clouds. 1 These. 4.

And enter into his joy, his full joy. Mat. 25. 21.

His joy which shall never be taken away. v. 22.

And enjoy that beatificall vision of him.

And remain with him for evermore,

And they only, only they of all the sons of men are blessed.

To grant me, the vilest of men, the meanest place there, a place even under
their feet, under the feet of thine elect, and of the lowest among them, and to
this purpose.

Let me find grace in thy sight, that I may obtain the grace to serve and
please thee with fear and reverence. Genesis 6. 8. Heb. 12. 8.

And give me yet a second grace that I may not receive that grace in vain. 2
Cor. 6. 1.

So far forth as to neglect it, or to be wanting to it. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Heb.
12. 15.

But that I may stir it up rather, so as to increase in it, and to remain
therein. to my lives end, 1 Timothy 4. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Acts. 13. 43.

And O Lord, supply thou the defects of thy graces in me, help my weak faith,
confirm my faint hope, inflame the smokeing flax of my charity.

And kindle it so in my heart, that I may learn to love thee, first and above
all, and my friends in thee, and any Enemies for thee, and thy sake.

As I would have men to deal with me, so give me grace to deal with them.

One thing only let me fear, that is, to fear any thing more then thee.

And let my heart so rejoice in the fear of thee.

That this fear of mine may be my hope.

Lastly, thou which give grace to the humble. Give me so much grace, as to be
humbled.

Comprecation of temporal blessings. Hosanna in Terrenis.
REmember O Lord to crown the years with goodness, and let thy providence
distill plenty, For the eyes of all things wait upon thee, o Lord and thou
give them food in due season. Thou openest thy hands, and fillest every
Creature with thy blessing. Psalm. 145. 15.

Vouchsafe us therefore o Lord the blessing of the heavens, and of the dew from
above, and of the fountains of the deep beneath. Deuteronomy. 33. 13. 14.

The precious things returned by the Sun, and the precious fruits put forth by
the Moon. v. 15

The choicest things of the ancient mountains, and the precious things of the
lasting hills; the precious things of the earth, and fulness thereof.

O make peace within our borders. And fasten thou the Bars of our gates. v.
19.

But cloth our enemies with confusion, and bless our children among us.

Let our Sons grow up as the young plants, and our Daughters be as the
polished corners of the Temple. v. 144. 12.

Lord bless our victuals with increase, and fill us with the flower of
wheat, and satisfy our poor with bread. Psalm. ^32. 6.

Let our Garners be full and abounding with all manner of store, let our sheep
bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets, And let our Oxen be
strong to labor. v. 13.

Let there be no decay, no leading away into captivity, nor no complaining in
our streets.

Two things I desire of thee (O Lord) deny me not them before I dye. Pro. 30.
7, 8, 9.

Vanity and lying words, remove far from me. v. 8.

Beggary and abundance give me not.

Give me only what is needful for my life, least being full, I be tempted to
deny thee and say, who is the Lord. verse. 9.

Or being forced by want I steal, and so forswear the name of my God.

Teach me O God to abound, and to want, Phil. 4. 11. that every where and in
all things, in what condition soever I shall be, I may learn to be content, v.
12.

Thanksgiving.
LEt all thy works confess unto thee o Lord, and let thy Saints bless thee.
Psalm. 34. 96. 103. 107.

It is a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing unto thy Name O most high.
Psa. 91. 1.

To declare thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the night
season. v. 2.

I will exalt thee O God my King, and bless thy Name for ever and ever, every
day I will bless thee and extol thy Name for ever and ever. Psalm. 145. 1. v.
2.

For it is thou which call the things which were not, as if they were, and
by whom all things are made in Heaven and on Earth, visible and invisible. Romans
4. 17. Col. 1. 16.

And it is thou which sustainest all things by the word of thy power, and by
thy ordinance they continue to this day. Heb. 13. Psalm. 119. 91. for all things
serve thee.

Which leavest not thy self without a witness, in doing good from heaven;
giving us rain and fruitful seasons and filling our hearts with food and
gladness. Acts. 14. 17.

1. It is thou which by thy wisdom and power did (thy self) 2. With thine
own hands make man of the mould of the earth. 3. And did breath into his
nostrills the breath of life. Acts. 1. 26. 4. And did honor him with thine
own Image. 5. And did give the Angels charge over him, Psalm. 91. 11. 6.
And do place him over the work of thy hands, Psalm. 8. 7. 7. And did seat
him in the paradise of pleasure. Genesis 2. 15.
And when he had despised thy Commandments, did not yet despise him, but
did open to him a gate to repentance and life, Acts. 11. 18.

Giving to him that great and precious promise of the seed which should save
us, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

It was thou which did instruct us.

1. By that which is known of God. 2. By the Law written in our hearts. 3. By
the services of sacrifices and oblations. 4. By the Oracles of the Prophets. 5.
By the melody of the Psalmer. 6. By the wisdom of the Proverbs. 7. By the
experience of the sacred story.
It was thou which when the fullness of time came did send down thy son who
emptying himself, and taking the form of a Servant, of the feed of Abraham,
Heb. 12. 6.

Being made of a woman and subjected to the Law. Gal. 4. 4. Phil. 2. 7. Heb.
21. 6. Ga. 4. 4.

By his active obedience fulfilled the Law, and by his death took away the
curse thereof, Ephesians. 5. 1.

Redeeming by his death, and by his resurrection reviving our nature, and
leaving nothing undone that was needful to do, that we might be made
partakers of the divine nature, who likewise manifested himself to be our
Savior in all places by the preaching of the Gospel. Romans 4. last. 2 Cor. 2.
14.

Bearing witness thereunto by diverse signs and miracles. Heb. 2. 4.

By the admired holiness of life in his Saints, and

By their wonderful patience even to the effusion of their blood. Heb, 11, 36,
37.

And by the incredible condition of the whole world to the faith. 1 John, 5, 4.

It is thou also which have made us the Sons of Saints and heirs of the same
vocation.

Which have given thy Church power, to be the pillar and foundation of Truth. 1 Timothy, 3, 15.

It is thou which have granted to our Church ability, to keep that which was
committed to her. 1 Timothy 6. 20.

To teach us the way of peace, and to retain certain ordered steadfastness and
decency, Romans 3. 22. Col. 2. 5.

It is thou which have established the throne of thy Servant our Sovereign, 1
Chapter 17. 13.

Which have instructed our Princes, and have taught our Magistrates wisdom
Psalm. 105. 22.

Which have vouchsafed us pastors according to thine own heart, to feed us
with knowledge and learning, Jer. 3. 15.

It is thou which have made peace in our enclosure, and have satisfied us with
the flower of wheat, Psalm 106. 13, 14. Which have strengthened the Bars of
our gates, and have blessed our Children among us.

Which have turned our swords into Mattocks, and our spears into sithes, Esaias
2. 4.

Which have clothed our enemies with confusion, and have given us for a
blessing for ever and ever, and made us glad with the joy of thy Countenance,
Psalm. 21. 7.

It is thou which have brought me into this life, and have led me to the
lavar of regeneration and renewing by thy holy Spirit, and have revealed to me
the paths of life. Tit. 3. 5. Psalm 16. 11.

Which have connived at my sins for my repentance. Wisd. 11. 12.

And have not crushed me under the hands of mine iniquity. Esa 64. 7.

Which have even waited to show mercy on me. Esa. 30. 18.

And have not suffered my heart to harden. Romans 2. 9.

But have left me in the compunction of heart, and memory of my latter end,
and conscience of my former sins. Acts 7. 37. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Hebr. 10. 3.

Which have not cut off my life like a weaver in the beginning, Psa. 16. 29.
nor from morning to night have made and of us. Jo. 20. 22.

Which have not called me away in the midst of my days. Psalm 102. 25. But
have holden my soul in life, and have not suffered my feet to slip. Psalm
66. 9.

Therefore for all these benefits, and for many more, through their multitude
and our forgetfulness omitted;

Glory be to thee o Lord, glory and honor and praise and blessing and thanks
with the tongues of Angels and men.

The meanest of thy work by reason of our sin now every hour and every day,
Even to our latest gasp, To the end of the world, and to all Eternity.

Amen.
Thankesgiving in particular.
O Lord my God, For my being.
living, endowment with reason.
For my nourishment, preservation, ingenuous education.
For thy gifts to me, of nature, of the world, of grace.
For my redemption, regeneration, christian instruction. For thy calling of me,
calling again, often reiterated calling.
For thy patience, long-suffering, long, long-suffering of these many times,
these many years, even until now.
For the good which I have received.
For the good (if any) which I have done.
For the use and comfort of thy prudent benefits.
For the promise, and my hope of enjoying thy future blessing.
For my good and honest Parents.
My kind and mild Master and Teacher.
My ever memorable Benefactors.
My trusty friends.
My faithful companions.
My loving and careful Wife.
My obedient and towardly children.
For all those which have any way furthered and profited me, By their writings,
Sermons, Discourses, Proverbs, Examples, Reproves, Injuries.

For all these and for all other, known and unknown. manifest and secret,
remembered and forgotten.
Wherewith willingly or against my will I have been affected and bettered.

I praise, and will praise. Bless. Bless. Thank. Thank thee. All the days
of my life.

What am I (Lord) or what is my Fathers house, that thou should vouchsafe to
look on such a dead dog as I am? Psalm. 3. 4.

What shall I render to the Lord, for all the things he has bestowed upon me?

What thanks can I repay unto my God for all the things which he has forgiven,
which he has given me to this instant.

Praises.
IT is good to sing psalms unto our God.

For sweet and decent is his praise: Therefore will I confess unto the Lord
with my whole heart.

In the counsel of the Saints, and in the Congregation.

O magnify the Lord with me, and let us elevate his Name.

Let all his works bless the Lord, in all the places of his Dominion, from the
Sun rise to the fall thereof.

Let all that breath praise the Lord.

Let all flesh bless his holy name for ever.

Praise the Lord o all ye Nations, and praise him only o all ye people.

Give unto the Lord (all ye Kindreds of the earth) give unto the Lord honor and
glory.

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name.

Being your offerings, and come into his Courts.

Praise thou the Lord o Salem, and thou o Sion, praise ye the Lord.

All ye that stand in the Lords house, in the courts of the house of our God,
lift up your hands toward his Sanctuary, o lift them up and praise the Lord.

My soul praises the Lord, him will I praise all my life long.

To my God will I sing whilst I have any being.

Thou art my God, and I will praise thee.

Thou art my God, and I will exalt thee.

Be thou o God exalted above the Heavens, and thy glory above the Earth.

Praised be the Lord for his great goodness toward all his Creatures.

All mankind in general.

The Klngdome of the whole world.

The Catholic Church.

The Kingdoms and Churches in several.

This Church and Kingdom of ours.

The orders and degrees in each.

And the particular persons in them.

Toward this City.

This Parish wherein I dwell.

Toward all that are mine.

Mine Household. Kindred. Benefactors. Friends. Wel-willers.
Toward my poor self.

My soul and body in the gifts of grace.

Nature. The world.
Now to this present, and which shall be at my time hereafter.

We lift our hearts up to the Lord,

For indeed it is most due and just.

Most meet and convenient in all, and by all means, in all ^indes.

Times and places.

To memorize.

adore. confess. praise. bless. Magnify and thank thee.
Which art the Creator, Nourisher, Preserver, Governor, Restorer, Promoter
and Perfecter of all Creatures.


Their Lord and Father.

Their King and God.

The fountain of life and Immortrlity.

The treasury of eternal blessing.

Whom the heavens applaud, and the heaven of heavens, the Angels and all the
Celestial powers each to other, and we most unworthy and humble sinners under
the feet of them, with them.

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, Esa 6. 3.
The whole heavens and all the Earth are full of the Majesty of thy glory.

Blessed be the glory of the Lord out of his own place, Ezekiel. 3. 12.

Glory be to God on high, in earth peace and good will among men.

Blessed and praised and magnified, extolled and glorified and hallowed be thy
Name O Lord.

The memorial, mention, and remembrance thereof.

For the faith of the Patriarchs.

The hope of the Prophets.

The labors of the Apostles.

Tthe truth of the Evangelists.

The blood of the Martyrs.

The zeal of the Confessors.

The study of the Doctors.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, glory be to thee.

Glory be to thee for the glorifying of them. In whom we also glorify thee.
Amen.

Glory and wisdom, Honor and Virtue, Praise and Riches, Blessing and Power,
Thanksgiving and Dominion.

Holiness and Salvation, be ascribed to our God which sits upon the Throne
and lives for ever, and to the Lamb which was slain. Amen.

Great and wonderful are thy works o Lord Almighty, true and just are thy
ways o thou King of Saints. Rev. 15. 3.

Who will not fear the Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy,
and all the Nations shall come and worshipp thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest.

Praises in Particular.
COme and harken unto me, o all ye that fear the Lord, and I will show you
what thing he has done for my Soul, he has created me, he has brought me
into life, and has so disposed of me that I am, A living soul, and not a
sensles thing; A Man, not a Beast; Civil, not barbarous; Freeborne, not a
slave; Legittimate, not a bastard; Of honest parentage, not of base or
Ignominious; Of understanding, not blockish; Sound in senses, not blind or
deaf; Sound in Limbs, not lame or maimed; Well brought up, not forlorn or
exposed. A Christian, not a Pagan; Peaceable not quarelsome; Clear of dangers,
not swallowed up by them; Clear of infamy, not wounded in credit; Of
sufficient estate, not forced to flatter; or borrow.

And living in the days of PEACE, not turmoyled with hurly burly.

To thee O Lord,

Which according to thy abundant mercy have regenerated us to a lively hope by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

To an Inheritance, Immortal, undefiled, and never fading, reserved in heaven
for us, which have blessed me with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things
in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3.

Which comfortest me in all my tribulations, that as the sufferings of Christ
abound in me, so through Christ my consolation abounds.

To thee O Lord,

The God of my fathers, I make my confession; to thee I give praise, because
thou have granted me wisdom and courage in some measure, and have showed me
the things which I desired thee, and have opened thy Word unto me.

Unto him which

Is able to do superabundantly above that which is desired or understood,
according to the power which works in us. Ephesians. 3. 29.

To him be glory in the Church of Christ, through out all generations for ever
and ever.

As with marrow and fatnes shall my soul be satisfied and with joyful lips
shall my soul praise him. Psalm. 63. 5.

Evening Prayer
HAving passed through this ^^^ I give my thanks to t^^e o Lord.

The Evening approaches, o bless that also to me, an evening there is as of
the day, so of our life, that Evening is old age, and age has now surprised
me, Lord prosper thou that likewise unto me.

Tarry with me o Lord, for the evening grows upon me. Luck. 24. 29:

And my day is much declined, cast me not off now in min age forsake me not now
when my strength fails me. Psalm. 71. 8, 9.

But rather let thy strength be made more perfect in this my weakness, 2 Cor.
12. 9.

O Lord the day is vanished and gone, so does this life.

The night does now approach, so does death also, death without death, the end
both of our day and of our life, is near at hand.

Remember this therefore we beseech thee o Lord, make the end of all our lives
Christian-like and acceptable to thee, peaceable, and if it like thee,
painlesse, translating us among thine elect, unto thy heavenly kingdom.

O Lord thou hear prayer, to thee shall all flesh come.

In the morning, at Noone, and in the evening I will call, I will cry out, and
thou shall hear my voice.

In the night will I lift up my hands to thy Sanctuary, and will bless thee o
Lord, Psalm. 133. 4.

The Lord has showed his mercy in the day, therefore at night I will sing of
him, and pray unto the God of my life, psalm. 42. 9, 10.

Thus will I praise thee all my life long, and in thy Name will I lift up my
hands, Psalm. 63: 4, 5.

O let my prayers be directed as the incense, and the lifting up of my hands as
the Evening Sacrifice. Psalm. 141. 2.

Blessed art thou o Lord my God: the God of my Fathers. Psalm. 144. 20.

Which have created the Changes of night and of day. v. 22.

Which give rest to the weary, and refreshest the weak. Esa. 40. 29.

Which give Songs in the night. Job. 35. 10. And make the out-going of the
Morning and Evening to praise thee. Psalm. 65. 9.

Which have delivered us from the malice of this day. Matt. 6. ult. And
cuttest not off our lives (like a Weaver) neither from Morning to Evening
make an end of us. Esaias. 38. 12.

As we add days to our days, so we add sins to our sins, Eccles. 5. 8.

The just man falls seven times a day. Frov. 24. 16. But we wretched sinners
seventy times 7 times. Mat. 18. 22.

But we return to our hearts. Esa. 46. 8. And with our hearts we return to
thee. Deuteronomy. 30. 2.

To thee o Lord we return, and all that is within us, says, Ps. 103. O Lord
we have sinned against thee. 2. Sam. 12. 13.

But we repent; alas we repent, spare us good Lord, Luke. 17. 4.

Be merciful and spare us.

Be propitious to us.

Have pity upon us, and spare us o Lord.

Forgive us the guilt, Romans 13. 19.

Take out the stains, Psalm. 51. 3. 9.

Cure the faintness in us by reason of our sins, psalm. 146. 3.

and heal our souls O God, for we have sinned against thee, psalm. 41. 4.

Deliver me from my unavoydable sins, psalm. 27. 17.

Cleanse me from my secret offenses, psalm. 19. 13.

And for my Communion with the transgression of others, pardon thy servant o
Lord.

All our good deeds thou have wrought in us, Esaias. 26. 12.

If we have done any thing well, mercifully regard it o Lord.

Our sin and our distraction is from our own selves, Hosea. 13. 9.

Whatsoever we have done amiss, graciously pardon it.

Thou which give thy beloved secure rest, grant that I may pass this night
without fear, Psalm. 3. 6.

Enlighten my eyes that I sleep not in death. p. 13. 4.

Deliver me from the mighty fear, from the business that walks in the
dark. psalm. 91. 5.

Thou which neither sleep at any time, nor slumbrest, keep me this night o
Lord from al evil: chiefly o Lord keep and preserve my soul. Psalm. 121. 4.
7

Visit me o God with the visitations of thy Saints: open mine ears in the
visions of the night. Job. 33. 15, 16.

At least let my sleep be a cessation from sins, from labor, and let me dream
of naught that may offend thee, or defile my self. Prove. 4. 6.

Let not my loins be filled with illusions, but let my reins chasten me in
the night. psalm. 38. 8. and 16. 7.

Let me remember thee upon my bed, and let me meditate with my heart, and
search out my spirit. Psalm. 63. 6. and 77. 6.

And when it shall be time for me to rise, let me wake with the light to
thee o Lord, to thy praise and thy service. Romans 13. 11. Psalm. 63. 1.

O Lord into thy hands I commend my spirit, my soul and my body. Thou have
created, thou have redeemed them o Lord, thou God of truth. Psalm. 31. 5.

And with my self I commend to thy merciful protection, all those that belong
to me, and all that is mine: Thou o Lord of thy goodness have bestowed them
upon me, Genesis 33. 5.

O keep us all from evil, chiefly good Lord keep and preserve our souls.
Keep them o God, keep them all spotless, and without guilt present them in
that day, Psa. 121. 7.

I will lay me down and sleep in peace. For thou only make me dwell in
safety, Psalm. 3. 5. and 4. 8.

After divine service.
O Lord thou which have suffered me this holy day, and hour to raise my soul,
and give praise unto thee and offer up the glory due to thee; accept then, from
my soul, this sacrifice sprituall, and send into me the grace of thy most
sacred spirit, o visit me in thy great goodness, forgive me all my sins both
wilfully and unwillfully committed, deliver me from the reward of them, that is
from everlasting punishment, yea, and from all distresses in this world, change
my thoughts into Piety.

Sanctify my spirit,

My soul and my body, Oh, give me grace to adore and please thee in godliness
and holiness of life, to the utmost end of al my days.

Amen.
Before thy Approaching the Holy Communion, say
O Lord, I am not worthy, nor prepared for thee to come under my sordid roof,
for it is wholly desolate and ready to dropp down quite, neither can thou
with me have any fitting place for thy Reposall. Mar. 8. 8.

But as thou denyest to rest in the Stable and manger of bruit beasts. Luke 2.
7.

As thou did not Disdain Simon. the Kepers house, and entertainment. Mat.
26. 6.

As thou did not forbid the adulterous Sinner to come and touch thee. Luke 7.
19.

Nor did abhor her impure and profane mouth, Nor yet the Thieves confession
of thee upon the Cross. Luke 7. 23.

Vouchsafe O Lord to receive me likewise (an over-worne and most unworthy
sinner)

Amen.
In approaching the Holy Sacrament.
O Lord with all thanks we commemorate the saving passions of thy Christ our
Savior.

This life-restoring Cross,
His precious death,
His 3. days Sepulture,
His resurrection,
His ascension to heaven
And his sitting on thy right hand,
His glorious and most
Dreadful return thence to the last Judgment.
And we beseech thee that with the sincere witness of our conscience
receiving part of these thy holy Mysteries we may be therewithal incorporated
into the sacred body of thy Son, and so communicating, worthily may dwell in
him and he again in us, and be his members as he is our head, and become
Temples of his holy Spirit.

And o good Lord scour out the stains of my old and fresh sins, and let not
such foul spots continue there, where thy pure Sacrament shall have entered,
but o Lord make not any of us guilty of these most dreadful and celestial
mysteries, nor weak or feeble either in Soul or body, for our receiving them
unworthily.

But grant that to our last gasp, we may retain the hope and comfort of this
ever blessed Sacrament of thine.

In the time of Receiving.
ATtend O Lord from thy most sacred dweling, and from the throne of glory, in
thy kingdom and come and hallow it, o thou which visitest on high with the the
Father, and yet invisible art present with us, come near and consecrate these
gifts of thine, and all those both by whom, and for whose sake, and the end
also to which they are consecrated.

And yet that we may so participate of these thy mysteries that they may prove
to us according to thy institution.

The monuments of our Lords dispensation, and a memorial of his sacrifice, and
the means of renewing our covenant with thee. Act. 2. 4. Luke 22. 18. 2 Cor.
11. 26. Pet. 5. 1. 5.

According to the manner of receiving by eating and drinking.

The Souls food for our strength and nourishment. 1 Cor. 10. 2.

Her medicine to purge and to restore her. Heb. 9. 14.

According to the effects o Lord let them like seals confirm our pardons to
us.

To the remission of our transgressions, and cancelling of all our debts and
sins Mat. 26. 28. Col. 2. 14.

Let them take out the stains that sin leaves in us and cure the weakness in
our souls bred by it. Heb. 9. 14. Esa. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 14.

Let them keep from us the destroying Angel, as did the lambs blood in the
Passover.

Do thou by them communicate to us the body and blood of Christ, and knitt us
unto him that we may participate his Spirit. 1 Cor. 10. 16. and verse. 12, 13.

Let them like Conduitpipes convey to us the graces of that most holy Spirit,
Hebr. 13. 19. 1 Cor. 12. 13.

That so they may enlighten our dark minds, and prick our hearts with the
compunction of true repentance, and cherish our weak faith, and prop our hope,
and become bands to us of Charity, occasions to us of our liberty, and the
awaker of all our thankfulness, Luke. 24. 31. 1 Cor. 11. 20. John. 13. 35.
Psalm. 116. 12.

And let them arm us against transgression to the increase of all effectual
grace, and the augmentation of our Consolation, and the tranquillity of our
Conscience. 1 Pet. 4. 1. Hebr. 13. 9. Psalm. 104. 15. 1 Cor. 11. 28.

That even we together, with the rest of all the Saints, which ever have been
gracious in thy sight, may be partakers of those incorruptible and everlasting
gifts prepared by thee for all that love thy blessed Name: In whom thou art,
and ever shall be glorified.

After the receipt of the Eucharist.
IT is good for me to adhere to God, to place the hope of my salvation in thee
o Lord, o Christ our God.

We have now finished all within our performance that concerns this Mystery
of thine own dispensation.

For we have had memorial of thy death.

And have had an earnest of eternal life, and tasted these thy most sweet
delicacies. Whereof there can be no satiety.

And o good Lord let it stand with thy pleasure, to grant that to us in the
World to come, Amen.

The LORD be merciful to every one that prepares his heart to seek the Lord
of our Fathers, though he be not prepared according to the cleaness of thy
redemption, 1 Cor. 30. 19.

Mourning and weeping.
OH that my head were full of water, and mine eyes fountains of tears,
Jeremiah 9. 1.

He which turns the flint stone into a springing well, vouchsafe me gratiam
Lacrymarum,. some small portion of the grace of repentance; that though weep I
cannot, yet wish and pray for it I may, at least complain and bemoane my self
as the Prophet. My leanenesse, my leanenesse, woe is me my dryness, my
dryness, woe is me the transgressors have o^fended, the transgressors have
grievously offended. Esaias. 24. 16. Grievously offend I can, grievously lament I
cannot, my dryness, my dryness woe is me, but I humbly beseech thee my
merciful God and Father, in default of my contrition to accept of the strong
crying and bitter tears, which in the days of his flesh, thy blessed Son in
great agony shed for me.

A Prayer on the meditation of the great work of our redemption.
O Lord which have set before us thy Passion and Throne, one to awake our love,
the other to quicken our hope, that we may this day, and ever, lift up our eyes
and heads, that we may this day, and ever carry them in our eyes and hearts,
look up to them both, so look that we may love the one, and wait and hope
for the other; so love, and so hope, that by them both we may move, and that
swiftly, even run to him, and running, not faint, but so constantly run,
that we faint not finally, to attain the happy fruition of himself, and of
the joy and glory of his blessed throne, that so we may find and feel him as
on the Cross the Author, so there the finisher of our faith, by the Son our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A meditation on Canticles, 5. 10.
THe Spouse in the Canticles. askeing of her Beloveds colors, says of him, my
Beloved is white and red, white of his own proper, so he was when he showed
himself in kind transfigured on the mount, his apparel then so white, no
Fuller in the earth could come near it, Math. 17. 2. Mar. 9. 3. white of
himself, how comes he red then, not of himself, but for us, that is our
natural color, we are born polluted in our own blood, it is sins color,
that for shame, that for shame is the color of sin; our sins says Esaias,. Chapter
1. are as Crimson, of as deep dye as any purple, this the true tincture of our
sins the Edomites. color right: for Edom. is red. The tincture of our sin
original, dyed in the Wool; and then again of our sins actual, died in the
cloth too, twice dried, so was Christ twice, once in his own, again in his
enemies. Right dibaphus,. a perfect full color, a true purple, of a double
dye, his too. So was it meet for crimson sinners to have a crimson Savior: a
Savior of such a color it behooveth us to have. Coming then to save us, off
went his white, on went our red: Laid by his own righteousness, to be
clothed with our sins. To wear our colors; that we his, he in our red,
that we in his white. So we find ( Apoc. 7.) our robes are not only washed
clean, but dyed a pure white, in the blood of the Lamb. Yea he dyed and rose
again, both in our colors, that we might die, and rise too, in his, he in
mount Golgotha, like to us, that we in mount Tabor, might be like to him.

His Prayer after the holy Ordinances on Whit-Sunday.
O LORD we have heard thy word, the outward means, and received the inward,
we began with one sacrament, baptism; we end with the other, the Eucharist,
we began with that where we heard of him; and we end with the other, where
we may, and shall (I trust) receive him, and Almighty God grant, we may so
receive him at this good time, as in his good time, we may be received by him
thither, whence he this day came of purpose to bring us, even to the holy
places made without hands, which is his heavenly kingdom, which God the Father
who prepared it, God the Son who purchased it, To whom three Persons, etc.

Lights from Heaven.
THere are seven lights, whereof God is the father, acknowledging the^ all for
his children, and to his children, will vouchsafe them, in their order.

1. The light of nature, for rebelling against which all that are without
Christ, suffer condemnation, Solomon calls it the candle of the Lord,
searching the very bowels. Pro. 20. 25. which though it be dim, and not
perfect, yet good it is, though lame yet as Mephibosheth, it is Regia proles,
of the blood Royal. 2. There is the light of Gods Law, Lex, Lux (says
Solomon) totidem verbis. Pro. 6. 23. and his father calls it, a Lantern to
his feet, nay in the 19. Psalm. what he says at the fourth verse of the
son, at the eight he says of the Law of God, lights both. 3. The light of
prophecy, as of a candle, that shines in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 4. There
is the wonderful light of the gospel (so Saint Peter calls it) the proper
light of the day. 1 Pet. 2. 9. the tongues that descended, so many tongues, so
many lights, for the tongue is a light, and brings to light, what before was
hidin the heart. 5. And from these other is the light of grace, whereby God
which commands the light to shine out of darkness, he it is that shines in
our hearts, by the inward anointing, which is the oil of this Lamp. 2 Cor. 4.
6. the light of his holy Spirit, chasing away the darkness, both of our hearts,
and minds. 6. There is the light of comfort, of his holy spirit, a light sown
for the righteous, here in this life. 7. There is the light of glory, where the
Saints shall reap light, where God dwells, and where we shall dwell with
him, even the inheritance of the Saints, in light, where the righteous shall
shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their father, the Father of lights, Moses
Candlestick, with seven stalks and lights in each of them. Gal. 1. 12. Mal. 13.
43.
The imprecation against the Enemies of the Church.
THe Serpents curse be upon them, and let their heads be trod to pieces, they
that are Sions malignant enemies, Oh Lord, let them be as grass, upon the
house top, as those that perish at Endor and become dung for the earth, let
them be as stubble scatterd, or wax melted, smoke driven, no man can tell
whither, let them perish, perish as Sisera, and Oreh, as, Absalon, Jaels bammer
on their heads, Gideons Axe on their necks, Joabs Dart in their hearts, one,
nay three, one for the enemies of God, another for the enemies of mankind, a
third for the enemies of Sion, Psalm. 12. 1. Let their sword go throw their
own hearts, and their mischeife light upon their own heads.

Amen.
His Prayer for King James, after his Sermon of Gowries Conspiracy.
Even so Lord let it be, set up thy mercy, for ever, for ever, stablish the
truth, of this thy Covenant, with thy servant our Sovereign, that it may never
fail him, as not this day, so not at any other time, let thy hand be still
upon him, and thine arm about him for ever, between him, and his harms,
violence, and hurt, never come near him, the sins of wickedness be ever
far from him, let them be non proficients, all the sort of them that study to
practice this wicked lesson, never loose thou him, nor suffer him to be lost,
ever find him good Lord, to succor and save him, and let thy right hand find
out his enemies, to smite and plague them, with the same blows thou did
smite, and with the same plagues thou did power, on those of this day, the
destiny of this day come on them all, and for him, Let his anointing still be
fresh on him, and his Crown still flourish on his head, let him all the day
walk in the light of thy countenance, and at night, rest in the covering of
thy wings, this day as once it did, so let it rise prosperous and happy to him
this day, and all days, that he, that we, all may sing thy mercies, and set
forth thy truth, all the days of our life, hear us o Lord, and grant it for
thy Sons sake our Savior,

Amen.
His Thankesgiving for the deliverance from the Gunpouder-Treason.
O God, with all the powers, thou have distributed in our Souls, the breath of
life, thou have breathed into our nostrilles, the tongues thou have put into
our mouths, behold, all these shall break forth and confess, and bless, and
thank, and praise, and magnify, and exalt thee, and thy mercy for ever, yea
every mouth shall acknowledge thee, every tongue, be the trumpet of thy praise,
every eye lookeup, and every knee bow down to thee, and all hearts shall fear
thee, and all that is within us, even our bowels, those our bowels, that but
for thee, had flowne, we know not whether; even our bones, those bones, that
but for it, had been ^^i^er'd, bone, from bone, one from another, all shall
say, who is like unto thee O Lord, in mercy who is like unto thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, wonders of mercy, as this day,
upon us all, to be held by us, and our posterity, in an everlasting
remembrance; glory be to thee O Lord, glory be to thee, and glory to thy
mercy, yea super omnia yea most glorious, of thy great, and high perfection,
glory be to thee, and glory to it, to it, in thee, and to thee for it, and
that, by all thy works, in all places, and at all times, and of all thy
works, and above them all, by us here, by the hearts and lungs of us all, in
this place, this day, for this day, for the mercy of this day, for the mercy of
it, above all mercies and for the work of this day, above all the works of it,
and not this day only, but all the days of our life, even as long as thy mercy
endures, and that endures for ever, in the world to come, through the
cisterne, and cunduit, of all thy mercies Jesus Christ.

A Prayer for Magistrates Ecclesiastical and civil.
LORD by whose almighty power all governments do stand, those especially
wherein the people are led in the way of his sanctuary, as he has graciously
begun to lead us in that way, so leave us not, till we have finished our course
with joy; knit the hearts of Moses and Aaron, and that they may join lovingly.
Teach their hands, and fingers of their hands, that they lead skilfully, touch
the hearts of the people, that they may be lead willingly, That by means of
this happy conduct, surely without error, and safely without danger we may
lead and to be led forward until we come to the fruition of his promise, the
expectation of our biessed hope; even the eternal joys of his celestial
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Before Sermon.
BLessed art thou O Lord Teach me thy Statutes, open my eyes that I may
understand the wonders of thy law.

O Lord remove thou the veil from my heart whilst that I either read or hear
thy word.

The form of Prayer used by Bishop Andrews after the opening of the Text
THat the Word of God may at this time, obtain in us that end to which it was
appointed, and this our whole action may be advantaged (Reverend Fathers and
Brethren in CHRIST) let us by our prayers invite hither the Divine Majesty,
acknowledging in the first place, from the bottom of our hearts our
unworthiness, even to draw near to him, much more to pray to, and yet much
more to obtain any thing from him. But that all our worthiness depends upon
his acceptance, and that all our confidence to pray and hope to obtain,
depends upon his intercession. By him let us deprecate the present punishment
most due to our former unthankfulness for, and carelessness in his word. Let
us pray that the grace of his Spirit may now prevent us; and that what my heart
has profitably meditated, he would bring into my tongue, thence into your
Ears, thence into your H^^r^^, thence into your life study and manners, to the
salvation of us all, and his eternal glory.

And least we should be unmindfull of the Church of CHRIST in our prayers,
which is never unmindfull of us in hers, let us interceed, with our most
merciful Father, for his Church militant, on earth, scattered far and wide
through all Nations That God would preserve unto her his truth, not long since
recovered out of the most thick darkness of error, that he would restore unto
her, when it shall seem good unto him, her unity, now almost lost through the
dissentions of the christian World.

And let us commend unto him, not without groans, that part thereof, which
beside and above the rest, stands in special need of our prayers: that part I
say, which is afflicted and oppressed either with the outward cross, for the
testimony of a good, or the inward for the testimony. of a bad conscience. Let
us pray for a happy issue of their calamities, and in the mean time, while the
issue is uncertain, so much patience, as shall be necessary for the bearing of
their crosses, (as is meet) meekly and courageously. For that part of the
Church flourishing with peace, and by name, for this our Church of England,
that God would give us to know the day of our visitation, and to walk worthy
of his so great mercy, that we indeed have, but before us no Nation, no age
ever had experience of.

For the principal members of our Church and State, the Queens most sacred
majesty, that she may be enriched and adorned with all virtues, fit for so
great a place, so great a Person, that in this her Kingdom, the Kingdom of
CHRIST may daily more and more be propagated: and that she may be as cordial
to us as careful, of all things which are Gods as God has confirmed; by many,
great, former, later arguments that he is cordial to, and careful of her.

For the Honorable Peers of the Kingdom: those especially who are of her
Majestyes Privy Council; that God would proceed (as he has done long) to
suggest to them whatsoever shall be for the peace of this Church, and Kingdom,
that what is good may be effected, that what is hurtful may be removed.

For the English Clergy: to which while I desire to to pray all happiness, what
other things should I beg of the Lord, then that they may once be of one mind
and Judgment in all things.

For our Magistracy, that they may discharge their Office purely and entirely:
neither turning Justice into Worme-wood, by corrupt sentence; nor into Vinegar
by long suspension and delay of Causes.

For the People, even the lowest part of the Kingdom: (so it is, but yet
precious, being bought with the precious blood of Jesus Christ) that they may
hear such as they have, and have such as they should hear, men fit to teach
both now and hereafter.

That this may be, and ever be, and that there may daily spring up a great
supply of Learned men, which may be able to plead our causes, and minister to the
health of our bodies, and procure the salvation of our souls, that God would
be good and gracious to all Schools of good Learning: To both the
Universities, and especially to this of Ours, and all the Magistrates thrreof.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Treasurer of the Kingdom, our Chancellor: To
the Right Worshipful Master ViceChancellour, Master Proctors, Master Taxors,
and the rest who have any Office among us.

Lastly, that he would plentifully pour out his blessings upon our Colleges;
and (as my special duty calls me) upon the whole Society of Pembrook Hall;
that we in gracing our Predecessors who have been always famous in this
Church, may follow their iudustry, considering the end of their conversation.

For all these (Fathers and Brethern) let us humbly offer up to CHRIST our
Intercessor, his own Prayer, to be presented to his Father in our name, that
he would graciously bestow upon us these things, and what ever else shall be
necessary for us.

Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Another Exhortation to Prayer, used by Bishop Andrews after his opening of
the Text.
IN the handling of which Particulars, that the Word of God may at this time
obtain in us the end to which it was by him ordained, and that this our whole
action may be profitable, let us by our Prayers hither invite the Holy Spirit,
Invoaking to that end the Father by the Son. And least we should be
forgetful of her in our Prayers, which in hers is never unmindefull of us; let
us make intercession to the most merciful Father, for his Church Catholic,
not Roman but Universal, militant upon Earth, scattered over the face of the
World. That God would preserve unto her, his Truth, now long since recovered
out of the thickest darkness of errors: that when it shall seem good unto
him, her Unity, now almost lost through the dissentions of the Christian world,
may be restored.

And let us not without groans commend unto God, that part thereof, which
besides and above the rest, stands in special need of our supplications; I
mean our Brethren, for what reason soever oppressed, and afflicted with any
kind of cross.

Let us pray for an happy end of their trials, and while the issue is
uncertain, for so much patience as shall be necessary to the meek and constant
sufferance of their troubles.

For the portion of the Church flourishing in peace, namely for the Churches in
great Britain and Ireland, and for that in both the Palatinate. And (as our
special duty binds us) for the most peaceable and powerful Prince, James, by
the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, and throughout his Dominions, over all conditions and orders both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, Supreme Governor. Let us pray for his long life,
etc. multitude of years, and that he may live long, daily more and more to
increase the Kingdom of Christ, see it propagated and rejoice. For the
incomparable Queen Anne.

For our springing hope the most noble Prince Charles. For the Bridegroom and
the Bride, the most Illustrious Frederick Prince Elector of the Roman Empire,
Count Palatine of the Rhene, and the most Excellent Lady, the Lady Elizabeth,
the Kings only Daughter, our only Princess.

For the most Noble, the Peers of the Realm, those chiefly of his Majesty's
most Houourable Privy Council. For this our Order, for the Clergy and for all
the people. But in our prayers first and last, we earnestly beg of God that
he would be good and gracions to the late Marriage, especially that Sion may
be glad therein, in whose Joy God always shares: that he may so bless them
out of Sion, that they may see (the clause in the marriage song) their
Childrens children, and (what we all do wish for) Peace upon Israel. For
which blessing let us prostrate, offer up to Christ our Intercessour his own
prayer, in our name to be presented to his Father, that he would most
mercifully and bounteously bestow upon us these things, and what else he
knows expedient for any of us. Our Father, etc.


