THE FIRST DISH AT THE WIL-SHIRE FEAST, NOVEMBER. 9. 1654. OR, A SERMON Preached
at LAURENCE JURY to those that there offered their Peace Offerings, and went
thence to dine at MARCHANT-TAYLORS-HALL. By SAMUEL ANNESLEY L.L.D. Minister of
the Gospel, at John Evangelists London.

If by any means I may provoke to Emulation them which are my flesh, and might
save some of them, Romans 11.14. God is able to make all Grace abound toward
you, that ye always have all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good Work, 2 Cor. 9.8. LONDON, Printed by E.T. for Nathanael Webb and William
Grantham at the Black Bear in Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Gentlemen, and Others of Wil-shire.
SIRS,
AS the extreme shortness of time, for the composing of this Sermon, did not
fright me from preaching it; so neither did the extreme importunity of
friends, allure me to print it. Conscience of duty makes me dare not to refuse
my Masters work: And hopes of provoking others to Emulation [while several
Counties are in the humor of feasting] does enforce the exposing it to
public view. I am not only ashamed, but grieved to hear of many
County-feasts, but -- nothing more.

I must confess, there is a Tang of indignation (in this crambe bis cocta) this
mushroome again set upon the table: the trouble begun in that you did no more
for your County, and it has been since heightened, that others do not so much
for theirs. You have the honor to give the Nation a Precedent, pray scorn to
be outstript by any. Other Counties may see, how easily they may do themselves
good; I hope they will scorn you should be singular. Has not this put many
Counties upon feasting? such a County feasts, and why should not we? will it
not better follow? such a County invited Christ to their feast, and why should
not we? O that I could put every County into a flame of contention! but it is
only, who should do most for the suppressing of wickedness; removing of
ignorance: promoting of godliness. And for your County, that I may warrantably
invert my Text, The men of Wil-shire, which were men that had understanding of
the Times, to know what England ought to do, about five hundred of them met at
a Feast, and all their brethren are willing to further their pious Projects.
This is the unfeigned desire of

Your Servant for Jesus sake, SAMUEL ANNESLEY.

THE FIRST DISH AT THE WILL-SHIRE FEAST, NOVEM. 9. 1654.
1 CHRONICLES. 12.32. And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do: the heads of them
were two hundred, and all their brethren were at their commandment.


I Forbear a Preface, because I have so much work in the Text. To improve time
at the first, that we may not want it at the last, I shall fall directly upon
the words.

And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the
times, to know, etc.

In an historical relation, you expect no other choice of words, then only fit
expressions, neither will a narrative well endure a garnish; for many times,
while the story is trimmed, the truth is smothered: yet in some cases, the
highest strains of Rhetorical elegance, can but sufficiently adorn noble Truth.

And what will you say to this Text? here is an extraordinary emphatical
Hebraisme, and an ordinary Metanymie in one sentence, and a significant
Trajection in the next, but I will show you, not tell you what there is.

And of the children of Issachar] a quiet midling tribe, neither the head nor
the tail. In the solemn and prophetical blessing of the Tribes, both by Jacob
and Moses, there is not much good promised to them, and therefore the more
observable to read such things of them. They

Were men that had understanding of the times] here is their excellency, and
it is excellently expressed (...), knowing understanding to the times: the word
[knowing] respects the mind in way of apprehension: the word [understanding]
respects the mind in way of consideration, when the mind does accurately
discern, and judge of things. And the word [times] lagnittim, the 70. well
renders (...) the occasion of time, and there is a Metanymie of the adjunct, time
being put for the things done in time, q. d. they had given themselves much to
observe seasons, wherein matters of moment were meetest to be done, and by
observing the occurrences of affairs, they got much experience, and thereby
much wisdom. And this their understanding was not for mere speculation, but

To know what Israel ought to do] (or if you admit of a trajection) that Israel
might know what to do. They instructed them that were any way under them, or
that came to them for advice.

The Heads of them were 200.] the division of Canaan unto the several Tribes,
is not altogether unlike the division of our and into Shires. And the officers
of their particular Tribes, do somewhat resemble our Sheriff, Justices of the
Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Officers of Shires, Cities,
Buroughs, Hundreds, and Parishes.

And all their brethren were at their commandment] gnal pihem super os eorum,
because the command proceeds from the mouth. Their prudence was so highly
esteemed, that every one was willing to do what they advised. In short, here
were 200. of the children of Issachar, men that had understanding of the times,
that knew and considered what was seasonable to be done, and all their brethren
were willing to follow their advice. Whence you may learn this Doctrine

That where some few hundreds of countrymen meet, that understand the duty of
the times, they may lead their whole country along with them, for their
general good. Here were two hundred of the tribe of Issachar met together at
Hebron, then the chief City of the Nation, and they met at a Feast of their own
providing, for verse. 40. The men of Issachar -- brought bread, -- meat, meal,
cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep
abundantly: for there was joy in Israel.

They manage the proper duty of the times with such understanding and
discretion, that all the country whence they came, are willing to do what they
advise them.

The Doctrine is so natural, I need not call in Scriptures to avouch it. Take
one that will do more then prove it, 2 Samuel 20.16.22. one wise woman of the
City went unto all the people in her wisdom, and persuades them to what
preserves them from destruction.

Quest. 1. Wherein does this understanding consist? I will keep within the very
words of the text, and what they plainly import.

Resp. 1. In a true knowledge and apprehension of things, as they are in their
own nature. To know the nature of a divine command, and the nature of a
christian duty. And to speak plainly in a word, such knowledge you will never
attain to, but by the Scripture. I remember Augustine closes his commendation
of Scripture thus; That whatsoever a man has learned, extra Scripturam, if it
be hurtful, there it is condemned; if it be profitable, there it is found. There
you shall abundantly find all those things, which you can profitably learn
elsewhere, and those things which you can learn no where else, are there taught
with wonderful height, yet condescension. Prove. 3.4. Forget not the Law, keep
the Commandment, so shall thou have good understanding in the sight of God and
man. [Good understanding] or good success, the Hebrew word signifies both, and
there is good reason why it should, because of the near dependence of the
things themselves: Good understanding, does beget good success.

2. This understanding consists in a due consideration of their duty. I dare
appeal to your own consciences, whether consideration be not a principal
ingredient in the composition of all graces. How come persons to repent of sin?
when do they set themselves against sin? when they consider the evil of it,
and the danger they are exposed to, by it. When do persons look after Christ,
but when they consider the necessity of him, and that they are undone without
him, that he invites them to come, and it is best to take his invitation? How
come men to get this practical wisdom, this understanding in the text, but by
enquiring what is their duty, and considering the fit circumstances of
performing it? Job says, ( Job 23.15.) when I consider, I am afraid. q.d. When
I weigh in my mind all Gods proceedings with me, I am afraid. When conscience
is asleep, consideration will awaken it; men could never run so madly into sin,
were they not inconsiderate.

3. Diligence is requisite to this understanding. This is implied in both the
other; you will never get a right knowledge of things, without a diligent
searching after knowledge: you will never consider rightly of things without a
diligent fixing of your hearts upon your duty. The diligent hand (says
Solomon) makes rich, rich in grace, rich in all good works; a lazy christian
is always a beggatly christian. You know one of the first curses that God
denounced against man, was, in the sweat of thy brow, thou shall eat thy bread.
Now though all curses be taken away by Christ, yet this lies still as a a cross
in the way of a christian, that even in spirituals, he cannot earn his bread,
he can never get, nor improve any grace without sweating for it. Gods free gift
does not hinder, but further and encourage labor and diligence. Eccles. 9.10.
whatsoever thy hand finds to do do it with all thy might: for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go.
This brings to the second Quaere.

Quest. 2. What understanding ought we to have of the times?

I must entreat you to be serious in the answer to this enquiry, for it cannot
but thwart the common practice of the generality of men. This understanding of
the times consists in these three things.

Resp. 1. In the understanding of the general duties of all times: There are
some duties which run through the whole course of our lives; we ought to live
always in the fear of God, Acts 17.30. God calls upon all men every where to
repent: we ought always to make Religion our business, to do nothing to Gods
dishonor, but to put forth our selves to the utmost to walk acceptably before
him; to bind our selves to our good behavior: Yet do not mistake, as if the
strongest engagements to be wholly for God, had any the least bondage in them;
but I would have Religion to be like the marriage bond, That as there is none
more strong, so there is none more desirable, more comfortable. I would have
you al to entertain Religion with something suitable to the Israelites
entertainment of the Ark, 1 Samuel 4.5. When the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord
came into the Camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth
rang again: so that the enemies of holiness may cry out, Woe unto us, woe unto
us, who can deliver us out of the hand of this mighty God, who will smite
profane persons with all manner of plagues?

And another general duty of all times, is to be profitable unto others: to do
what we possibly can to promote Religion in the world. The Apo. in Ephesians. 4.12,
13. compares the collective body of christians to the natural body of an
infant, and Christ to the soul; as the child grows in all the parts of the
body, so the soul puts forth it self in all rational operations. Now every
member grows not out of self-interest, but common interest, and Christ
communicates of his spirit according to such growth; only here is the
dissimilitude: let a child grow never so fast, yet the growth does not make any
addition of new members unto the body, there is not so much as a finger, or a
toe the (...) for all the growth: but now Religion spreads it self like l^^^^,
communicates it self unto those that are yet unlevened. There Is addition of
members in the mystical body of Christ. And there is not any gracious soul, but
can heartily join with Paul in his wish for Agrippa. Acts 26.29. I would to
God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day were both almost,
and altogether such as I am.

Secondly, The understanding of the times consists in the understanding of
the particular duties of special times, every season of a man's life brings
'its particular duties along with it. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth: do not spend the morning of your life in vanity, so let young men
improve their strength, and old men their experiences for God, and the good of
others. But the Text fits us with two adjuncts of time very considerable.

First, they were times of division, alteration and changes: and what are ours?
they had been long harrast with civil war, between Saul and David, between
David and Ishbosheth, and they were yet unsettled; now at such a time the sons
of Issachar, many of them shepherds, most of them plain countrymen. These
knew what to do, this shows their wisdom. Go you, and do likewise. But what
shall we do? I will tell you what, and give you a president for it. 1 Pet.
2.15. for so is the will of God, that with well doing, ye may put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men, there is your duty. Daniel 6.4, 5. Then the
Presidents and Princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the
Kingdom, but they could find none occasion, nor fault: for as much as he was
faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him. Then said these
men, we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it
against him, concerning the law of his God. There Is your president. Observe the
time of it, 'twas when Darius had broken the head of gold, the Babylonian
monarchy, and now Daniel is again gracious in court, and preferred in office
above all the enemies of the church. These could find [no occasion] no matter
of accusation, nor color of suspicion of unfaithfulnes [neither was there any
error] his many, mighty, envious, subtle enemies despaired to find him faulty,
or colourably faulty in the management of so great affairs, in so tickle times
[except we (...) it against him concerning the law of his God] they must
proceed to outrage against God himself, or they can do nothing against him.
In a word then; walk so exactly, that your very enemies may have nothing
against you, and if the world use you like it self, Matthew. 5.12. rejoice, and
be exceeding glad for great is your reward in heaven.

Secondly, they were times of opportunities for doing good: and so are ours.
It Is confessed all times have something peculiar in them to exercise the graces of
the godly: and there will never want snares to entangle those that are godly,
but let us not for any evil that we feel or fear, neglect the opportunities
of doing that good which we may -- what opportunities you have, I shall show
you in the application.

Thirdly, The third thing wherein the right understanding of the times
consists, is in prudently observing the fit season for the performing of all
duties. Every thing is beautiful in its season: and it is considerable, God
never calls to any work, but he gives a fit season for the doing of it. I must
work, says Christ while it is day, the night comes when no man can work.
Eccles. 8.6. Because to every purpose there is time and judgment: therefore
the misery of man is great upon him. Every enterprise has its proper season,
and peculiar manner of acting, upon which narrow point the success of such
undertakings does depend, and this cannot without wisdom be duly observed.
There Is a word used. Romans 8.26. helps our infirmities (...), lifts over
against us; it is a metaphor taken from two men's lifting at a logg, which one
man cannot move; now the spirit of God lifts at the heavier end; if we lift
with him, we may go thorough with our duty, but if we lose the season of his
help, all our endeavors may come to nothing. For if that season which God
affords us for business be lost, it is probably lost irrecoverably. I once
saw a ship strike upon the Goodwin sands, but the tide coming in, and help
being at hand just in the nicke of time, it came off safe, whereas had it been
let alone a little till ebbing water, it had been lost irrecoverably: Do but
time your business, and you sail before the wind, loose your opportunity, and
you drive as Pharaoh did in the red sea, when his chariet-wheeles were taken
off. I cannot better express this, thereby turning you to Christ's own words,
which he uttered with tears over the once holy city, which is now a ruinous
heap. Luke. 19.41, 42. when he was come near, he beheld the city and wept
over it, saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peaco! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

Quest. 3. How is it likely that a few understanding men may probably engage
all their countrymen to perform the duties of the times they live in. I shall
only name a two fold ground.

Resp. 1. Men know the state of their own country better then strangers can,
to speak directly ad rem: here you are met from all parts of your country. Do
not you know the state of your country better then ten times your number of any
other men in the world? One can say, I was born in such a place, where the
Gospel was never powerfully preached in my time. Another can say, I live in a
place, where profanenes does exceedingly abound. And a third can tell stories
of the ranting, and licentiousness of apostate Christians. Again, you know
the temper of your own neighbors and country men, better then others can: you
know in what places people be incorrigible, and men must deal with them as
with thorns, as David expressed it: you know where people are fickle and
unsettled, that they must be stroakt into a good liking of sound truth, or they
will fly out, and be worse by means of bettering them. And

Secondly, Men of the same country are interested in one another affections,
which does exceedingly fit them for the doing and receiving of good: men will
take that from a countryman, a neighbor, a friend, which they will not from
another. Let me tell you plainly, you have carried your selves ill in the
places of your abode, if you have not gotten some esteem and credit, more then
in places where you are not known, that a reproof or an admonition will come
with authority from you. Men commonly love the places of their birth, and their
countrymen among whom they were bred, being more willing to do for them then
for others; and the places of our nativity and education do challenge, and
look for something from us. This is deservedly put into Sions lamentation, that
of all the sons she brought up, there was none to comfort her. Now if God give
you opportunity, will you not answer it? you read of Mordecai Ester, 10.3.
Mordecai the Jew was great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his
brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.

But I hasten to the application, and begin with an use of Reproof, wherein if
any shall think I am too keen, let them think withal, that I shall be glad
to be mistaken, in the sins that I reprove, if you can plead for your country
in any particular, not guilty. But if these sins be among you, the two edged
sword had need to cut, and therefore I will not say, bear with me, but as
Jothan to the Shechemites, Hearken unto me you men of Shechem, that God may
hearken unto you: There are five sins I shall reprove, and with the reproof
propose a remedy, that as I launch the sore, I may apply a plaster.

First, Profaneness: Are there not with you, even with you, aye with us in
this congregation, some profane Esau's, that will hunt away their blessing, and
game away their blessing, and swear away their blessing, and drink away their
blessing, that scorn preciseness, and hate reproof? to such as these, I am
sent with heavy tidings; I must tell you from a holy God, that when you can
laugh no more at holiness, God will laugh for ever at your destruction: that
when you have wearyed your selves in works of darkness, you shall have your
portion in everlasting darkness; I remember astory of your own country, it is
of Roger Bishop of Salisbury, that built Shirborne Castle, and the Castle of
the Devises (accounted once one of the goodliest Castles of Europe) when he was
ready to die, it is reported, that inter mortis metum, et vitae tormenta, vivere
noluerit, et mori nescierit, Between fear of death, and torment of life, he
would not live, and yet he knew not how to die. How soon may this be your
case? remember Esau Heb. 12.16.17. that profane person Esau, who for one
morsel of meat sold his birthright, for you know how that afterward when he
would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of
repentance, though he sought, it carefully with tears. I hope better things of
you, but pray then, do what you can to stop the inundation of profaneness in
the places where you live, or have acquaintance. What Is the remedy?

Put down the multitude of alehouses in your country. These are the
pest-houses of the nation: it were well if they were shut up, for thence the
plague of profaneness spreades all over the land: but I forbear them at
present, this being one of the projects wherewith I shall close my sermon.

Secondly, The second sin is error, this is the cunning of the old serpent,
that when he cannot keep persons, profane, he will drive them into the other
extreme; if profaneness stare men in the face, and look dreadfully, then a
smacke of religion, with a vigorous embracing of some unsound opinion will set
them in the highest form of Christianity presently. O beloved, it is sad to
consider, how this leprosy spreads, what more ordinary then for persons when
their consciences are a little awakened, and thereby disquieted by the word, to
take the opium of some error, and quiet all again presently. Heretofore upon
the preaching of the word, you should have persons pricked at the heart, and
cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? But now if
strictness be pressed, that is Legal; if repentance be urged, that is not fine
enough; when poor souls are a little startled by a rouzing sermon, satan has
his emissaries to seize upon them, let them but list themselves in such a
congregation, take up such an opinion, the work is done, they are Saints
presently.

The cure of this, is, get a godly Minister into your country, if you cannot
get a sufficient number settled, yet you may procure some godly, learned,
prudent Ministers to preach up and down in the country, from place to place,
that there may not be a dark corner in the country. Be as vigilant for truth
as satan is for error: let not satan set up his flag, but endeavor [what in
you lies] that the spirit of God may lift up a standard against it. You may
probably meet with reproaches here, but go on, fear not. When by Jeromes
means some heretics lost their liberty of teaching their error, Augustine
writes thus to him, I have always honored thee, but now much more, if my
esteem be capable of addition. All that love the truth will reverence thee,
and which is a greater glory, all heretics detest thee. Gentlemen, I would
recommend unto you Jehashaphats practice, He sent Priests and Levites to preach
in the cities of Judah, and his Princes accompanied them, to give countenance
and encouragement to the design, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8.

Thirdly, the third sin is formalitie in religion, which is nothing else but a
finely composed and well acted tragedy o^ religion, a pageant of piety, a
resemblance of godliness. Ignatius speaking of some kind of Christians, says,
They were but (...) and they had only (...), written upon them.

And Christ calls them whited Sepulchers, they have religion written in
capital golden letters upon the outside, but inwardly they are nothing but
stinking rottenness. O that you would deal plainly with your own souies, is
there any here, that serves God with a reserve, that quarrels with scripture
for requiring more strictness, then they are willing to practice? I remember
it is given as one character of the Manachees, that they labor for nothing
more, then not to find what they seek. Is not this the character of some here?
I am sure it is of too many professors that pretend to search after the
knowledge of their duty, but they are loath to find it: pretend they would
seek out their secret sins, but they are loath to part with them.

For the cure of this. Truly I am here almost at a stand, this disease is
Ludibrium theologorum, these kind of Christians can do by sermons, as
Mountebankes do by poison, they are fore-armed, that they cannot work upon
them; let Ministers say what they can, they will practice what they list: this
disease is like the stone in the bladder, the remedies spend their strength ere
they come at the place affected: reproof, and conviction, and counsel, have
spent their strength, before they can come near their hearts, but I must
attempt a cure. The only remedy I know, is a dose of true repentance; this may
set them right, and that I may set it on with efficacy, I will give you a
scripture instance, what a cure repentance wrought, in a case as bad as this,
(so far as any sin may be compared with formalitie) there were some hundreds
of one tribe met together, and a sad meeting it was, but it proved a good one
at last, it is the tribe of Benjamin, I mean, who for their sin were brought
to 600 men only. Judges 20.47. in the days of Jehoshaphat there were 380000
fighting men of that tribe. The greatest number of them in the plains of Moab
were but 45600, not the sixth part of what they were after their great blow,
upon their repentance they mightily increased, out of a small handful; sin
brings low, but God upon our serious repentance, can quickly increase us, and
make our latter end better then our beginning.

Fourthly, A fourth sin is uselesnesse: how many are there that are rather-like
what Jacob foretold of Issachar, then what Ezra here records of them, that he
is like an ass, couching down between two burdens, because rest is good.
Many men care not so they can but snug in quiet and rub out their time without
trouble and danger; if they can do so, they take themselves to be very wise
men: as if men were sent into the world, to have only such a narrative made of
them, as there is of some Judges of Israel; they had so many cities, so many
children, and they rode upon so many asses, and that is all you read of them.
So such a man he got a great estate, and he matched his children very well, and
perhaps when he is dead, you may hear of some charitable legacy in his
Testament, but not by his Will; thank you death, or you should never have
heard of any good at all, and but a little then. If this baseness be creeping
upon any of you, for cure of it

Take a holy revenge upon your selves, do you find your hearts cling close to
the world, it is like the cleaving of a cold hand unto a hot fire-iron in
extremity of weather, it is some refreshing at present, but it tears the flesh
off when removed. You cannot let your hands cleave to the world, but it will
do worse then burn your fingers. It is a pretty passage (me thinks) that I
heard of a Gentleman as he rode by the way, an old man begged something of him,
and he gave him a groat, when he rode a little past, he bethought himself, a
groat, that might have served 3 or 4, upon these thoughts he rode back to the
poor man, and demanded his groat, which when he returned him, he gave him a
shilling, saying to himself, now I am revenged.

Fifthly, The fifth sin I shall reprove, is Temporizing, this is the
understanding most men have of the times; they know how to make their advantage
of the times, to turn with the times, and to serve the times: they can fawn
upon the sins of the times. O the base spiritednesse of the men of this
generation! that if they can but cringe themselves into preferment, and get
some fat gobbets of wealth, or bladder of honor, blown up with stinking breath
like their own: they will venture the displeasure of God, and what not! Do any
of your consciences tell you, you are such? let me add this for conscience to
chew upon; you shall be filled with your own ways. You can complement with
God, and give him good language, but nothing else, so God will give you good
words again, but turn you off with, I know you not; or as Christ said to Judas,
Friend, wherefore art thou come? betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? it
were better for thee thou had never been born. Can any of you kiss Christ,
and betray him? bow the knee to him, and smite him upon the head? Friends, what
do you think Religion is? do you think it is a mere juggle, a Blind to make
use of? a Servant to wait upon your designs? are these things becoming
christians? but I must forbear.

For the cure of it. Be convinced of the vanity of the creature. Do but, says
Cyprian, withdraw thy self a little, suppose thy self on the top of some
mountain, where thou might safely see fluctuantis mundi turbines, the world
in its proper colors, thou would pity the world, and rather bless God for
thy being delivered from the snares of it, then desire to have much of it. Alas
poor rich man! thou do shift, and shuffle, and make shipwreck of faith, and
conscience, and all to get -- what I pray you? nay, I know not what, all thou
can possibly get, will not buy a plaster broad enough to lay upon thy
wounded conscience: this is directly cross to Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then that
you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because
the days are evil.

The second use is of Exhortation.

First, Be persuaded every one of you to mind Religion seriously. You know
Christ tells us, that toward the end of the world, the times shall be like
those before the flood, men shall be eating and drinking, etc. but in this
unlike them; for then one might have a temporal deliverance by the faith of
another: but now, two shall be in one house, the one shall be taken, (to glory)
and the other left (to perish) two shall be in one bed, the one shall be taken
(into Abraham's bosom) the other shall be left (to the devils torments) a
believing wife cannot then save an unbeleeving husband, a gracious father,
cannot then save an ungracious child. Christians, it is a personal reformation I
would first urge you to. Begin with your own hearts, and with your own lives.
Take up Job's resolution, My heart shall not reproach me as long as I live:
when you hear a Sermon, let every man think he is spoken to, in particular.
This is one reason why the Commandments are given in the second person
singular, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc. every man is to apply
them unto himself, as if God spoke to him by name. This is it that loses so
many Sermons, aye, and so many souls to, viz. the want of personal application.
O that I could therefore speak to you all, as if I were speaking but to one
man. Romans 14.12. Every one of us must give account of himself to God: therefore
1 These. 2.11. I exhort and charge every one of you (as a father does his
children) that ye would walk worthy of God, who calls you unto his Kingdom and
Glory.

Secondly, Set up the Power of godliness in your families: as ever you would
have a part in Abraham's blessing, take part in his work, Genesis 18, 19. I know
him that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord. He had as big a family to instruct as any of
you: there were above three hundred in it, able to bear arms. But I will give
you an instance beyond his, and it is of Solomon, pray observe it, for the world
can never match it. He had a thousand wives, and could give an account (a true
one, though a sad one) of every one of their souls, Eccles. 7.28. And for the
number of his servants, it is not easy to guess the quantity: how many
servants must every one of his wives have? he had seven hundred wives which
were Princesses, their retinue was certainly great; he had forty thousand
stalls of horses for his charets: Judge hereby what a world of servants there
must be belonging to his Court. You read his daiely provision, that shows the
greatness of his family. 1 King. 4.22, 23. And Solomous provision for one day
was thirty measures of fine flower, and threescore measures of meal (that is
three hundred bushells of flower, and six hundred bushells of meal) ten fat
oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pasture, and an hundred sheep, besides hearts,
and roe-bucks, and fallow-deere, and fatted fowl: and yet his family, though so
great, was so well ordered that, (1 King. 10.15.) the Queen of Sheba was
amazed to see it, nay more, his servants were so seasoned with Religion, that
about five hundred years after their children are in a special manner
recorded by the spirit of God, to be the most eminent of their times for
Religion. Ezra. 2.58. The children of Solomon's servants, were three hundred
ninety and two: they are with the forwardest to enjoy freedom of Gods worship,
and though others shrunk from their first subscription, so did not they; not a
man of them, Nehem. 7.60. The children of Solomon's servants were three hundred
ninety and two. This cannot but shame us, that have so few to take care of, and
yet take so little care of them. The Lord set it upon our hearts.

Thirdly. Combine together to advance Religion in your County. You know what
God commanded his people to do for the land of their captivity, where they
were in a condition of slavery. Ierem. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City,
whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it: for in the peace thereof shall you have peace. What then should you do
for the place of your Nativity? Christ takes it for granted, that in Nazareth,
where he had been brought up, They will surely use this Proverb, Physician heal
thy self, whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy own
country; and 'twas their opposition to the Gospel, that hindered him from
answering their expectation. Friends, I hope that opposition to the Gospel will
not hinder you, but that every one will be willing to do his utmost for your
own County. It is easy to heap up instances in all histories, what good
Patriots have done for their country, but I forbear; and will only urge a
raritie of your County: the like whereof, I do not remember that ever I heard
or read: I mean that Cathedral which was longer in building then the Jews
Temple; for it was above fifty years in building: and do you not think the
Founders did intend, by proportioning the doors to the months, and the windows
to the days, and the pillars to the hours of the year, that you should learn
this instruction. Not a month, nay, not a day, nay, not an hour should be let
pass without something of Religion? And what may you now do for promoting
Religion in your County? what may you not do, if you will set to it in good
earnest?

You know in our constitution of Parliaments, we have the members chosen from
every County, and though some Counties have but a very few, yet their County
expects good from them. Might we suppose now all the members of Parliament to
be chosen out of one County, and that Parliament so constituted, to be the
supreme Authority. O what would all those men do for that County? why Friends,
I may in some sort call you the VVil-shire Parliament, and I dare boldly say,
if you will manage your business wisely, you may carry on the projects I shall
propose, with as good success, as if you had Parliamentary Authority to back
them: and you may raise sufficient money by voluntary contribution, as if you
had power to lay a tax; and I dare say, 'twill be paid more willingly. Me
thinks by this time your Attention asks me, what would you have us to do?

I shall name three projects, which I shall but name, as being more chargeable
then the present times will bear.

First, To set up the light of the Gospel in all the dark places of your
County.

Secondly, To raise a stock to set the poor on work, this stock when once
raised, a small matter would continue it.

Thirdly, To maintain some poor Scholars, for some considerable time, at the
University. If you will but think of these things, I may spare my labor in
telling you the use of them. But I leave these; if any will but brood them
between this and your next meeting, by that time these projects may be hatched.

At present, there are three things I shall crave leave to urge, as being more
feasible then the former. The first will save many extravagant expenses. The
second may be done without much charge, and the third is resolved upon already
by some, and I doubt not but will be embraced by all.

First then, put down all your wicked Alehouses, if you have any mind to be rid
of profaneness, put down your base Alehouses. These are the Devils Nurseries,
where his children are instructed in the mysteries of iniquity. There it is
men harden themselves against the Gospel; and steep them selves, as if they
would fain make themselves like sobby logges, of which the fire can have no
power: but they are mistaken in the nature of hellfire, for though the Sea
should empty it self into the bottomless pit, 't would be as water upon lime,
make it burn more fiercely. But there is not a drop of water to cool that
tongue, that upon the Ale-bench sets it self against heaven.

Could I persuade you but to suppress Tippling, I should not doubt but
profaneness would receive its mortal wound. But I must add, Those that
undertake this business, must arm themselves with patience, and resolution,
and manage it prudently; otherwise they will do more hurt, then good.

Secondly, set up petty Schools in every Parish, or in every other Parish, to
teach children to read, and let them be catechized every week. This though it
may seem a difficult work, yet if you would all of you, according to your
several relations, to several parts of the County, endeavor it: the work would
be done speedily, as Nehemiah said of the building of the wall of Jerusalem,
when every one took his part, and had a mind to the work ( Nehem. 3.
throughout.)

How many poor people may hereby come to knowledge? many whole families in the
country have not any one person in them that can read: how can these learn any
thing? how can these sanctify a Sabbath? could their children but read, and
were their children but taught the principles of christian Religion, it might
be a more spreading good then you are aware of: and one ten pounds would buy
above two thousand Catechismes, which would yield a pretty handsome
distribution to every Parish in your County.

My third project is contrived to my hand, viz. the setting up of some weekly
Lectures in places most destitute of the Gospel. Now it is not only proposed,
but resolved by the Stewards to set up two weekly Lectures for the year next
ensuing, the one at Trubridge, the other at Calne, upon their Market days, and
to allow five and twenty pounds to each of those two, godly, able, and
faithful Ministers, whom they will forthwith employ to preach there: and if
your bountiful contribution shall exceed that sum, the overplus shall be laid
out, for the redeeming some of your contrymen out of prison.

And now I have proposed these things, I am ready to believe, you will not need
arguments to persuade their entertainment. I can scarce think of any thing to
be objected against them. It Is true, carnal reason may say, these kind of
projects will spoil your meeting, for when you intend a meeting for the
continuation of friendship, and shall be imposed upon, to the picking of your
purses; who will meet another time? if carnal reason make this objection, I
hope Religion is well able to make an answer to it. It Is better never to meet,
then merely to eat, and drink, and rise up to play: may you not expect, that
while the meat is yet between your teeth, the wrath of God may fall upon you:
or at least, that God may send leanness into your souls. You know how Christ
managed a great festival, John 7.37, 38, 39. In that great day of the Feast,
Jesus stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink, He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living
water; this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive. O do what you may, to bring sin-sick souls unto Christ: to lay them
under the influences of the Spirit of grace: and to stop up sinners way with
thorns. Ierom affirms that this was Issachars understanding of the times;
they were (inter alia) doctores ad festivitates, their excellency lay in giving
directions about Religious feasts; Though he may be mistaken in the
interpretation of the Text, I am sure you will not be mistaken in the
improvement of the Text, if you Religiously and industriously set your selves
[at this your Feast] to do your country some real spiritual good.

But alas, it is not to be hoped that you should all be unanimous in so good a
design, there are but few will be drawn in to such an undertaking, I will grant
this. But because there are but few will do any thing; therefore shall those
few do nothing? because you meet with more reproach, then assistance, therefore
you will forbear acting for God! why, by the same reason, you may forbear
praying in your families, and hearing of Sermons, for these things are subject
to reproach too.

But you do not know yet what to do, you apprehend more difficulty in these
things, then you can at present foresee, or express. -- And so you always
will, till you are resolved with christian courage to bear down difficulties,
to turn over objections to be answered by faith, to beg wisdom of God by
prayer, and to set down this with your selves, God offers me an opportunity of
doing good, how short it may be I know not: I cannot be faithful unto God, nor
so much as answer it to mine own conscience, if I do not trade my talent for my
Masters greatest honor: I will therefore honor God with my substance: I will
return him something, that gave me all. Beloved, can you possibly rake up any
demurre why you should not lay out your selves to the utmost for God; which God
may not infinitely return upon you, why he should never have given Christ unto
you? and why Christ should never have undertaken your reconciliation with God?
can you meet with the difficulties Jesus Christ met with? can you meet with
that contradiction of sinners, that Christ bore? He was not discouraged. He
went up and down doing good. He left you an example, that you should follow his
steps. Be followers of Christ as dear children. If the example be too high,
take Hezekiah. 2 Chronicles 31.21. in every work that he began in the service of the
house of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did
it with all his heart, and prospered.

THE END.

