ANNOTATIONS UPON THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS CONCLUSION.

The Twelfth of April, 1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

THE CONCLUSION Of the Earl of Straffords Defense, the twelfth of April, 1641.
MY Lords, there yet remains another Treason, that I should be guilty of; the
indeaovuring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Land, that they should
now be Treason, together, that is not Treason in any one part of Treason
Intention of Treason, is Treason (not so in felony) when it is proved, though
by facts which in themselves are no treason.
accumulative, that so when all will not do, it is woven up with others, it
should seem very strange.

Under favor, my Lords, I do not conceive that there is either Stature-Law,
nor Common Law, that does declare the endeavoring to subvert the fundamental
Laws to be high Treason One excepted which is a law against such as break the
fundamental law of the kingdom besides 25: Ed. 3 which leaves it in the
breast of a Parliament to judge such things treason which are so in their own
natures, though not expressed.
.

For neither Statute Law, nor Common Law written In things wherein men should be
a law unto themselves; If they sin without the law, they perish without the law.
, that ever I could hear of, declares it so.

And yet I have been diligent to enquire Had you not bin worse then a heathen,
you might have found at within you written in the common law of nature.
, (as I believe you think it does concern me to do.

It is hard to be questioned for life and honor, upon a Law that cannot be
shown If it were so, it is but lex taeionis, and it is well that by altering
the Scene, your judgment is so rightly informed, which never thought that
burden hard you laid upon others.
.

There is a rule which I have learned from Sir Edward Cook, De non apparen.
tibus and non existentibus eadem ratio, (Jesus) where has this fire lain all
this while, so many hundreds of years without any smoke to discover it, till
it thus burst forth to consume me, and my children And longer might have lain,
had not such a firebrand as you, given too just cause to teend it; Who as you
have made women childlesse, so in justice will God make your mother childlesse,
and your children fatherless.
: extreme hard in my opinion, that punishment should preceede promulgation, of
a Law punished by a Law subsequent to the Acts done? Paricide has been thought
too notorious and unnatural a crime to have a law made against it, and yet
judged a crime when committed. Some offenses are so heinous, that they condemn
themselves, and need no law to judge them, much less to be proclaimed against
them, whereof this is one, a worse then paricide.


Take it into your considerations, for certainly it is now better to be under
no law at all but the will of men, Hoc op^^, hic laborest.
then to conform our selves under the protection of a law as we think, and
then be punished for a crime that does preceede that law, what man can be
safe, if that be once admitted Nay, rather what Commonwealth can be safe if
this be not admitted, in such cases as either cannot be foreseeme, or which
Nature abhorrer to imagine.
.

My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no token set
upon this offense, by which we should know it, no admonition by which we
should be aware of it It is strange that he that carries the face of a man
should need an admonition, not to betray his country.
.

If a man pass down the Thames in a Boat, and it be split upon an Anchor, and
a boy, being set as a token that there is an anchor there, that party that
owes the anchor, by the Maritine Laws, shall give satisfaction for the damage
done; but if it were marked out, I must come upon my own peril One would
think there need no Law to forbid a man to fire the house he dwells in, or to
sink the ship he fails in, and in cale he attempt this, though no Maritine
law forbid it, no doubt, it is just to throw him overboard to save the rest,
and let him perish alone.
.

Now where is the mark upon this crime, where is the token that this is high
Treason The Parliament is as well a court of equity as of Law (as by a
special clause of reservation in the 25. Ed 3. in the very case of Treason
does appear) and so in equity may supply the litterall defects of the Law (in
case it were defective) as the Chancerie does the Kings bench; and if so, it
must needs be just, That he that would not destroy three Kingdoms, for no
other reason, but only because there is a Law that makes it Treason, should in
equity suffer as a traitor for taking the liberty to do it, because there
is no law, or because he knows of none against it.
.

If it be under water, and not above water, no humane providence can avail,
nor prevent my destruction There is great hope so, because a divine one has
decreed it. Job 34.29.30.
.

Lay aside all humane Wisdom, and let us rest upon divine Revelation, if you
will condemn before you forewarne of the danger He that kills a King, in
humane wisdom without Revelation, may well think he shall dye for it, though
no Law should threaten it, and much more if he destroy the Commonwealth which
cannot perish, and the King be preserved.
.

Oh my Lords, may your Lordships be pleased to give that regard unto the
Peere-age of England, as never to suffer our selves to be put on those nice
points, upon such constructive interpretations, and these are where Laws are
not clear or known, if there must be a Trial of wits, I do most humbly
beseech you, the subject and matter may be in somewhat else, then the lives and
Honors of Peers Or the Beings and Wel-beings of whole kingdoms.
.

My Lords, we find that in the primitive times, in the progression of the
plain Doctrine of the Apostles; they brought the Books of curious Arts, and
burned them. And so likewise as I do conceive, it will be wisdom and
providence in your Lordshippes, for your posterity, and the whole Kingdom,
That means to tread in your steps.
to cast from you into the fire these bloody and most mysterious Volumes of
constructive and Arbitrary Treasons If there were no express Law to make it
treason, yet it is equal that he that seeks to bring this Kingdom under an
arbitrarie government, should receive an arbitrary punishment.
, and to betake your selves to the plain Letter of the Law and Statute, that
tells us where the crime is But yet so, as that there is left a place for you
and your offense by a wise foresight in the reservation of 25: Ed. 3.
; And by telling what is, and what is not, shows how to avoid it He that
having power in his hands so far endeavors the ruining of the Commonwealth, as
he thinks may stand with his own safety, it is just to judge him a Traitor to
his country, though true to himself.
. And let us not be ambitious, to be more wise and learned in the killing
Arts, then our forefathers were It is but equal that he should have judgment
without mercy, that showed no mercy.
.

It is now full 200. and 40. years, since ever any man was touched for this
alleged crime (to this beights) before my self, we have lived happily to our
selves at home, and we have lived gloriously to the World abroad Never since
your time of promotion, though it is hoped, when you are gone we shall do so
again.
.

Let us rest contented with that which our Fathers left us, and not awake those
fleecy Lions to our own destructions So let all the enemies of God and their
country perish.
; by raking up a few musty records that have layen so many ages by the walls,
quite forgotten and neglected Ill manners being forth good laws. Which it
seems were made in a good time, and kept to a good hear to rid us of so
rotten a member that many ages cannot parallel.
.

May your Lordships be Nobly pleased, to add this to those other misfortunes
befallen me for my sins, not for my Treasons; that a president should not
be derived from me of that disadvantage (as this will be in the consequent to
the whole Kingdom) I beseech you seriously to consider it, and let not my
particular case be so looked on as you do; though you wound me in my interest
in the Commonwealth, and therefore those Gentlemen say, that they speak for
the Commonwealth, yet in this particular I indeed speak for it, and the
inconveniences and mischiefs that will heavily fall upon us It is pity but
you should die whilst you are in so good a mind, now you are again turned
Common-wealths-man, which you were once before, lest you alter as you have done.
; for as it is in the 1. of Henry the fourth, no man will after know what to
do, or say, for fear And to that pass we were come again of late by your
means, till God set us free.
.

Do not put (my Lords) so great difficulties upon the Ministers of state, that
men of wisdom, honor, and virtue Had you had the last, it would have
preserved the two first, but your want of honesty has made your wisdom
foolishness, and your honor ignominy.
, may not with cheerfulness and safety, be imploye a for the public You
mean against it.
, if (...) you weigh and measure them by grain (...) and scruples Your
pressures have indeed been heavier, then to deserve to be weighed with so
light weights.
, the public affairs by (...) the Kingdom will be laid waste, and (...) no
man will meddle with them, tha^ (...) has honors, issues, or any fortunes to
lose Before you wished you might not be made a president, but we cannot have
a better, it will but produce this effect, that men of your mischievous mind
will for your sake refuse preferment, and employment (...)
.

My Lords, I have now troubled you, longe^ then I should have done, were it not
for the interest of those dear pledges, a Saint in heaven hat^ left me; I
should be loath my Lords, (there he stopped.)

What I forfeit for my self it is nothing, b^^ that my indiscretion should
forfeit for my child^^^ it even wounds me deep to the very soul.

You will pardon my infirmity, something (...) should have said, but I am not
able, (and sighed* therefore let it pass.

And now my Lords, I have bin by the blessi^^ of Almighty God taught, that the
afflictions (...) this life present, are not to be compared to (...) eternal
weight of glory that shall be revealed (...) us hereafter.

And so, my Lords, even so with tranquillity o^ mind, I do submit my self
freely and cleare^^ to your Lordships judgments; and whether tha^ righteous
judgment shall be to life or death.

Te Deum Laudamus, te Dominum Confitemur.
FINIS.

