ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. Congreve's LATE ANSWER TO Mr. COLLIER, etc.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. Congreve's LATE ANSWER TO Mr. COLLIER. IN A DIALOGUE
between Mr. Smith and Mr. Johnson.

With the Characters of the present POETS; And some Offers toward New-Modeling
the STAGE.

Sr. Jos. Egad, there are good Morals to be picked out of Aesop's Fables, let
me tell you that, and Reynard the Fox too.


Bluff. Damn your Morals.


Sr. Jos. Prithee don't speak so Loud.


Bluff. Damn your Morals, I must revenge the Affront done to my Honor.


Old Batch. Page 47. LONDON, Printed for John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. School.

TO THE INGENIOUS Mr. --.
O Could I write like D -- s sternly loud,
That Ixion Author, in his Fancy proud
To chase a Goddess, -- but embrace a Cloud.
With stretched out Wings on such Pursuits he soars,
Presses the Cloud, and then the Thunder roars.
Lost in a Fog, he sucks Infection there:
The very ugliest Demon of the Air;
On whose foul Aspect should you sagely look,
You cannot but fancy that he is Thunderstruck.
Such heavy Dullness dwells upon his Face,
You read him much a Critic, -- more an A --.
Or could I run in Hop -- s thundering strain,
He who the Triumphs Sung of Peaceful Reign:
In noisy roar of Numbers to excel,
And gain to Kiss that Hand which fought so well.
He who had every Muse, -- and yet had none;
With all his Grand-Sire's nonsense added to his own.
Or could I write like the two Female things
With Muse Pen-feather'd, guiltless yet of Wings;
And yet, it strives to Fly, and thinks it Sings.
Just like the Dames themselves, who flant in Town,
And flutter loosely, but to tumble down.
The last that writ, of these presuming two,
(For that Queen Ca -- ne is no Play it is true)
And yet to Spell is more than she can do,
Told a High Princess, she from Men had torn
Those Bays, which they had long engrossed and worn.
But when she offers at our Sex thus Fair,
With four fine Copies to her Play, -- O rare!
If she feels Manhood shoot -- it is I know where.
Let them scrawl on, and Loll, and Wish at case,
(A Feather often does Woman's Fancy please.)
Till by their Muse (more jilt than they) accursed,
We know (if possible) which writes the worst.
Beneath these Pictures, sure there needs no name,
Nor will I e what they never got in Fame.
Renowned like D -- y, for his written Chat
Of Quixots, Monkys, and we know not what.
Light in repute with all the Sacred Throng.
Unless for heavy Burden in a Song.
With stutt'ring Muse, and Self, he Sings, -- or says
He writes things sometimes, but his last were Plays.
Next struts in Foppington of high Renown,
Called the Beau-writer by the Sparkish Town;
But him for all his Failings, I Will Excuse,
He makes fair promises to quit his Muse:
Yet here is the Danger, a Relapse before,
Shows that the scurvy Sickness is not over;
And drunken Men who know not what they do,
Reel first on one side, then on 'tother too.
Next, let the needy Gil -- n peep abroad,
Without a Muse, but more without a God.
The first he claims, the latter's only Named
In idle Talk, -- so to be doubly Damned.
Of all our throng of Wits and Men of Parts,
It Is certain he has had his full Deserts,
In a late Book, where of most Plays he treats,
Of his dear self who knows what he Repeats?
He tells you how his Beads were from him thrown,
Then what Religion has he now? Why none.
Equal to him in Poetry and Fame,
Comes one who both has got, and lost a Name.
Se -- le, who, when he gained a faint applause,
Played a Just V -- n, showed us what he was.
He yields, no doubt, Great --! soon to you,
We know, his recantations are not new.
But he, it is feared is fond of Gil -- n's Curse,
Eager of change, though still from bad to worse.
Yet thou have flashed such rays of Sacred Light,
Sure, their dark Souls, for once, might find the right.
Next in desert stands one, a Man of Wit,
Made so by what he stole, not what he writ.
But should each Bird pluck from this Crow his own.
His Plumes would all be lost, and he undone.
In some Years space, Play drops from thieving Muse,
So long a time she takes to pick, and choose.
Thus while he bears his burdens from the rest,
His Title's but The Ass of Wit, at Best.
Yet we may guess this Malefactor's end.
Though the old J -- H -- be now his Friend.
Inferior even to these, Mot -- x appear,
Do thou the last in Wit, bring up the Rear.
Let the next piece you write, to Damn the Pit,
Be called not Beauty in Distress, but Wit.
Poor every way, in Poetry and Pence,
Keep your Advice, and write, to show your Sense.
And if you cannot do better for your Heart,
Think not our Charity your own Desert.
But be as conscious still, you want a prop,
As when both Priest and Poet bore you up.
On each side one, but now as Matters stand,
I wonder which took place, and dear Right Hand.
The Priest, no doubt; for Dr -- en Pious grown,
Throws down his Arms and yields to you alone.
Triumphant --! over thy Vanquished Foes,
As such, I wish not now to write like those.
If 'e'er too high my raised Ambition flew,
It was, like thee, to Write and Conquer too.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
CVstom has made it requisite, that every body that Writes, should have
something called a Preface prefixed to his Undertaking; but it is here, as in
writing Private Letters, a Man has always the hardest Task, when he has no
Business; so I have little else incumbent on me, but to let all my loving
Friends in Town know, that I am very Well, and all that, as Mr. Bays says.

As for News, (now you may suppose me writing to a Country Friend) Dear such a
one,

Because I have none else to tell you; Mr. Congreve has set out a Book in
Vindication of his Plays from Mr. Collier's. Most of the other Scribbling Sparks
o'th Town, have discharged their little Artillery and their Spleen as well as
he, but not one Breach have they made yet in Mr. Collier's Bastions; they are
too well Lined against the disorderly Fire of such Poppers. And I am told, he
will very soon make a Sally, which I am positive, will raise their Siege, and
open for himself a vast Field to Triumph in, who even in his Walls was
Conqueror.

Being very Idle, I made bold to seize the Reins of your Friend Will's Prose
Pegasus, (and yet his most fiery Poetic Steed is no better) to make my Remarks
a little how he foamed, and champ'd upon his Bit; and though he was a Gift Horse
to the World this bout (for I think no body bought him) I presumed to look him
in the Mouth. He had many Faults, I sound as I Viewed him; very Headstrong;
when Spurred, apt neither to run, nor Pace, but Kick and Fling, or at best,
fall into a hard uncouth, unsufferable Trot. I observed him from Head to Tail,
he was both Crop'd and Bob'd. He was so untoward, he had given his Rider (while
he pretended to show him) several Falls, and so I thought fit to take hold of
him.

This is all the Account I think necessary to be given of my Pebble-stone
attempt upon the very Front of this Goliath; one, who braves Heaven as much as
the former did, even in his most Modest and Innocent Play as he calls it. I Will
give you an Instance or two. --

Alm. -- How I have Mourned and Prayed, Mourning Bride, P. 20.

For I have Prayed to thee as to a Saint;

A Roman Catholic no doubt, but on -- And thou have heard my Prayer, for thou
art come
To my Distress, to my Despair, which Heaven
Without thee cannot Cure.


This is Superfine, for certain; But I find here was a Cure to be performed in
the the business, and Heaven we must suppose, could not have applied it to the
Wounded part, till the Poet had spread out Ozmyn as a Plaster to be laid upon
her -- even so, for here again he says -- Ozmyn. Thou art my Wife -- nay, Page
35
thou art yet my Bride!
The sacred Union of Connubial Love
Yet unaccomplish'd; his Mysterious Rites
Delayed --
Is this dark Cell, a Temple for the God?
Or this vile Earth an Altar for such Offerings?



It Is pretty plain, he wanted to be doing: And, since Mr. Congreve left them in
the Dark, no doubt, but they grop'd out one another Meaning, and he found an
Altar for his Offerings.

Now, Old Batch. Page 46.
If you can be as Grave as a Bishop, when he hears Venereal Causes in the
Spiritual Court, you shall have more on it in the next Page --

Ozmyn. Then Garcia shall ly Panting on thy Bosom,
Luxurious, Revelling amidst thy Charms,
And thou perforce must yield and Aid his Transports.

This is luxuriously Modest, on my Word. I wonder who yielded to Aid Mr.
Congreve's Transports when writ this: He must certainly have beheld several
beautiful Idea's of Lust, to draw this Picture of Obscenity by, as well as the
other Painter had, who drew his Luscious Venus.

Now for another touch of Profaneness -- Alm. It Is more than Recompense to see
thy Face;
If Heaven is greater Joy, it is no Happiness,
For it is not to be born. --



If that be Mr. Congreve's Opinion, he need not covet to go to Heaven at all,
but to stay and Ogle his Dear Bracilla, with sneaking looks under his Ha, in
the little side Box.

One more, and then I have done; it is a most rampant one.

King. Better for him to tempt the Rage of Heaven, Page 26.

And wrench the Bolt red hissing from the hand
Of him that Thunders, than but think that Insolence.
It Is daring for a God --

Now, he might have made something of this with a little Paraphrase, and
avoided the Prophanity too, as thus -- Better for him to tempt the Tavern's
Fury,
In the full Face of a Presenting Jury.
Snatch the brisk Glass red sparkling from the hand
Of him that draws it --
Comment. Drawer understand.
Than but to think to thrust out Snout like Hog.
Or Bark, or so -- it is daring for a Dog.



Pray now, as not our Poet a very insolent Capaneus, to Brave a true Jove, and
real Thunderer? But it is my Opinion, that he who shows no Morality to Men,
cannot show any Religion to a God.

As an Instance of his unGentile Principles; One Mr. P -- showed him his Play,
he approved on it, and though perhaps it deserved its Fate, yet it is very well
known who it was, that by his Interest of Voices caused it to be damned. I
instance this Gentleman particularly, because, his false Friend failed in all
his other attempts of the like good Office.

However, this Gentileman's Countrymen are not much obliged to him; for he is
pleased (where he confesses his Demerits) to say he hopes the Faults are to be
Excused in a young Writer, and especially a Man of Ireland. None I think, but
the Author of such a Play, would have writ such a thing; I resent it, for
perhaps I have the misfortune to have been born in Ireland, and to own it too.
However, I think Mr. Congreve would have done well to have made the like Excuse
(in spite of Staffordshire) for his Poetry.

But a word or two of the following Pages. Some perhaps will say, that they are
too Light and Airy; that they have not all that Solidity in them which is
required in an Answer: But the Title Page is (I think) a sufficient Reply to
this Objection; for the Word Animadversions, signifies only loose Thoughts, and
not a set and studied Discourse: Nor will the Method they are writ in, (which
is Dialogueways) permit of any other than a free, easy and light way of
Writing. However, if there are still some Carpers, who will not be satisfied with
this, but would have had a more solid and elaborate Reply to our Friend's
Pamphlet, I shall only say, That I think it does not deserve it.

Others perhaps may fancy that I have been too Severe upon Mr. Congreve; but I
shall only desire these Gentlemen to take a slight View of his Book, and I dare
engage they will soon be of another Opinion. They Will find his Pages fuller of
Malice than right Reasoning, and instead of being stored with Sense, blackened
with Gall and Spleen. His way of Answering Mr. Collier, is with Satyr and
Reflection; and since he has set the Copy, he cannot take it ill if he is
Imitated, especially when he sees we have observed our Distance, and not
presumed to cope with him in his Masterpiece.

For we are all assured his Prophetic Truth's now fulfilled, viz. Not But the
Man has Malice, would he show it; Prologue to the Old Batch.

But on my Conscience, he is a bashful Poet:
You think that strange, -- no matter -- he will out-grow it.


ANIMADVERSIONS ON Mr. Congreve's LATE ANSWER TO Mr. COLLIER, etc.
Mr. Johnson. COme, Mr. Smith, sit down. -- bring a Flask Boy, let Wit and Wine
flow together; here is Congreve, Congreve; here is the Man of the World, Old Batch.
the Wittol of Wittol-Hall, Gads daggers, Belts! and Scabbards! come and
Embrace my Bully, my Back, this Pen of his I Will maintain to be the best Divine,
Anatomist, Lawyer, or Casuist in Europe; it shall decide a Controversy or
split a Cause --


Smith. Nay, now I must speak, it will split a Hair, by the Lord Harry, I have
seen it.


John's. Oh, now I kiss your Hilts Sir, you are floating upon the full blown
Bladders of Repentance, to swim once more into his Favor. O Gad! I have a
great passion for Congreve, don't you admire him? Ah! he is so fine, so
extremely Fine, so every thing in the World that I like.


Smith. Cowley I believe you mean.


Johnson. No, no; our English Horace I mean: Cowley was a very pretty Fellow,
but let me tell you, Comparisons are odious; Cowley was a very pretty Fellow in
those days it must be granted; but alas, Sir, were he now Alive, he would be
nothing, nothing in the Earth.


Smith How Sir! I make a doubt if there be so great a Poet breathing.


Johnson. O Lard! Will Congreve's alive Man, he is my Countryman, he has been
regenerated ever since he turned Poet, and his Muse has had a new Birth too
since the Peace.


Smith. What Miracle has made him a Stassordshire Man, I know not, but I Am sure
his Muse, for all his fine Flights, is but a Bogtrotter still.


John's. Fie, Fie, I don't like that (still) it is no good word, vide Congreve,
page 47.

But why so sever upon your Friend, the Courteous the obliging Mr. Congreve?
the very Pink of Courtesy; Love for Love.
nay, the very reflection of Heaven in a Pond. --


John's. Ay, ay, but he that leaps at him, is lost.


Smith. No, you mistake him, he is all Love for Love, not on jot of the Double
Dealer; come, come, edisie, and chew the cud of Understanding; here is Paper
Diet that will make you Fat, here is Congreve against Collier Man, you shall see
how he mauls him, Egad, he does not yield the Parson a Tithe of his Citations,
For why should a Blockhead have one in Ten? You know the Song, Friend. Here,
hand Willy with the Wisp hither to me; so -- armed with this Book and this
Flask, I stand like Jove, with my Thunder and Lightning: Ha, Boy, here is
Bacchus and Apollo Virorum for you; come, Pledge me: By the Muses, though this
Helicon of Wit will please you better than that of Wine, come, bless your self,
and I Will open the Book.


Smith. Conjure up Parson Saygrace, to crave a Blessing, no doubt, Mr. Collier
will give Thanks after Meat.


John's. Stay, cut open these two Leaves, and I Will tell you, (O pox! this will
discover, (Damn the Bookseller) my partiality in commending before I read it)
very well -- so, thank you, my Dear, -- but as I was telling you -- pish, this
is the untoward'st Leaf -- so, as I was telling you -- how do you like it now?

Hideous -- ha, frightful still, or how?


Smith. O no, Sir, it is very well as can be.


John's. And so -- but where did I leave off, my Dear, I was telling you --


Smith. You were about to tell me something, but you left off before you began;
I am afraid your Friend Mr. Congreve does so too; come, we'll see in the Title
Page here what it is he drives at; Amendments of the Citations from the Old
Bachelor, Double-Dealer, Love for Love, Mourning Bride. -- By the Author of
those Plays. Who alone in the name of Wonder, can this be? Did you not tell me
this was Mr. Congreve's Book? I hope you will not make me believe these four
Plays were Mr. Congreve's.


John's. Whose are they then? Cujus pecus?


Smith. Non Meleboei --. You know what Hartwell says, this Brat's mighty like
his Grace, has just his Smile and Air of's Face, has such a one's Nose and
Eyes, and Mr. What de call's Mouth to a tittle. In short, those Plays are
little Compounds of the whole Body of Scriblers: Nay, even Tom. Du -- y has not
been proof against his Stealths, and I would have him reflect Mr. Congreve's
Motto upon him, viz.

Those pretty things Friend Congreve you rehearse,
Were once my Words, though they are now your Verse.
Well, now to page 1. here he says, Some would think him idle if he labored
for an Answer to Mr. Collier; intimating, that Mr. Collier would upon his own
Evidence be Condemned, and he Acquitted before he could make his Defense, --
and pray why so? all the World are not Staffordshire Men, and 'twill be no
easy Task to make them so.

But to agree with him, if he were acquitted at all, it must have been before
he offered at his Defense; for he has made so mean and wretched a business of
it, that he is now Cast in the Opinion of the World: He has said nothing that
can hinder Sentence from being past upon him, even in the Opinion of his
bigoted Friends.


John's. Well, but peruse him from page 2. to 7.


Smith. Yes, I see he very dully Asperses Mr. Collier all the way; and at the
end, to close the Climax of the Abuse, he calls him Mr. Collier. Now it is my
Opinion, that Mr. Collier knows himself very well, and needs not that Advice
which may justly be given to Mr. Congreve.

Ne te quoesiveris extra. For indeed he is Tantum mutatus ab illo, that he
seems to be no more his Father's Offspring, than the Plays he owns are his.

Before I proceed, for Method sake, I must premise some few things, V. Cong. p.
7.
which if you think in your Conscience too much to be granted me, I desire you
to proceed no further, but you may return to Mr. Congreve's Book a lone, etc.


John's. Well, go on, you will come to Greek presently, it is very Witty I believe,
but I cannot read it, --


Smith. (...) I wonder Mr. Congreve has not instructed his Friends in the
meaning of that; why, it relates to all kinds of Vice; O yes, here it is
Construed, look here Mr. Johnson.


John's. Well what think you now of his four Postulata's?


Smith. Why, he plays a sure Card, he is at all-Fours with Mr. Collier I think,
Highest, Lowest --


John's. Jack and the Game boy, -- ay, ay, he steers a right course, he can give
him a Broadside, let the Winds blow how they will.


Smith. Ay, right, but he sends his Wits for a Venture, and I fear they will be
plaguily Weatherbeaten before they come home; here he is run a-ground already,
I see, and beats upon the Sands, and for fear of being made Prize, has set out
false Colors, viz. His third Postulatum, where he desires Mr. Collier's
Citations may be absolutely thought false, that is, may appear in Mr.
Congreve's own Colors: Now his Answering Mr. Collier, must certainly be
ridiculously vain, if this is granted; for any Man, to clear the Aspersion of
being Scabby, need only expose his Hands, and turn up his Backside, to prove
his Cleanness. But he is Affronted I suppose to be turned up by Mr. Collier,
because taking him unawares, the dirty Linen appears in view.


John's. Hold, hold, good Friend, you lash too hard; our Jehu too will turn
Hackney-Coachman I fear. If my Friend has been in fault, and is taken up to be
Whipped, and has nothing else to say; he piously cries out, Jesu, and like other
good Natured Boys, promises never to do it again.


Smith. But if he has still the itch to steal and publish on, and scan other
Men's Prose on his own Unpoetical Fingers, he does it so roughly, they must
needs break out to Soreness.

Et vivos roderet ungues, etc. For Example, I Will repeat you one or two of his
smooth Lines.

For Love's Island: Old Batch. p. 8.
I for the Golden Coast. Now if you can get a Shore on that Island without
being plaguily out of Breath, I Will be bound to find out the Golden Coast for
Mr. Congreve.

Let Us have a fair Trial, and a clear Sea. Prol. to Double Dealen.
There Is a Line for you, that has sailed it self into a clear Sea of Prose.


John's. No indeed, it is a Verse, I Am sure, for it Rhymes to three lines going
before.


Smith. O then the Rhyme does the business, or else I'gad let me tell you Mr.
Congreve 's standing Argument is depressed in dumb show: If this Claim will not
pass in the Court of Parnassus, I Am afraid we shall see him expelled the Land
at the next Visitation of Apollo.


John's. Come read on, it is mighty fine I think, and as my dear Friend Setter
says, Old Batc. p. 47.
my Head runs on nothing else, nor can I talk of nothing else.


Smith. That (Nor) makes it excellent English -- nor Du -- y nor M -- ux
themselves, nor the insufferable Dullness of P -- x, nor the Lightness both in
Head and Tail of the presuming T -- r, could have brought in Nor more elegantly.

Well, as to his fourth Postulatum, we'll see what he says there, I Will pass his
two first, for he may have halfway given him in his Race, and be easily run
down too. To show himself a Man of Letters, he talks of the Alphabet here in
the fourth place, and says, that though he claps a Scripture Sentence into the
Mouths of Persons in a Play (which, by the by, may be Bawds or Whores) it is
allowable, because the same Letters are requisite to the spelling of all Words
whatever. Here Mr. Congreve seems not to understand his A. B. C. for though the
Bread and Wine may be received in the Church before the Altar, yet it is not to
be offered in a Playhouse, or any other place of Sport, much less be swallowed
by such whose touch would Pollute it; for once Consecrated, it immediately
ceases to be common.


John's. Nay, if you will not allow him his Heads, the Body of his Discourse is
ruined.


Smith. His Heads? why I can find neither Head nor Tail in it for my part, it is
a beastly sort of a Monster that crawls on all Four; and only licks the Dust,
which it self raises.

In his 13th. page, he says, he has written but four poor Plays, here indeed
the Man were modest, had he not said Written. Well, four Plays; in how many
Years? About eight; does he not hammer out his Minerva's?


John's. Why; it is necessary a good Play should be a twelve Month or two a
Writing; but go on with the Book, come turn over a new Leaf and don't rail.


Smith. Well; in the next page Mr. Collier, he says, is in the right, and he
agrees with him, and immediately after he says he does not understand him, and
can make no answer to him.

He Juggles finely it seems, sometimes there is something in his Cups, and then
whip it is gone again. The Gentleman understands Legerdemain sure.


John's. I know not what you would be at. Sir, with your Juggling, and your Cups,
pray, what do you mean?


Smith. Why, I believe your Friend Will was in his Cups when he wrote this P.
15. He makes a great splutter about big Whores, and because there are three of
them that are of the biggest, and but four in all, he would put them upon Mr.
Collier; nay, sure they will be reconciled soon, now he parts with his Whores;
but hold, I see it is out of a sly design, he has made them Whores, and now
would put them on him; a cunning Shaver, and knows how to dispose of a Wench
when he is tired of her: Here he runs on like an Arithmetician, builds upon a
false Multiplication Table of Three of the biggest of Four, runs to Divisions
and Substractions, and casts up Accounts, which he places to Mr. Collier, and
which really when Examined, turn only to a Cipher.

Here he changes his Tune again, and after he has blown the World up with
false Music, he lets his Pipe fall, and says, He loves to meddle with his
Match. He says, It was a Mercy all the four Women were not Naught. It was so
indeed, since Mr. Congreve had any Business with them. Toward the end of the
Paragraph, he musters up Furies and Harpies; and after he has shown his little
Reading, he brings in honest Aristotle, with his ipse dixit, to pass a
Compliment on Women, and say, there are more bad than good in the World: This
very piece of Breeding is what he taxes Mr. Collier with just before. But his
Opinion perhaps may be as his Song goes, The Nymph may be Chaste that has never
been Tried. Love for Love.
Which Sense, Ovid writing after Mr. Congreve, had occasion to borrow, but to
hide his Theft, he made Latin of it, and put it in an Elegy. Casta est quam
nemo rogavit. Book 1st. Elegy 8. And because he seems to value himself for the
niceness of his Breeding, I Will quote you a place out of the Old Bachelor,
shall give you a strong proof of his good Manners; Hartwell says,

My Talent is chiefly that of speaking Truth, Old Batch. P. 7.
which I don't expect should ever recommend me to People of Quality -- I thank
Heaven, I have very honestly purchased the Hatred of all the Great Families in
Town.

The Gentleman is extremely well bred, and the Lord C -- to whom it was
Dedicated, had, no doubt, an extraordinary Compliment of it. But here, in the
18th page, he begins to look about him and refer to his first Proposition with
a Witness.


John's. How do you mean with a Witness? What because he quotes Moliere?


Smith. Ay, as the Proverb goes, Ask my Brother if I am a Thief. But prithee,
do think thy Friend Will has no other mark of the French, but a small
Citation?


John's. None that he is willing to produce Sir; go on prithee, here you shall
see he is a Sophister; in short, he is every thing; see here how he argues about
a Pimp and a Poet, Page, 20.
and when he has talked toward the end, a little, of Worshipping the Devil, he
conculdes --


Smith. Like the Grave-digger in Hamlet, very Gravely with an Ergol, etc. Truly
I think, that Grave-digger and he, were the fittest Persons to cast up their
Dirt and their Arguments together. In his pretty concise Sentence of three
Lines, immediately following, he Snaps and Snarls like an angry Cur, that will
suffer none to pass in quiet but his own Mungrel Breed: But, it is not Mr.
Collier, as he would have it, but he himself that ought to be Licked, Vide Ans.
p. 21.
but not with an Absolution.

O Law! Answ. p. 23.
here is the poor Mourning Bride taxed with Smat and Profaneness, Alack! and a
Well-a-day! Nay, if there be Immodesty in my Tragedy too, I shall never write
any thing Modestly while I have a Being. Poor Will. what do the Damned endure,
but to Despair.

In Page 26. he is got to his Letters again: Who knows but he may be able to
write something with Modesty and Decency as he calls it? If he can but get back
again the Skill that he wittily gives to Mr. Collier, in Anagram, there may be
some hopes still. Here he seems more than ordinary moved: That his Poetry
should be Criticiz'd upon, is ten times worse than the Profaneness, but the
corruption of an incorrigible Plagiary is the Generation of a Sour Poet.

Here he seems to take a breathing a little, and for refreshment sake, I
suppose, wafts the Air to and fro with a couple of Epithets, till he cools
himself into a consent with Mr. Collier in a very short time; and indeed he has
need on it, for he seems to be in a very fiery Passion: But I find, Non potest
and sor^ere and flare. He might have kept his breath to have cooled his Potage.

Here in the self same Paragraph he breaks the new made League, and that very
affair which just now he consented to, he lays, at the close to Mr. Collier's
Charge as Nonsense. Prithee don't tell your Friend Congreve I find fault with
his Book, for if it be his Irish-Staffordshire way of boxing, to shake hands
first, and hit one a slap in the Face, I Will be sure to keep out of his
Clutches. He Is a dainty Critic indeed? It Is with him and his Muse, as he says,
--

O let us not support, but sink each other lower yet, down, down, where
levelled low, etc.

Prithee, what would his Muse and he have? Are they not low enough already? I
am sure if her wings were cut, as Mr. Collier has justly marked them, we should
have fewer of his flights to Heaven or Hell, till he were better convinced
whether the Torture of the Damned were, but knowing Heaven, to know it lost for
ever.

Here he falls a Jesting, and letting off Puns and Crackers, he has got a Whip
and a Bell too, and indeed I think they are in very good hands. Since he by his
own confession, and in his own dog Language, can teach a Spaniel to set. So,
he is got into his Element again. What will he say to this here, where he would
make two of Mr. Collier? I don't find that he has hacked, and hewed him so,
that he is like to fall one jot a-pieces; rather, crescit sub pondere virtus.
Two to one they say is odds at Football, and I fancy Mr. Collier unmultiply'd
has given him tosses enough to make him shun him, but poor Will. when the Ball
is lost, will venture to kick at his Shins, for I don't underderstand how he
can make Mr. Collier the Divine any other Man than what he is, so as to assume
another Person to turn Critic in, and yet remain Mr. Collier the Divine, all
the while; if he can spin this double spider's Web out of the Bowels of his
Invention, I should allow that he had some guts in his Brains, and consent with
him, where he says, p. 51. Nature has been provident only to Bears and Spiders.
Here Is a rare boy for you again.

Epithets make Prose languishing, Answ. p. 31.
and cold; and the frequent use of them in Prose, makes it pretend too much,
and approach too near to Poetry, Sure the Gentleman forgot himself here, the
Ague of inervate coldness, not the Fever of Passion has seized him now, but he
has been kneading up his Prose so long, that in spite of all his shaking, it
will stick upon his hands; for that the same thing should make Prose
languishing and cold, and yet approach too near to any Poetry, (but Mr.
Congreve's) is as strange to me, as that the same acquaintance between Mr.
Charles Hopkins and him, should make the former, through too much good Nature,
and willingness to raise his Friend as he thought him, Dedicate, and Ascribe to
him, what he really owes to Nature only; and the latter very impudently, in
public; to say he was very angry with him for the presumption. A very pretty
Fellow truly this. Now, I suppose he was at the head of the Table, where he
always sits, when he talked at this most arrogant manner.

Well, Mr. Collier says some of his Figures are Stiff. I don't doubt it, he is a
very stiff Gentleman, we see, but prithee what answer do think he gives him?


John's. Why, I don't know, I dare swear he does not bend to him, for I don't
know where his stiffness bends in the whole Book, unless it be to an Old Woman,
p. 42. why, perhaps he answers him as I would do my my self, and says, they are
not stiff.


Smith. Just so indeed, that is his way of arguing as well as yours. It Is
certainly to be observed, that all weak Disputants, when they have nothing to
say, grow plaguey positive. I wonder he did not offer to lay a wager that they
were not stiff, for, Fools for Arguments lay Wagers Hudibr.

But he is too far in for the Betts already, and I am sure would be glad to get
his own Stake, and sneak off. And indeed I have heard so bad a Character of his
Book since it came out, that I fancy it is worse with his countenance than the
proverb would make it, which says, he looks as he had neither lost nor won. He
has gained nothing, Old Batch, p. 9.
but what as a Man might say has been to his loss: Nay, don't stare, for
there is another Sharper has been forced to own the same thing.


John's. Prithee mind the Book, and read that, not the Man, don't make him worse
than he is, or you will run into as bad a distinction as you say he does, when he
divides Mr. Collier the Divine, and Mr. Collier the Critic, for here you make
a difference between the Poet, and Mr. Congreve.


Smith. O there is a great deal of difference, but perhaps I don't pretend to
make them the same person. Besides, he takes Mr. Collier's person to task, and
why should not I inspect him a little, it is not his snarling at the Town in a
fulsom Dedication to a damned Play, when he should Address to his Patron all
the while, that shall make me spare him, neither am I bound to believe him when
he says in the same Dedication -- If I really wish it might have had a more
popular reception; it is not at all in consideration of my self; Dedica. Double
Dealer.
but because I wish well, and would gladly contribute to the benefit of the
Stage, and diversion of the Town. There Is your Double Dealer for you, never was
Poets Character better drawn by himself, since the Ignorance and Malice of the
greater part of the Audience grew such, Ibid.
that they would make a Man turn Herald to his own Play, and blazon every
Character. I Will no more believe his late Declaration to the World and his
Patron, than I believed him, when he said he would go as far as New Market to see a
Play which a Friend of mine writ; but perhaps Mr. Congreve thought himself
particularly concerned, which made him mention New Market, when the Horse-Races
were run there, this Gentleman, he said, (as he had heard) declared to set up
in opposition to him in the other House, so, it is likely, Mr. Congreve thought
his Poetry in danger: But, set up, what? Not himself, in opposition to Mr.
Congreve. I dare excuse my Friend from that Grand Presumption, or the open
profession of it at least; he only, as being a Poet, designed indeed to set up
his Pegasus at the other House, pray, what was that to Mr. Congreve: O, but
when he talked of opposition to his House, perhaps 'twas something to the Beast
he rides on. Now in my opinion, it would be well if he could bridle his Tongue,
and not spur himself, as well as his Rosinante, out of breath; nor would I have
him think others, (who may have better Coursers) must be rid out o 'the
stirrups, because he has got so much the start of them; and I know not how it
might have gone, if my Friend had given him the Challenge, (though he never
designed more than an ayring) but I dare swear he would have sweated least, and
yet I Will allow too what Hartwell says, All Coursers the first heat with vigor
run,
But it is with Whip and Spur the Race is won.
the Gentleman too thought Mr. Congreve not his Enemy at least, because when he
was first recommended to him by a Friends Letter, the mighty Man of Wit was
pleased to say he would give him what assistance possibly he could in his Art, (as
he was pleased to call it) when in the end, at the Representation of this Play
of my Friend's, he was seen very gravely with his Hat over his Eyes among his
chief Actors, and Actresses, together with the two She Things, called
Poetesses, which Write for his House, as it is nobly called; thus seated in
State among those and some other of his Ingenious critical Friends, they fell
all together upon a full cry of Damnation, but when they found the malicious
Hiss would not take, this very generous, obliging Mr. Congreve was heard to
say, We'll find out a New way for this Spark, take my word there is a way of
clapping of a Play down. -- This was heard by very creditable Persons, but his
Malice could no way prevail, for spite of him, and all other disadvantages the
Play survived with Applause, and overcame his Envy.

But to go on with his Book, here he talks of puffing and blowing, and laying
about in short Sentences, sure he has been an Apprentice to a Blacksmith that
he is always stirring the Coals thus, only to make himself more smutty; but the
mischief on it is, he can never strike the Iron while it is hot: Well, I begin to
be tired of him, and shall only run him slightly over, and take notice of his
errors, where they shall appear blazing in his polite Pages.


John's. You are undoubtedly in the right to take just as much as serves your
own turn. Ans. Page 38.
But I don't hear you commend at all.


Smith. No truly, I cannot commend a dull thing, if I know it to be such; I
cannot forbear falling a sleep over the Double Dealer, though Dryden has writ a
fine Commendatory Copy before it: Where the paint's laid on so very thick,
it is a sign the Face is a very scurvy one; and as for Dryden, why he would give Du
-- y a Copy of Verses if he would cringe to him, pray did he not write one to
'ther day, prefixed to as wretched a piece of Stuff of a Play, as ever a
Tennis-Court Theater tossed into the World?

Here in page 38. he musters up a Speech of the crying Sin of Adultery. Shows
us that Mr. Collier has left a rank broken and imperfect, and refers us to the
Play, as the main body to make the breach up from thence. A pretty sort of an
Answer this; Is Mr. Congreve so assured that every Body has his foolish Plays
by them? Or does he think those that have, will take the pains? Pray, whose
Business is it? it is they that Answer Mr. Collier, if they do, not he -- Ah!
poor Man! Ans. Page 39.
Indeed I cannot forbear Laughing when I compare his dreadful Comment with such
poor silly words as are in the Text. -- But hold, what is here? is our
Democritus turned Heraclytus already? Alas! Let sable Clouds her chalky Cliffs
adorn. Pastora.
Which with his foregoing Line, which makes up the burden of the Song, is
Stolen from a Poem written on the Death of General Monk; but I need not detect
him in Particulars, what has he published that is not Stolen? Alas! this is so
Melancholy, it is almost next to Dead, Dead, Dead. Well, if I can constrain my
Tears, I Will read it you in totidem Verbis.

-- Especially when I reflect how young a beginner, Ibid.
and how very much A Boy I was when that Comedy was Written, which several
know, was some Years before it was Acted: When I wrote it, I had little
thoughts of the Stage; but did it to amuse my self in a slow recovery from a
fit of Sickness. Afterward through my Indiscretion, it was seen; and in some
little time more, it was Acted. And I through the remainder of my Indiscretion,
suffered my sels to be drawn in, to the prosecution of a difficult and
thankless Study.

Poor Billy! why I protest, the poor Boy has been hardly dealt with. I Am afraid
it has met with a Stepmother Muse; But what would it be at? would it have its
Backside stuck with Points? Or would it have the Ladies of the Town send it
Bread and Butter with Glass Windows wrought on it? Or what other Gugaw would it
have? Mr. Collier has given it a Coral to make it cut its Teeth kindly, and a
Rattle to quiet it, but these it is not pleased with.

Well, Ans. Page 40.
here is another piece of Mr. Congreve's Kindness, he is very glad Mr. Collier
has some devotion for the Lips and Eyes of a pretty Woman; the Wag talks so
pleasingly of it, that he licks his own Lips at her till he makes his Teeth
water, and yet he gives her up to Mr. Collier; what will not he do to be
Reconciled?

Well, with reverence to your Friend the Author be it spoken; Immediately
following here, Ibid.
he confesses himself to have writ stark Nonsense. I wonder now what is become
of all his wonted Fury, he has not been very angry for a pretty while, but as
he says, perhaps Passion comes upon him by Inspiration. I wonder if Dullness
does not so too.

Here he repeats a Citation out of the Old Bachelor, and says.

There are some things promised in some body's Name.

Now, to excuse himself from the abuse of the Catechism, he wisely says only --
I meant no ill in this Allegory, Ans. Page 42.
nor do I perceive any in it now. To rerturn his own ill Expression on him
which he uses on this occasion, he has proved but a very bad Godfather, to
promise some thing, and perform nothing, but poorly excuse himself with
pleading Ignorance, when he should rather correct the Brats he has promised
for, than wilfully (merely to be rid of them) have them confirmed in their
unbounded Wickedness. So, -- here is another Paragraph I Will read you verbatim.

In the Double Dealer, Ans. Page 42.
Mr. Collier says, Lady Plyant cries out Jesu, and talks Smut in the same
Sentence. That Exclamation I give him up freely. I had my self long since
condemned it, and resolved to strike it out in the next Impression. I will not
urge the Folly, Viciousness or Affectation of the Character to excuse it. Here
I think my self obliged to make my Acknowledgments for a Letter which I
received after the publication of this Play, relating to this very Passage. It
came from an Old Gentlewoman and a Widow, as she said, and very well to pass:
It contained very good Advice, and required an Answer, but the Direction for
the Superscription was forgot. If the good Gentlewoman is yet in being, I
desire her to receive my Thanks for her good Council, and for her approbation
of all the Comedy, that word alone excepted.

This is a pretty tale of a Tub, is it not? In the first place, the word Jesu
is no less than thrice Profanely mentioned in this Comedy, which I never heard
that any body but Dryden and this good old Woman ever yet approved of. Well,
'twere something could we hope this word, which he applies so ill, would be
dashed out of the next Impression; but hold, I forget my self, who will ever be
at the charge of another Impression of such a piece of heavy Stuff as the
Double Dealer? Well, -- here is a most surprising Turn, here is an old Woman
(because, as she said, very well to pass) courted at a most extravagant rate:
But poor Will was very hard put to it here, that he might not make his
Confession, and owe his Thanks to Mr. Collier; and being thus heavily puzzled,
and in the dark, thought Joan was as good there as my Lady. After he had been a
good while, as I imagine, between Hawk and Buzard, he even wisely turned to the
to the latter. But what a wretched condition must he certainly have been in,
when he was forced to frame so idle a Story, chiefly for the sake of a pretense
to make us believe in the tail of the Paragraph, that he had an Old Woman's
approbation of all the Comedy, that word alone excepted? I think he had better
have yielded thankfully to Mr. Collier, but he is of his own Mr. Brisk's temper,
where he says,

Egad, I love to be Malicious, Double Dealer, Page 8.
-- nay, the Deuce take me, there is Wit in it too -- and Wit must be foiled by
Wit; cut a Diamond with a Diamond: No other way Egad. --

Egad; there is a Diamond for you now, pray what Diamond can cut that? I Am
afraid the World Exclaims, (or l'm sure they have reason) at the unequaled
Profaneness of his Expressions, worse than the Lady Plyant does in his Play,
viz.

But I have not Patience -- Oh! Double Dealer. Page, 21.
the Impiety of it! as I was saying, and the unparablel'd Wickedness! Then
follows, O Merciful Father!

A very pretty Exclamation, that -- when the Person speaking, Dissembled all
the while, and taxes another with what she knew to be false. I shall only
desire your Friend to consider, what the same Lady says a little after.

O reflect upon the horror of that and then the guilt of deceiving every Body.

Here he seems to be at Questions and Commands, Ans. Page 43.
a playing with Mr. Collier, and because the latter has not given a pawn for my
Lady Plyant's loose talk, your Friend Will pretends to Smut him, it is a very
dirty trick of him, that you will own at least.

Well, here he pretends to excuse the Character of a Fool in his Play, Ibid.
(saying upon all, and upon no occasions, -- I am beholding to Providence,
truly, I am mightily beholding to Providence.) only by, catching at a slip
which perhaps the Printer might have been guilty of, not Mr. Collier, the
meaning is plain however, but such a Foe as your Friend Will once driven to
despair, will give no quarter, but catch at all advantages. Well, if this
Profaneness of his, ben't reputed to him as Sin, (without Repentance,) he will
have reason in earnest to take the words of his Fool into his own Mouth, and
say, truly I am mightily beholding to Providence.

But here the aspiring Hotheaded driver runs on in his Career, more mad than
Phaethon, lashing the Scripture with Burlesque, calling Jehu a
Hackney-Coachman, he really does what the other Madman was only feigned to
have done, he drives at Heaven to confound it with the wildness of his Course;
and might he be suffered to go on, he would set the World on Fire; but as the
saying is, I hope, there will be a spoke put in his Wheel. Mr. Collier has
Thundered him pretty well, but like the other rash mistaken Boy, he runs
headlong on, because forsooth he thinks himself a Brat of Apollo's. Well then,
because we suppose our self to have sprung from this radiant God, we may be
presumptuous, and Passion may come upon us by Inspiration.

Well, see this same Highborn Babe, with not one of his Father's Rays about
him, or any thing else of the God, but the fiery Rage, when he is at a loss how
to Guide.

Inspiration signifies no more than Breathing into; Ans. Page 45.
Now, if if it be so, I believe when Mr. Congreve was Inspired with Poetry, he
was only Breathed into; but whether it might be the back way or no, I leave to
the Opinion of the World. He has got a Dog-trick of turning round sometimes
before he lies down, as referring, (when all his other Breathing into is gone)
to some of his fine Propositions.

Well, after his reference to his Postulatum, sure you would think he were
laid; Ay, but he gets up again to Bark a little; he renews the Discourse,
merely to show his knowledge of a Puppetshow, where he owns he can only argue
as the Pupper did with the Rabbi; It is Profane, Ans. Page 46.
and it is not Profane. This is pro and con, that is the Truth on it, but if he
would do as Mr. Brisk desires, that is, give us Marginal Notes, it might be
some Satisfaction.

So, to excuse himself here from Mr. Collier, in his saying,

Though Marriage makes Man and Wife one Flesh, it leaves them still two Fools. He
is forced to detect his Theft, and confess that he Borrowed it from Ben
Johnson. who says in one of his Plays, Man and Wife make one Fool.

Well, Ans. Page 48.
here Scandal says, he will die a Martyr rather than disclaim his Passion. Now,
what Martyr the Greek word may signify, I must beg leave to contradict Mr.
Congreve, and say, that in plain English, that is, plain customary Acceptance,
it does not signify Witness, but Martyr, that is, as our common Notion of the
word bears, one who dies for his Religion. But Mr. Congreve is so angry, and so
near Swearing about it, that he will needs have it for a Witness; well, he is a
fiery Gentleman, and would rather die a Martyr than disclaim his Passion.

Here again he is put to it to confess where he borrowed the word Whoreson; from
Shakespeare and Johnson. Well, but he has used it so lately, that I shall not
dispute his Title to it by any means.

Hey day! what have we got here? Jeremy Congreve, who is that prithee, do know?


John's. No, faith, my Friend's Name is Will.


Smith. No, no, it is Jeremy, it is certainly Jeremy, I Will call him so, because
there is Wit in it; Oh, it is very Ingenious when I would rally a Man, to say,
Ans. Page 50.
He cannot call me Jeremy Congreve; let him call me what he will, he cannot call
me Jeremy Congreve.

I find he rallies more like a Waterman than a Gentleman, and and argues more
like a Pedant than a Scholar.

Here again, he desires the Reader to look over his Plays, to find Citations;
set the Impudence on it aside, it is a very pretty way of Evasion; when he is
caught in the Net, if possible, he gives a flounce out, and the Standers by, if
they please, may go seek for him in his own Mud; but as the saying is, I fancy
most have other Fish to fry.

Here he talks of a Speech of Sir Sampson's; in the Play it is said, The
Sampsons were strong Dogs from the Beginning. And so on with more such Profane
Stuff; but let Mr. Congreve take notice how Sir Sampson is Auswer'd, for it is
well if he does not pull an old House over his Head.

Here he is a Star-gazing with as much care as Sir Sydrophel's Watchum himself,
Aus. Page 52.
to know whether Solomon had his Wisdom by Astrology or no; or perhaps it may
be to find out whether or not he was Wise; for, to banter the Scripture, and
ridicule the Knowledge of Solomon; I remember where he says, All that he knew
was, that he knew nothing. and that Stolen too from the last Lines of the
Emperor of the Moon.

I wish Mr. Congreve knew as much of himself, I am sure it were not amiss to
tell him so; for in spite of all his Astrology, I fear in the end he may come
to Curse his Stars.

Well, here Valentine says I am Truth. This is in all Men's Opinion, whom I have
heard speak of it, horrid Prophanity, and I think scarce any Body but a Wittol
would have put such words in a Madman's Mouth: Poorly to excuse it, he says he
had first written, I am Tom-tell-troth. Ans. Page 56.
I dare presume, Mr. Congreve is not Truth, when he says so, nor will I allow
him the Title (which he himself as he owns has blotted out) of Tom-tel-troth
neither. As Mr. Congreve allows Inspiration to be but Breathing into, certainly
I believe, when he was Inspired to write this, he was breathed into by the
Devil.

A pretty Humor this next of his, viz.

In the next Chapter he quotes me so little, Ans. Page 57.
and has so little reason even for that little, that it is hardly worth
Examining.

This is all very little I must confess, but while Mr. Congreve seems to slight
it, and give no Answer, he is raised so upon that little, that he looks very
big upon it. I find he grows a little weary of his Adversary though, for he is not
rather for playing at small Game than stand out.


John's. Sure you will be pleased at last, come prithee read it out.


Smith. Pleased! no Faith, but I Am almost a-sleep, prithee drink to me, all
this stuff is so plaguey dry and insipid, I want something to put my mouth in
Taste.

Here Is a long business all the way from page 60, to page 78. Whether or not
Parsons should be Exposed upon the Stage; I shall leave that to Mr. Collier (in
the Answer I am told he designs) to determine; I shall only give my private
Opinion that they should not; for, to bring a Minister to ridicule him upon the
Stage, must be merely the effect of the Author's Contempt of the Clergy, and
desire that the Audience should despise them them too, for what we have in
Derision we Contemn: there is certainly no necessity for making the Priest or
the Chaplain appear on the Stage; for, the Ceremony for which they are generally
hooked in, (that is Marriage) is never performed in the presence of the
Audience; and as to Exposing their Faults, I take it to be the care and
business of the Bishops set over them, who can Punish them too for the Offense,
and not the business of the Theater, where Divines very rarely or never come of
late. But I had like to have forgot one of your dear Friend's Expressions.

Mr. Ans. Page 38.
Collier, who is very Conversant in ill Plays. A very fair Confession this that
he makes now of his own four poor Plays; (his own, as he is pleased to call
them.) But because Mr. Collier is so conversant in his ill Plays, he is resolved
to hew him down, and place one part of him in the Pit, and the other on the
Stage: he had divided him Potentia once before, but now he divides him Actu.

He dares not engage him any longer entire, but (as the French served us at
Landen, when our Army was separated) he fights him by halves. Well, but while
Mr. Collier is thus planted Piecemeal, where do think Mr. Congreve will take
his Post? Why with his Dear Bracilla, in the little Box over the Stage, with
his Hat held before his Face, to show his Modesty; or his Hatstring. But I
shall pass his Conceited Stuff which he runs on with here, as arrogantly as if
he had Spatchcock'd Mr. Collier in good Earnest: And take it from me, though some
of the Town be your Friend Will's Bigots, yet they will not continue so, when

He shall appear mounted upon a false Pegasus, Ans. Page 83.
like a Lancashire Witch upon an imaginary Horse, the Fantom shall be
Unbridled, and the Broomstick made visible.

Well, he continues his fine Division of Mr. Collier for some Pages; I wonder
what he makes of him at last, he will rise in his Arithmetic to his own Golden
Rule by and by perhaps, and make him in the first ten Lines, the chief of the
Giants that fought against the Gods, and in the following Ten, the Mars that
overthrew the Giants; this he could do admirably well in a Poem on Namur, and
why not here?


John's. And yet you say he steals every thing, now I dare swear he did not
steal that?


Smith. Yes, doubtless, he stole both the chief Giant and Mars, but for his own
particular fancy he thought fit to make but One of those Two, just as he
thought fit here to make Two of Mr. Collier: By this, I am afraid, that Mr.
Collier appeared more dreadful to him, than both Mars and the Giant together.

But, Ans. Page 85.
pitiful and mean comparisons, (viz. Mars and the chief Giant) proceed from
pitiful and mean Ideas, and such Ideas have their beginning from a familiarity
with such Objects. From this Author's poor and filthy Metaphors and Similitudes
we may learn the filthiness of his Imagination; and from the uncleanness of
that, we may make a reasonable guess at his rate of Education, and those
Objects with which he has been most conversant and familiar.

Here he says a great deal of Valentine, Ans. Page 88.
to vindicate him, but I shall not trouble my self with it, even let the two
Madmen go together for me, with the Curse of all kind tenderhearted Women,
which he modestly calls the Pox, and which he wonders Mr. Collier could write
at length, doubtless, Mr. Collier would not rob Mr. Congreve of his Pox; for he
knew it to be his, and that he deserved it to the full, and at length.

Here he has got a Cat to Mew out a Spanish Proverb for him, and I dare swear
the one understands the Language as well as 'tother, but any thing to show our
learning; though it be a Cat one while that shall storm a Town, and the next
Minute Mars and the Giant. But he is of his dear Sharpers's opinion -- this
excellent Talent of railing was born with him, Old Batch. p. 38.
and he must needs confess he has taken care to improve it, to qualify him for
the Society of Ladies.

Now I think all the Citations in your Friends Book are over, and to give him
his due, he seems every where to write more from Prejudice than Opinion; he
Rails when he should Reason, and for gentle reproofs, uses scurrilous
reproaches. He looks upon his Adversaries to be his Enemies, and to justify
his Opinion in that particular, before he has done with them, he makes them so.
If there were any Spirit in his Arguments, it would eva, porate and fly off
unseen, through the heat of his Passion. His Passion does not only make him
appear to be in many places in the wrong, but it also makes him appear to be
conscious of it.

That which shows the face of Wit in his writing, has indeed no more than the
Face, for the Head is wanting; he has put himself to some pain to show his
reading; and his reading is such, it puts us to pain to behold it. He discovers
an ill taste in Books, and a worse Digestion. He has swallowed so much of the
scum of Authors, that the over flowing of his own Gall was superfluous to make
it rise upon his Stomach.

Mr. Congreve 's vanity in pretending to Criticism, has extremely betrayed his
Ignorance in the Art of Poetry: This is manifest to all that understand it, and
I am not the only One who look on this Pamphlet of his to be a Gun levelled at
the whole Clergy, while the Shot only glances on Mr. Collier. Persecution may
make Men persevere in the wrong; Men may, by ill usage be irritated sometimes
to assert, and maintain even their very errors. Perhaps there is a vicious
Pride of triumphing in the worst of the Argument, which is very prevailing with
the Vanity of Mankind; I connot help thinking that our Author is not without
his share of this Vanity, --

And so, Friend Will, I return you your Pamphlet.


John's. Well, and how do you like it in gross, speak your mind.


Smith. Why, he has followed Capt. Vanbrook most servilely, in every thing --
but his Wit, and Gentleman-like style, and it is no matter if he had followed
the Gentleman Capt. Vanbrook talks of, who went Poet-Laureat to Russia with the
Czar. He has very plainly shown himself to the view of the World, and in that
he has lost himself; he was unfit to play at Blindmans-buff with the Muses, who
could not fare well, but he must cry out Roastmeat.

I must indeed confess, I think, Mr. Collier is a little too severe, when he
would have the Play Houses pulled down. In truth, rather than remain so
horridly wicked as they are, with such Actors, and such Actresses, I should be
of his Opinion: but my Sentence passes, as it was once given at Rome, of
Carthage -- Non delendam, sed Carthaginem esse non timendam.

The incomparable Author of the Whole Duty of Man. Sund. 2d Lect. 35. does not
complain of the Theater, as an Evil, where, if there had been reason, he had
just opportunity, viz. By the Pomps and Vanities there are several things
meant, some of them such as were u'sd by the Heathens, in some unlawful Sports
of theirs, wherein we are not now so much concerned, there being none of them
remaining among us.

Well, it is a little late now, but I should be glad to meet you here some other
Night to talk of Matters of the Theater. Here boy, receive your Reckoning, --
Friend Johnson, I thank you for bringing me to a Bottle of good Wine.

Stay, I protest I had almost forgot: I have a Paper in my Pocket concerning
the Stage, and 'twas given me this Morning by a young Lady --


John's. I am afraid you have quite forgot, are you sure it was a young Lady?
Ha, Mr. Smith; perhaps this is like my Friend Will's old Woman.


Smith. My young Lady like your Friend's old Woman! I assure you Sir you are
mistaken, She Is in her bloom of Beauty as well as Wit, and that the latter
flourishes in her, you shall see immediately, She Is a little brief, I must
confess; her writing is like her self; the Possession and Enjoyment of either,
would but raise our Wishes and desires, for new fruition.


John's. Prithee, let me see this so celebrated Offspring of a Beauty -- you use
me as a Jilt does a pressing Lover; you raise me to a height of expectation
which I cannot bear, till at last my desires fly out, and the fruition's lost.


Smith. You know Ceremony is always used to Ladies; but not to keep you
longing, here it is; read it, and give me your opinion.


A Short ESSAY ON THE STAGE.
TOtus Mundus agit Histrionem, is a Saying demonstratively true: All Mankind
are Actors; though the Lives of some pass away in gaudy Show and Opera, and the
Lives of others are shuffl'd over, and spent in wild Confusion; like irregular
Plays, whose Scenes are ill, and often shifted: And though in reality, we, (even
while we are Spectators in a Theater) play and act the Droll, or serious parts
of our Lives, our selves; yet are we pleased with the Representation there, as
we are, when we see our Faces in a Glass. Every Spectator, Narcissus-like, may
view his Shadow in this Well, and fall in Love with the Phantom if he pleases.

The use of the Stage, is to Instruct and Delight, and where the Representation
fails in either of these Points, it fails of the end; for Instruction (in a
Theater particularly) without Pleasure, is as heavy, as Pleasure without
Instruction, is light.

Instruction like a Plant, may shoot forth into many branches, but at best,
they would look bare and naked, without the flourishing Ornament of blooming
Leaves; for, it is through those the Representation courts, and Gently bends to
the applause of the Audience, as spreading Boughs receive the Southern Breezes.

Now, on the other hand, Delight may please or take the Eye a little while,
like full blown Roses in a Garden; and while the Actor gathers them, to strew
your Bed of Pleasure, you are ravished with the Odor, but 'soon as ever you
press them for Enjoyment, your Delight is Crushed.

The Representation then ought to appear like the Orange-Tree, with Blossoms,
to please the View, and Fruit to feed on: So that it may be supposed the
Instruction ought to proceed from the Delight; (or appear at least to do so.)
For, the Spectators must needs be tempted with the Fruit, viewing the Beauteous
Blossoms whence it grew.

I shall now look into the Affairs of the English Stage: that, (as a stander
by, seeing all the Miscarriages of the Game) I may give my Opinion how it ought
to be: showing where the Oversights are committed, and how the like may be
avoided for the future.

I would by no means have a Player made a Sharer, for then he grows so Saucy
immediately, that the Poet and the Actor tread the Stage with equal Foot; nay,
and the Actor in a little while, shall Ten to One, pretend to turn Poet too.
Actors should indeed never have more Sense than generally they have; a
Parrot-like sort of Cant, so they can but change their Tone, is sufficient for
them.

The chief Manager, or Patentee, besides Honesty, ought at least to have a good
share of Sense, if not some acquaintance with the Muses. However it may happen
that a Patentee has not a Palate to relish Helicon; but then it is absolutely
necessary that such a one should keep a Taster; he should employ and encourage
some industrious Inhabitant of Parnassus, and make him his Agent to set the
Playhouse Leases; by this Method, though the Tenant Poets take them but for the
term of three, or six Nights at most; if they are Substantial Men, they may be
encouraged often to renew; and the Landlord have his Rents come in, with all
the Duties.

I would not have the top Actor a Madman, nor be admired for the Rant, and
Clapped more for his Lungs than his Action. I would have all Actresses obliged
by their Articles, to a considerable Forfeiture, upon proof of the abuse of
their Virtue, or rather be Expelled the Theater; for I think no Woman, after
she has played the Whore notoriously, can be fancifully received upon the Stage
for a Heroine.

I would have a moderate share of the Gains of the Theater, set apart to some
good Use, by public Order; and special care taken for the performance of it:
If I may give my Opinion, it should be to ease the Commonwealth of some of its
useless Members, either by maintaining Old Decrepid Persons, or putting a
select number of poor Children Apprentices Yearly, to some honest and useful
Employments; and all Players should be obliged to contribute a certain Quantum
out of every Pound they gain, toward it. This would seem as it were a kind of
Compensation for the Idleness of their own Lives; 'twoud look like a Purchase
upon their Country, and be a sort of buying their way of Living.

I would have Seats separately for the Men and Women; which would perhaps be
the best Method to lessen the company of the Masks and Vizards in the Pit, who
bestow their Half-crown only to make Prize of some unwary Gentleman, whom they
may Cully out of a more considerable Sum; and be a very effectual means to
hinder the dismal Consequences that too often attend those unhappy Encounters.

This separation of the Sexes, would cut off all conveniences and
opportunities for such sort of Engagements, or however, it must be granted, it
would totally take away the strongest and most powerful parts of the
Temptation: It would secure the Ladies from the foolish and vexatious
Impertinencies of the Fluttering Fops, and protect them from their Noise and
Nonsense; the Moral of the Drama would be consequently more minded, and the
Poet's Sense and Player's Action more regarded: Bad Poets could never be able
then to pass such Stuff on the Audience, as they daily do; and even the Best
would be obliged to a greater care and pains in their Productions.

By this nice attention and regard to the Performance, we should have fewer
Plays, yet more good ones. The number of our Dishes would be lessened, but the
remaining few, would be more Wholesome and Palatable.

I would have such Immorality and Profaneness as the Master of the Revels
Marks to be cut out, absolutely refused the Stage, and a nice care taken that
nothing pass to compliment Vice, or discourage Virtue: Nothing that bears the
least tendency to Immodesty, should be permitted. By this means, the Ladies
might came boldly to a new Play; and not be at the trouble of enquiring into
its Character, before tthey appear at the Performance: They need not then be
afraid of paying too dear for their Divresion, nor of being at the cost of
Blushes as well as Money, for their Entertainment.

The Stage being thus regulated, it will afford us Instruction as well as
Delight, or at least it will become an Innocent Diversion: And in order to
encourage it is continuance in this State, I would have all Ladies, (as I would
my self) come constantly on the POET's Night

Mr. John's. Well, all I have to say, Mr. Smith, is, it is a Lady's you tell me;
I am a Lady's humble Servant at all times.


Mr. Smith. And I am yours Sir; come, will you walk Mr. Johnson?


John's. O Sir, -- nay, but pray now, --


Smith. Indeed Sir, -- I will not take the Wall of you by no means, -- you are Sir
Jeremy Congreve's Back, -- pray Sir, -- Your most Humble Servant.


FINIS.

