Animadversions ON A DISCOURSE ENTITLED, GOD's WAYS OF DISPOSING OF KINGDOMS.

LONDON, Printed for W. Rayner, 1691.

Animadversions ON A Discourse of God's Ways of Disposing of Kingdoms.
NEXT to the Treachery of Men, Vid. Pref. Seem to be too jealous of themselves,
for fear some worldly Considerations, etc.
who have not had that jealousy of themselves which the Right Reverend and
Learned Author of the late Discourse makes a Virtue in his Brethren, who have
renounced the Benefit of that Protection which this Government has extended
toward them; nothing has more promoted the Interest of him, who, as some Great
Men insinuate, still remains our Rightful King, than an obstinate Justification
of all the Follies and Flatteries of some Clergymen, at a time, when in their
Tantivy speed to Preferments, they not only trampled upon the poor Persecuted
Dissenters; but upon those Laws, which forbad their making Riots of Religious
Meetings, and Statutes of Royal Edicts, or Proclamations.

Rather than it should be thought that they, who call themselves the Church of
England were to blame in these Matters, and held Erroneous Opinions of Civil
Power; this Government, which is a reverse to their Doctrines, shall be
maintained to be an Usurpation, either upon King James, or upon the People of
England; who invited their Deliverer, and made the most suitable Acknowledgment
of such a Deliverance.

It is a Melancholy Consideration to think, how many are imposed upon, by
Doctrines made for no Lay-end whatever; and which will serve no Government, but
what is against or above Law: if there come in such consent of Men, Vid. Hooker
Eccl. Pol.
as the Learned and Judicious Mr. Hooker thought absolutely necessary for the
making of Laws; this consent either must lose the nature of consent, or want
Authority: for fear some Clergymen should be condemned for having ascribed to
Princes those Powers which were never given or allowed by the consent of the
Nation: and if one who exercised such an Illegal Power, be Dispossessed against
his will; Allegiance must be transferred to another, still without Humane
Consent; for otherwise Passive Obedience to no Law, could not revive again, and
be transplanted.

Nor could those Divines, whose Doctrines encouraged the late King to attempt
what occasioned his Abdication, have expected to make Atonement by the
Difficulties which they and their Partisans might bring upon the Successor; and
yet hope to impose upon him, as if they were the only Loyal Men.

If they were as Passive themselves, when their Loyalty comes to be tried, as
they would have others be, it were something; but they who take to themselves
all the Privileges belonging to Gods Lot, or Peculiar Inheritance, are like
the Men of Kent; Vid. Camd. Brit. Parker's Antiq. Brit. Dicit Canrii Comitatus
quod in ipso Comitatu de jure debet de ejusmodi gravamine esse liber, quia
dicit quod Comitatus ille, ut residuum Angliae, nunquam fuit Conquestus.
who having opposed William I. after the rest of the Nation had submitted to
him, would have it, that all but themselves were a conquered People.

No respect to any Man's Person or Character, ought to come in Competition with
the Duty which we owe our Country: on the contrary, while the Errors of Men,
Great for Name of Learning, or Pomp of Office, derive Authority from their
Persons; those Errors or Artifices, which tend to the Prejudice of the most
valuable Interest of Men, as united in Societies; ought to be treated with the
greater Freedom, and with that Contempt or Laughter, which is due to the Folly,
or the Disguise.

That the World may judge of the Merits of those Notions, which are vented
under the Venerable Authority of the L -- A -- and, as it should be thought,
with such a charitable Design, as becomes that Office. I shall,

1. As far as they are consistent, and hang together, give a true
Representation of them, with their plain and direct Consequences.

2. Shall show their Inconsistencies.

3. Their Doubtfulness and Ambiguity; as if intended to serve either Prince or
People, and to impose upon both.

4. The Weakness of the Reasoning, want of Authority, and gross Mistakes, in
relation to those Rights of Princes, which he would infer from Passages, or
Omissions, in Sacred or other Writings.

5. That the show of Reading, and the Positions are wholly beside the Cushion;
not applicable to the Constitution of this Government, nor to the present
Debate.

1. The manifest Scope of the Book, A Representation of the Doctrine.
is to prove, or rather to maintain, by the Authority of the Person, without
Proof, that all Kingdoms are disposed by Gods immediate Act, P. 30.
without the allowable Interposition of any, but Sovereign Princes, P. 32.
and that the Acts of all others have an original Nullity.

Upon which I may make this general Reflection, to justify my Anti-Title. If
Acts proceeding from the Free Wills of Sovereign Princes, are no Objections
against Gods Disposal of Kingdoms so far by his immediate Act, as that himself
confers the Power by his sole Authority; neither would what proceeds,
warrantably, from the Free Will of the People, be less Gods Act, or have his
Authority less immediately from his Gift. But how much soever God Almighty
influences Mankind in the Choice of their Actions, we must suppose that they
act with Freedom, even in the Changes of Kingdoms and States; or otherwise we
must impute to the Almighty those Crimes, by which Changes are sometimes
brought about: which to surmise, were Blasphemy. And if Changes are made
according to natural Equity, and more especially the known Rights of any
Kingdom, agreeable to that Equity, and allowed of, and exercised as there has
been occasion in all times, from the first Erection of the Kingdom; we may well
say, that those Acts of such a free People, which God permits, and blesses with
Success, are by, and with, his Authority.

What, are the Rights and lawful Powers entrusted by God Almighty with the
People of this Land, Vid. Bp. Bilsons. Christian Subjection.
for the Preservation of their ancient Regiment, and Laws, it is not needful
here to prove: but it is necessary to show, in their proper Colors, those
Arts, or in Truth, Weaknesses of Clergymen, whereby they would bring in God
Almighty to Authorize the Contrariety of their avowed Principles to the Right
of this Government; and of their Actions to any Principles, but such as may
free them from Slavery to their Promises or Oaths; and at the same time might
enslave all others: as if their Freedom were purchased at this Price, and were
the Reward of such Merits.

I cannot but use this Book of one of so settled a Reputation for learning, as a
Demonstration, that it is necessary for their own Sakes, as well as for the
Good of Mankind, that Clergymen should not, in these Matters, be wise beyond
what is written in our Law: If I am thought to expose the Nakedness of a
Spiritual Father, I doubt not, but it will be pardonable, if not meritorious,
when it is to preserve the Chastity and Freedom of our common Parent.

The Subject of the Book being of the Disposal of Kingdoms, and conferring of
Power, the Measures of Power, or manner of enjoying it, might seem not to fall
within the Question; and yet it will appear that here lies the Hinge of the
Controversy: for if the Government of England be in King, Lords, and Commons;
then, Vid. Grot. de Jure belli and pacis de modo habendi potestatem.
whatever Difference there be in the Modus habendi potestatem, the manner in
which the Sovereignty, or absolute Power, whereby the Nation is governed, is
enjoyed; the King may, as Grotius has it, in partem non suam involare, seize
upon, or usurp that part of the Sovereignty which does not belong to him: or to
speak strictly (as the Sovereignty is indivisible, though enjoyed by several)
he may take to himself alone, what the laws have communicated to him and to
others.

And there would be no manner of Consequence, that a Conquest over the King,
should, ipso facto, transfer the Dominion to the Conqueror, so far as to make
the Subjects P. 20. In giving one Prince a Conquest over another, he thereby
puas one in Possession of the others Dominions, he makes the others Subjects
become his Subjects, or his Slaves, as they come in upon Conditions, or at the
Will of the Conqueror.
Slaves, unless they obtain Conditions from the Conqueror, which is maintained
in this Book.

And whereas the learned Author pretends that he has sufficiently provided
against the Charge of Vid. Pref.
Novelty, by the Number of Authorities (to no purpose, as I shall show) I
challenge him to bring one Author of clear Credit, who holds any thing like
this.

I take Grotius to have given a much safer Rule in this, Grot. de Jure belli,
P. 503.

Potest autem Imperium victori acquiri vel tantum ut est in rege aut alio
imperante and tunc in ejus duntaxat jus succeditur non ultra, vel etiam ut in
populo est, etc.


and yet to have gone to the utmost Stretch, when he says, Dominion may be
acquired by a Conqueror, either only so much as is in the King or other Ruler;
and then he succeeds only to his Right, and no farther: or also so much as is
in the People.

All the Right of the People Grotius supposes not to be acquired merely by a
Victory over the Prince; where the Prince had not the Sovereignty absolutely
and solely in him: and that in such Case the Conqueror succeeds only to that
Right which the other had: that is, to a Government according to the Laws of
that Country. But our Reverend Author is express, P. 49.50.
That though the Prince that is disseized was obliged by that Law while he was
in Possession, it never was a Law to the Prince that is now in his Place.

And thus by the Conquest of a Prince, limited by Laws, according to him, the
Conqueror would not only acquire all the Power which the Law gave the other;
but would be let into a Power by Gods Gift, without any legal Limits.

But this Supposition, as it is wholly precarious, is very absurd, in any
Government where the Sovereignty is communicated to more than one.

And how it is in England, next to the Determination of our Lawmakers, who are
the Judges ordained by God, recourse ought to be had to Men, whose Profession
it is, to be acquainted with the Laws and History of the Government; but the
Divine thinks himself insignisicant, if he cannot, like the Pope of Rome,
hook-in Civil Power, and the Decision of its Rights, in Ordine ad Spiritualia;
and therefore some Rule must be found out, common to all Sovereign Princes or
Kings, as such; and that Rule must be one of which Divines may be allowed to be
the most competent Judges, or Interpreters.

Whereas, therefore this Author resolves all Gods ways of conferring Power. 1.
Into the Right of the First Parents, called Patriarchical. 2. Conquest. 3.
God's Nomination. 4. Consent of the People.

1. He makes those Rights, which belong to one who was King by Divine
Nomination, equally to belong to all of them. For, says he,

David; P. 5.
as being a Prophet inspired, best knew the Mind of God, and his ways of
dealing with Mankind. And David, as being called to be a King, by the immediate
Designation of God, best knew what belonged to that Dignity. His word therefore
is on all accounts a sufficient Proof.

He is indeed there speaking of the Exaltation to Power, P. 4.
but either the Exaltation is all that belongs to the Power, and then there is
only a Name without Power till Man has consented; or else by what belongs to
the Dignity, he means all its Rights, or the Rights of Sovereignty. Whatever
therefore was a Right of Sovereignty in David, is according to him the Right of
all Kings, as such; because David was a King by the immediate designation of
God.

And therefore where one who is called King has not such a Right of
Sovereignty, P. 18, 19.
as he supposes to be common to all Kings, he will have the Government to be
properly a Commonwealth.

Wherein he has thought fit to explain the mystery, how it came to pass that
all who hold Their present Majesty's Right to this Government, after the
Declaration of the States of the Kingdom, upon the late King's breach of the
Original Contract, and Abdication; are run down as Republicans, and Enemies to
the Monarchy; though they are the only Men who would preserve it to Their
present Majesty's.

And it is not an unpleasant story, for the truth of which I will not vouch;
That when a Man was recommended to a Place of very great Trust, though he had
been a constant Companion of them who Caball'd against their Majesty's; this
being objected, his Patron should say, O Sir! he is a Friend to the Monarchy.

2. As with this High Monarchical Author, the Rights of all Sovereign Princes
and Kings, as such, are equal; he is not shy of letting the World know what
Their Right is; P. 20. P. 64.
and that it is a Right to make the Subjects Slaves: or in other words of his
own, to do with them and theirs what they please.

For that he tells us is the Right of War, or of a Conqueror; and all Kings
have the same Right, or else what David shows to have belonged to the Dignity,
would not be a Rule to this day.

3. One would think that the consent of Men who are at liberty to dissent,
proceeds from their Choice; and that they who choose one to reign over them who
had no Right before that Choice, P. 11. P. 11.
give him the Kingdom; and that this (as himself calls it) is the Act of Man,
and merely an Human Act.

But if this were only an Human Act, then the Government would be founded in
Contract, if it was not given in an absolute manner; and the King that was
chosen might be no other sort of Sovereign than Humane Laws made him. Wherefore
it is necessary that this mere Humane Act should not be a mere Humane Act, but
should be spiritualized to come within Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and that
the Authority should be immediately from God only; and become such an Authority
as he gives a King of his own Nomination, or one to whom he has given the
Kingdom, in way of Judgment, upon an Appeal to him, and Trial by Battle.

To get clear of the troublesome Objection here, you must understand, that there
are but two grounds for their Election: 1. Real Merit in the Person chosen. 2.
Favor toward him. P. 13.
Where there is Real Merit, they could not go beside him in their Choice, they
took him as one already chosen of God.

As to Favor, P. 14.
whereby they prefer one before others of as much Merit, it is the same great
God who rules the roaring of the Sea, and the multitude of the People.

But if the Translators of the Bible were as well skilled in the Hebrew, Psalm.
6;.7.
and rightly rendered it tumult or madness of the people; the most tumultuous,
irregular and undue Election, would by this be ascribed to God as his immediate
act.

But whether the Choice were regular or irregular, they it seems were not free
to choose, or not to choose.

And as the Poet has it -- Thus like a Prisoner in an Isle confind,
Man walks at large, a Prisoner in his mind;
Wills all his Faults, while Heaven the Indictment draws,
And pleading Guilty, justifies the Laws. Dryden.



And according to our B --, where Men thought they exercised a Free Faculty
given them by God; the Man of Merit took their Subjection as his Right, because
God had marked him out as their King; which would warrant the Usurpations of
any Man, who could latter himself into a persuasion that he merited to be King.

But where they chose without Merit, it seems it was Choice without liberty to
dissent, and consequently though his Choice were a sinful act, as sometimes it
might be; ^et he who makes God the Author of the Choice by is immediate Act,
makes him the Author of the Sin. Puf. Elem. Juris prud. p. 1. Dof. 1. Actiones
humanae dicuntur actiones hom voluntariae, cum imputatione effectuum.


But as the Choice of the People is made no Choice; ^ery little room is left by
this Author even for that ^ Choice. For,

1. Where a Kingdom is Hereditary, P. 16.
there ^e Ancestors consented once for all following ^enerations; and then
though the Heir who Claims by Descent from the first Monarch, should be a
natural Fool or Madman; God has given him the Kingdom for a perpetual
Inheritance: and all the acts of the People alone, to set him aside before his
actual Possession, are a mere nullity: they can acquire no right against that
which God alone has given the Prince, by reason of his P. 16. For the
Derivation of that Right to their Persons, they owe it only to God; for it
comes to them by their Birth, and they owe their Birth only to God.
Birth.

2. As the Succession is continued to the Heir of the Family, Page 15. Sect. 26.
without other Human Act than the first consent; if the Crown be taken from the
Heir of the Family, and another comes to enjoy it, it is God who Page 19. This
(says he) can be understood of nothing else but the Conquest of one Prince over
an other. This which seems there to be only a Conquest over the Prince, he soon
advances to a Conquest over the Nation; For thereby (he says) God makes the
others Subjects become his Subjects or Slaves, accordingly as they come in,
etc. God's putting down one being here extendable to all cases of removals,
even by Death, or cession, he, Page 49. finds it needful to insinuate as if he
had proved in Sect. 26. only That Conquest is the way by which a Kingdom is
taken from a Sovereign Prince against his will.
puts down one, and sets up another; and in all cases where God does this, it
is by Conquest, and can be no otherwise understood. And in the case of
Conquest, no consent of the People is required, but [thereby] God puts one in
possession of the other's Dominions, before the People express any consent to
receive him for their Prince: and though the Conqueror should condescend to make
them his Subjects, they are his Slaves by right of War. Should they capitulate
with their Swords in their Hands, while the Event of a War which they might
threaten, were doubtful; Yet God has given them up for Page 20. He makes the
others Subjects become his Subjects or Slaves, accordingly as they come in upon
Conditions or without.
Slaves, they have no Right to capitulate, but in their very capitulating,
resist God's Ordinance, while they would put Limitations upon a Prince who by a
Right given of God ought to be Absolute: and extort by force a Promise, Page 11.
perhaps, to observe the Laws of the Country, from one to whom they never were
nor ought to be Laws. Here our State-Casuists would find these Flaws in the
Claim which the Subjects might make to their Ancient Freedoms.

1. The Prince his Promise is but the Grant of one in full Possession of an
Absolute Power; and the Sovereign Power cannot bind it self.

2. It cannot have the nature of a binding Contract; because the People were
but Slaves at the time of the Contract.

3. The Terms are extorted by force.

4. God Almighty has, prior to any consent of the People, entrusted the Prince
with an Absolute Power, which he must exert upon necessity; and has made him
the Judge of the necessity.

Since therefore, according to Men of these Notions, W. I. was a Conqueror, and
the late King succeeded to the Right of the Conqueror; it is pretty plain, that
the Exercise of the Dispensing Power, would not have brought the Union between
the late King and his Subjects to a State next to a Dissolution; P. 66.
had it not fell heavy upon the Clergy, who always intended to exempt
themselves from the Consequences of their own Doctrine.

3. But suppose the Conqueror or his Heir should use the Right of Conquest over
his Subjects, and make them his Slaves, notwithstanding former Concessions; the
People are by this Author tied up from freeing themselves. He says indeed very
truly, P. 24.
If a Prince will have no Law but his Will, if he tramples and oppresses his
People, their Patience will not hold out always, they will at one time or other
show themselves to be but Men.

But may they show themselves to be Men? No, God forbid! What, shall Slaves
rebel because they are used as Slaves? It is enough that they are allowed
Prayers and Tears, the Arms of the Church: if the Prayers are in Church-Form,
and the Tears flow decently and in order, God will raise up to them a Deliverer
in some Foreign Sovereign Prince: till then they must wait.

And for their Comfort, P. 32.
though all their Proceedings toward their Deliverance by War, have an
Original Nullity, even their Invitation of a Foraign Prince, how great soever
the Occasion be; yet a Foreign Prince need not be very scrupulous.

If he be of their Religion, P. 45. He has discovered an Hostile Mind toward
the Professors of it. Na Pufendorf allows Subjects to use, even an absolute
Prince as an Eneiny, if he discover an Hostile Mind toward them. Nay, allows
this to any one, whom the Prince thus casts out of the Number of his Subjects,
Pufend. Elim. Jurisprud. P. 340.
and they are persecuted upon the Acount of their Religion; their Persecutor
having discovered an Hostile Mind against all of the Religion, this is a Cause
of War, which will justify the Arms of a Foreign Prince.

But Religion is not to be preserved by any Sword, that is not Canonically
ordained, or Consecrated.

If a Foreign Prince see himself in extreme Danger of suffering an intolerable
Injury, P. 36.
by another Prince's Oppression of his own People, (though God had given them
up for Slaves) then he may make an open actual Invasion, Ibid.
in Defense of another Kings Subjects; but rather to ward off the Injury which
he was in danger of suffering.

But this Rule is not limited to an intolerable Injury; but may be extended
to justify a War, P. 24. Princes have no other way to right themselves for the
least Injury.

P. 30. Their Rights and Injuries are inseparably Joined with those of their
Kingdoms and Nations, etc. They must insist upon those Rights, with which God
has entrusted them for others, more than themselves: It is not only their
Interest, but their Duty so to do.


upon the receiving, or fearing the least Injury: and it is not only Lawful,
but a Duty to God, for the Sakes of their own Subjects, to right themselves by
War.

But the Sufferings of the People of other Nations, are then only to be
relieved by a Foregin Prince; when he has a particular Interest, or Cause of
his own, and receives immediate Prejudice thereby, or fears that he may.

Indeed, P. 47. As it is necessary, etc. so.
when it is necessary to do this for themselves; then they ought to do it much
the rather for the Sakes of their oppressed Brethren: no sufficient Cause, it
seems, is to be found in that common Relation between Mankind, Grotius, de Jure
Belli and pacis, lib. 2 c 25. Sect. 6. Postrema, latissimeque patens est
hominum inter se conjunctio, que vel sola ad opem ferendam sufficit.
upon which alone, Grotius and others, would justify the Heroes of Past Ages;
who have undertaken the Deliverance of oppressed Nations, merely for the Sake
of common Humanity, and as they were fit Objects of their Compassion.

They who confine Deliverers to selfish Ends, seem to envy them their greatest
Glory; or to have been so sordi^ themselves, as to have had no Idea of this
Virtue: and like Mr. Hobbs, to draw a Scheme of Humane Nature from too solitary
a Dwelling at Home.

Whatever Latitude was given to warrant the Expeditions of Sovereigns, here
they are confined: because per haps some could not imagine that they should
take Pleasure in what is so disinterested. But for Subjects, P. 32.
how much soever oppressed, they have no Right to make War without Leave of
their Prince. Ibid.
None have Right of making War, but they that are in Sovereign Power. Whoever,
it seems, is in Sovereign Power, though he be not the Supreme, or Chief in
Power, he is no Subject: and you may be sure the Prince will never give his
Subjects leave to make War against himself.

It must therefore be some Foreign Sovereign Prince, who makes War against the
oppressing Prince; otherwise the War is not only unjust, P. 32.
but no Right can be accquired by Success: there is an original Nullity in all
the Proceedings.

Very good! But let us now apply this to our present Case, that we may come out
of the Clouds. To make the Discourse pertinent, it must be admitted, that a War
was made upon the late King, while he continued King, and that he was
dispossessed against his Will.

Here I would ask this serious Question: Is not our Deliverance, and the
Settlement of the Crown occasioned thereby, Vid. Pref. No other Doctrine than
that which has been received and past for cur rent in the Church of England,
ever since the Reformation,
not only condemned, but rendered a mere Nullity, by the plain Consequence of
this Doctrine, insinuated as the Doctrine of the Church of England?

All must agree, that King William, while he was but Prince of Orange, and
Stadholder of Holland, was invited over by many of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy of this Land; that his Arms were joined by Men of all Orders,
immediately upon his Landing; that he was, upon the late King's Withdrawing,
petitioned to accept the Administration of the Government, and after that,
freely chosen, togetheir with his Princess, to supply the vacant Throne:
without any Force offered by him to the late King, or the People; much less
setting up for himself, and compelling them to declare him King.

This I take to be the true State of the Question; but if we suppose such a
State of it, as may make the B -- s Discourse consistent, and to purpose, it
must be admitted.

1. That all they who invited the Prince to assist them, departed from the
Doctrine of the Church of England.

2. That however, he having had Success, thereby immediately became rightful
King: and that all who were for the Regency, or opposed his being King, equally
departed from the Doctrine of the Church of England.

But upon the true State of the Case, there may naturally arise these two
Questions, not here to mention more.

1. Whether, if King James were conquered, Vid. P. 49.
it was by the then Prince of Orange, or by the People of England? and whether
the Prince, or the People, took the Dominion from the late King, against his
Will?

2. Whether the Deliverance, in which his present Majesty was so gloriously
instrumental, was, according to this Discourse, by a Sovereign Prince? That our
King was not a Sovereign Prince, barely as Stadholder of Holland, must be
granted; and then as to the Principallity of Orange, even according to this
Book, though the Cause of War between the French King and the States, or their
Stadholder, were unjust on that King's side; yet it was not only lawful, but a
Duty for the Subjects of that Principality, P. 57.
to obey the French King: Nay, the Government is so far settled in that King,
that we are to presume a Right; for, says he, Wheresoever this is once settled,
P. 51.
whether by length of time, or even sooner, by general Consent of the People;
there it ought to be presumed there is a Right, at least there ought to be no
farther Dispute of it.

But the Principallity of Orange is now settled in the French King, by a general
Consent of the harassed People: his Right to it therefore is not to be disputed.

Farther yet, if that Principallity were feudatory to France; then by the
Feudal Law it was subject to Forfeiture, for the Fault of the Owner: and then,
according to the Discourse, he was no Sovereign Prince; P. 19.
for all Sovereign Princes, as they have their Authority from God, so they are
only accountable to him.

2. Perhaps it may be said, Inconsistencies.
that my Questions here are not properly applied, they belonging to his Notion
of Conquest; whereas our Case is not of a Conquest, but of an Eviction and a
Deliverance thereupon: which leads me to his Inconsistencies.

But I must premise, that no Man can avoid his own Positive Assertions, by
contradicting himself elsewhere, especially by Contradictions to the very
Groundwork and Foundation which he lays. The only way to Merit a Pardon of
dangerous Positions, is ingenuously toretract them.

Besides, as he denies the Right of Conquest to any, but one who was a
Sovereign Prince before; so he denies him the Right of a Deliverer, not
allowing him to make War for a Deliverance. So that admit he were consistent
throughout, yet my second question would deserve an answer.

But in truth it will appear, that either a Deliverer is one, who but calls, or
suffers himself to be called a Deliverer, when he is a real Conqueror; or else
his Notion herein is a direct Contradiction to his Fundamental Positions, and
the manifest Drift of his Arguments; or rather Affirmations; for perhaps his
Book is as improperly called a Discourse, as any that has come out a good while.

If, Page 66.
says he, another Prince, having a just cause of War, is so far concerned for
an oppressed People, as to take them into his care; and to declare that he
makes War for their Deliverance: The Effect of this War, though we may call it
a Conquest, because it has a Resemblance of it, yet it cannot be properly so in
any respect, etc. As to the Prince on whom it is made, it is properly an
Eviction, by the just Sentence of God, Page 67.
etc. As to the People, it cannot be a Conquest over them, who are so far from
having the War made against them, that it was made chiefly for their Sakes. If
there be any Pretense of a Conquest, it is only over them that were their
Oppressors. But as for them that were oppressed, it makes all together on their
side; so that they are the Conquerors in Effect, for they have the Benefit of
it: And he that obtained this for them, has a much more glorious Title than
that of a Conqueror; for he is properly their Restorer and Deliverer. And
elsewhere he says, Page 70.
Though one may Conquer and drive out an Oppressing Prince, he may have no
Right of Conquest.

This seems very plausible, but either is a downright Contradiction to his
Fundamental Position; or is none of the ways, in which, according to him, God
disposes of a Kingdom, when he puts down one Prince and sets up another; for,
according to him, in all cases where God does this; immediately upon the
Conquest of the Prince, the Conqueror [thereby,] in virtue of that Conquest, is
by God put into Possession of the others Dominions: V. sup. Discourse p 56, 57.
No consent of the People, etc So p. 28.
he makes the others Subjects become his Subjects, or Slaves; Accordingly, as
they come in, or submit: and it is their Duty to obey him before he has their
Consent.

Farther yet he says, Vid. inf. p 49.
Conquest being the way by which a Kingdom or Dominion is taken from a
Sovereign Prince against his Will; and by which another Prince gets into his
Possession: as often as this happens, there arises a question between the two
Princes, whether of them has a Right to the Kingdom or Dominion.

This he will have to be decided by the Law of Nations, a Law common to both:
P. 50. That cannot be the Law of the Kingdom; for the the Prince that is
disseiz'd, was obliged by that Law while he was in Possession; yet now it seems
he is not; and it never was a Law to the Prince that is now in his place.
for the Law of the Land, he holds that to be a Law to neither.

Where the People may take this for their Comfort, that if the Prince
dispossessed or evicted, should be restored again; he will come back freed from
all the Laws of the Country: Nor is the Prince, who Conquers him, a Restorer of
those Laws, eo nomine, as he is a Deliveror; for whatever the Assurances might
have been, to induce the People to assist him, or not to assist the other; they
are his Slaves, till he has condescended to grant them Liberty upon their
coming in, or submitting after he has conquered their Prince, or delivered them
from his Person: but as to the Oppressions, what might have been an Usurpation
in their Legal King, would be but Right of War in a Deliverer. And thus if the
Restorer or Deliverer dispossess the other, the Deliverer and Conqueror differ
not, as to the Right which they acquire, or in Reality, but in name. P. 27. so
28.
The Eviction was by God's Sentence; the effect of which, he says, is a just
Conquest.

And if he be consistent with himself, he must agree, that however the People
please themselves with the sound of the word, P. 63. Sect. 47.
the Deliverer may by right of War, do with them and theirs what he pleases:
for this he makes the right of War in all cases, where a War is made upon their
Prince for just cause; and the Deliverer is one whom he supposes to have had a
just cause of War: P. 66. Sect. 48. P. 59.
but where the Justice of the War is certain, the Right of a Conquest he takes
to be clear. And if we consider what he says, against a Deliverer's acquiring
the Right of War, we may see that it is not with intent of opposing, if he
insists upon that Right.

1. P. 67. sup.
The People are the Conquerors in effect, because they have the Benefit of it;
but if that Benefit is denied, they are not Conquerors in effect.

2. He says it has always been judged by the People of God, that such an one as
he describes, is not properly a Conqueror: but mark his Proof, we have the
Example of the Jewish Church in the time of Alexander the Great. I need not
observe that this is a palpable Contradiction to our B -- 's Letter about
Jaddus, Vid. The Letter to D^. Sherlock about Jaddus, p. 28. This Story of
Jaddus affords us a very good unquestionable instance of the Judgment of the
Jewish Church in his Age; That it is lawful to submit to a Prince that comes in
by Conquest.
wherein he holds that the Jewish Church submitted to Alexander as coming in by
Conquest. He gives other Examples of the like Nature in Cyrus and Constantine;
but what he says of the last, runs through all, P. 69.
though he had acquired a Title by the Expulsion of those Princes who had been
Oppressors; and might have taken the Government upon him as a Conqueror; he did
not.

But the Titles which all these Deliverers acquired, the Right which they might
have used, was Conquest: and if they had thought fit to use the right of
Conquest, according to himself, they were complete Conquerors; and if they lost
that Right, it was only for their Lenity. An admirable Admonition to Princes to
have a care of being too generous.

Two of these Princes were Pagans; the third appears not to have been
Christened when he set this Example: And yet because he held the (a) First
General Council, and gave the Clergy Secular Power; he, by receding from his
Right, made a binding Law to restrain the Right of following Princes. Oh! the
strength and weight of the Argument. (a) P. 69.

3. What has been observed under the former Head, might be enough to show the
doubtfulness and ambiguity of the Discourse, The doubtfulness and ambiguity of
the Discourse.
as if intended to serve either Prince or People, and to impose upon both. But
sometimes it is not unprofitable to show the same Notions in different Lights.

One who comes to the Possession of a Crown by Succefs in War over a Sovereign
Prince, may think he has Right of Conquest; for that is ascribed to all Princes
whom God sets up, upon dispossessing another. But then

1. It is not enough to become a Prince by God's Gift of the Kingdom, but he
must have been a Sovereign Prince before, or all is a nullity, God's Gift is
void.

2. He must be sure not to suffer himself to be called a Deliverer, without
Right of Conquest: for if he were such an one, he would not be a Prince of
God's setting up; and therefore as he would maintain his Title from God, he
must assert the Right of a Conqueror.

3. But call him Conqueror, Deliverer, or what you please, the Discourse founds
his Right, upon the Dominions being taken from one against his Will; and
another's coming into Possession.

If therefore both the one and the other be in some cases the Act of the
People; then he lays no Foundation for any Right of Conquest, but what will be
an equal Right in all Conquests; though the People be themselves the Conquerors
over themselves.

Farther yet he comforts Princes, P. 23.
That though they should be guilty of Breach of Faith, not only to their
People, but to God also, yet they may not therefore be deposed by them. And yet
he admits, That the Laws are the Bond of Union between Prince and People, P. 66.
and that by these the Prince holds his Prerogative.

But the Breach of this Bond on the Prince's side, by his Act, he will have
only so to loosen the Union, that it may be next to Dissolution. It seems there
is some School-distinction between breaking a Bond, and dissolving a Bond. But
one would think that when the Bond is broken by the Prince, it is dissolved by
the Prince; and no doubt he meant so, but thought not fit to say so much. But
perhaps, since he speaks of a Sovereign Prince; according to his Notion of
Sovereignty, he might believe that he may break his Faith or Promise, and yet
not break the Law, because his Will is the Law.

However he grants, P. 7. Sect. 6.
That whosoever disobeys or resists the public Order and Government of the
Kingdom or State where he lives, he disobeys or resists the Ordinance of God.

The King therefore in a limited Government, where his Will is not a Law, nor
can he dispense with Laws, may himself disobey the public Order and
Government. And by his breach of those Laws by which he holds his Prerogative,
and which are the Bond of Union between him and his Subjects, may break or
dissolve the Bond; and then he is no more their King. And thus the People are
decently let into the Sovereignty, and may make War against him without
Rebellion: Nay, he who was their Prince till the Dissolution of the Bond,
resists the public Order and Government, if he goes about to force himself
upon them again.

Which are the lucid Intervals, those that bind up the Peoples Hands in all
cases, unless Foreign Princes interpose; or those that set them free by the Act
and virtual Cession of their Kings, we shall know when Elias, or someother
Great Prophet comes. But the Book seems not so much to justify submitting to a
Deliverer, as to condemn them that have not the patience, in all cases, to wait
God's time for raising up some Foreign Prince for their Deliverer. Nor have Men
reason to flatter themselves with the Notion of a Deliverer, which has no
Foundation in this Book: and if the Prince be a Deliverer, he must set up
himself, or the People must set him up: For all that are of God's setting up,
are Conquerors with Right of Conquest.

Again, the People may use the formality of a Choice, but it is no such thing
in reality; this Act was not merely humane, but divine.

And the Prince may think this God's immediate Act; and yet though he were a
Conqueror, and had the Right of Conquest given and adjudged to him Vid. p. 18.
It is God that does this. 2. He does it judicially.
by God himself; this might have been by P. 53. So it was by those Conquests
that God removed Kings, and set up Kings; though we see not that it was any
more than by the permissive Providence of God, etc.
no more than the permissive Providence of God.

4. It has appeared already, that he would have what David mentions, as
belonging to the Royal Dignity, The weakness of reasoning, want of Authority,
and gross mistakes, in relation to those Rights of Princes which he would
infer, from Passages, or Omissions, in Sacred or other Writings.
to be a Rule in all Ages and Countries. But David says of God Almighty,
agreeably to what I shall show of the Donation to Noah and his Sons, The Earth
has he given to the Children of Men. Which certainly comprehends Dominion as
well as Soil; and is a Confutation of his Notion of the Patriarchical Power.

David says, God established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in
Israel. Here God was the Lawmakers, not the King; as every Prince truly a
Sovereign, according to the Notion which I oppose, is.

It appears that the Law which David tells us God established in Israel, Vid.
Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 18, 19, etc.
had particular Clauses limiting the Right of the King. Here at least was a Law
of the true nature of a Contract, superior to the King; and that the Law of a
State or Kingdom: Will they allow the Law of the Kingdom to be thus superior to
their Sovereign?

The Rolls of this Law some Jewish Rabbis affirm that their Kings destroyed.
When therefore our Learned B -- shall produce an authentic Copy of the Law, or
that manner of the Jewish Kingdom which Samuel wrote in a Book, 1 Samuel 25.
and laid up before the Lord; his Arguments from the Jewish Polity may deserve
Consideration: and yet what the present B -- of Worcester says in his Irenicum
would have its due weight.

Those who plead the obligatory nature of Scripture-Examples, Iren. p. 13.
must either produce the Moral Nature of these Examples, or else a Rule binding
us to follow these Examples: especially when these Examples are brought to
found a new positive Law obliging all Christians.

From hence he proceeds to treat of God's ways of conferring Sovereign Power
immediately in the Patriarchs time. Vid. p. 7. Marg.
Ib Sect. 8.
This (he says) at first was from God we are sure; because it was from the
beginning of Mankind. The first Men that were born into the World, were all of
Adam 's Family. And so were all that came after, till some of them went forth,
as Cain did, to make Families for themselves.

Observe the reasoning here, We are sure it was from God, because it was from
the beginning of Mankind.

Does he mean here from the Creation of Man; from the first Multiplying or
Infancy of the Subjects; or from their Maturity and years of Discretion?

If the first, then we are sure Civil Polity, or Sovereignty, was not from the
Beginning of the World: unless there was a King without a Subject. The second
cannot be said to be Subjects of a Civil Polity; Pufend. Elementa Jurisprud.
cap. ultim.
and Pufendorf grounds the Paternal Power over them, upon their presumed
Consent. But for the last, it would be no Consequence, that because they were
Subjects while they were not capable of Dissenting; therefore they must
continue so when they are at years of consent. And if the Sovereignty began
when they commenced Men; then there is no Presumption to the contrary; but that
it began upon their consent: nor will they be obliged to give up their Lives,
and the Fruits of their Labors to their Parents, merely for their having
exercised that Affection toward them in their Childhood, which Nature both
requires, and delights in.

Himself admits, that the Sons, when they come of Age, may choose whether they
will be under their Fathers Government or no: for he places the Power in being
Father of the Family; and allows the Sons then to make Families by themselves,
and to set up for Independent Princes: This is plain from the instance of Cain;
Genesis 4.16, 17.
he of his own accord left his Fathers Family, and built him a City. Till then,
says our B -- they were governed by the common Father of Mankind. Page 8.


So that Cain, who voluntarily deserted his Fathers Family, by that act of his,
set up himself King in the Lifetime of his Father.

But this Man was not the Patriarch, had no Divine Nomination or Appointment;
nor is it likely he should have: for he went out from the presence of the Lord,
Genesis 4.16.
cast off the Theocrasie, nor had any Appointment that appears from his Father.
Either then that City or Civil Society was governed popularly; or if he was a
Sovereign, it was of the Free Choice of the Society; for otherwise he had no
Right at all.

And thus Cain bids fairest for being the first Independent Monarch in the
World; while Adam was under the Theocrasie: and this he must grant in
consequence of his own words elsewhere: For, says he, when Jacob and all his
Family went down into Egypt, Page 9.
there ended their Patriarchical Government.

It appears therefore, that the Patriarchical Government was inferior to the
Monarchical: And if Adam should have gone to dwell in Cain's City, his
Patriarchical Government would have ended.

This matter is so intreagued, that I need not enquire.

1. Vid. Gielfusii op. pol. p. 5. An fuisset futura politia instatu
Innocentiae? Aff. Quia fuissent futurae Societates in primis duae priores
eaeque certo ordine inter se devinctae: nulla tamen fuisset in imperando
violentia vel injustitia, sed dulcis harmonia. Hooker 's Eccles. Pol. c. 1. f.
26. There were as yet no Civil Societies, no manner of Public Regiment
established.
Whether there was any occasion for the Rights of Sovereignty in the State of
Innocence?

2. V. Genesis 9.3, 5, 6.
Whether Power over Life was given by God to Man, till after the Flood?

3. Targum of Onkelos Polyg. f. 35 Quicunque effuderit sanguinem hominis, per
testes ex sententia judicum sanguis ejus fundetur.
Whether that Power, when it was given, was an Arbitrary Power; or only to be
exercised in the way of Judicature?

4. Digests, Lib. 1. Tit. 61.
Whether the Compilers of the Digests were in the Right, when they say, That
the Law whereby Children begotten in Lawful Marriage, are in the Power of the
Parents; (and that as the Commentator explains it, so far, as that they acquire
for their Parents) is, Jus proprium civium Romanorum; "a Law peculiar to the
People of Rome?

But to follow our Author to Noah. Noah was the Father of all them that lived
after the Flood; P. 8. Sect. 8.
and he was their Governor too, till his Children were too many to live in one
Country, or under one Government: and then they branched themselves into
Nations, among whom the Earth was divided.

Is this agreeable to Holy Writ? what matter for that, it serves the
Hypothesis. Tho the Scripture shows expressly, that God gave the whole Earth,
Vid. Genesis 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
and the Power over Life, to Noah and his Sons; and the whole Covenant was
between God on one part, and Noah and his Sons on the other.

Upon which Mr. Mare Clausum, f. 13. Certe non obscura verum plane communionis
vestigia occurrunt, in donatione illa numinis, qua Noachus and tres filii ejus,
etc. domini pro indiviso rerum omnium facti sunt.
That Noah and his Sons, were, by Gods Donation, Lords of all things in common.

Either no natural Right can be inferred from this, because it was Gods
immediate Free Gift; or it shows that they who are adult, have Right to share
in Dominion with their Parents. Either way it cuts off the Patriarchical Power,
which he would continue till Jacob went into Egypt. Page 9.

The Scripture says, Genesis 10.32. The Nations were divided in the Earth, after
the Flood, by the Families of the Sons of Noah: And that the Families were
after their Tongues.

He will have it to be by Noah's Children, and speaks of it as if it were a
regular branching themselves into Nations; because the Children were too many
to live in one Family. Page 8.
He takes no notice of the dispersion upon the Confusion of Tongues; from which
time, to God's setting up a King in Israel, he elsewhere owns that perhaps in
some Nations it was the Peoples part to choose who should rule over them. Page.
9.


This, if we consider it, will be more than a perhaps. Upon the Confusion of
Tongues, there were 70, Cluverius Epit. Hist.
as Cluverius holds. Noah's Children were not so many as there were different
Tongues and Nations. The Heads of Families could not then be distinguished, and
the People of every different Tongue must have chosen to themselves Heads, or
have so many Commonwealths, or Communities without a Sovereign or Supreme Head.

When (says he) the Fathers, or some of those Nations, made Conquests upon one
another, as Nimrod did on the Nations about him, who was called a mighty Hunter
before the Lord; or when they were otherwise incorporated together. These made
the ancient great Monarchies whereof the Assyrian and Egyptian are famous in
ancient History.

This his great Hunter before the Lord, or upon the face of the Earth, was an
Usurper, and a Tyrant. And The Septuagint, (...). Via. Sir W. Rat. f. 158.
citing St. Austin.
Men of greater Authority than himself, instead of before the Lord, render it
against the Lord. But,

1. The Heads of those Nations, as appears, were not all Patriarchical Heads,
but many of them must have been Chosen by the People.

2. He leaves room for a voluntary Incorporation of all Fathers of Families; in
which we say consists a Civil Society.

3. Families so incorporated, cannot be dissolved at pleasure of every
Individual, as his Patriarchate may.

4, Several Powers and Necessities arise upon such an Incorporation, of Men who
have distinct Interests and Properties; which are not within single Families,
where the Property is in one.

5. According to himself, God had given the Power to every one of these Fathers
before the Incorporation. And the Sons of these Fathers are admitted at full
age to make themselves Families; and so, ad infinitum: these are a Community or
People. And all these, as Fathers of Families, have equal Patriarchical Power.

If then this Power be Sovereign; when they, or the majority, give up their
Power to One, the People give him a Sovereignty over them, which he had no
Right to before their Gift. And thus, with God's Permission, the People confer
Power, Quod erat demonstrandum.

Upon his supposed Expiration of the Patriarchate in Egypt, Page 9.
to the setting up of Kings, he will have it, That God's People were governed
first by Moses, as a King; and after, by Judges of God's Nomination, or what
was equivalent to a Nomination. Which equivalent he soon stretches to a proper
Nomination. For, speaking of the Government among God's chosen People, from the
Beginning, to Solomon inclusive, Page 10.
he says, There was no other standing Government in that Nation which God chose
to be his peculiar People, but what was administered by single Persons. And
those Persons Title to the Government, was Patriarchical, or by Divine
Nomination.

He seems to have put in the word [standing] for a fence against instances of
other Governments set up among God's People within that time. But if the
Public Affairs were regularly administered at any time, under any other known
Form of Government, the word [standing] either will not help him, or ought to
be struck out. And I desire him to show the single Person that Governed the
Commonwealth of Israel; or Headed them upon every Emergency, from the time of
Judges, c. 1. Vid. Sir W. Rawl. Hist. f. 350. Tit. Of the Intrregnum after
Josuah's Death.
Josuah, to Othniel; during which interval, they carried on several Wars with
success, in the Name of the People of Israel. I think I need not put him to
prove, that the Judges in Israel were Sovereign Princes; or to Answer Mr.
Harrington's Commonwealth of Israel; Nor to evade those Texts which, besides
the Prophet, seem to place the High Priest above the Temporal Judge.

When God's Chosen People came to have Kings, he tells us, God was pleased so
far to grant his Peoples request, that they should be an Hereditary Kingdom.

The request was to have a King, that they might be like all the Nations. 1 Samuel 8.20.
But himself says, In most Nations we read of at that time, it was the Peoples
part to Choose who should Rule over them. ( page 9.)

According therefore to them, who would have the manner of the Kings of other
Nations at that time to infer a Right in the Jewish Kings; and the manner of
the Jewish Kings, a Right in all others; the request of the Jews was not to
have such an Hereditary Kingdom as he contends for: but a Kingdom wherein the
People might choose their King.

If by Hereditary Kingdom, he means an established Monarchy, where the People
were to be Governed by a Succession of Kings, and no other Form of Government:
that might be the effect of a Promise made long before. And yet even that
related not to all the People of Israel, The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah.
if it be taken for the Government of one alone over the whole Body of that
Nation: For that People was divided into two Kingdoms, however they might have
a settled Monarchy; and yet the People might have chosen the first King, and
every Successor.

For the first King of the reigning Line (he says) God would have the choosing
of him himself; and accordingly he chose Saul. But himself admits, That the
Kingdom was not Hereditary to him.

Observe so much of the Fundamental Law of the Jewish Kingdom as is now extant,
concerning the setting up of a King among them.

When thou shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all the Nations that
are about me, Deuteronomy 17.14.

Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall
choose: one from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee. Thou may
not set a Stranger over thee which is not thy Brother, ver. 15.

Was this a Law to God himself, or a Promise, That he would never set a
Stranger over them? Or was it a Law to them for a Limitation upon their Choice?
If it were God's Promise, then he would never have suffered them to be in
Captivity to any Foreign Prince. If it were a Law to them; then how much soever
it might be God's Choice, as being within the Rule which he gave them; yet it
was properly the Choice of the People.

Suitably to which the Learned Grotius Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis, lib. 1.
cap. 4. sect. 7. Quod lex vetat alieniginam popuso prefici de voluntaria
electione intelligendum est, etc.
rightly observes, That the Law which forbids a Stranger's being set over the
People, is to be understood of a Voluntary Election; not of what the People was
compelled to do through the necessity of Times.

If we observe the Circumstances previous to Readiness Accession to the Throne, we
shall find, that though God had anointed him by his Prophet; that was not a
Nomination made known to the People: 1 Samuel 10.16. Ib. ver. 20, 21.
the matter of the Kingdom was a Secret kept even from his own Relations. And
as the People chose to have a King, they proceeded regularly to the Choice of
the Man, within the limitation chosen or appointed by God. The method agreed
upon was what, in some sense may be called God's Choice, as Men thereby leave
the matter to Chance, or to God's permissive or overruling Providence, as he
shall think fit. Themselves chose how many Lots to use, but indeed could not
put in one for a Stranger.

God here, as in other Instances, as it were to baffle the Notion of
Patriarchical Right, permitted or directed the Lot to fall upon Saul, of the
House of Benjamin; the youngest Son of Jacob or Israel by Leah; and upon one
who was not the Head of the Tribe, nor Head of a Family within that Tribe.

Then says our B --, God made choice of David. David having many Sons; among
them all, God chose Solomon to continue the Succession in him and his Heirs, as
he did till the Babylonish Captivity. He by his reference in the Margin, founds
God's Choice upon the Declaration of his Judgment against Saul, 1 Samuel 13.14.
when David is not named; 1 Samuel 16.
and it could not be known to Saul, or to the People, whom God designed
Successor. Samuel indeed had, in Readiness lifetime, privately anointed David,
the youngest Son of Jesse; and this was known in Jesse's Family. From whence it
seems to have been published; but depending upon their Credibility, and mere
Human Testimony, was not obligatory to the People: yet they having resolved
upon choosing David, then took notice of this, as a Divine appointment; 1 Chronicles.
11.
which hindered not their making a Covenant with him. There was a Free Choice on
their side, and Stipulation on David's with a Free People; or rather a mutual
Stipulation and Contract.

Our B -- 's Notion of an Hereditary Kingdom of Man's setting up, is, That it
descends to the next in the Line by Right of Birth; Page 15.
and that this Right cannot be forfeited: Yet it appears in the Sacred Story,
that the Right of Birth which Adonijah had, upon his Hypothesis, was forfeited;
because he exalted himself for King in the lifetime of his Father. 1 Kings 1.


Nor did the Crown descend to the next after him: Nor yet does it appear that
God immediately interposed, Ibid. ver. 20.
but David set up Solomon, or recommended him to the People; in pursuance of
the Promise that he had made to the beautiful Wife of Uriah. 1 Kings 1.17.


And whereas he will have it, that Solomon and his Heirs continued the
Succession till the Captivity; it is plain, the Succession was but to two
Tribes of Twelve: the other Ten freely chose their King; their Choice was
approved of by God, and he never permitted them to return to the House of
David: the reason of which, according to Sir Walter Rawleigh, was, Sir W. Rawl.
History, f. 437.
that the Kings of the House of Israel used a more temperate Method of
Government than the Kings of Judah did.

The Promise that the Scepter should not depart from that House, Judah Jacob 's
fourth Son by Rachel.
till the Shiloh should come, was such an Exaltation to that Younger House;
that no wonder if it had the like Effect with our Passive Doctrines here.

But consider the Import of the word [Heir] in the Jewish Law, from whence this
Writer would derive his Authorities; and it will appear, that the Eldest Son is
not according to that, the Patriarch or sole Father of the Family, upon his
Fathers Death; two parts of three was the utmost that the eldest Son was
entitled to: And this, as Mr. Seldom observes, Deuteronomy. 21. v. 15. Seldom de jure
Succes. ad Leges Ebraeorum, f. 24.
was only of what was in the Fathers Possession: what came in right of the
Mother, or descended from the Grandfather who survived the Father; descended
to all Males equally.

How well he has shown, Page 14.
that all the Kings that God set over his People, were by Divine Nomination;
either themselves alone, or they and their Heirs, I leave to his second
Thoughts.

I have dwelt too long upon his Scripture account of Power; wherefore shall
advertise him but of one Mistake more, which he might have rectified by his
Skill, in Profane as well as Sacred Story.

I do not, says he, speak all this while of Free States, or Commonwealths, Page
16.
because I do not believe any such Government was known in David 's time; for
as we read of no such Scripture, so it is agreed among the most Learned Heathen
Writers, that the first Government every where was by Kings.

Observe the reasoning: there was none in David's time, for the first was by
Kings; as if notwithstanding there might not have been Commonwealths both then
and before.

But what thinks he of the Commonwealth of Israel, Vid. Harrington's
Commonwealth of Israel.
in the Interval before mentioned, between Joshua and Othniel?

And what thinks he of the several Free Cities and Islands inhabited by Grecian
Colonies in David's time? Cluverii epit. Hist. Tit. David.


I cannot but again return to his gross Mistakes about Conquest.

1. No Consent of the People is requisite to establish the Right.

2. Be the Sovereign in Possession, possessed of the Soverignty only in the
Supreme manner, tho it be not Absolute; yet by the Conquest of him, it was the
Duty of all, to whom the Sovereignty was communicated, to give it up; tho they
had Power to maintain it, and to restore their former King: for they are become
Slaves immediately, by the Conquest over the Prince. And tho it were in an
unjust War, Page 56. Page 57. He refers to Pufend. de Jure Not. and Gent. 7, 8,
10.
If the Usurper has no Pretense of Right, no Prescription of time, no consent
of the People, but only an unjust Possession; it is a Duty to obey him, when
the Legal King can no more do the Office of a King? Is not this a mighty
thorough Settlement? This surely is not to be found in the Convocation-book
which has been so much tossed about; much less I am sure is it in that
admirable Author Pufendorf, tho the B -- makes a general reference to several
Sections in his Book of the Law of Nations, as if it were to be gathered from
thence: and yet himself, in the next Page, cites one of those very Sections,
which he refers to, Page 58.
in Terms directly contradictory to what he would infer from him: unless a
Prince who Conquers in an unjust War, has a Right beyond him who Conquers in a
just one; Pufend. de jure Not. and Gentium VII. 7.3.
for Pufendorf is there express, that after a Prince is overcome in a just War,
till the Subjects consent, the State of War continues: and there is no
Obligation, nor Faith; and so no Dominion.

3. In all cases where God puts down one, and sets up another, this is by
Conquest; this Conquest must be by a Foreign Sovereign Prince, and the
Conqueror has the Right of War over the Subjects of the dispossessed Prince:
From which Rule thus laid down absolutely, there must be these several
Exceptions.

1. Himself excepts, and not excepts, the Case of a Deliverance.

2. Reason will oblige him to except the case of a limited Monarchy.

3. The case of a Prince's assisting the People to dispossess an Usurper.

4. All Instances when the People have renounced their Allegiance to one King,
and set up another from among themselves: as when Jeroboam, Solomon's Servant,
having headed the People of Israel, 1 Kings 11.26.
when they urged for an Assurance of a Regular Government from his Master's Son
Rehoboam; the Servant was advanced to the Government of Ten of the Tribes, 1
Kings 12.13.
after all Israel had renounced the Family of David.

Edward the Second among us, being governed by Gaveston, and the Spencers,
murdered his Uncle Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and numbers of Great Men; the
People rose against him, Imprisoned him, and a full Representative of the
Nation, Anno 1326. Vid. The Porm of it. Knighton Col. 2549.
in a Solemn manner renounced their Allegiance to him: but comforted their
Abdicated King with the Declaration which they made, that they would suffer his
Son Edw. 3. to succeed him.

Rich. 2. had been carried on in the like Extravagancies, by the Loyal Men of
his time, the Duke of Ireland, and other Minions; these Men finding a Storm
coming upon them, by the just Judgment of the Nation, persuaded the King to
give himself up as a Vassal to France. The Nation, to secure their public
Regiment, and Laws, deposed him, and set up H. 4. a Subject of this Kingdom,
till they made him King.

Upon these Instances, and more which might be brought, I would ask.

1. If there was a Conquest in any one of them, who was the Conqueror? the
Prince constituted by the People, or the People who constituted him?

2. Whether the Prince so constituted, had a Right of War over the People?

3. Whether it was a Duty in all these cases, to expect a Deliverance from some
Foreign Sovereign Prince, when perhaps all Neighbor Princes might be Bribed by
Moneys extorted from the Subjects by Oppression and Tyranny; when all might be
of the same Religion, or might have the same end in their Government; and would
assist each other to Enslave their People.

5. Reason would except all cases, when a Prince comes with Title, or pretends
it: and where he declares the occasion of his Arms, or condition of Success.
These being used for Inducements to have Right done, or for the Subjects to
join with, or not oppose him; are implicit Contracts; and either of them is a
full bar to farther Claim.

More Exceptions would lie; but these are enough to set aside his General Rule.

5. That the show of reading, and the Positions, are wholly beside the Cushion,
not applicable to the Constitution of this Government, nor to the present
Debate.
It must be confessed, that in this Book he is not come to his second Head:
wherein he undertakes to show, That the work of God, in bringing [his] Majesty
into this Kingdom, was truly Gods making use of his Prerogative, in putting
down one, and setting up another.

But since his Discourse is with the professed intention of so applying it;
surely it is allowable for me to try his Rule for him before hand, if it were
only to persuade him to find out other Topics for the Justification of [their]
Majesty's Right; and p^oving that [her Majesty] is of Gods setting up, as well
as [his Majesty.]

This I hold, but am sure I cannot prove it from his Rule, applied either to
the Case of an Absolute Conqueror, or to a Deliverer; nor does he so much as
pretend to say any thing, to show that God has made [her Majesty] our Sovereign
Lady.

The supposed Conquest would bar her Hereditary or other Right; and her Right,
whatever it is, will not admit of a Conquest.

But the States of the Kingdom have declared, That King William and Queen Mary,
are, and [of Right] ought to be our Sovereign [Lord] and [Lady.]

Tho this Declaration was made in a Convention of the People, by its
Representatives, not called by a King, or Queen; yet the Parliament following
declared the Acts of that Convention, which became a Parliament, upon acting in
Conjunction with [their Majesties] to be binding Laws.

And if there be any question of [her Majesties] Sovereignty, because the
Administration was placed in [his Majesty] the Act of this present Parliament
impowering [her Majesty] to Administer the Government during [his Majesties]
Absence, has removed that Objection. Neither before that was [her Majesty] a
Subject: Nor can a King make a Viceroy to act in his Absence, but such an one
as must be a Subject, punishable for Treason against the King.

What shall be thought of them, who Swear Allegiance to [Two] and yet believe
it to be due to but [One]?

This alone were enough to show, that the Quotations and Positions in tha^
Discourse, are not to the purpose: if it be to justify the Settlement and
Submission to it.

The best which can be said of it is, That the Design is not for the Strength
or Honor of the Government; but of the Clergy: And to show, that though many
of them were degenerate Sons of the Church, in contributing to the Revolution,
(for all they are given up,) yet in submitting to it, they have done nothing
but what is agreeable to that Doctrine; Preface.
which (as the Preface has it) has passed for the Doctrine of the Church of
England, ever since the Reformation.

But if it has passed for the Doctrine of our Church, and is not; it were a
labor worthy of a Bishop to undeceive Men.

If it is the Doctrine, why should they not admit that it has been assented to
only for the sake of Peace? As they say of other Doctrines, which the Church
undeniably holds. And why do they continue to maintain it, when it so much
disturbs the Peace of this Land, divided only by the means of it?

Farther yet: Our B -- must admit, that being the Church is incorporated into
the State; the late Bishops are duly deprived by the Law, though not
Canonically. Why therefore is not an Act of Parliament, which places our
present Settlement upon a downright Contradiction to this Doctrine, enough to
set aside a Doctrine which has not so much as a Canon, excepting always the
Laudaean, to color it? And which has no better Foundation than the Roman
Traditions.

The Doctrine, perhaps may be suitable to the Canons of 1640. or to the Oath,
generally taken by the Clergy, not to bear Arms against the King, or any one
Commissionated by him.

The Great and Victorious King Edward I. Stat. 7. E. 1. Rast. f, 25. An. 1279.
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Comonalty of the Realm, above Four hundred
Years ago, set up a Landmark to Posterity. Which one would have thought they
could not have gone beyond; declaring, That the Subjects are to Aid the King,
to Defend Force, and Punish Offenders, [according to the Laws and Vsages of the
Realm.]

But in the ferment of Loyalty upon the Restoration, the Flowers of some,
falling in with the prevailing humor, and hopes of Preferment, made Men quit
the substance of lawfully Commissionated; though they were convinced by the
solid Arguments of the Great Vaughan, afterward Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, That this was in effect to give up Magna Carta, and all the
ancient Liberties purchasd at the expense of so much Blood and Treasure. It was
therefore yielded by the Chief Advocate for a Commission, without the
encumbrance of lawful, that it ought to be employed.

But however, it past as a Snare, at a time when it was well known, that if
Charles II. was not a Papist, his Brother James was.

But as to the Laudaean Canons of 1640. it was the same Year unanimously
resolved by the House of Commons; Rash. Hist. Col. 2d. Vol. Resolved, December.
17. 1640. Nullo contradicente.
That they do contain in them Matters contrary to the King's Prerogative, the
fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the Right of Parliament, to the
Property and Liberty of the Subject, and Matters tending to Sedition, and of
dangerous Consequence.

Nay, Stat. 13. Car. 1. c. 1. Not to confirm the Canons made An. 1640.
that very Parliament in which the High Church, or Laudaean Party, so far
prevaild, as to pass the cramping Oath, put a particular Mark of Reprobation
upon the Canons of 1640.

And the Oath is now repealed: so that if it ought to have been taken strictly,
the Constitution of the Government is now freed from the Invasion.

But there is a Notion which makes specious Pretenses to be part of the
Constitution. Which is, That this Government has been made Hereditary in such a
sense, Discourse, p. 15.
that a Right to it is given, by God alone, to the Person who stands next, by
reason of Birth.

This imposes upon our B -- to believe a necessity to maintain that this Divine
Right has been set aside by a Divine Judgment; and that our present Settlement
results from the Event of a just War made by a Sovereign Prince: Or, to go in
the path of the Answer to Ashton's Paper, Discourse, p. 47. An excellent Book,
etc.
to which our B -- gives his Approbation, or Episcopal Confirmation, That the
Right to the Government is Conquest.

His Notion of Hereditary, as it has appeard, has no Foundation from among the
Jews; Answer to Asht. page 23.
from whose Polity he would fetch Examples obligatory to us.

Dr. Hicks admits, Pref. to Jov. p. 11.
That the words Heir, Hereditary, etc. never in the Latin or Greek Authors,
signify in that especial manner, which he presumes that they do here.

And it has been shown, Vid. The Fundamental Constitution of the English
Government, proving Their Majesty's our Lawful and Rightful King, and Queen.
and may appear more fully, That no such Notion has been anciently received in
our Law.

Our B -- says, indeed, from Cerdic, King of the West Sanons, the Descent of
our Royal Family is unquestionable.

If he means, that the Descent of the Crown has always from that time gone in a
right Line, there is no color for the Assertion. Nay, it will be difficult to
show the Right of the Family, acknowledged and observed before Ina's time.

If he means that the present Royal Family can make out their Pedigree from
Cerdic; what is that to the inalienable Right of Inheritance in the next of the
Line?

If by Hereditary, be meant no more than the Inheritance of a Family; such an
Inheritance as may solve all the Breaches, or rather Windings in the Royal
Line, from Ina's time to this day; we might agree, by putting in Ina at the
Head of the Right of the Family.

But I challenge him to show, that the next Heir of the Family has always
succeeded, even from Inas time, or been accounted to have had Right to succeed:
or, which is used as a Supplement, that the Nomination of the Rightful
Possessor has been always had or thought necessary, where he that succeeded was
not the next upon the Line.

But to show to how little purpose he has labored, I must mind him of the
Clause in S. Edward's Laws, the Receiving and Keeping which is part of the
Coronation Oath; by which if those Laws are wilfully broken by the King, Nec
Nomen Regis in eo constabit. Not so much as the Name of King shall abide in him.

Suitable to this is that Passage in a Speech made by K. James I. to his
Parliament; Cited page 23.
wherein he tells them, Every King in a settled Kingdom is boundto observe the
Paction, Na. Paction, or Contract.
made to his People by his Laws, in framing his Government agreeable thereto.
And that a King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off Governing according to his
Laws. In which case the King's Conscience may speak to him, as the poor Widow
said to Philip of Macedon, Either Govern according to your Law, Aut ne Rex sis,
"Or be no King.

All this our B -- himself refers to in his Margin; but tells us in such case,
Kings are not to be deposed by the People: nor, indeed, is there need of it;
for it appears that they by their own act, cease to be Kings; and therein
depose themselves.

If there were any doubt upon so much of the Speech as we now have; there was
none in the words then spoken to the Parliament, at least there is none in that
Sense in which they took his Speech, and he submitted to.

For they, to keep him to his word, and handsomely to admonish all future
Kings, of the Consequence of breaking Fundamental Laws, wisely repeat the
Substance of his Speech in the Preamble to an Act of Parliament: wherein they
say, His Majesty has vouchsafed to express many ways, Stat. 1. Jac. 1. c. 1.
how far it is, and ever shall be, from his Royal and Sincere Care and
Affection to the Subjects of England, to alter or innovate the Fundamental and
Ancient Laws, Privileges, and Good Customs of this Kingdom; whereby not only
his Regal Authority, but the Peoples Security of Lands, Livings and
Privileges, both in General and Particular are Preserved and Maintained. And
by the Abolishing or Alteration of the which, it is impossible but that present
Confusion will fall upon the whole State and Frame of this Kingdom.

Here is, in effect, the Judgment of Parliament, as well as Confession from the
King, of the Consequence of a King's altering, or innovating the Fundamental
Laws.

After this there will be no need to refer to Pufendorf, whom the B -- himself
cites; to Grotius, Bishop Bilson, and even Falkner, besides many more.

I need only ask him, whether he, who assumes a Legislative Power, in
dispenceing with Laws, would not, cease to be King of England? or by altering a
Fundamental Law, dissolve the State of this Kingdom?

But this I find needful to mind him of, which I was in hopes he would have
attended to; that the Parliament has declared, that the Throne was vacant upon
the late King's Breach of the Original Contract, and the Abdication: whether
one alone were enough to make a Vacancy, it is not needful to determine, for
Vindication of the Settlement; both at least were: And if King James ceased to
be King, upon the Breach of the Contract, this was a full Justification of
them, who invited over His Majesty, and were at his first Landing, ready to
Fight on his side against the late King. However if there were a Vacancy, upon
either, or both of the Grounds, then the Kingdom or Dominion was not taken from
a Sovereign Prince against his Will; but himself, by his own Act, Vid. p. 66.
dissolved the Bond of Union between Prince and People.

Now here was no King of Gods setting up after the Vacancy, according to the B
-- 's Notion; for upon the Abdication, the Government did not, thereby, come
immediately to their present Majesty's, but there was a Vaeancy, Vid. The Act
reviving Law Proceedings.
till [their Majesties] accepted the Crown: and the Parliament provided, that
all Indictments for Misdemeanors in the Interval, should be laid Contra pacem
Regni, "against the Peace of the Kingdom or People.

During that time it seems the Power was lodged in the People; how then came it
out of them, but by the Free Consents of all that were not infected with such
Principles as are contrary to the Settlement?

I would desire him, therefore, when he treats of Politics again, not to fill
his Margin with Quotations, which are not in the least to that case to which he
would apply them. And especially I would advise him, as he values what he holds
forth for the Doctrine of the Church, not to put Men in mind of reading that
admirable Author Pufendorf; whose Works, if they were translated into English,
would convince all, not obstinate against Conviction; that this Revolution and
Settlement (which we say, was begun and finished with full Legal Warrant) is
according to Natural Equity; and has the Suffrages of the best Writers of
Politics.

And let me entreat him, not to encourage or raise Scruples against complying
with this Government; by yielding those Grounds, upon which Men may Scruple,
till they find an Oracle less doubtful, a more sure word of Prophecy, than
Bishop Overal's Convocation-book, or this Discourse of God's Ways of Disposing
of Kingdoms.

FINIS.

