Sacrilege a Snare.

A SERMON PREACHED, AD CLERVM, In the University of Cambridg, by the R.
REVEREND FATHER IN GOD Lancelot Andrews: Late L. BISHOP of WINCHESTER. When he
proceeded Doctor in Divinity:

Translated for the benefit of the Public.

Will a man rob GOD? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, wherein have we robbed
thee? In Tithes and Offerings.

Ye are cursed with a curse; for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation.

Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open
you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not
be room enough to receive it.

P. Malachy 3. chap. 8. 9, 10. v. LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Andrew Hebb, at
the Bell in St. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD. 1646.

Sacrilege a Snare.
PROVE. XX. XXV. It is a snare to the Man who devoureth that which is HOLY.
IT is commonly received, among Divines, that The Proverbs, which we read
scattered and in parcels, from the Xth. Chap. are without Method, not written
in a constant tenor, as the former Nine, by Solomon; But some at one time, some
at another, as the matter and occasion afforded, were uttered by the King,
observed by standers by, and, afterward, not without great benefit, though
without order, committed to Writing.

And other occasions there were for uttering others (for, so wise a man spoke
nothing rashly or unseasonably;) but, for this Proverb now in hand, what hint
was given, to what it was an answer, upon what occasion it was propounded, is
not so evident. For what? Solomon was no Grater on the Laity, much less (which
is as infamous) on the Clergy. None more bountiful then He, toward Holy
things; none farther from Alienating. Whence then, or what had He to do with
Sacrilegious persons, or Vow-breakers, whom this Verse points at? Was there any
in Solomon's time, of so cursed a stomach, that Consecrated Things must be his
Morsels? Any, in that age, such an enemy to Holy Things, as to Devour them? Of
Vows, as to break them? So it should seem: And indeed to this pass it came,
that Interpreters, of no small account with me, are of opinion it was so; and
that there were some such in those days, of whom there are not a few, now. And
that this pious and wise answer, was given by that Wise and Pious Prince to
those Counselors, who labored to persuade him, that those things, which were
given and designed by His Father, by Saul and Samuel, and reserved in the
Threasury for the building of the Temple, might be Alienated, and spent upon
Court Vanities.

I shall diduce this a little higher.

To David (whom the Holy Scriptures call a Man after Gods heart) God gave such
a mind, 2 Samuel 7.2.
being a man to His mind, that he judged it unseemly, the storm of War being
now blown over, that He himself should dwell in Cedar, and the Ark of GOD lodge
between Curtains. And truly it is an unjust demand of certain men, that the
Church should be in no better condition, now flourishing with Peace, then
formerly she was, Philip, 4. ^2.
when groaning under the Cross; never Abound, ever in Need. The Temple must
have its share in Prosperity; so thought David, so with David all the Saints.
In times of War and distractions the Church must be content with Goat Skins; In
Peace, and settled times, she requires Carved works and Cedar. To this
therefore David wholly gives and applies Himself; 1 Chro. 26, 27. 28.
and, besides much formerly dedicated and stored up to this purpose, by Saul,
Abner, Samuel, and by Him piously and faithfully conserved, he bestowed further
at his own charge, both Cedar and Marble, Precious stones and Metals: And that
not sparingly or grudgingly, and with an evil eye: 1 Chro. 26. 4.
For he expended 3000 Talents of Gold, 7000 of Silver. And besides not content
with that, partly by his example, partly by his persuasion, he wrought so far
upon his Nobles, that they likewise engaged themselves in the like vow and
promise: 1 Chro. 29. 7.
By whose bounty there was an accession, of 5000 Talents of Gold, 10000 Talents
of Silver, of Brass 18000 Talents, and 100000 Talents of Iron; so great an
accession, say I, that, which happened in our memory in the taking from the
Church, did then in the addition to it, there was need of a Court of
Augmentations, over which, the Chronicles testify, 1 Chro. 29, 8.
one Iehiel was President.

This so great weight of Gold and Silver, when David, at the point of his
death, delivered to Solomon his Son, for the building of the Temple, it being
as yet in the Threasury, and not brought into the Temple; that there were
certain Court-Ratts (happily Jeroboam and others of the same stamp,) who would
persuade the King, as they in the Prophet, That the House of GOD needed no
sieling; P, Hag. 1,4
as He in the Gospel, That CHRIST'S head might be well enough without Ointment;
To what purpose is this waste? St. Mark 14. 4.
That therefore He should apply it to his Threasury, for which it was much
fitter then the Temple; and that they, to this end, were ready to make
inquisation into Saul's and Abners Vows, and (which is easily done) pick out
some holes, find out some tricks, to make those Vows null and invalid. These
Counselors were not effectual with the True-hearted King, but such
Counselors there were; and it seems probable to me, that this was the
occasion of this Verse, and that the Rabbis were not much out in their
conjecture. That these Counselors were not effectual, this Verse declares;
which, with Solomon and the like godly Princes, will for ever stop the mouths
of such Petitions. And also, why they were not. For, it would be a certain
Snare to Himself, and the Ruin of his Kingdom, if he should permit so great a
wickedness. It is indeed a bait, sufficiently enticing, but wrapped about with a
Snare not to be avoided.

You see whether the Words tend (and at the first veiw deliver themselves) Viz.
to the conservation of the Sacred Patrimony, to the repelling of Sacrilegious
hands from it, and stupifying or deading their Teeth who do Devour it. Which I
would to GOD this our Age could be persuaded of; in which a wicked custom,
has prevailed, and grows daily more and more, of Laying hands upon HOLY
Things; in which, there are no improvements to the Clergy, (would that were
all?) there are frequent impairings; I say, frequent impairings; and I wish it
might only be said, there are; and that there might never be cause of using the
Future tense. But, I shall speak freely; what for that Unholy hunger after
Gold, there is nothing esteemed HOLY; and the restitution of Holy Things is the
pretense for SACRILEGE.

Add to this humor of the present Age, another Error; That those Worthies,
not to be named without all honorable respect, whose help GOD made use of for
the Reformation of Religion, were very sollicitous for the Reformation of
Doctrine, but less attended the Churches Patrimony; and almost said, what the
King of Sodom did to Abraham, though in another sense, Give us the Souls, and
take the rest to You. But as they, who thought they should find the Baptist in
Kings Courts, so they, that think they shall find ABRAHAM there, are both
deceived.

Which Error, though a small one (and a small one indeed it is, if we compare
it with those great and famous acts performed by them) yet, we may justly
fear, if not seasonably withstood, will lie heavy upon succeeding Ages: in
which true-hearted honest men (from that of Solomon, Pro. 14. 4. Where no Oxen
are, the crib is clean) presage Barbarism, or somewhat worse, which I will
not speak of; falsely perchance, and I pray GOD it prove so, but not rashly, I
am sure, not without cause. So that, in very truth, unless we would have the
Universities to be broken up, the Clergy to be trampled on, and all that is
called HOLY come to ruin, there lies a necessity upon us to plead for the
Churches Patrimony: That, which is left of it, let us aneil and rub over with
this bitter juice; let us show them the Snare in which they take pains to trap
themselves; and, that it is not lawful for them to do what daily they attempt,
unless it be lawful for them to blot this Verse out of the Holy Scriptures.

And indeed to confess the truth, this blur upon our Age, that Holy Things are
so Devoured, much troubles me, (though there were, there were indeed, in
Solomon's time, such, whose teeth itched to be at them.) But this troubles me
more, that we Divines see these things, and are lukewarm, nay silent; that we
put up and Devour these Devourings; that (which the Apostle complains of, 2.
Cor. 11. 20.) We suffer if a man devour us, if a man bring us into beggary.
But this most of all, that we our selves, (so it is) daily expose our selves to
be eat and drunk up, as I may so say, by these Devourers of the Clergy. This is
not the way, believe me, to effect what we desire. It Is the wish of many, and
mine among the rest, that we may have a Learned and a Teaching Clergy: Grant it
Lord JESUS, grant it speedily; It is a Holy and a wholesome wish: But, if we
suffer the Churches Means to be thus gnawed and shaved, eaten, and devoured, a
Vain wish. This was one piece of Pharaohs madness; He would have them
sacrifice to the Lord; but not a Sheep or Ox to be allowed. Exodus 10. 24. And
this is our Error, our Madness rather. Commanders of Armies are a great deal
wiser: first, they take care for Victuals, then for Soldiers. But we daily
list many strong, good Soldiers; we bring them in no Provision, nay we suffer
that they have to be taken from them. And (which I have not seldom wondered at
in these men) we are ever talking of increasing the Light, seldom or never of
allowing Oil. But we must preach for one, as well as the other, the Oil as
well as the Light. We must often and vehemently call upon men to remember the
Threasury of GOD: We must labor to bring them to that pass Solomon brought
his, to esteem it a part of Religion, not to touch any thing set apart for
Religion; to fast, rather then make their meals upon Holy Things: to give
themselves for choked, and strangled, if they should, even unwittingly,
swallow down that which is Holy: This if accomplished, I shall hope for days
as good as SOLOMON'S. If not -- But I will not presage any thing grievous. I go
on to my purpose.

The Verse I shall divide, as it divides it self, into 2. Parts. The One,
concerning Holy Things not to be Devoured. 2. The Other, concerning Vows not
anxiously to be inquired into.

The First, for my more distinct progress, J shall part into 3. Members.

1. What Things those are which Solomon calls HOLY. 2. Who they are that
Devour them. 3. They, that do, engage themselves in a great sin, catch
themselves in a Snare.
1. OF the first. By Solomon in this Chapter, that part of our substance is
called Holy, wherewith (chap. 3. ver. 9.) He told us, God ought to be
honored. For not Augustus alone has power to tax the world, God has also His
power of Taxing; and that out of His full right over our Goods. Of which to
take away all obscurity or doubt from any; Under the Law He commanded two
diverse Coins of money. 1 One stamped with the Sword, and Scepter of the
Prince. 2 The other with the Pot, and Rod of Aaron. By the One allotting to the
Prince his Tribute, for his Protection of us; by his Scepter, against Injustice
and Contention; by his Sword, against Hostility. By the Other allowing the
Priest his due; by whose labor it is Gods pleasure of dry Trees to make us
live and flourish; and, living to Feed Us with Heavenly Manna to Eternal life.
God the Father commanded both; God the Son paid both: Doves to the Temple,
Tribute to the Prince. That First is the sacred Tribute.

Of which to take a little more exact knowledge. Four things there are, which
in Holy Scripture are called Holy. What things are called Holy.


1. Among them that is the first and principal, for which the other are
sanctified: I mean, the first Fruits of the Spirit; namely Holiness it self,
with which they must be adorned, who look to enter into that holy and
heavenly Jerusalem. It is the Encomium given to God by the Holy Angels (so by
them, so by us,) P. Esaias 6. 3. Holy, Holy, Holy: So has God commanded us under
the Law. Levit. 20.7
Be ye holy, for I am holy. So under the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. This is the
will of God even your holiness: This is the will of God, ought to be ours.
Since Ephesians, 1.4,
God the Father has chosen his Church (which we are) before the world. Ephesians.
5,26
God the Son Redeemed from the world: and 1 St Ioh. 2. 20.
God the Spirit anointed in the world. You have the first, our Sanctification.

2. But, for the begetting of Holiness, first, and then increasing it, in us,
He has sanctified a second sort of Holy things. To wit, Four Means: 1 The
Word. 2 Prayer. 3 Sacraments. 4 Censures. 1 The Word, principally; St. Joh. 17.
17.
Sanctify them by thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. 2 To which Prayer is coupled.
1. Tim. 4. 5.
Sanctified by the Word of GOD and Prayer. 3 Then the Holy Sacraments. 1 Of
Baptism, Ephesians. 5. 2 Of the Eucharist, Hebr. 13. 4 Lastly, Censures. These
Christ calls S. Matthew. 7.6.
Holy, not to be cast to dogs; Sanctified by himself, both to retain us in,
and recall us to our duty. This the Second. Holy Means.

3. Further, for the exercising of these Means, and applying them to that use
to which he has ordained them, He has sanctified a third sort of Holy
things: Which is threefold. 1 Of the Place, where. 2 Of the Time, when. 3 Of
the Persons, by whom, they ought to be administered. 1. Of the Place; Which He
therefore calls Holy, and the Sanctuary, S. Matthew. 24, 15. 2. Of the Time;
Which He calls the Holy day of the Lord, P. Esaias 58. 13. 3. Of the Person;
Whom He therefore calls his Holy One, Deuteronomy. 33. 8. You have the Third.


4. But to these Persons thus employed in Divine Offices, and making little
account of their own in respect of Holy things, a fourth kind, viz. of Holy
Tribute was appointed for their mantenance and livelihood. Ezechias, the best
of Kings, 2 Chro. 31. 4.
has very well comprised the whole business, appointing a fit portion to the
Priests and Levites, that they might more courageously attend the study of the
Law. Which portion that it should be deemed Holy, there was an express command
by GOD Himself: Both under the Law, where the People was taught to say; Deuteronomy.
26. 13.
I have brought away the hallowed things out of my house; which was, to
acknowledge that which was paid to the Levite as a Holy Tribute: and also under
the Gospel; where, not only those things we are exercised in, but, those also
which we live upon, are termed by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 13.
the Holy things of the Temple.

So you have a fourefold sort of Holy things, one issuing from another, and
appointed for the conservation each of other. 1 Holy Manners. 2 Holy Means. 3
Holy Persons. 4 Holy Revenues. Our business is about this fourth. For no man
gapes after, or fastens his teeth upon those three: This last, this, this it
is, upon which they set their teeth and stomach. Though indeed, as I shall show
anon, there is but one bit, one draught of all. Truly, they are tied in a close
and strong knot together, Holy Revenues, Holy Persons, Holy Means, Holy
Manners. Nor shall we be ever able to keep up Holy Manners without due Means;
nor due Means without fit Persons; nor fit Persons without ample Revenues and
comings in.

This therefore which Solomon calls Holy, is the Tribute of the Sanctuary.
But what is that, or how so called? I shall tell you that, too. The Holy
Scripture is plentiful about it; but it may be reduced to two heads. 1 Of
Oblation. 2 Of Indiction.

1. Of Oblation; either by Vow, or Freewill; that the Hebrews call a Vow,
simply. vid. Gen, 28. 20.
Neder, this a free will Offering. vid. Levit. 7. 16. Deuteronomy. 16. 10. joined with
Missah. Levit. 27.
Nedabah. These will fall into the second member, I will not prosecute it. Only
this I say; The Church had a Patent granted her, by virtue whereof every one
had leave to alienate and set apart what he would of his own to holy uses, and
that either by way of Freewill offering, or by Vow; whether it were Person; or
Beast, Clean or unclean, of the Flock, or of the Herd; whether Houses or
Lands, of inheritance or purchase. The same gracious License remained under the
Gospel, for any to lay down, what, how much he would, of his own, at the
Apostles feet, Acts 4.35.
that is, to give, bestow, dedicate, consecrate his Goods to God.

2. I come to the Indiction, that which is set and determined. And sure there
was a necessity for this, lest, if those Freewill offerings should come in
coldly, and the Threasury of the Church should be, as it is often, empty for
want of a constant shower of Manna, the Priests should well nigh starve. I am
to treat of a hard point, and (that, which grieves me most) but briefly. It is
certain that in every ones estate there is a sacred part. This is more obscure,
what that is, or how much. Genesis 14.20.
Abraham the father of the Faithful (wholly to be imitated by his Children
for the Place and Measure of their donation) laid upon himself the Tith, the
Leviticall Law being not then written. How so, who declared to him the measure
of the Divine portion? no doubt but the Holy Spirit to so holy a man. That same
Spirit, who before had tacitly dictated it to Abraham, did afterward by an
express Law take order for that and no other portion, to be paid to Persons
consecrated by Him. Numb. 18. 21.
Indeed to some this seems wholly ceremonial, as all things do now a days
that touch the purse. Others will not allow any portion to be by Natural Right,
nor so great by Positive. That GOD was indeed as careful for our sustenance,
as He was for the Levits. That there was nothing then reserved to the Positive
Law, nor therefore now: and to this purpose they urge that in the 23. of St.
Matthew. Ye ought not to leave the other undone. I came hither to Preach, not to
dispute: and therefore betake my self to the more received opinion, that Tithes
have their force from the Imposition of the Church. For the same power which
the Church had of old to make Ordinances, and to charg it self with a Shekel or
the third part of a Shekel for the Service of the House of God remains still
the same under the Gospel, H. Nehe: 10. 33. Acts 11.29. 1 Cor. 16.1
in which you shall meet with (...) and (...), Decrees and Ordinances; Acts 24,
17.
and those, not only, as St. Paul testifies, for Alms to the Poor, but also,
for Offerings. When therefore the Primitive Church would take order for a set
allowance for such as attended the Divine Service, turning her self on all
sides, and casting up her thoughts, she found out no equaler Portion which she
could ordain, then that known old one and appointed by the Law, Viz. the Tith
of the yearly comings in; the most equal in respect of GOD and Man. In respect
of GOD, so St. Augustine in the person of GOD. Thou art mine, o man; this
Earth, which thou tillest, is mine; these Seeds, which thou sowest, are mine;
these Beasts, which thou imployest, mine; the Rain and Showers, mine; the Sun
and heat, mine; all, mine; thou which lendest only thy hand, deservest only the
Tith; but I grant Nine to thee; give me the Tith. Could a more reasonable
speech possibly be made?

In respect of Man, that must needs be most equal, which is not too loose for
one, too strait for another. By this, there is a most exact equality: the Rich
are not spared, the Poor are not oppressed: which is the common complaint of the
Edicts of Princes; the Crow, there, better then the Dove.

This Portion therefore the Church has hallowed, and given that honor to God
the author of this Imposition, to believe that He best knew the Measure of His
own Tribute; and that no Councils of the Church, no Assemblies of the Kingdom
could settle that affair more wisely, then it was of old provided for by the
Sacred Law; then the Lawyer himself (so absolute, that Justinian is no body to
him) had proclaimed many ages since. But then, you will say, She who imposed it,
may, when She will, forbid it I think not, but, however, would not persuade her
to it; and that upon this ground; both, because a dangerous custom might
thence arise, to hold for Sacred what we list, how much we list, as long as we
list, if we grant that: and also, because the rights of inheritances ought to
be most holy: and God calls His Covenants, Covenants of salt, therefore not
to be made and unmade, incroach'd upon, exchanged, or repealed at our pleasure:
Again, because an ancient Law ought not to be antiquated, saving for its
((...) or (...)) weakness or unprofitablenesse. Here Is neither. For I see its
strength from the Author, Consent, Custom, Multitude; and not the mute or
silent, but the express and clear approbation of all ages. And its use, as
manifestly: for it has a long time been employed, without complaint of any, to
that use to which it was appointed: and, unless the sinews of it had been cut
by certain Improper Proprietaries, it had been better employed, neither would
the Church have ever complained in that point. And then, lastly, because, where
by crafty counsel the Tith has been changed into a stipend, they wish it
undone: thence many errors, deceipts, difficulties, complaints have risen.
There was a complaint of the Church of Scotland exhibited to the Parliament at
Edinburgh, A. D. MDLXV, when I read the eighth Leaf of it, it pities me for
them: I say no more, but what the Boys use to sing, Felix quem faciunt, etc.
Happy they, whom other men's harms make to beware.

Let this custom then stand inviolable; and so I shut up this first part, with
telling you, that whatsoever is either dedicated by Vow, or imposed by Law is
Holy; and (in the language of the Twelve Tables) Qui clepserit repseritue,
Sacrilegus esto: whosoever diminishes or devoureth it, is guilty of Sacrilege.

What it is to devour Holy things.
You know now what are Holy things. What it is to devour Holy things, which I
promised to show in the second place, now learn: The Prophet Malachy, for the
Old Testament calls it P Mal. 3.8 (...)
to rob; Saint Luke, for the New, Acts. 5.3.
(...) to defraud, or divert. In which point Solomon seems to me to have used
a most fit word, when he called that devoured, which was most properly to be
said to be alienated.

1. For, when we eat of our own, we eat, as mannerly people do, by
morsells, well chewed and ground: if it be Another, we snatch at it, and, lest
the true owner of it should come upon us and take the bit out of our mouths,
we swallow it down suddenly and all together. In that respect, first, properly
said to devour, because not our own.

2 Secondly in this, because Greedily. Look me upon Seneca's Mastiffe, or
rather the P. Esays Dog, P. Isai. 56. 11.
gaping at the table, never stirring his eyes, but wagging his tail, and
fawning upon you, while yon fling him somewhat. And then show me one of our
Clergy-Devourers stretching his chops and soul upon the Church, Means, gaping,
and his teeth itching to be at them, ever and anon up with, Give me those
grounds, give me that superfluous farm, that decayed Church. I pray what
difference? In that respect, secondly, because Greedily taken.

3 Again, mark that Dog well, you shall see him not only Greedy, but one that
cannot be satisfied, never having enough. If a bone be flung to him, it is down
in an instant, and he is gaping again, no less then before. In like manner, you
may observe these to be ever craving, sick of a dropsy; their thirst
increases with their drink; you may know them to be a kin to the Horseleach,
whose daughters are ever crying, pro. 30. 15 (...)
Give, Give.

4 Lastly, what usually falls out to such devouring and ravenous creatures, as
Kites, Wolves, Locusts, that they are ever starvlings, none of them grows the
fatter, or in better case; Genesis 41. 4
even so to these. Just as Pharaohs lean kine eat up the fat ones, and yet
were ill favored as before; so these are ever snatching, and ever in want, GOD
blowing upon their goods thus gotten, that we may even wonder what is become of
that mass of treasure which, not many years since, went into the stomach of
the Commonwealth. Let this tell us what it is to Devour: Namely, 2 Greedily
to swallow down, 1 What is not ours but Gods, 3 With which we shall not be
nourished, 4 nor satisfied. I have done with the Thing: now briefly of the
Persons.

Who the Persons that Devour,
There is a twofold sort of men. 1 Such as have no Right at all. 2 Such as
indeed have a Right, but shamefully and wickedly abuse it.

Such as have no Right.
1. Such as have no Right: Their sin is a hundred times more heinous, though
both's be heinous. For if he sins, who flingeth away that which is his
own; how great a sinner is he, who takes away that which is another, to
which he has no Right, no nor any capacity of Right (as they say) and that
with injury to God; and that not to any God, but the living God. Every one his
own; Romans 13.7 Numb. 18 St. Matthew 22.
so Justice wills: This is their own; but so Theirs, that, first, Gods: and
these men sin, first, against Heaven, then against Us: for His primary Right
God reserveth to Himself. If every ones own to the true owner, then, what is
Gods, to God. But these are Gods, if we will believe God. Gods, twice, indeed.
First, by His Creation; so that we must all necessarily say with David, 1 Chro
29, 14,
These things which we give are all thine own: we give thee but thine own.
By His Creation, first; by our Dedication, secondly. Which God by a secondary
Right has made over to Us, as most just that We, who are constituted for men
in the things which appertain to God, should be constituted for God in those
things which appertain to Men; that We, who reach to Men the things which are
Gods, should receive, the things which are Gods, from Men. GOD has made over
to us this Right, and that so strictly, that it is lawful, not only not to
take any thing away, no not by Ignorance; Levit. 5.
But (which is lawful in Civil matters) not to sell; P. Eze, 48. 14.
I say not, not all, but not a part. Not to sell, not to buy? much less then
to devour. And truly this is not his fault alone who extorts it, but the
Magistrates too who permits it: Whereupon that good Prince Nehemiah protests,
H. Nehe. 13 6,
not only that He did not take away the Holy things, but, that He was absent
from the City, when they were taken away. And that if he had been present,
rather than have suffered it, he would (with Artaxerxes) have bestowed
somewhat from his own Exchequer, or (with Pharaoh) from his own Table. I say
therefore, that they, who cut the Levits short of what they ought to receive,
offend against God, whether they do it by force or by fraud; whether they
employ it to pay Soldiers, or build Houses; whether they do it for profit, or
pleasure; whether they invert all, or but a part. By Force wicked Athalia
breaking into the House of God, and taking away all that was therein: by Fraud
wicked Achan privily digging in his Tent, added the Saered spoils to his own
household stuff. Ioas pretended to provide for the Public Good; for with the
Threasurie of the House of God He procured conditions of Peace, but a slippery
Peace; for He Devoured the Holy things. Jeroboam seemed to intend the Public
Honor; for He built Shechem, and Phenuel; but in blood; for it was with the
spoil of the Temple, and the alienating of the Tithes: Tobias furnished
himself a chamber in the Porch of God, for his Profit and Convenience:
Baltazar for His Pleasure drank out of the Vessels of the Sanctuary: all of
them were Sacrilegious. Finally, not only that EPIMANES who ransackt All; but
Judas also, who was so bold as to thrust his Sacrilegious fingers into Christ's
bag, though content with a Part, was guilty of the same crime: as was likewise
that Sacrilegious Couple, who durst invade the Church Threasure, and detein but
a part of that which had touched the feet of the Apostles. Every one of these
was guilty of Sacrilege.

Such as have right, but abuse it.
Now we must speak concerning the second Sort. A kind of men there is indeed,
who have a Right, but they wickedly abuse that Right. You think, perhaps, I
will go far hence to seek; I stir not a foot, I move not hence; We are the
Men; and even amongst us, there are many, too too many, who Devour Holy
things. For (which, it is to be feared, some of us do) by sloth and Idleness,
to tarry here like Drones, to fling away our precious hours, to flow in
Luxury, to be at leisure for feasts, and plays, and vanities, to do these
things, and yet to fatten our selves with those things which are consecrated to
Holy uses, this is, in our Saviors judgment, S. Luke 15. 13.
to Devour, and spend our Fathers goods in riotous Living.

I will come nearer yet. A great part of that former Devouring came from our
selves: and therefore are Holy things Devoured by others, because they are
Devoured by Our selves: And indeed as lawful (think some) for them, to gather
the Holy Tiths, and to neglect the Holy Duties, as for Us. And truly (to tell
you my fears) they who now sheere the fleece, will one day pull off skin and
fleece together; they who are now gnawing at Church Means, will consume them
at last with open-mouth, unless GOD chang our minds and manners. For sure
there is no throat so Holy, that it can be lawful for it to consume the things
that are Holy; it is lawful to eat, to feed upon them: but to Devour them is,
not only unlawful, but, a high wickedness, not only for those Locusts, but even
for us too. May there be heaps, heaps of provision, 2 Chronicles. 31. 4. 6.
but for them that war the Holy warfare; let them that partake of the Altar,
wait at the Altar. 1 Cor. 9. 14. But to him that partakes and waits not, that
spends the Means, and attends not the work, to him it is sin.

I speak not this that the people may purloin the ( Priests) wages: they may no
more take from the Shekel of Caiphas an evil Priest, S. Matthew. 22. 21. Romans
13.7.
then from the tribute of Tiberius a wicked Prince; to both they must give
their due, though they do not perform their duty; both of them are the
Ministers of God, and stand or fall to Him. Both take that, which belongs to
God, if they take it with Sacrilegious hands, and must give an account to GOD.
I speak it to this end, as wishing Both in a better mind, Laity and Clergy.
Them, that, for the future, they would be quiet and forbear to Devour Holy
things, by unjust detention and alienation; These, that, for the future, they
would labor and forbear to Devour Holy things, by idleness, and misimploying.

What it is, who they are that Devour Holy things, is now clear, I would it
were not so clear.

Him, Their punishment who Devour.
that shall, what is like to befall, (which was my third Proposal,) now
hearken: It is a snare. That some such there should be, who would do it,
Solomon foresaw; and future ages have proved too true. In truth there is such a
cursed holy hunger, that there will be Theft, there will be Sacrilege, there
will be a total overthrow of all that is called Holy, unless God Himself
take order, to the contrary, by immediate command, countermand, nay by thunder
and lightning, and so provide that they be untouched: It Is so sweet a bit, so
pleasant to the Palate, so full of delights, that you may rend their chops, and
break their jaws, yer you shall get it from them. This is not as it should
be; Solomon therefore adds, Let them eat and drink Holy things, if they like
them so well: perhaps the bait may please, but under the bait there lies a
hook, which they swallow with it. Let them take heed of the bait, there is a
net not far off: let them not meddle with the Field, it is an Acheldama, a
field of blood. Let them not take away the gifts of the Temple, for they are
wrapped about with the Anathema of Heaven, a curse for the spoylers. By which
word Solomon very aptly, and elegantly compares the whole matter, whereof he
treats, to Fowling, wherein Satan the great hunter of souls, (for so H.
David, Psalm 91. 3. so Saint Paul calls him, 2 Timothy 2. 26.) waiting for his
prey, lays out, for his bait, Church Lands and Revenues, but covered over
with the Crime of Sacrilege, as with a gin or snare. There you may see our
Clergy-eaters, who (as Pharaoh thought, when he oppressed the Church, Exodus 1,10.
Come let us deal wisely) take themselves to be very wise, having made a gain
of holy things, hasten to the snare with those foolish birds, (Prove. 7.23.) not
knowing that it is for their life: Fly as soon as the^ see the prey, to take,
but are taken, and devouring the prey, are made his prey, who goes about, day
and night, seeking whom he may devour. It is a most true saying, that in every
sin there is a bait and a snare, a bait pretended, a snare which lies hid. The
bait, some little profit of iniquity, or some small trifling pleasure of sin;
the snare, the sin, with its sting, viz. the fearful curse of the Law. I will
not go far hence; chap. 5. v 3.4. In wandering Lust: the bait, the lips of the
Harlot, distilling nothing but honey; the snare, the relics of sin more bitter
than wormwood, more sharp then a sword. Chap. 23. v. 31.32. In luxury and
drunkenness; the bait, the color of the Wine in the Glass, the taste in the
Palate; the snare, the biting as of the Serpent or Basilisk, which with its
sting brings certain death.

In this very chap. ver. 17. In stealth; the bait, Bread of deceit, stolen,
got without sweat; the snare, sin filling the mouth with gravel, whence
necessarily follows the gnashing of the teeth. Every sin, I say, has its
bait, and its snare: but this (in of Sacrilege, more and above all other. The
bait, I take for granted: the snare I shall show, if you please, even in
Profane stories. Cambyses, who rifled the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, found it
destructive to himself: Brennus, who robbed the Delphick, found it destructive
to himself and his. Crassus who did as much to the Temple at Jerusalem, was
forced to swallow down melted Gold with the same chaps, which he had before
devoured the Holy things with. Had you rather have Sacred stories? I follow
your desires in that too. Dathan, Numb. 16 32.
who had but a mind to devour Holy things, was himself devoured of the Earth.
Achan, H. Ios. 7.29
who was the first that adventured to add the Sacred Wedge of Gold to his own
housholdstuffe, was devoured of a heap of stones in the Valley of Achor. P.
Dan. 5. 24. 25.
Baltazar, when he held the sacred Vessels betwixt his fingers, saw, over
against him on a Wall, fingers, which proved fatal to his life and Kingdom.
Athalia, 2 Kings 11. 16.
slain with a sword within the close of the Temple, of that very Temple, whose
Threasure, it is not long since, she took away. But because it is an easy
matter to find the just vengeance upon Sacrilege, under the Law, and the credit
of the Old Testament is in this point suspected, I had rather show it from the
New. There, Judas who first filch'd from his Masters baggs, afterward betrayed
his Master himself, and, as a just punishment of his former sins, taught us by
his miserable example, that there is an halter, a snare, which lies hid in
these Holy things. This befell him who theiv'd from Christ. But they, who first
dared to make an inrode upon the Church stook, Act. 5. 10.
(though it be all one) I say not to take it away being given, but only to
detein it, before it was given, (the Gospel it self making no plea, nor
interceding for the fact) were choked with a sudden and most horrid death,
upon a word of the Apostle. Upon which place I will stand a little more: For it
is, as the fairest, so the most apposite and full in this point.

First, then, it is evident that things may be consecrated to Holy use, even
under the Gospel.

Secondly, That being so consecrated, they are no longer ours.

Thirdly, that, since they are not ours, they cannot be detained without great
sin, not taken away without greater.

Fourthly, That whosoever does one or the other, does it therefore, because Satan
has filled his heart. ( Sacrilegious Persons, then, are filled with Satan.)

Fifthly, That this kind of men is to be punished with death, not only with
censures.

Sixthly, And that death sudden, that there should be no space for the
expiating of so great a sin. And,

Seventhly, with death immediately from Heaven, whereby God declared, as it were
from Heaven, that he himself was the avenger of so great a wickedness.

These examples, Fathers and Brethren, are from the Gospel. The Gospel is no
milder against these men then is the Law. And even the Gospel itself, the
Minister of life, has its snare, a snare of death, for that man, for that
Conscience, which makes no Conscience or Religion of devouring what belongs to
Religion.

Yes, but how many Sacrilegious persons has no such thing befallen? For it is
not usual or perpetual which is inflicted on a growing mischeife: Neither
does Solomon say it is; that they shall be taken in the very act. But what he
says, is usual, neither do examples fail us; for, though they may escape the
light and day for a while, they shall not escape so; Solomon's snare will take
them by the heel. For the snare he speaks of, is the Snare of a Fowler; in
which perhaps the bird, that is taken, is not presently strangled, but tangled
by the foot or neck, oftimes till the evening, and oftimes longer, till the
return of the Fowler. Many times the destruction is slow, but ever sure.

I believe you have observed, that the Holy Scriptures speak not of the
punishment of wicked men, always, after the same manner. The Wrath of God is
sometimes as a storm suddenly rushing down all before it; H. Ios. 23 13.
sometimes as a Net taking for the present, and after a while slaying. In P.
Esaias, ( Chap. 51. v. 8.) it is an Axe suddenly cutting down: and it is a Moth
consuming by peicemeale. In P. Hosea, ( Chap. 5. v. 12.) He says, he will be a
Lion to some, to others rottenness and a Moth: a Lion, which teareth in a
moment; a Moth, which wears out insensibly and by degrees. The Apoplexy
kills one way, the Hectik another, but both kill. A Ship perishes one while
by neglecting the Pump: another while by the Overflowing of the Billows; but
both ways it perishes. That Thunderbolt of St. Peter effected the business
sooner; this Snare of Solomon, slower: but both this and that bring the same
business about, have the same issue.

This is the fruit of Sacrilege. Men fly upon the bait, nay into the net too,
but being wholly intent and set upon the prey, they taste its sweetness, but take
no heed to the danger, with which they entangle and snare both Soul and
Conscience. Not so indeed, that they come suddenly to ruin, but, feast upon
this Worm, while they have devoured all; but when they would get loose, they
shall find that they are held with the cords of sin, Pro. 5. 22. with the
snares of death, Psalm. 118. and that the judgment, which, perchance, rusheth
not suddenly upon them, but waits at the door, is not to be made slight of.
That the Fowler will come at last, will certainly come, and the Soul so
ensnared shall be his prey; a prey, I say, to the Devil, ( GOD and what belongs
to God, having been formerly his prey) by that most just sentence, P. Ier. 30.
16. They that devour thee shall be devoured.

I have showed you the Snare. And that is laid for (...)
Man. Both Him that sins, and others for his sake. For such is the nature of
this sin, that it reaches all the Camp over, that it makes the whole
Commonwealth a valley of Achor. Touching the Sacrilegious Person himself, we
have told you, that he provides very il for his own private fortune, into which
he brings this cursed gain, as a pledge or earnest of misfortune. P. Hag. 1.6
These Holy things will eat out the bottom of his bags, in which they are
crowded, and will make them full of holes and rents. This field will blast and
burn up all his other feilds: This stuff will bring a consumption upon all the
rest; the punishment, this, denounced by the P. Haggai. 2. 16. 17.
Worse, then so, betides their Souls, Acts 5. 3.
which they fill with Satan, who catches them in an inexplicable Snare, and
reserveth them to that Judgment which is insufferable.

I will speak briefly, both of the Commonwealth, and of the Church.

When this sin is once admitted, GOD sends a Devourer upon the State, for the
Devouring of his Holy things. Either the Catterpiller, P. Malachy 3. 11. or Men
worse then the Catterpiller. The Kings of Israel, when they once plundered Holy
things, had no peace, but much trouble and vexation, going out or coming in;
what they took from the Temple, they were forced to fling away upon the
Soldiers, the Camp-Locusts. In S. Augustin's time, when the President of the
Provinces rifled the Sanctuaries, that people was not enriched by it. What they
took from the Temple, they were forced to fling away upon the Lawyers, the
Bar-Locusts. Because Devotion to God decreased, the commings in to the
Exchequer increased. One devourer follows another, either a Brigade of
Soldiers, or a swarm of Lawyers. There will be a Snare for certain; or a Snare
of Law, or a Snare of Taxes, or a Snare of War: doubtless, God will rain down
Snares upon such a Nation.

Now briefly, touching the Church. But, there, when the Holy Portion is
devoured, all that is Holy is devoured with it. For by weakening the hands of
the present Clergy, and alienating the minds of others for the future, either
there will be no Prophet at all, P. Hos. 8,9.
or he, that shall be, will himself be a Snare in the ways of Israel. The
People will become the prey of the Dragon: Revel. 12, ^
of that Dragon who stands before the woman now ready to bring forth, that,
when she has brought forth, he may Devour it. For certainly a greater sin
then Sacrilege lies under this; and (what I admonished at the first) these men
are, not only Sacrilegious, but, to be taken for Enemies to all that is called
Holy.

For whereas these four kinds of Holys cleave, and are, as it were, bound up
together, 1 Holy Manners. 2 Means. 3 Persons. 4 Revenues. There is but one bit
of all; and, it cannot be but, he, that shall swallow one, must needs swallow
all the rest, at the same draught 1 Let there be no Revenue, there will be no
Levite. H. Nehe. 13.10. Do you see all this great Assembly? Every one of them
will betake himself to the Country, and give over the House of God, unless
order be taken for their sufficient mantenance. 2 Let there be no Prophet,
there will be no Prophecy, no Law. If those be but once gone, there will be no
learned Priest, to teach the people. The Holy Spirit joins these two together.
2 Chro. 15,3. Without 1 a Teaching Priest, and without the 2 Law. 3 Let there
be no Prophesy, and there shall be no People. K. Solomon's word for it. Prove.
29. 18. The issue of all is; those men, who Devour Holy things, Devour also
the Prophets, as they did their Judges. P. Hos. 7. 7.
But they, who devour the Prophets, devour Souls. They, that devour Souls,
devour the People of GOD as it were bread. Whosoever then swallow down Holy
things, Psalm. 14.4
are the gulfs not only of Revenues and Mantenance, but also of the Prophets;
of Sermons, of Souls, of Kingdoms. Let no man deceive you with cunning words;
as salvation is not without the Word, nor the Word without a Prophet; so, most
certain it is, that, there will be neither Prophets nor Schools for the
PROPHETS, long, without liberal mantenance.

Say I these things after the manner of men? Say not the Holy Scriptures the
same also? What all Heathen writers inculcate, that, Honor is the Nurse of the
Arts, the same does St. Paul, thrice in a verse, affirm to be the Nurse of
Divinity. 1 Cor. 9 10.
That we must plow, sow, thresh, in Hope: that without this Hope of Carnal
things, we may bid adieu to the harvest of Spiritual. Pro. 14,4.
K. SOLOMON said, where the Crib is empty, the Oxen fail: He said it for us:
who in vain expect well managed Oxen, unless we store up Provender for them.
A wiser then K. Solomon said, though not of this matter, yet not beside it,
unless there be a Carcass there will be no Eagles. St. Matthew. 24. 28.
He said it to us, who in vain expect Eagles, if we take away the Carcass. The
study of Divinity must have its encouragements. For CHRIST and His College were
not begging Friars, as some have determined. No, but He had a bag, and that so
larg^, that He could buy with it not only what was needful, but also give unto
the Poor. S. Joh 13. 29.
And St. PAUL will's that there be an abundance, not only in Alms, but much
more in Offerings; 2 Cor. 8. 20:
(for we must understand him to speak of both, 1 Cor. 9.6. 12.
as I formerly acquainted you.) bountifully, not sparingly, not only supplying
want, but also abundant. 1 Timothy 3.2.
Besides, he that will have a Bishop to be given to Hospitality, as well as apt
to teach (and indeed if there be any prejudice against it, he puts, in the
first place, given to Hospitality) would have him to be not only well furnished
from his Study, for Doctrine; but also from his Chest, for Hospitality. And,
lastly, Philip. 4. 10.
he is of opinion that they wither in the Faith, who are so tenacious, such
holdfasts. And that, if at any time their Faith increase, our condition and
fortune will be mended. The condition of the Clergy ought to be, such as should
be, nearer Envy, then Mercy.

Look upon the Old Canon. One part of Consecration was Anointing; another,
Filling of the hand; and, where the last fails, the first is also wanting. So
under H. Moses; Dathan envyed at it. The Levits must have, 1 Chro. 26 15. 18.
Asuppim, their gatherings, and, Parbar, their store. So under K. David. There
must be heaps, great heaps, enough to eat, plenty, great store. So under K.
Hezechiah. 2 Chronicles, 31, 10
Nor was there ever a merrier world, then under those Kings, who have been
bountiful to the Levits. Nor ever a more dismal face of the State, then under
those Kings, who looked with a Malignant, envious eye upon the Levits.

Look upon that Anarchy of the Judges; Judge. 17. 7.8.10
See the Levits wandering up and down: the Reason: why, their wages were Ten
Shekels. Look on Readiness time; the Ark was not sought to in those days: the
Reason: 1 Samuel 2. 36.
why, their fortune was to bow themselves for a piece of silver, 1 Samuel, 22.9
and a bit of bread. Doeg was in more esteem then was Ahimelech. Look on
Ieroboam's. Whosoever would was consecrated Priest, even of the lowest of the
people: the Reason: why, 1 Kings 12 31.
the lowest are fit enough for the lowest condition. And, with Us, ( Fathers
and Brethren) if we would fling away our pains at so low a price, as some, now
they have bras'd their foreheads, stick not to say; any, that can but wear a
long Gown, and prate by the houre-glasse, and huddle out much, no matter what,
to the purpose or beside, shall be a fit PROPHET for Us.

What remains, I shall give you in a word. Consider we how GOD, in the
Prophet Zachary, Chap. 11. v. 12. when he had thoughts of forsaking Israel,
forsook them upon this very point, because they requited His pains with too
cold and beggarly a reward. Do you hear? quoth He; if you think good, give
me my price: and, if not, forbear. When they had weighed him some money, viz.
Thirty pieces, He, in indignation, flies out into these words; surely, a
glorious Reward, a goodly price that I am prised at of you. And he broke the
Staff of the Pastoral Office, and made void whatsoever good he had purposed to
that people. This example was not given in vain. Believe me, this happens
daily to Excellent Spirits, and full of GOD, (unless there be perchance one or
two, an Eldad or Medad) who sometimes have these thoughts, and tacitly speak
thus to themselves: Alas, this of its own nature is a weighty burden; but, by
the Pharisaicall laying on of load, (which yet they touch not with the little
finger) is now made infinite; the place is slippery, and full of Cares and
Troubles: Will there be any Reward? When they see that men are cold in that
point, that they must take pains at a low price, that infinite labor is
required, and Thirty pieces shall be paid for all; many who otherwise incline
to the study of Divinity, break their Staves, betake themselves to other
Studies, and fall off from their purpose of consecrating themselves to these
Studies, and to this sacred work.

Which that it may not come to pass, ( Fathers and Brethren) that there may be
no more breaking of these staves, apply early remedies to this disease. Free
the Church from that tail of Prophets, P. Isai, 9. 15.
which is otherwise likely to happen; free the Commonwealth from these snares
of troubles; free your selves from the blood of so many souls, which daily
perish by SACRILEGE. P. Eze. 3. 18. 20.
Often urge this Text, and others like it.

I take it for granted, and confessed by all, that a Learned Clergy would be an
excellent and most desired thing, so we might see grounds how it may be
effected. Which that it may be, it seems to me to be the better course to
inculcate this point in our Sermons, then (what we have long done with
lamentable success) to bite and tear one another, Gal. 5.15.
while at length we be consumed one of another.

Unless this be done, truly the wastes and ruins of the Church are manifest:
but the buildings or materials of the building appear not. I see the decaies,
and dilapidations, but, how they should be repaired or made up, I see not. I
cannot hope that things will be better then they are: that they will be worse
then they are, I can fear.

I have treated of a Subject, as I often think with my self, necessary to be
treated of and thought upon. My judgment concerning it, and myself too, I, a
Prophet of the same Order, though not of the same Worth, submit to you who are
the Prophets, and Fathers of the English Prophets.

The true Light of the world inlighten our minds with his light, that we may
not only see the vices and corruptions of the present times, and search out the
causes of them; but also that we may dislodg them out of those things which are
of greatest moment, and apply our selves with all our might to remove them. Let
us, what lies in us, make the Church to flourish, and keep it so being made.
Finally, let us reflect upon Jerusalem, as the chief of all our joys, through
JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Amen.

Some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not. Acts. 28. 24

FINIS.
October. the 29th. 1646.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNHAM.

