ANIMADVERSIONS upon a sheet of Mr BAXTERS ENTITLED An APPEAL to the LIGHT,
Printed 1674.

For the farther Caution of his Credulous Readers.

Mat. 10.26. There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL, 1675.

I Do not remember I ever saw a Discourse more at variance with its
Inscription, and so much its Confutation, as This. Let any indifferent Reader
Judge what Light there is in it: not one Text of Scripture (the best and safest
Light) little else but dark general and roving Reflections throughout, as we
shall presently see.

It seems He was accused for some Sermon He had Preached, and there we have his
Lightsome vindication. He tells us first that after He had opened (no less
then) 50. blessings or Privileges of Believers, He named 20 counterfeit
Privileges asserted by the Libertines, called Antinomians, Corrupters of the
Doctrine of Jesus. Now may we know who these Libertines, Antinomians, etc. be?
For, if He mean only such as are usually distinguished by those infamous Names,
where have They of late apper'd? with what strength and numbers to require so
brisk an alarm, as if they were still at our Gates, and ready to climb our
walls? To what purpose is He in such have, to abase his Pen by setting it to
scrach in those Dunghills, where such names have layn buried and putrefying lo
long? Sure there must be something in it of more Mystery then This. Let us try
if we can find it out.

First, it were worth our knowing, what Monsters they are who say (not who
mean or spoke by consequence, but say downright) that Christ was not only an
Ignorant, Infidel, Page 1.
Atheist, a Blasphemer, a murderer, an Adulterer, a Liar (I tremble to repeat
the words) but the greatest Sinner in the world, as having the Sins of all the
world or Elect made in THEMSELVES His VERY SINS: and this with great moderation
He calls ill Language and no more. But 'twere fit we should know whose Language
it is ( Antinomians or others) that we may have them more in Execration,
otherwise let any Body Judge at whose door all this Blasphemy must be laid,
the very repetition of it in such odious particularities without their Author
sounding little better then a Libel against that Holy ONE The son of God. we
know very well who (besides Libertines, Antinomians, etc.) affirm truly that
all the Sins of Believers are Christ's by Imputation, and that God caused to
meet upon Him the Iniquities of us All, but not in the vile sense Mr B seems
willing to have his Reader believe; we know none such, and if we did, should
call it somewhat more then ill Language. Nor will it help him a jot to allege
that such Blasphemies flow from His Libertines Principles, unless some Body
would own Them: He is not to take up all the filth He can find in the chanel,
for any Consequence of His making, to be thrown against our blessed Lord; this
is not Reverence. And it is as far from LIGHT; for which of his Ordinary
Credulous Readers will understand Him otherwise, but that indeed there is a
Generation in the world who tremble not to utter such names and characters of
Christ, as He out of his Abundance has marshalled together for Them? and that
His Libertine and Antinomian are but his stalking-Horses, not his Game, will be
more and more discovered; and it is but fit; it is high time it should.

Next, though He allows Christ to be a Mediator, yet He denies Him to be a
FULL REPRESENTER of our Persons: Ibid.
and why so? Hear Himself speak (and they are no ordinary words) that is, says
He, His Person and the Person of each sinner were not the same indeed But first
they were the same indeed, Ibid.
Legally and sensu forensi, though not naturally, But his plain meaning is (if
his words have any sense at all) Christ and a Believer are not one and the same
Individual natural Person, therefore He cannot be a FULL Representer. But I
would fain know how He should be a Representer at all, if He were not another
Person. Must He represent Himself be Servant, Agent, Delegate to Himself, (as
He varies the Expression?) what ever Divinity this be, it is certainly new Law,
and new Common sense too. For to Represent has ever bin taken in the Judgment
of Mankind as well as of the Law, Locum alterius. and numerum obtinere, to
stand in another stead, and not to be that other Person. But this is the
effect of Have, and wandering too far from Home. Mean while He very well knows
(though his poor Ignorant Reader must not (that Christ's full Representation has
other And much Greater Assertors then Libertines and Antinomians, who are no
Corrupters of the Gospel of Jesus, but have done it far better Service then
Himself, and no disparagement to Him.

Again, when He would persuade us, p. 4. that He has only opend a weighty part
of Christ's Gospel, which Babes should understand, and has only sought to keep
us from such Corruptions as look too like another Gospel, and if prevalently
practiced would be Men's utter Ruin, it is plain I think to any considering Man,
that His eye is chiefly upon his Justification by works and the Points
depending. This is one at least of his weighty Parts of Christ's Gospel, to deny
which in the prevalent practice would be men's utter Ruin. And are none but
Antinomians and Libertines concerned in This? what an odd thing is it for a Man
when He winks to fancy no Body sees Him! But to be short, and to let all the
world see I do Him no injury, may we believe Himself? then Hear Him in his
Aphorisms (till his Retractations appear) These. 20. p. 111. To affirm, says
He, that our Evangelical or new Covenant Righteousness is in Christ and not in
our selves, or performed by Christ, and not by our selves is such a MONSTROVS
piece of ANTINOMIAN Doctrine, and. But that All our Justifying new Covenant
Righteousness is extra Nos, in Christ not in our selves, performed by Christ,
not by our selves, is the general Affirmation of the Reformed World, its
Churches, and Doctors: Therefore These are amongst Mr Baxters Libertines, and
Monstrous Antinomians, Corrupting the Gospel of Jesus. The like in a private
Letter to his Friend (Mr Ant. Burgess I suppose) some two or three years after.
I have not the Book by me, but this He knows to be the sense of his words, that
if we grant not his Principles in the Doctrine of Justification, it would be no
hard matter to maintain all the dotages of the Antinomians, or to that effect.
So now at last I think we have brought Him to the LIGHT indeed. His Libertines,
Antinomians, etc. are whosoever assert against Him the Justification of a
Sinner by Faith, without works, such as the Church of England with the rest of
the Reformed Churches. These must be driven by Him with the Herd of Libertines
as Beasts to the Slaughter. Let any sober man Judge if I wrong Him in the
least, nay I durst almost (did not the Thing seen too shameful to be
confessed) appeal unto Himself. However if I am mistaken, I shall be heartily
glad to know it; but then to convince me, He must bring some better Light then
shines in His Appeal. Page 3. He has discovered a new and wonderful kind of
Justification; we must be Justified, says He, by our Faith against the charge
of Infidelity, and by our Repentance against the charge of Impaenitency, by our
Love, Holiness and Sincerity against the charge if Final unholiness, rebellion
and being Hypocrites. Is not this a pretty fort of Justification?

1. Unknown to S. Paul, who alone of all the Inspired writers has ex professo
and so largely tread of this Doctrine. He tells us of no Justification but by
Faith without works, and from Mr Baxter we have a Particular-Justification for
every particular Grace than can be named (for we must not suppose Him to
exclude any, His reason being the same for all) The Apostle therefore by this
Rare Divinity, might have said Being Justified by Patience, Chastity,
Temperance, Frugality, etc. as well as being Justified by FAITH; nay, He ought
to have said so, if He would be Faithful to his Trust, and to the Souls of men.

2. This Justification gives no more to Faith then to any other Consequent
Grace; point blank contrary to S. Paul, and to the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, particularly that of the Church of England, as I have elsewhere
prov'e as plain as words can do it.

3. If we are Justified by Faith only from Infidelity, and from every other Sin
respectively by its opposite Grace and virtue, how shall we understand Him who
is THE TRUTH when He tells us so often to this effect, He that BELIEVES shall
be Saved* and what means S. Paul to assure us that being Justified by Fatih*we
have peace with God? For if Faith Justify us only against the charge of
Infidelity, and every other Grace be required to Justify us against its
opposite Sin, then it cannot be true* at least universally as the words are
intended) that He who believes shall be saved, and have peace with God, no
more then that a Felon shall be acquitted at the Assizes and freed from fear,
who is found not guilty of one Indictment, and has twenty more to plead to. We
are sent to no garment to cover our Iniquities from the Eye of Divine Justice
but the Robe of Christ's Righteousness put on by Faith alone, a Robe without
seam or patch; no Linsey-wolsey stuff admitted there.

But the Defense He makes for Himself against a City- Report is very
considerable, and as clear as midnight. Page 5.
He tells us how it was reported; that He should saey the Difference between us
and Papists was but in words. I hope He would not do so; but what says He to
it, for now it concerns Him to speak? Why truly as to the Business against his
Libertines, Antinomians, S. Paul, and the Reformed Churches in the point of
Justification, wherein His Appeal seems chiefly if not solely concerned, I can
find nothing but a general Complement to his Reporters, an Information how dear
He has bought his knowledge, a Prophecy that He may shortly Die, with an
Information of Preferments offered. This in effect is All to the Defense He
makes to a Charge of that moment. Let every one be satisfied by his own eyes.

Only He complains that some Distinctions and Instances of His were left out in
the Report. Now observe how He Courts the LIGHT, to which He appeals. Let any
man read the beginning of his 4th Section, where indeed He distinguishes
between Popish Points, some of mere Interest, and some arising from the
Difficulty of the matter and the weakness of human understanding: of the former
He gives us also some Instances, as the Papal power, Indulgences, Purgatory,
etc. Of the latter not one that is either usually or properly called Popish,
but such as are canvass'd by the Remonstrants and their Antagonists, as well as
the Jesuits; and so smooths off the business, and All is well. But not a word
all this while of his Libertine- Points, Justification by Faith, etc. Not the
least direction where we shall bestow these, whether amongst the Interest or
the Difficulty-matters. No, no; There is a Time for All Things. This is Mr
Baxters APPEAL to the LIGHT. And whereas He concludes with this bold Persuasion
that few Ministers of Christ in England will prove so weak as to propagate what
He condemns, and call's Errors, it is an immodest Bravado, highly injurious to
the Virtues and Learning of the MINISTRY OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND, as if They
were generally in such a Readiness to forsake the Banner of their own Church,
with All Her Renowned Captains, to fight under the Colors of a single Mr
BAXTER.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
By some unfortunate mistake in my Absence, my Answer to Mr Baxters Quotations
for his new Original Sin, have wholly escaped the Press. It should have entered
page 20. after lin. 14. which therefore I am necessitated to piece here at the
end, and referr all to your favorable Construction.

From page 12, to. 21. I find you very busy in smoothing your way (where none
can easily stumble) to prove some Interest of children in their wicked
Progenitors Sins: a thing never questioned by me, nor by any man else (I think)
who owns the Authority of the second Commandment; so that I am not the man you
combat (though your Credulous Readers must upon your word believe the
contrary) Alls but the shadow of your Fancy, and the Itch of your Pen to fall
upon me. I charge you with a new Secondarie Original Sin, whose pedigree is not
from Adam: I engage not a syllable farther.

And now let us advance to your Proofs, and observe the issue. Tertullian leads
your Van; but neither He, nor any of the rest, strike one stroke in your Cause.
Page 22.
I cannot in Reason exspect that He should so much as use the word Original,
when applied to Sin: for (If I mistake not) it came not in on that account till
about Austin's time, in his famous wars with the Pelagian. However, if we can
find the Thing, this Secundary Original Sin, all is well enough, I am for no
mere Logomachies. All that can be forced from that Quotation, must lie in the
single clause of [ Quanquam si Evangelium veritatis accipias, etc.] which in
English sounds thus; Allthough if you own the Truth of the Gospel, you will
find to whom appertains the sentence of visiting the Iniquities of the Fathers
upon the children, namely to Them who were to bring this Doom upon themselves;
His blood be upon us, and upon our children.

Now This is very far from curing any Admiration of mine (as you seem to
promise me) save that of giving your self the Trouble to quote Him so little
to the purpose. Page 21.
For He proves nothing in contest between Us; no more then This, that God upon
that execrable Imprecation most justly required the Sins of the Bloody Parents
at the Hands also of their children, who have generally approved that
wickedness unto this day. You will have a knotty piece of work to hew out
another Original Sin from any such Testimonies as these. Page 23.
Next comes the Martyr Cyprian, who discoursing the mischief which children are
subject to from ill education, and especially from the bad Example of their
Parents, aggravates the matter in a Rhetorical Prosopopoeia, where He brings in
the poor children with this sad complaint, we have found our Parents our
Murderers; They have denied for Us the Church our Mother, and God our Father,
etc. He speaks there of the Lapsi, who out of Fear offered unto Idols, and by
their Example taught their Children to do the like, and so were instrumental
to their Guilt and calamity. It must be some Delian Diver can fetch out your
new Original Sin from hence; for the old and only one came in at another door
then that of Pelagian Example; and besides we should make as many Original
Sins, yea as many Fathers, as we have prevailing Examples in the world, which I
know you will not grant.

Your whole Quotation out of Leo unto the bottom of p. 24. is the same verbatim
with S. Austins, Page 23, 24.
where you quote His Enchiridion. But however that happened (both living in the
same Century) it is no bar to Him as another witness, if He have any Evidence
for You. The greatest force of that Consort-Testimony lies I think in the
close, where it speaks thus, quia and in illo uno quod in ownes Homines
pertransivit, etc. that is, because in that ONE Sin which passed upon All men,
( and which was so great, that it changed the nature of man into a necessity of
Dying) there are many Sins to be found, with other Sins of Parents, which
though they cannot alter Nature, yet involve and bind the children in the
Guilt, unless the Free grace mercy of God relieve them. Those Holy Fathers are
there interpreting that passage Psalm. 51.4. Behold I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother bring me forth. Which they think fit to render with
the Vulgar, In iniquitatibus, in peccatis, and thence infer that David has
respect unto some other Sins wherein Children may be involved besides that of
the first and common Father.

But besides that They suggest an Answer to the Inference, when they tell us of
many Sins in that ONE Original; it appears they either had not consulted, or
were not skilled in the Hebrew (which S. Austin somwhere confesses of Himself,
nor was the want of that convenience any way scandalous in that Age, though
Jeroms industry had rescued Him from it) For in the Original, all runs in the
singular number (...) and (...), so that nothing can be concluded thence, But
take what those Pious Fathers say De been esse, and as we find it, they will do
you no service, seeing all their Evidence amounts to no more then This
generally Confessed Truth, that God if He pleases may reckon with wicked
children for their wicked Parents (as well as their own Personal) Sins. This
will not rise up to a new Original Sin, which those venerable Doctors
sufficiently distinguish from the Sins of nearer Progenitors, when of these
they tell you, non possunt mutare naturam, i. e. they can work no change upon
Nature, as the true and only Original Sin has done to such a sad degree. And
whereas you tax Bellarmines accommodation for a shift and a mere violence, when
He interprets them to mean of the punishment, and not of the fault, Page 27.
upon this ground that there can be no punishment without a Fault, I wish you
had considered it better. For allowing your Proposition in Se, that Punishment
supposes a fault, it follows not that the contagion of the Parents Personal
Faults are derived unto their children, seeing they have Sin enough of their
own for which at any time they are responsible to the Sovereign Justice of God.
And when that Justice is pleased to visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, it is indeed the wicked Fathers deserved punishment, but not their
Posterities ( eatenus, and upon that account) save only when they tread in the
same forbidden Paths Themselves, and then every one will pronounce them
inexcusable.

After Leo comes Gregory the Great, who indeed seems at first view to favor
you more then any of the Rest, Page 25.
especially in that one clause, dum pro culpa parentis Ex originali Peccato
anima polluitur Prolis, i. e. for the fault of the Parent the Soul of his Child
is polluted by Original Sin. But 1. here is no mention of any Original Sin but
one, no Secondary Originals.

2. He says not, the soul of the child is polluted by any personal actual in
of the Parent, but ex Originali peccato, from Original Sin, from that one (in
the singular number) we All derive from Adam: I can make no more of it, and
that is nothing to your purpose; for ex culpa Parentis is there interpreted to
be Original Sin, of which every Father as well as Adam is guilty, and so
derives His own Original Sin as well as Adams to his Children; Here is nothing
of any personal actual Sin to be rationally inferred, as you would have it.

For S. Austin (whom you place after Gregory; Page 25.
though almost 200 years before Him) you told me in another place I knew not He
was of your Judgment. No more I do to this day: He has nothing of your new
Original Sin; of any more Originals in specie then one. Only He moves a
quaestion, whether Children be not guilty of all their Progenitors both Actual
and Individual Original Sins transmitted successively from Adam: and in the
upshot: leaves it undetermined, with a non immerito disceptari potest, (it may
justly be disputed) and temere affirmare non audeo (I dare not, says He,
affirm any thing) Call you this his Judgment for you, where He pronounces
nothing, and tells you He dares not define? A praegnant evidence indeed, that
speaks not one positive syllable in your Cause! But this is to be in Have.

You tell us you would trouble your self and the Reader with more of the
Ancients words, if you thought it worth the Cost. Page 27.
But truly I think you have given sufficient trouble to both already, and ought
upon that account to pay both Costs and Damages to your Reader.

Now for your Gul. Parisiensis, Page 27.
whom Trithemius I grant adorns with the Title of Eruditus in Scriptaris, a man
well versed in the Scriptures (let every one believe of that as much aa He
pleases) what shall we say to Him, who tells us in one chapter that Original
Sin is a Pest, and Scaturigo vitiorum, De vit. and Pecc. c. 6.
and Seminarium, the source and seminary of all vices; and in the very next
denies it to be either culpa, or aliquid culpabile i. e. to be a fault, or to
have any thing faulty in it? an absurdity, which Bellarmine Himselse has
sufficiently refuted, De statu Pecc. L. 4. c. 3. It Is plain however from the
front of his 5. chapter ibid. that his concern there is only in the Cause of
Original Sin, and how it is transmitted, where He appeals to Galen and his
Disciples, and determines it to be conveyed by a Seminal infection, with
which neither you nor I have any thing to do, as to our present particular
contest. For let it be conveyed this way or the the other, I am not now
concerned, it is still Original Sin, and still but one, and so this Quotation is
of no weight at all. Let the soul of man if you please be ex traduce, by
generation as well as his Body (for which you so earnestly contend) it will
never contribute any thing to your new Original Sin, except you can show us
some either habitual or Actual Vices, which are not rooted in the OLD; and when
you have done that, we will add it to the wonders of the world. Your own
Parisiensis with his Scaturigo and seminarium, will never allow of This.

But now we come out of the thick darkness of Parisiensis his Age into the
light of the Reformed writers. Of whom good P. Martyr makes the Foreman of the
Jury. And what says that worthy Person? why, Page 28.
the utmost I can find is this, that Sin pollutes both Soul and Body, and that
some infection of the Soul may be derived from the seminal contagion of the
Body; whereupon He advises the Parents to a Holy life, ne and animos suos and
corpora polluant etc. lest they pollute both their Souls and Bodies, and
consequently infect both in their children; which at the highest He never
understood but of bad seminal Dispositions which every one knows can
necessarily effect nothing, and so He tells you a little after, notandum he
esse contingens, non necessarium. But good Sr you might have minded that in
your very Quotation, He denies all Sins of nearer Progenitors to be of the same
kind and nature with Original Sin, and proves it too, and consequently is point
blanke against you; Page 29, 30.
which if you heeded no better, looks like an Oversight, and if you knew it,
you deal not fairly with your English Reader, by hiding it from Him.

You injure Walaus (and so abuse your Reader) when you make Him reprove
Corvinus, Page 31.
without taking notice of any of his explanations, for asserting with the
Pelagians that the Imputation of Adams Sin and that of our nearer Progenitors
is alius plane rationis, of no kindred or likeness at all. Whence you would
infer the parity or resemblance (at least) of your new Original Sin with the
Old one, as if the difference were little or none. But pray Sr tell me, did you
transscribe from others, or read it your self in Walaus, what you quote out of
his 9. chapt. p. 263, 264? Did you read both those Pages (not to mention the
268th)? If you did not, we have no cause to commend your diligence; if you did,
we wish better proofs of your syncerity. For there He interprets his meaning
(of no alliance with yours) in as plain words as a Scholar would desire.
Corvinus denies the Imputation of Adams Sin to be true and Real and asserts it
to be only dispensative (as He tells you there) to make way for the Covenant of
Grace, Wall. p. 264.
as if God were not angry in earnest with mankind for that Original Sin etc.
but grants the Imputation of nearer Progenitors Sins to be indeed true and
proper. Waleus blames Him justly for the former, in making no Body knows what
of the Imputation of Adams Sin (which is no part of our present controversy)
so that in effect He speaks in all your Quotation no more then This, that the
Sin of Adam was really and properly imputed to his Posterity, not only by
Corvinus his imaginary Dispensation. Whereas you no doubt would have your
Reader believe, that Walaus holds the Imputation of Adams Sin and our nearer
Parents to be in the main ejusdem rationis, of the same kind and Genius, which
as to the Reality of Imputation we grant they are, but not as to any thing else
you aim at: so that I suppose you have enough of your Walaeus.

Neither does Vrsin speak a word for you, but in the close of that Quotation,
Page 31.
against you (so far as I have any thing to do with you) He tells us indeed
that non foret absurdum etc. There would be no absurdity, if God for the
multiplied Sins of Progenitors should make the burden of Them heavier upon
their children, and that's All; and who ever quaestiond this? no more is to be
fished out of Mr Gatakers words, nothing to a new Original Sin.

Nay me thinks you have something like a forced offer to a Recantation, p. 33.
where telling us of your abundance of Protestant Writers on your side, and
generally all the Expositors on the second Commandment, all I can find you
would make of them is (in your own words) that Temporal Judgments and some
spiritual are often inflicted by God on children for their Fathers Sins. And have
you not now brought all to a doughty conclusion, in which you have none to
oppose you? may not you sit down and plume your self over your incomparable
performance, and the rout you have given me?

But however all this shall not hinder me from an Act of Charity to you. For
seeing you seem not at all to understand your own Quaestion, nor to know well
how to set about your work, give me leave (though unworthy) to hint you a few
directions how to manage this unwieldy business you have undertaken. You may
use or reject them as you please, it is at worst but a little good Counsel lost.

Sr, if you are for a new Secondary Original Sin, I conceive (with your pardon)
you have these three great works to do.

1. To prove (what you have asserted) that this Novel Original Sin is not
derived from our Original Father, no line of Communication between them; a Sin
besides that which is derived from Adam, as you plainly and positively affirm.
For if indeed it derive in a direct Line from the first Transgression, and have
its whole Root fastened there, to talk of a new Secondary Original Sin, is not
in my Judgment the best sense that may be spoken.

2. To make good against Austin ( Page 25.
in your own Quotation) that your new Original does mutare naturam, change the
Nature of Man, as the Old one does to our Cost and sorrow.

3. You have also to prove against Peter Martyr (and in the words you have Page
30.
cited too) that the derivation of Progenitors Sins (be what they will) to
their children is constant and necessary, not uncertain, or Contingent. When
you have proved the first, and baffled your own witnesses in the other two, I
care not if I promise you to be your Proselyte: but till then I much fear that
all you can say will be but Trifling and Impertinence.

The words that should have followed are these, p. 20. I have now done with
that part of your Preface, etc.


