AN ANSWER Of a LETTER, FROM AN AGITATOR In the City, to an Agitator IN THE
ARMY.

London, printed 1647.

An Answer of a LETTER, From an Agitator in the City, to an Agitator in the
ARMY.
IN answer to yours of the 24, instant. Our friends in the Common Council are
brave and especially our best Ingineers, the two Aldermen, the one for Logic
and solid Reason, the other for sweet Rhetoric excels all the City, and
gains many a phlegmatic Common Council Man to his party.

Upon Mr. Allines and Colonel V^ns Message from the House of Commons (which
they performed with great vigor and hight of spirit) the Common Council began
to sink and were at a low eb: and I could have wished our friends had forborne
to send the second time those weak Aldermen, as Pennington who is rather
peevish then sprightfull, (besides the House remitting the 3000l. his kinsman
the great Delinquents John Pennington lest in his hands which he concealed, and
so became a Delinquent himself) he was by the Ordinance to pay it double: and
the House gave him over and above 3000l. this was so partial and gross:, that
our very friends cry shame of it: and it is a great scandal to our party: for
Alderman Atkins, he is ridiculous and the scorn and by word, and cliped
Alderman.

We have discovered that the Apprentices have their several Agitators, so have
the Saylors, Watermen, Carmen, Porters, Butchers: and the Ringleaders of all
these are the Reformadoes. I could here wish our friends in the Army had not so
often insisted to the Parliament to have them put out of London by Ordinance:
for some of them said openly, the Army are afraid of us, therefore we will
continue in the City: Besides for our obedience to the Parliament, and
relinquishing the Rebellious mutineers, we are called desertors of the Army,
and are voted to be disbanded; and one day (say they) the House was ready to
vote down Sir Thoma's Commission and Declaration, and the rest of those
Officers Traitors which summoned the City: and afterward the case was altered,
and the same Traitors accused the 11 Members.

The Reformadoes laugh at our charge against the 11. Members, for (say they) it
is against law for an Army to accuse any man, because they cannot make
reparation in case their accusation prove false. But we have intelligence that
the Reformadoes and some others will bring in a Charge against 6. Lords, and 30
Comminers: and that they will not proceed in generals, but in particulars, and
the prosecutors intend to proceed legally and set their names to the charge;
some they will accuse of high Treason, others of high crimes: and the least
crimes are that they have given the public treasure to themselves being
feoffees in trust for the public, contrary to the fundamental laws of the
Realm: whereby the souldery is unpaid, and the public faith unsatisfied,
contrary to their several Declarations and Ordinances; and no doubt but this
will pay all the arrears of the Commanders and Soldiers about the town. They
resolve never to leave the Houses, till some be sequestered as soon as prooffe
is made: and they are for purging the House as well as we, and will put out
many (as they brag) by the same votes they will make it serve as a trap to
catch our own party. I confess I like not their oath ex officio* for it is
against our principles the liberty of the subject.

They are resolved to enforce the House to revoake Sir Thoma's Commission, and
to send immediately for the King (otherwise we suspect from some extraordinary
intelligencer we have) that they will get some of our best friends of both
Houses into the Tower of London, and to guard it with Reformadoes, Apprentices,
Seamen, Watermen, Porters, etc. And for certain they are all linck'd together
by a damnable covenant. They say we are all for our selves, and to that end
keep up an Army to inslave the kingdom, and have forced both Houses the
60000l. a month, which was intended for Ireland, and converted to their own
use, and will make the King as Duke of Venice, and and make 31. of themselves
Grandies and Conservators of the Peace. I am sorry our friends have issued
their designs so fast,

And they scorn at our Colonells, and say all the Army can make is not 2000l.
Land per annum. And that each Regiment, will be worth 1000l. per annum. As
Pride the Dray-man, Huson the poor Shomaker, Okey the Brewers Clark, Whaley
not worth a groat before these times. Harrison, an Atturnies boy the other day,
Rich a Coward, Fleetwood a Coward, L. G. Hamond a notorious Coward. These are
great scandals, and I pray get them amended.

They say also that Colonel Tho. Hammond, Rainsburough Lilburn, Sir Hardres
Waller, were poor, and turned Jndependents and Anabaptists to please Crumwell;
Ireton they say was a Parsons son, that he is proud, wilful, and revengfull.
For our Atlas, brave Crum. they say he was a Brewers son at Ely, and called the
Town Bull, and he is much talked of for Colo. Lamberts wife: I would our friend
Lilburn would leave his scurrility and personating, it becomes not our
profession which is sanctity and gravity, and his freedom of writing, causes
all these aspertions. And now the Presbiterians are vexed, they spit and skratch
like somany gib Cats. We hear there are diverse Lawyers of their Counsel, and
that the Presbiterian Citizens makes a general purse to carry on the forenamed
Charge with Gravity. They intend to fall foul one my LORD Say for the loss at
Oxford, and leaving the plate there, and sending money to the King, and
correspondency at Oxford with Cottington and some others. They will revive the
business of the loss of Bristow and Banbury by Nathaniel and John Fines. In a
word, either they will force the Parliament to rise confusedly, then where are
we? or it they adjourne, they are but a Committee that can conclude nothing. We
hear the Soliceter, our wise L. G. Crumwell, Jreton, and young Sr. Henry
Vain, Eveling of Wilts, and 4 Lords are for joining with the King. And some
great ones of the Kings party have undertaken it; but we fear the Queen, the
French Ambassador, and the Scots. And we have intelligence some Citizens meet
often with them, and that they promise if they will make good London, they have
an Army of 20000 foot. 6000 horses, and 2000 Dragones which are ready, and
that Montrosse, Kilketto, the Stewards, the Gurdons, and all the Kings party
will rise as one man, and will be content (so they be pardoned for what is
past, which is granted) that they will take and fight for the ends of the
Covenant especially to establish the King on his Throne, according to the
Apprentices Petition.

We find the Kings party generally falls from us, because (say they) you do
nothing for the King but carry him up and down like a vagabond farther from us,
and they suspect you will imprison him in Pomfret Castle: you must do some
popular thing speedily, offer the King his own conditions, I mean such as are
for safety. We hear the Agitators grow peremtory, and clash with the Counsel
of War. That they are all for parity and a Republic, and that they give out
the Counsel of war is above them.

Take heed you intertain not too many Soldiers from London, nor of the Kings
party, for they will deceave you: and beware of that beggarly Scot, Master
Walter Steward, and my Lord Oradiell Carnewayh, they will sell you at the last
to those which will bid most, and if the Scots comes, they will be as so many
spies upon you.

The Scotts are very Iocuand, and it is thought (by some who have good
Intelligence) that the King has signed a Declaration under hand, wherein he
declares himself a Prisoner, and that his Parliament is in the like condition:
that the Army is the Jailer, that he will declare the first opportunity that is
offered, for a free Parliament. In a word we are in a straight: for at present
I was certainly informed that the Presbyterian faction will secure the
principal Members of both Houses and of our best friends in the Tower, and
there they shall remain as Hostiges until the King be at safety at his house
at White Hall, and that Sir Thomas Fairfax Commission shall be voted down, and
if he do not obey, that a Declaration be set forth to the Kingdom, to
proclaim him and his Officers which shall not obey Traitors: and that the
several Counties give no free Quarter, nor pay no Taxes. And that they resolve
to pay the common Soldiers all there Arreares both Horse and foot, and ease
the Kingdom of all burdens, especially Committees.

That the five Members of the Army shall be proclaimed Traitors, and have
Articles drawn up by all against them.

It Is whispered the Lawyers will make all those which connived at Ioyoes
plundering the King Traitors.

We hear that the City has Agitators in all the Counties to associate with
them, and that they send to all their friends, the leaders of the Declaration:
Kent are much troubled their Committee is going down, it will be a great blow
to out party. You must be courageous and storm London presently, otherwise we
are all undone: And threaten to plunder the Rich, which will work more upon
them then Reason.

All my hope is they dare not defend their own, nor run such a hassard: and in
your Declaration set forth, that all that are neutrall shall not be plundered,
hope and fear are the predominent Passions of the rich. What you do you must
do speedily, and give out you are bringing the King to London: and counterfeit
the Kings hand to a Declaration.

Dolus and vertus quis in host requiret,
Young Sir Henry Vain has more tricks in his buget, I fear witty Henry
Martin, and deep Will. Wallin soment this humor too much in the Agitators: and
there are many of our friends in Parliament, some are more against*the Person
of the King then Monarchy, as old Sir Henry Vain, who hates the King, but
loves tyranny with his soul: for he was ever of the Spanish faction, so does
Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Arthur Haselericke (but he is taken off, for he shall
be Governor to the Prince of Wales) Master Gurdon, Master Denis Bond, they
have prayed publicly, that all the bloodshed in England and Ireland may light
upon the King and his posterity.

Master Wever, Master Scot, Mr. Challiner, Master Miles Corbet Master Renoldes,
Mr. Cornelius Holland, Master John Blackestone Alderman Hoyle, and Sir William
Allansan, are all Antimonanchicall, so is Master Westrow, Sir Gilbert
Pickering. Sir Henry Hamon, and 40. more at the least, for this is our
strongest party in number: though not for wisdom and power, for one of our
richest and best friends, Master William Perpoint (who has carried on the
great design, with as much secrecy, industry and gravity as any of our Party
is for closing with the King: My advise is to join with the King only to save
stakes, for he grows daily in the Affection of the People, and there are
Pestilent books daily writ, especially in Law Points, which are not for our
turn: if we prosper, we must reform the Lawyers as well as the Parliament or
Devines, for they grow saucy, I fear you have too many of the Kings party in
the Army, trust not to them, for they look through our designs, and incourages
their party in London to join in the last Petition: for your Army drawing up
near London, I fear you have lost your time, for they are able to draw 40000.
men on the works, and the Reformadoes are grownd to an edge against you and
will put you to intolerable duty, or else hazard the beating up of your
Quarters. If you get a repulse at London, you will sink daily in your
Reputations, and the Counties will rise upon you, if the City plyes you with
sallyes; Besides look to your Rear, for a friend tells me for certain that
the Scottish Commissioners, some leading Citizens and the leaders of the
Reformadoes are engaged in a secret Oath. I hear Sir William Belfore and
Dolbeere are very active, and have shrewd Pates and knows the Constitution of
our Army.

They jeere and give out that all our Commanders will preserve their sacred
Persons, especially Crumwell and Jreton, they are wise and fitter for
direction, the brave Hardy General must fight himself as he did at Naseby,
and Crumwell must direct, and look to the Rear, and the last Reserve. We want
brave Ressiter, I hear he is too much of the Presbyterian faction. Our
Religion is the best, and that cannot but make our Cause good: but we are much
scandolised with covetousness, ambition and lying, but these are but the
infirmities of particular men, not of the godly party of the Army.

We are much murmured at by the people, that we send not relief for Ireland,
being in such extremity: I wish well to Ireland, but I love the Wealth of
England better, we have been very near to have all England in our possession.
This base Irreligious City has been a rub in our way: but I hope they shall
pay for it with Interest: for I hope you will enrich the poor Saints (which is
there proper inheritance) with the Treasure of Vserors and cheating Citizens.
Let me hear at large and often from you, and twice a week you shall have an
answer. Farewell dear Brother.

You must prosper, for you have the Prayers of the Communion of Saints.

FINIS.

