ANOTHER EXTRACT of more LETTERS sent out of IRELAND, Informing the condition
of the Kingdom as it now stands.
SIR,
SIthence my last to you, that is to say, the 23. of June, the Marquess went
to meet the Rebels at Castle-marten near Killcullen Bridge, where for the
Rebels, there met for the Province of Leinster, the Lord Viscount Gormonston,
and Sir Robert Talbot; for the Province of Munster, the Lord Viscount Muskerry,
and John Welsh the Lawyer; for the Province of Connaught, Sir Lucas Dillon, and
Ieffery Brown the Lawyer; for the Province of Vlster, Tirlogh o Neale, Sir
Philem o Neales Brother, and Ever, M. Gennys of Killwarlin. There went with the
Marquess, the Earl of Roscommon, the Lord Moore, Sir Francis Willoughby, Sir
Thomas Lucas, Sir James Ware, Sergeant Eustace, Colonel Muncke, Colonel
Gibson, and many others; Our Commissioners and others were in several
Chambers, and as I hear, Treated by writing, only sometimes Messengers went
between them: The Lord Taaffe was at that place and very busy, they continued
there till the first of July, and appointed the 18. of July to meet again,
but being better advized upon the unreasonablenesse of the Rebels demands, they
met no more but brake off the Treaty, as it is reported, and are now preparing
with all speed to take the Field.

In my last Letters that miscarried at Sea, I wrote you word of a great
overthrow given by Sir Robert Stewart, Sir William Stewart and Sir William
Coals Forces, against Owen Roe o Neale the Rebels General of Vlster, where
after a long fight they beat them, and killed 1000. of them as is reported,
took a very great prey of Cattle, above 6000. Cowes as it is said, many
prisoners of note taken, and Owen Roe o Neale escaped very narrowly, so-that in
Vlster appears no Army of the Rebels, and those Irish which are left there,
are eating up of one another through famine.

About a week before the Treaty for a Cessation, here was a report that
Preston the Rebels General with some Soldiers was come into Mead, about
Tecrohan and those parts, but with how many, and for what cause, we had not so
good intelligence as to know yet, Colonel Muncke then ready to go for
England, was entreated by the State to go out toward him with a party of men,
who yielded to it; he should have had 1500 Foot at the first, and 3 or 400
Horse, but they were so scattered here and there, up and down in the Country,
that he had but 1200 Foot, and about 150 Horses, he relieved Castle Jordan,
and some other parts thereabouts, and coming homeward by Clancarry, about 15
miles from Dublin, Preston meets him with about 6000 Foot, and 600 Horse, some
that were present there and had seen all the Armies on both sides since the
Rebellion first began, do affirm, that this of Prestons was the greatest;
both sides did strive for a straight passage which Muncke was of necessity to
go over, for which they disputed the matter a good while, but Colonel Munck
gained it; then they encountered and fought a good while, till Preston and his
Army very stoutly ran away, having lost about 150 of his men killed in the
place, as 'twas reported to me, and took many of their Arms, and some
Colors; and of our side not one man killed, only one man shot but not dead;
thus God yet preserves us miraculously, and why we should distrust him who
deals thus for us I know not.

It is thought by some, that Preston had a design upon Dublin, coming so
near it with such an Army, and having no Enemy, or other place to look for
thereabouts.

Dublin, July 5, 1643.
Written again from thence by the same hand, being a man of credit and worth
in the City of Dublin.
I Wrote in my last how Colonel Muncke had beaten Preston, but not being able
to pursue him, he having so small a party and wanting means, he marched into
the Counties of Wickloe and Wexford, and as he returned burnt most of the Town
of Arckloe, but the Castle there was too well fortified for him to deal with,
he returned home to Dublin the last Monday, and brought with him about 500
Cowes, which he gave amongst the Soldiers: In the mean time Preston took in
Crohan and Edenderry in the Kings County, and is now marching again toward
Castle Jordan to besiege it.

Though Captain Bartlet came to us the last week with that provision which
the Parliament sent us, yet our Commanders say, they cannot stir without 5 or
6000lb. to provide for their train of Artillery, for Carriages, for Shoes for
the Soldiers, and such like necessaries, which money when and how it will be
gotten here none knows, the Protestants especially are so drained, that they
have little or nothing left, and the Papists will lend nothing.

The Rebels agree well together, so do not we, and if we spend time about
private differences one with another, and seeking to charge and undermine our
selves, what must become of the public.

It is still confirmed, that there are no Rebels to be seen in Vlster, and
that the Irish that are there, are so miserable that they eat their children,
and one another, a just judgment of God upon them for their cruelties.

Owen Roe o Neale their General in that Province, with all his men are said to
be gone into Connaught, and that the Scottish Army is gone after him, but I
hear of no message sent by them to our State here of it, so that what they
will do we know not, only of this I am sure, if things were now well followed
by them, as they might be, and that we had but some money for the Officers,
Victual and Ammunition, and that well ordered and governed as it should be, we
might by Gods help break the heart of this War in a very short time.

Bartlet came in a blessed time, for in that time upon a strickt search in
Dublin, there was but 400 Barrels of Corn found in the whole City for all the
Army and Inhabitants here, multitudes of the poor English come still from
Vlster and other parts, as they get from the Rebels, which fills us with famine.

Dublin, 12 July, 1643.
From the same hand.
THat provision of Victuals brought by Bartlet was a means of keeping us from
a desolation which then was falling upon us; but that is almost spent, and we
shall suddenly fall into the same case again, if we be not supplied; and if we
shall be supplied in time with necessaries, there is no doubt but by Gods
blessing we may have a quick end of the War for the maine of it; for Vlster
is already upon the matter conquered, and no Rebels in a body to be now seen
there. The Pale is so wasted, that scarce a Cow, Garron or Man is to be seen
in many miles together, and the ears of the Corn which is now growing in many
of these parts, is so generally cut off now before it is ripe, by the
hunger-starved Rebels, that very little of it will be reaped, so that if we
could have reasonable supplies for the present, that we might be able to take
away this harvest from them, and destroy that which we could not take, a great
part of this War would be ended this Winter, which otherwise may long trouble
us.

You must know, that Soldiers which serve in a Country only for their pay,
and have no interest in it, will not care so much what becomes of it, and will
exclaim more for the want of their pay if it be wanting, then those who are
interessed in it, and have hopes to recover their ancient possessions and
rights, of which sort I would we had more here.

Do not forget what I now write, that the sending of help to us now in time,
will be more, then ten times so much when it is late, and when matters are
brought to that exigent, that we shll be like to those in a deep consumption
which cannot be recovered.

Brent the Popish Lawyer is suddenly expected here from Oxford; and at his
coming some alterations and changes amongst us here to follow.

Preston we hear is about Tecrohan, threatens the Garrison at Trim, our Army is
gone that way, my Lord Marquess in person is to follow presently, God bless
and prosper him.

You will sell good bargains of our Cities and Towns here certainly when
they shall be gained. I do not think it will be two years purchase* and I
think if things may go on roundly, before this summer is spent, the work
would easily by Gods help be done, but if you loose time a little longer,
instead of getting any thing, both you and we shall be sure to loose all, two
Months more of such times as we have had the two last Months past, will do
much to bring us into a hecticke Fever, which Physicians say is irrecoverable.

Dublin, July 19, 1643.
From another good hand from Dublin.
WE know not how to live, there are now here such an infinite number of poor
people come to this Town, which have bin sent by the Rogues from the Garrisone
which they have taken from us, that it would grieve the heart of any Christian
to see them lie in the streets starving, and no means to help them. Our Army
is now going forth, God presper them. Our Soldiers are in great distress, not
having either Meat, Money, Clothes or Shoos to their feet, it is a lamentable
thing to see what distress they are in. The North is cleared, I wish their
Forces were with us.

Reasons delivered in Ireland, against the Cessation of Arms there so much
pressed by the Rebels, the Treaty now broken off.
1. WHereas a Cessation is treated of, and the only reason thereof, because by
that we must secke our subsistence; This must infallibly starve us and the
Army, Now there being many hands and active wits in several places, who do
often get something by force and so live, then they must take nothing, but must
only trust to the dole of the false Rebels who themselves are poor and warning.

2. Now our Soldiers grow in martial exercises and action, then they shall
grow dull, sick and idle to their destruction, sell their Arms not cared for
by their Officers, who do so ill look to them now as they lose them and
embesle them daily.

3. The English Soldiers will run away into England, and Irish will be taken
in their rooms, all will be Irish in a years space, which is the time of
Cessation, especially a peace being expected, and so we shall have no Army
English Horse or Foot, whereby we shall be altogether at the will of the Irish
as is desired, or else the English will straggle to their old dwellings, and so
be murdered here and there.

4. The Churles shall murder us in every corner, and the prime men not seen
in it, where shall we have remedy, their being no judge nor party answerable,
the Law not current, the Irish faithless and really tied to nothing.

5. The Garrisons in sever all places have neither Corn nor Cattle, they must
take none by force, how shall they live? the contribution cannot or will not
come in, what remedy? The Rebels will have all the Corn this harvest, we must
buy it of them, and are not able for want of money, how then?

6. The Rebel is now in great want of Corn, Ammunition, etc. this harvest and
a whole years time, by the Sea will provide them of all things, and so if we
shall have men to fight with them (which we may well doubt) they will by this
furnish and enable themselves for 2 or 3 Years further at least, and so tire
us and England, whereas it were our wisdom to lose no time.

7. The Irish will come into Dublin, and very likely surprise us, if not, they
will sue us for any thing we owe, if we sue them, there is no Law nor Officers
to execute judgments, and if they do not surprise us or pinch us with suites,
they will starve us.

8. Our little Ammunition we have will be spent before winter in ordinary
watches, we have nothing to acquire more, so that if England help us not one
ways or other, this next winter we shall be at the will of the Irish as is
desired.

9. Now they see our Army and Dublin only stands in the way, these two must by
this devise unfallibly be destroyed by what is above said, So no help but a
new conquest upon most extreme disadvantages if not impossible.

10. The Cessation is for a long time, and able to give scope to all manner of
practices wherein they will never sleep, and we by authority or inherent
negligence utterly lull asleep; The blood of so many innocent English now in
the heat of action being almost grown cold, by this devise a whole year will
be given to wrap it into more oblivion, and so the Irish shall have their will
both in Religion and possessions of our goods and Lands.

11. When our Army by this long idleness is made Irish or unserviceable, if it
be said we will have new Armies, and not trust the Irish, Then must we fight
with raw Soldiers against experienced and better armed men, which will be
dangerous, besides the great increase of the charge more then now it would be.

12. Can any man expect that the Rebels whose only aim is to extirpate the
English and Religion, will keep better faith with us now, when the English are
wonderful few and disabled, then they did when the English were in all parts,
the government strong, and the English inhabitants rich and in vigor.

13. The advantage is apparently now on our side, the Irish are every where
beaten, they are distressed in Victuals and Ammunition, they have no Foreign
aides, they fear our Armies every where, and undoubtedly by a little
subsistence out of England, we are able to consume them, but by this devise all
will be turned the other way.

14. If a peace should ensue this prologue, which is certainly expected, then
the English are certainly destroyed, for the Irish continuing in their full
multitudes and fully armed, will be masters both of government and interest
both of King and Subject, the English cannot inhabit here.

15. This Cessation cannot give us Corn till harvest, in the mean time we
starve, though they strive to send us in Cattle, which is much doubted they
can very hardly do.

16. The Cessation will provide only for the Army, and that in a scant
measure, not enough to serve half the year, what shall the poor English
robbed subjects do, they have neither money nor means to buy food, but the
English must all be gone, which is the principal labor of the Irish and of
those that have promoted this Cessation.

17. If all the Arms of the Irish mighe have bin delivered up, and the Towns
rendered to us, we might perhaps have had a little breathing, but no security,
so long as such huge numbers of the Irish remain, and the English in such
paucity and weakness.

18. This Cessation will utterly deface our Religion, and set up Popery in the
full height.

19. The harvest saved to them and lost to us, will be of much greater value to
them for the subsistence and advantage, then all that they can give us can be
to us, besides the lengthening of the war for many years.

20. Their malice is now more and their power more then at the beginning, can
we think they will hold longer with us then they see their time.

21. This Cessation leads to a peace, and being as is principally pretended by
reason of our extreme necessities and the failer of the Parliament, even to
save our lives: whereas in truth our lives are not worth the dishonor and
detriment it will bring to the Crown and English Nation, and it must work to
base ends, even to give the Irish all the Lands, and for ever keep out the
English, which is the thing mainely affected, and to work the dissolving of
the Act for the Adventurers, and to smother all the cruelties, murders and
rapines committed by the Irish.

22. It does utterly discourage all the English, and makes them forsake the
Kingdom all they can which will soon be done.

23. The Rogues of this Rebellion (though not seemingly countenanced by the
great ones) being needy and in want, will steal all our Cowes, etc. from our
garrisons and no remedy.

24. The Cessation has in pretense an aim at our subsistence, and to be
founded only on our necessities, which truly is a dangerous ground of peace,
amongst so persidious a people: but the inward meaning is the preservation and
restitution of the Irish, and keeping out the English and English government,
neither does it seem to be a thing so resolutely commanded by the King, for it
has bin said openly, if we would lend 10000lb. there should be no Cessation,
and yet the King should be satisfied, or if we would propound any other way for
maintenance, the like should be done.

25. It is a certain way to lose Ulster, which is now in a manner entirely in
our hands, and we in a fair way to Connaught.

26. New the Cattle which we gain though they be sold dear here, yet our
Soldiers have the money who spend it amongst us, but if the Cessation proceed,
then we must buy Corn and Cattle from the Rebels who will have all our money.

27. Lastly, Although we are truly in a most miserable case for subsistence,
gasping daily for the last breath by samine or our own enemies Sword, seeming
for a time to be left by the Parliament through the intemperate exclamations of
a wanting Army, and our Sovereign Lord the King not able at the present to
help us, Yet doubtless it is less dishonorable and shall render us less
scandalous to posterity to die with our Swords in our hands, yet expecting Gods
mercy, then by a craved Cessation and in a certain destruction, to tie up our
hands now helping us a little, and yield up our selves and the Kingdom against
his Majesty and the Crown of England, into the hands of barbarous Rebels, who
thirst only to riot in the blood of innocent English, and the utter abolition
of the Protestant Religion.

The new Oath made by the supreme Council of the Rebels of IRELAND at
Kilkenny.
WHereas the Romish Catholics of this Kingdom of Ireland have bin enforced
to take Arms, for the necessary defense and preservation as well of the
Religion plotted, and by manifold practices endeavored to be quite suppressed
by the Puritan faction, as likewise the lives, estates and liberties, as also
for the defense and safeguard of his Majesty's regal Powers, just
Prerogatives, Honors, Estates and Rights invaded upon, And for that it is
requisite that there should be an unanimous consent and real union between all
the Catholics of this Realm, to maintain the premises, and strengthen them
against the Adversaries; It is thought fit that they and whosoever shall adhere
to their parties as a confederate, should for the better assurance of the
adhering fidelity and constancy for the public cause take this ensuing Oath.

I A. B. Do promise, swear and protest before God and his Saints and Angels,
that I will bear faith and Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the
grace of God, King of Great- Brittany, France and Ireland, and to his Pleyres
and lawful Successors, and that I will to my power during my life, defend,
uphold and maintain all his and their just Prerogatives, Estates and Rights,
the Power and Privilege of the Parliament of this Realm, the fundamental
Laws of Ireland, the free exercise of the Catholic Romish Faith and Religion
throughout this Land, and the Lives, just Liberties, Possessions, Estates and
Rights of all those that have taken or shall take this Oath, and perform the
contents thereof: And that I will obey and ratisie all the Orders and Decrees
made and to be made by the suprcame Council of the confederate Catholics of
this Kingdom concerning the public cause. And that I will not seek or
receive directly or indirectly, any pardon or protection for any act done or to
be done touching this general cause, without the consent of the major part of
the said Council: And that I will not directly or indirectly do any act or
acts that shall prejudice the said Cause, but will to the hazard of my life and
estate, assist, prosecute and maintain the same. So help me God and his holy
Gospel. Killmore Castle in Ireland, June 23, 1643. A Letter from Sir Robert
Stewart Knight and Colonel to the Earl of Eglington.
Right Honorable, and my very Noble Lord,
YOur Lordships I received the very same day before Sir William Stowart and I,
with the rest of the Forces here, took our march upon a late expedition to the
Counties of Monoghan and Tirone, for the which and all your Lordships kind
expressions unto me, I give your Lordship many hearty thanks, and am your
Lordships most humble servant; and for what happened in the same expedition,
your Lordship shall have the true Relation of it as follows; and first when
Sir William Stewarts Regiment, Colonel Mervins, and mine own, with five
Companies out of Derry had marched a day or two together, we had intelligence
that Owen Mac Art o Neale the Rebels great titulary General had drawn all the
Forces in Vlster together, with their whole Cowes, and was upon their march for
Connoght, of purpose as we were informed to leave his weak people there and
all their Cattle, and to return himself with a strong Army to assault us and
the rest of the British Army in Vlster, upon which intelligence we hastened our
march to a place where we heard that he was to march through, a place called
Clownys in the County of Monnoghan, being upon the road way from Tirone to
Connaught, and about some 25 miles distant from Charlemount, and through Gods
providence it fell out, that upon the 13 of this instant June, a Scout of Horse
which I sent out (I having the Van that day) discovered the Irish Army, upon
the which I gave order that our Army in regard of their hard march formerly,
should refresh themselves with one hour or two's rest, which was done
accordingly, and so we strengthened our Porlorne guard, and so continued our
march toward them; whenas we advanced near unto them, we discovered their
Horse drawn up upon a piece of ground of advantage, and from them were
commanded out a party of their best Horse very well mounted, which in a daring
insulting way came up and charged some of my Troop, which they received very
resolutely, and after a whiles dispute they were put to a retreat, in this
interim, a party of the Rebels Foot had drawn up into a place where was a
narrow stone causey and straight pass, where they thought to keep up our
Horse, but was put from it by our commanded men, and so the pass was cleared,
and my Troop being seconded by Sir William Stewarts Troop and Sir William
Belfores, advanced forward upon their Horses, and our commanded men on both
sides gave very good fire upon one another, the way where the rest of our Army
marched was very narrow, so that none of them came to do service, exce^pt only
the sirst division of my Regiment, which I led on my self, and before ever the
second division came to my service, notwithstanding that there was 11 Colors
of the Rebels upon service all the while, the Rebels was routed both Foot and
Horse, and our light wings and Cannons did very good service, and many of the
chiefest and best of their Foreign Officers were either killed in the filds
or taken prisoners, for our Horse had the killing of them for 8 or 9 miles
together upon all hands, and our Foot for 5 miles or thereabouts, where was
done great execution upon the best of their men, Owen Mac Art o Neale himself
very narrowly escaped, for the Captain of my Troop was in gripes with him,
but his Horse stumbled and he was hurt with a shot, and Owen Mac Art was
releeved by one of his Captains. One o Mellane who is now prisoned with me,
several other prisoners I have, as one Colonel Brother, son to Owen Mac Art
and bred a Soldier, borne in Brussels, another Lieutenanr Colonel who has
bin an Officer abroad this 24 Years, call- Shane o Neale, 3 Captains, Named
Art o Neale, Shane o Neale and Pattick o Mullin, and 3 Gentlemen of quality,
Named William o Clenton, Manns o Sheale, and Con o Neale, great store of Arms
we had both for Horse and Foot, and I believe they carried few with them, for
my Regiment had 300 Muskets for their share, besides many Swords, Petronels and
Pistolls, besides all that the rest of the Regiments had. That night Owen Mac
Art himself betook him to a Wood, where was a Friery within 7 or 8 miles to
Charlemount, where he lodged that night with six only in his company, as I was
informed by a party of mine which I sent out the next morning to that same
Wood, but before they came they were unfortunately escaped, and my men burnt
the Friery and brought away a great prey of Cowes with them, and so spent 7 or
8 days in ranging the Country, good numbers every day of scattered Roagues we
killed in woods, Boggs and Mountains, the strength of the Rebels Army was
near 3000 good men, by relation of some of themselves who now are Prisoners,
besides those that were with the Cowes, thus giving glory to God Almighty in
whose power it is with few to defeat a great many, this being the true
Relation, wishing your Lordship all health and happiness, I rest

Your Lordships loving and obedient servant Robert Stewart.
They had 32 Colors, with 3000 Foot, and 300 Horse.



A Letter written by Owen Mac Art o Neale the day after they lost this Batell,
unto Sir Robert Stewart.
SIR,
I Should entreat you to be pleased for to certify unto me by this bearer
what prisoners you have taken or have in restraint of ours since the other day,
together with your demands, whether you will exchange them for any Prisoners
we have, or if for Ransom, how much, wherein you shall do me a courtesy, and
to your self no hurt, for now though Fortune be favorable unto you, it may
chance fall out hereafter, that your kindness and favor therein may be
requited, if ever it comes in the way of

Your assured Friend as I find you Owen o Neale.
From our Camp the 16 of June, 1643. This Camp was only himself and 5 or 6
more.

I pray let this bearer see the prisoners.



By a Letter dated the 20 of June, 1643. From Londonderry it is thus written
by Captain Henry Finch of the said City.
THat upon the twelfth of the said June, 600 chosen men out of that City, and
60 Horse joined with Regunents of Sir Robert and Sir William Stewart, and
Colonel Audley Mervin, who met with Art Mac o Neale the General of the Irish
Forces in Vlster, and all his strength, near a Town called Clownes, about 50
miles from our said City of Londonderry, where but a part of our Army being
drawn up had a glorious day, slew 500 of the Rebles in the place, whereof 150
Commanders and Gentlemen of their prime, who fought courageously for their
lives: We took prisoners who are now in our Jayle, Hugh o Neale Colonel,
Shane o Neale, Lieutenant Colonel, Art o Neale, Captains. Shane o Neale,
Captains. Pattrick o Mullin, Captains. William O clinton Lieutenant. Manus o
Sheile, Gentlemen. Con o Neale, Gentlemen.
All men of prime note and very considerable, we lost only 6 or 8 Troopers, but
many dangerously hurt, where of Sir William Stewarts some was and Captain
Garthconte, Captain of Sir Roberts Troop, and other men who came bravely on
that day: It was a great Victory, and near a breake-neck to the Northern
Forces of the Irish Rebels, It was Gods doing, 500 of our men did not fight for
it, the greatest part of our Army not so much as seeing the Enemy but upon the
flight, and dead, we had the chase 6 or 8 miles in good ground, in the march
out and home we killed above 500 more of the Rebels. We have now no
considerable Enemy within 40 or 50 miles of us, but we are so straightned for
provision Victuals and Match, Powder and all other Ammunition, that we cannot
keep the Fields long, had our Army bin there or provided, we had cleared
Tyrone before our return, but we had no bread in three days, and our Match,
Powder and other provisions were spent; so against our wills, for want thereof,
were forced to return home. We have made so many marches this Summer into
Donagale, Tyrone and Londonderry, that there is little or no provisions left
in the Country, and few or no Rogues to be seen, all either killed or fled
into Connought, but great store of women and children, whereof few Cabbins in
our march was empty, in some 5, in some 10 and in some 20 found dead in a
Cabin, part of them eaten by the living, it is a most lamentable case they
have brought themselves unto.

Dublin 12 July, From another hand.
I Have bin out with the Army this 5 Weeks, or else I had written unto you
before now: whiles we were abroad we took the Lord Dempsyes Castle, and blew
it up. which was a very strong hold and nurserie of Rebels, and one Fitz
Garrets Castle of Clorboly we took and blew up, and one other of the Fitz
Garrets yielded his upon quarter, and had half his Arms, and as much goods as
he could carry away, we got above 2000 Cowes in Wickloe, the Lord Moore has
gotten 7000 Cowes another way, the poor Rogues are starving, for they have
nothing in most parts hereabours, but Horses and Weeds to live on.

A Letter from Dublin of the 12 of July, 1643. from a man of worth to his
Friend in London; Concerning the Earl of Ormends carriage in the matter of
Cessation desired by the Rebels.
SIR,
SOme Letters of yours I have received, but diverse I believe have miscarried,
through the Sea Captain Mr. Plunkets mistake, or knowing, for to both he is
very subject. I am shrewdly tempted to tell you, that mine to you have run
the same fortune, but the truth is, this is the first I could find time or
reason to write since you went, I know you have heard gallant things of the
Lord Marquess of Ormond there touching a Treaty he had with the Rebels about a
Cessation of Arms; and I make no doubt he is set forth from hence in the true
shape and color of a Rebel, or at least a lover of Rebels, there is no man to
whom he has more clearly decared himself, touching his thoughts of, and
intentions toward them, then my self: And believe me, he is just where you
left him, nothing changed, either in good will or bitterness toward them,
when he went to Treat with them, he had by the favor of the Lords Justices
and Counsel, some of the Board to go with him, and he desired some chief
Officers of the Army with them, to be witnesses of his carriage through the
whole matter, which what ever end it take, I believe it will be printed, when
first some of his good friends here, have written their conjectures of it; in
the mean time, the maine matter that is like to be suggested to his prejudice,
is, that this Treaty was not only performed, but desired and wholly gained from
the King by his means and advice: His Lordship has learnt by Sir Benjamin
Rudyards speech, about the beginning of this Parliament, how unhansome it is to
justify unpleasing things, by putting them upon the King, and therefore I
should say nothing of that in his behalf, but that to you, I desire to give
satisfaction, that there is nothing falser, except him that shall write it, and
having said this, I shall trouble you no more in that point.

One other thing is so much talked of here, that I owe his Lordship the right,
and you who are my friend the satisfaction; To acquaint you with his carriage
in it. Very soon after your departure hence, the Captain of the Swallow and
others of that company came ashoare, amongst the rest the Master, who stayed
late at the Globe Tavern, so late, that the Master of the house against his
own profit, desired him and his company to depart, which when they refused, he
likewise refused to give them wine, and at length being desirous to be quit of
them, he sent for a guard to take them away, which accordingly was done, and
the Master sent to the Main-guard, where the Captain being in like disorder,
as I hear, not only misused the man, but spoke disgracefully of the
Parliament, the Earls of Essex and Warwick as is alleged, now his Lordships
share of the matter is as follows, the Captain came to him and complained of
this usage, and when his Lordship told him he was ready to do him justice as
soon as the matter would give him ground for it by petitioning, he said he
took it to be the better way to pass it over, sithence he found the Officers
were generally so discontened, as that the stirring of this might prove the
occasion of more disorder, and be a means to spread the matter further then
he desired, to that his Lordship answered, that he knew best what he had to
do, but that he was ready upon complaint as aforesaid to do his part
toward the vindication of the justice of this place, and of any person injured
here, but approved of his mclinations to smother a business of that unpleasing
nature, this discourse past between his Lordship and him in my hearing, when
it was ended he went away as I thought, resolved to say no more of the matter,
but a little before his going hence, when he had taken other advice, he
preferred an Information into the Martial Court against him who was the
Captain of the watch night, but there left it without any man to follow it,
where it still remains ready for further scanning, when any man shall call
upon it, and so much for that. If I should take upon me to answer all the lies
raised on his Lordship here, by the father of lies and his hopeful issue, I
should become the greatest writer of this age, and therefore I leave them to
the shame I know will one day overtake them, resting

Your most faithful friend and humble servant I B.

Another Letter from the same man from Dublin, 20 July, 1643.
SIR,
I Have according to my improvident custom, deserted writing till this last
minute of time, having bin for some days employed in setting on a present
march, which has bin infinitely retarded and distracted through the miserable
want of all things, now at length the business has proceeded, that together
with some Forces appointed to meet from Drogheda, Trim and Dundalke, and a
party sent hence before, there will be about 4000 sighting men, Horse and Foot,
the latter pitiful poor, but as they are, I hope they will stop Preston in
the course of his proceeding against our Garrisons, whereof he has possessed
himself of one, which was deserted by the men and burnt, other places where
there were wards belonging to private persons, were rendered without
resistance, as Edenderry and Techrohan, and now Castle Jordan and another place
is in danger, which to prevent, my Lord Marquess does go after the Army to
morrow, but his proportion of victual not being for many weeks, he is tied to
a very short time for the work which his Lordship will attempt, and leave the
success to God, this I tell you, that your expectation be not raised above
what is possible to be effected: two packquets from hence were taken by the
Wexford men, wherein they boast to have found great miseries; and I fear by
those Letters they have found too much of division amongst us, for calumnies,
complaints and accusations are so frequent Theames of some dispatches thither,
which may encourage the Rebels, and dispose them to unite in much the worser
cause, for even now I have adverisement that Preston has possessed himself of
all the passages into that fast Country, except what lies behind him, whereto
I fear his Lordship shall want bread to march, nor were it fit to leave him
nearer this Town then our selves, the condition of the inhabitants duly
considered, and Castle Jordan for Dublin being but a bad exchange, so that upon
the whole matter, hard are the terms his Lordship goes upon and in this
harder then any man's, in that the good shall be imputed to others, if it please
God to bless the Army with success, and if any mischance happens (which is
not impossible) his Lordship I fear must bear it, withal the malicious
constructions that can be made, these have bin his Lordships encouragements
since he had the honor to serve the King in these employments, but I can
assure you that does not discourage him, nor will any thing else, that can be
raise or done here or there, I am

Your very faithful friend and servant I. B.

Another Letter from a very good hand in Dublin, dated 19, July, 1633.
YOur Letter lately received here and some small quantity of victuals sent
hither, persuades me, that we are not wholly deserted by the Parliament, though
I must tell you, so barely and coldly remembered, that if a better and ferventer
regard be not timely had of us, nothing in humane reason can be expected but
absolute ruin, and destruction of the best parts of the Kingdom.

Preston with his Forces of 7000 Foot and 800 Horse, superior unto us in
Cavelry, and Arms doubling our strength that is here, or that can conveniently
be drawn together from or nearest Garrisons: is now in the County of Mead,
has taken Sir William Coolies Castle, and several other holds, have
endeavored to block up Castle Jordan, and is quartered at this time about
Tecrohan, Sir Lucas Fitz Gerralds, with intention, as our intelligence brings
us to take in Trim, Manooth, or both of them, peradventure vaster purposes.

Ten days we have traveled in all the fair and foul ways that can be
invented to raise a small sum of money to set forth our Army, but are not yet
at the end of our journey, two days more I hope will finish it, and then my
Lord Marquess goes forth in person, I pray God prosper him.

The harvest is now beginning, but before the sickle comes to the Corn, most
of it is devoured by the starving people, and that in truth is the best
expedient to end this War, and soon will do it, if our Army, and the small
remnant of our Nation remaining here may be ascertained of food from England;
and Powder and Arms are all most as necessary; labor these two as you love
the peace of Jerusalem, such is the suit and desire of

Your humble servant T. H.

A true Relation of the manner of our Collonell Sir Frederick Hamiltons return
from Londonderry in Ireland, being 60 miles from his Castle and Garrison,
where he was at the beginning and breaking out of this Rebellion, with the
particular services performed by the Horse and Foot Companies which he
commandes garrisoned at Manor Hamilton in the County of Leinim in the Province
of Connaught.
THe Iron works called the Garrison within six miles to Hamilton Castle,
^^tober 24
was by the O flannygans, of the County of Fermannagh, and the Mac Laughlins
and Mac Murrayes, of the the County of Leytrim, set on sire and all burned.

Seven or eight score men, ^^^ober 24
women and children, most of them English, belonging to those Iron works, were
diverse of them sore wounded, all of them robbed, came flying for relief to
Castle Hamilton, where the Colonels Lady charitably received them, himself
and his two sons at that time being at Londonderry.

This news coming this day fortunately by a messenger from his Lady, ^^^ober
he desperately adventured homewards with 10 or 12 Horse of his own servants,
passing over Barnesmore in the night time with every Horseman his Calliver and
his Match light at both ends, with sound of Trumpet most part of the night as
we marched, making a great show and a noise as if an Army had followed us. Thus
it pleased Gos we passed 30 miles of our way that night, coming to Donegall the
next morning.

At Donegall we found Sir Raph Gore, Mr. Brook, Octobr (...)
and all the British of that part of the County, robbed of their Cattle,
shortly expecting themselves to be destroyed, much admiring if we had bin 500
men, how we durst have past Barnesmore, advising our Colonel to adventure no
further homewards, Ballyshannon Castle in his way homewards being block't up
with a great many English in it, and that Town bruned.

That night nevertheless did we pass with a Convoy only of 20 Scottish
Horsemen to Ballyshannon, relieving that Castle, presently calling out Captain
Follyot with some few men for our guides, went a hunting for the Rogues, who
had been lately about the Castle, where that night ere we lighted we killed
some of them, and brought home 22 Prisoners. That night out Colonel dispatched
a messenger to his Lady being 12 miles. It pleased God so to bless his
messenger, that the next morning by day his Lady sent him a good guard of his
own Soldiers and servants, before the Country could hear of our being upon
the way, which otherwise it had bin impossible for us to pass, having the
borders of 3 Counties to march through, and that the most dangerous way in
Ireland.

Our Colonel is visited by Connour o Rourke the High Sheriff of the County of
Leytrim, congratulating his safe return beyond expectation, Octobe^ 31.
then professing much loyalty and neighbourly love which not long lasted.

Came from Dublin with the Lords Justices pass six of our Colonells Soldiers
from Carlisle, who miraculously passed without loss of Arms, Nove^^ 6.
Cleathes or what else they carried, to our Colonells great joy and comfort,
being sive Scotch-men and one Irishman good Musketeeres bred with himself.

The Colonel makes up amongst his servants and Tenants, Nove^ 7.
a Troop of 50 good Horses, which do duty day and night about the Garrison
and Castle.

It is discoved to the Colonel, that one Conouroge Mac Shant, Nove^ 9.
Class Mac Laughlin a most dangerous active man, and the chief of that name,
was drawing of a Boat 8 miles over mountains, thinking to have manned an
Island in the Lough of great consequence, being in a great glynne called
Glevedin, which Island in former Rebellions had much galled the English Forces,
it lying convenient for the bordering Rebels both of Vlster and Connaught; Upon
this information a party of able Foote-men were sent out, who met with the said
Connour upon the top of a great Mountain, with a many Horse and Foot, drawing
of his Boat, where himself was taken Prisoner, and his Boat broken all in
pecces upon the Mountain.

The Colonel received two Letters, ^^^emb: ^
one from O Connour of Sligo, the other from Ballagh o Rourke, both professing
much loyalty, excusing their not waiting upon him, and congratulating his late
and unexpected return from the Derry. These Letters were kindly answered, with
encouragement from the Colonel to persevere in their loyalty, though he little
expected it, as it afterward came to pass.

Con Mac Ternan bane o Rourck, ^^^emb: ^
the most active and most dangerous man of that name: It is informed that he
and others had lately robbed an Endlish-Minister called Mr. Bushe apprehended
by the Colonells order.

Bryan o Rourke another prime Gentleman of that name, ^^^emb: 6
and Brther in law to the foresaid Con o Rourke, was likewise apprehended upon
Information that he had robbed another Englishman, William Brown.

Being informed that many of the Rebels of Donegall all Firmannagh, ^^^emb: ^0
had their daily tandevous at an Alehouse kept 6 miles from our Colonels
Castle near the borders of Fermannagh: A party was sent thither in the night,
where the Alehouse keeper Cahir Mac Caba with six Rogues more were apprehended
and brought to our Colonel, with 60 Beeves from the County, who were all in
Rebellion as all the other Counties about us, only the two Barronyes near to
our Colonels, where his own Jrish Tenants lived, made show of loyalty, hoping
thereby to have gotten greater advantage afterward.

A Court was to have been held by the Colonells Senesehall, ^^^emb:
expecting his Irish-Tenants should have made their appearance, as till that
day they duly did, he using all the means he could to preserve his own in
their Ioyalties, as many times they faithfully promised, but that day absenting
themselves, he perceived them all traitors.

Hugh Mac Cahill Mac Murry the chief Irish-Tenant upon the Colonele Land,
^^^^^^mb: 30
who had jugled with his Brittish-Tenants, making them believe he was a guard
for their Cattle, in preserving and recovering some of them which had been
stolen by the neighboring Rebels, did this day join himself with the Cavan
Rebels, who in a great body marched with Drum and Colors within two miles of
our Castle, drawing with them a many of the Brittish-Tenants Cattle, and
taking with them one Englishman whom they hanged.

The Colonel now perceiving their general trecheries, ^^^^^b: 4
leaves off any more to trust them, and seeing no order for relief either from
the Lord Justices, or the Lord President: They having received advertisement
from our Colonel not only of the state of his own Castle, but also of the
Town and Garrison of Sligo, where a part of the Lord Presidents own Company
lay, with a many British, who were miserably murdered at the taking in of
that Town, being promised daily relief by the Lord President, which promise
and encouragement as some of themselves say, helped to destroy them, otherwise
they could have joined with us before the Rebellion there brake out in that
height. This day by our Colonells command, a Gallows was erected upon the top
of an hill near the Castle, and having about 24 Prisoners in the Castle, he
caused 8 of them to be hanged up, which had been at the burning of
Ballyshannon in the County of Donegall, and at the burning of the Iron works
in the County of Fermannagh.

The same day our Horsemen scouring the sields, took two of the Rogues
Centries, who were brought home and hanged.

A party was sent in the night to scour Glansfarne Woods, Decem^^ (...)
upon intelligence that Hugh Mac Cahill the righleader of the Colonells
traitorous Tenants kept in those Woods, where indeed they were met withal, 3
of them killed, diverse wounded, and their great leader narrowly escaping in the
Woods through the darkness of the night.

Our Horsemen scouring the fields, Decem^^ 14.
met with another of the Rebels Centries, who was brought to the Castle and
hanged.

One Thomas Abercromy being misled by a treacherous Jesuiticall kinsman of his
own, this day did for sake his own house, Decem^^ 15.
being a pretty stone House with a Barn, within a mile of our Colonells
Castle, transports himself, his Wife and Children to the Castle of Con o
Rourk, apparently by this time in Rebellion, leaving in his own house his said
Rapisticall kinsman, married to an Irish-woman, with some of the said Con o
Rourks Irish Rogues, for maintaining of that house, which our Colonel held no
good neighouthood; He many times neighbourly and kindly inviting the said
Thomas Abercromy with his wife and children to take share with him in his
Castle, and not to shame and dishonor himself and his Nation in such a kind:
whose answer was, he was fully preswaded of the destruction of this Castle and
all in it, for it was so resolved, as he was credibly assured, not only by
those of this County, but of all the bordering Counties near it, and that he
was promised by the favor of the said Con o Rourke, to have his own life with
his wife and childrens preserved until they were elsewhere transported.

Complaint was made to the Colonel, Decem^^ 16.
that some of this Con o Rourkes Rogues had robbed some of his Tenants,
servants and gardens, who sending after them, had some of the Rogues
apprehended; where little Thomas Abercromy the Papist presumed to interpose
himself for the rescuing of those Rogues, as they were brought by the house
his Cosen left him in, upon this Information our Colonel caused him to be
apprehended as a dangerous Instrument there, (...)
the Rogues in the house with him running away, the house is demolished and
made unserviceable.

A party in the night time was sent abroad toward Sligoe, ^^^^mb: ^0
where we met with a number of Rogues, hurt diverse, killed three, brought home
thcirheads to our Colonel with a lusty Prisoner, who was hanged next day.

Own o Rourke, ^^^ary 6.
Bryan Ballagh his Brother, with the greatest strength of this County of Cavan,
made a great show this day, being about a 1000 or 1200 men, (...) e
marched with Musket shot to us, (where from the Castle we shot one of them
dead, (...) 6
being a sign of good luck, making them march further off,) This night they
encamped at Larganboye, where Abercromyes house was lately destroyed, being
disappointed of what they expected for there, (...)
their chief Commanders marching a mile further for their quarters to Con o
Rourke the then Sheriff, who till that day had not publicly declared
himself; there they found Thomas Aberoromy with his wife and children; The
Rogues continued with their Camp at Larganboy, within a mile to us, and their
chief Officers at Con o Rourkes, from Thursday till Tuesday following, daily
drawing out their men to the hills about us, every day multiplying, making
great shows, thinking thereby to have scared us out of the Castle.

This morning the Sheriff Con o Rourke in the head of Rebels, ^^^^ary (...)
marched in a full body within half a mile to the Castle, as if he meant
presently to have assaulted us, which the Colonel perceiving, draws forth in
person as strong as he could make, both Horse and Foot, being far short of
the sixth man of their number, yet made offer there to have fought with them,
which the Rogues perceiving make a halt upon a Hill a River dividing us, they
calling to us that we were Rebels to the King and not they; Our Colonel
wishing them, since their quarrel was so good and their number so much greater
then ours, they would try it with us: In the mean time while we were thus
parleying, men were sent out by the Colonel in several quarters behind us, to
set fire on a many goodly Houses and haggards belonging to his own Tenants,
least the Rogues with their multitudes should have quartered themselves most
convcniently round about him, which sudden fire the Rogues perceiving,
presently imagined aid was come to us; The fires being up we advanct with
greater confidence, whereupon they retreated in disorder, and dispearst
themselves presently, some of our Horsemen employed in the burning,
apprehended two of the Rogues, which were brought to the Colonel as we drew
home to the Castle, which by his orders were that night hanged.

A party of Horse and Foot were sent toward the Sheriff Con o Rourkes
Castle, to requite his kind visit toward ours the day before, Ianu^^^ 12.
where we found himself, with his wife, children and family sled that night,
leaving Thomas Abercromy with his wife and children in possession of his
Castle, whom our Soldiers turned out, victualling themselves with store of
Poudred-Beefe, Butter, Meal and such like commodities, what they were able to
carry away; afterward setting fire in the Castle, and in many other thatched
houses about it, burning all.

A party is sent toward the Castle of Drommahere, Ianua^^ 13.
where their great Colonel Owen o Rourke with all his strength lay; yet we
burned many goodly houses and haggards of Corn within a mile of the Castle,
burning all within five miles forwards.

Our party marched Westwards 6 miles toward Sligo, Ianua^^ 14.
burning many goodly houses and haggards that way, and amongst them the house
and haggards of Bryan ballagh o Rourke, Brother to the foresaid Con o Rourke.

A party of Horse were sent North-westward 6 miles toward the borders of
Sligo, where we burned a strong stone house slated with a bawne, Ianua^^ 15.
built by Sir Roger Jones, called Vnloanes Foart; This day we also burned many
other Irish-houses and haggards, and in our retreat, we encountered amongst the
Woods a prime Rebel called Ternan oge Mac Art o Rourke, whose head was brought
to the Castle that night.

A party of Foot are sent 6 miles Northwards toward the borders of the County
of Fermannagh, Ianua^^ 16.
burning all that way many houses and haggards belonging to the o Menghons,
Thomas Mac Loans, and the o Frciles of Rossenner: The party marching homewards
was betrayed by their guide, and were laid for in their march by above 300 of
the Rogues, our party not being 60, five of our men were killed, and 8 of the
Rebels, so this march concluded the burning of all houses and Corn within 6
miles round about our Castle, not so much left as a Cabin to camp in.

This day the greatest strength of the Conty with the assistance of the Lord
Taffes son, and Captain Bryan Mac Donnoghy, Ianua^^ 25.
from the County of Sligoe, the Mac Gawrans from the County of Cavan, to the
number of 1200, or 1400 men, encamped themselves at the old place Largenboy,
where they lay in the Fields that night, and the next morning drove away all
our Colonells Cowes to the number of 4 or 5 hundred.

Having gotten our Cowes, they who took them came this day again, Ianua^^ 26.
and encamped themselves at two houses, which our Colonel was persuaded by his
Licutenant to leave unburnt, within half a mile to the Castle, where was store
of Corn at one of the houses, belonging to the Lieutenant himself, which
Corn the Rogues fell a burning, which much vexed us, but they lying in that
manner, burning of our Corn from Sunday till Tuesday, our Colonel then with a
party of Horse and Foot, did beat them from their quarters, killed 8 of them,
and chased the rest being five times our number.

This day Owen o Rourke, ^^^^ary ^
with the assistance of Colonel Con Mac Donnell o Rourke and his Regiment from
James Town, with the o Connors and Mac Gawrans from the Counties of Sligo and
Cavan, to the number of 1500 or 1600 men burnt our Town and Mills of Manor
Hamilton, sssar^
which day upon the Rogues retreat from that good service, our Colonel not
being provided otherwise to entertain them, endeavoring the safety of his
people, which that day God preserved within his Castle and bawne, yet caused he
to be hanged upon the gallows in their view, Con o Rourke, Brother to their
great Colonel Owen, and Connor Mac Laughlin chief of that Name, two of the
ablest and most dangerous men in this County.

Owen o Rourke with his Brother Bryan Ballagh, ^^^uary
and the Mac Glannahans to the number of 600 or 700 men from the Darty,
encamped themselves again in the former place at our Lieutenants and John
Murrayes houses and haggards, falling to their old work of burning, and
sending away of our Corn: The next day with a party of Horse and Foot, we
again fell upon them as before, killing diverse of them, their great Colonel
being shot through the hat and through the Pike near his hand; we brought home
to the Castle 3 of their ablest men's heads, (...)
The wives and boys of our Soldiers loading themselves with the burnt Corn
and pillage, we burnt those houses, and what Corn in the haggards we were not
able to carry with us, to prevent their further company there, they being too
far masters of the Field.

Our horsemen scouring the Fields apprehended two of the Rogues Centries,
^^^uary
Owen Mac Thomas Mac Murray, and Ferries Mac Kegan, two lusty able Rogues,
which were the next day hanged.

Our Colonel being informed that Mr. Park at New-Towne within 6 miles of our
Castle, ^^^uary
and 12 miles from Sligo was strongly blockt up with a Camp about him in his
Castle, sent a party of Horse and Foot under the command of our Lieutenant,
with orders to view their strength, and if possible to relieve and speak with
Mr. Park; As we marched toward New-Towne, we saw little danger, only some
scouting Rogues from hill to hill. But coming to Mr. Park, he told our
Lieutenant that he wished us all home again, holding us all lost men, as if he
had been acquainted with the plot; Our Lieutenant amazed at his speeches,
perceiving no such sign, upon his march admiring Mr. Parkes intelligence,
finding himself and his Castle free, desired Mr. Park, since for his relief
our Colonel had seut us thither, that he would therefore lend him 20 or 30 of
his men for the strengthening of his party homewards, which Mr. Park would by
no means do, though persuaded thereunto by his own Officers, and diverse of
his men, who told him it was shame for him and them all, he leaving men enough
besides to defend him in his Castle, whose answer was, it was well for him if
he could defend himself and his till aid come, without Provoking or doing any
thing to draw the County upon him: Our Colonel having in person upon his
entreaty lately visited him with a small party of Horse, where since it is
said, New-Towne should have been the trap to have caught us all for our
kindness to it. On our march homewards we were beset from all quarters with
near a 1000 men, who within 3 miles to our Colonels Castle, gave us a most
fierce charge in a most dangerous rocky place, where our Horses could make no
play, yet did our men so bravely behave themselves being instantly engaged upon
push of Pike, our Musquetieres once having given fire in their bosoms, were so
plied with their stones wherewith they had provided themselves, and had such
dexterity in throwing them, as we got not leave to charge again; but we
falling upon them pell mell with the but ends of our Muskets did so closely
stand to it, as having by Gods great mercy and power broake through, disordered
and routed them, killing a number, chasing them like dogs with our Horse and
Foot from hill to hill; In the mean time our Souldies boys stirpped near 30
of their best men of the Counties of Sligo and Leitrim, of which number was
Mulmurry Mac Ternan (chief of that name) a Justice of the Peace who had been
Sheriff of this County, who with his eldest Son and heir, and his Son in
law Carery o Trower chief of that name, Cormack Mac Murray, Farlisse o
Deganan, Bryan o Rourke, and John o Crean, all of them that are named being
prime Gentlemen of these two Counties, besides a many of their common Soldiers
were killed, whereof is made small reckoning amongst them; It is thought that we
cut off that day of all sorts above threescore of them: Our party not
consisting of 80 Horse and Foot, of which we lost in that service only one
Pike man and one Musquitiere, though many of us were sore bruised with stones,
and slight curable wounds with push of Pike, the Rogues afterward
acknowledging that day they saw God was against them, they being ten times our
number, and most confident to have destroyed us all, yet it pleased God thus to
preserve us from this great damage which we were engaged in, for that ungrate
man Mr. Park his sake, we brought home with us abundance of the Rogues Arms
and Apparel, which was a good supply to our Soldiers.

This day o Connour Sligoe shows himself from that County with his Regiment,
^^uary
drawing to a Mountain not much above half a mile from our Castle.

O Connour with his Regiment encamped themselves in Cornestacke-Woods, ^ch 1.
upon the side of a boggie Mountain not much above half a mile from our
Castle.

Owen o Rourke with his Regiment and the assistance of the County, ^ch 4.
encamped themselves on the right hand of O Connours Regiment, in the same
Woods near together; O Connour sends a seeming friendly Letter by a Boy of 6
or 7 years old, advising our Colonel to yield to some Treaties with them, and
to prevent the eminent ruin was threatened toward his Castle and all in it,
which Letter was answered with contempt and disdain by our Colonel, who
scorned any Treaty with Rebels and Traitors.

Owen o Rourke, ^ch 8.
O Connour Sligoe, and all they could then command, being a great multitude,
marched toward our Castle from their Camp, as if that day they would have
done great matters, but having showed themselves, and marching about us,
keeping without Musket Shot of our walls, they drew back to their quarters.

They again that morning, ^ch 9.(...)
being supplied the night before with Colonel Con Mac Donnels Regiment, which
as the day before with near 2000 men, siring some Cabbins, and sheltring
themselves as they set fire in the ditches of the Orchard, where of from the
Castle walls our Colonel shot two of them with his own hands, which they
carried off retreating to their old quarters.

Being their Patron St. Patricks day, ^ch 17.
and the day they had prefixed for the destruction of our Castle and all in it,
Our Colonel that morning with Trumpet, Drum and Colors, marched out with
Horse and Foot toward their unaccessible Camp with his small number,
challenging them that day to draw near for performance of their great braggs,
where we parlied and made some sport with them a while, a River and a bogge
dividing us; Our Colonel sending for one of his Prisoners, the Rogues being
drawn up in a body right before us, we called to them since they durst not
come to perform their promise and take the Castle, they would rescue their
Countryman who was there to be hanged in honor of St. Pattrick, which
Prisoner being hanged and proving but an old sack of straw, long stockings
being sowed to it, as it was thrown over the gallows, our Hangman sitting on
the gallows, calling to them if they had charity in them to send the poor
prisoner a Priest, they imagining that sack to be a man, fell all on their
knees in our view praying for the Prisoners soul.

Till this day our Campers lay quiet, April 2
our Colonel daily causing the Plough to go in despite of them till this
night, that all our plough-Horses through negligence of our Centries are stolen
from us, they thinking by that means they had overthrown our ploughing, and
the next morning we falling to geere our Ploughes our Colonel causes his
Troope-Horses which had been kept in the house, to be made ready and fall to
plowing and sowing with them faster then formerly, and ploweth and sows near
fourscore Barrells of Corn, the Rogues not daring for all their strength to
plow or sow for themselves within two or three miles of his Castle.

By this time the Rogues grew so consident of their securities in their Camp,
April 7
that the Colonel o Rourke brought his Cattle to graze upon some wast land
within two miles of us, wherewith our Colonel being acquainted, that night
sent out a party of Horse and Foot, and seized upon all their Cattle, driving
them homewards by break of day, whereupon they raising their Camp, brake out
upon us, thinking to have destroyed us and rescued their Colonels cattle; but
it pleased God we so paid them, that we not only made good our prey, but killed
a number of their ablest men, bringing with us to the Castle, 6 of their chief
Officers heads, of which number was James Murrah Mac Glannaghy the chief man
of that name, chasing all the rest to their Camp, where we found 3 stand of
Pike-mens Arms, 2 Drums, 6 Muskets with Bandaliers, 2 Sergeants Halberts,
with a many Pikes and Skeanes, most of those Arms formerly belonging to the
Lord President of Connaughts Officers and Soldiers, having layne in Garrison
at Sligo till it was lost and they cut off; Thus we destroyed their great
Camp, where our Soldiers wives and boys plentifully victualled themselves,
bringing from the Rogues a many great Iron-crowes and such like instruments,
made and marked with the sign of the Cross, making their poor churles
believe, that with those Irons they were to pull down our Colonels Castle and
Bawne.

A party of Foot was this night sent to Glenden, some 5 or 6 miles off, April 9
where we killed and burned in their houses near 20 Rogues, bringing home a
number of Cowes and Goats, and burning a many of Irish-houses.

Our Colonel this night in person, April 18
marched forth with a party of Horse and Foot into the County of Sligo, where
within two miles of the Town, he burns of some Villages called Belfather, and
other houses there, killed some Rogues, he returns by Mr. Parkes Castle of the
New-Towne, finding that Town and Castle untoucht or troubled, being in the
bosom of the Rogues, where our Colonel being informed the Rogues were daily
relieved by that Town and Castle, their Cowes having grazed peaceably about
the Castle all the while their Camp lay about Manor Hamilton, Mr. Park
never permitting a man of his either to meddle with their cattle or
themselves, as they went and came with their provisions from Sligo to their
Camp, he having in his Castle near 60 able men, which might have done good
service if M. Park and the o Rourkes had not so made their bargains, that
until our Colonels Castle were destroyed, he should not be meddled withal, so
as he made them no interruption whilst they were encampt about us; In the
mean time Mr. Park causing his Weaver to weave 40 yards of broad-cloath for
the use of Mr. Bryan Ballagh o Rourke, whilst he and his Brother Owen were
lying in camp about us; And the next day after we had beat them from their
camp, Mr. Park not only suffered them to carry away their cattle, which all
that while they grazed near to his Castle gates without any guard save one
coward, as also that day lent Bryan Ballagh the cloath-weaver in his Castle,
with diverse such like informations proved by Mr. Parkes own servants,
whereupon our Colonel thought fit presently to burn that Town which so long
had relieved and sheltred the Rogues, and killed some of them at that instant
in the Town.

Our Horse men this morning scouring the fields, ^^^il 21.
killed one of the Rogues centryes bringing his head home to the Castle.

This night a party was sent toward Dromahere, (...) 23.
where we killed above 40 of the Rogues, burnt many good houses, brought home 7
or 8 score cowes, with many Horses, Sheep and Goats, by this march we
diverted another great gathering intended to have encampt about us the next day.

A party of Foot is sent into a Wood-land Mountain country 10 mile from our
Castle, May 1.
where by the dawning of the day we fell upon some houses belonging to the
great Lord of that Country Mac A Nawe, where we burnt and killed in the houses
upwards of 3 score persons, taking Mac A Nawe himself, with his two Daughters,
and a Kins-man Prisoner, his Wife being killed unknown to the Soldiers,
amongst the rest we brought home our Prisoners with 8 or 9 score cowes, and
near 200 Sheep and Goats.

That night a party of Horse and Foot are sent into the country of Sligoe,
May 10.
where we burnt the houses of Teig Mac Phelomy o Connour, Teig bog o Connour,
near Cozens and Captains in O Connours Regiment, whilst he lay about us we
killed some 10 or 12 of the Rogues themselves, being then at Sligo, most of the
people of the Barrony being sled to the Town for fear of our men; That
Country being almost wast, we brought home only a prey of Sheep.

This night we marched into the County of Fermannagh, May 13
where we killed the Wife of Donnogha Mac Flagherty Mac Gwire, with about 40
more, whom we surprised in houses before day, and brought with us 9 score
Cowes, above 200 Sheep and Goats, and 47 Horses and Mares, 30 Swine, and 5
Prisoners which we hanged.

Intending toward the Friars of Crewly, we found that house uncovered, May 18
and the Friars fled; This morning we encountered a number of Owen o Rourkes men
near to the Castle of Dromahere, where we killed above 20 of them, our
Soldiers got good Pillage in their Cabbins, brought home above an 100, most of
them Scotch and English Cowes, 7 or 8 score Sheep, some lusty Mares and
Horses, with a many Pikes, and the Lord President of Connaughts Halbert, his
Sergeant being taken when they left Sligo.

This morning our Castle is attempted to be taken by 4 or 5 handred Rogues from
the Dartey or Rosenver, May 20
but our Centries timely giving us the Alarmes, they are rescued, and the
Rogues retired to the Mountains.

In hope this night to meet the Rebels who attempted our Castle, May 21
a party is sent toward Glon^an 6 miles from the Castle, where we found a many
fair Irish-houses, neither man nor beast near them, all which we burnt, and
marching homeward we perceived before Sunrising a many Rebels at Largenboy,
within less then a mile to our Castle, coming from the County of Sligo, with
intention that morning to ass^ile our Castle: Our party perceiving them,
notwithstanding their sore chase in rescuing the Castle the day before, and
their hard march that night, yet did we advance toward them with Horse and
Foot within speech of them, our Colonel calling to them from a hill, asked if
their errand were for the Castle, for the rescuing their Lord Mac A Nawe and
his Daughters, or was it Cowes they were seeking, they should have a venture
for both, our Colonel causing a Prisoner to be brought out, told them it was
Mac A Nawe, to be hanged for their welcome to their old Camp, which Prisoner
was immediately hanged in their own view, the gallows standing on the top of
a hill, within less then two Musket-shots, where the Rogues were drawn up, as
the Prisoner was thrown over the ladder, we could perceive the Rogues upon
their knees, thinking we had hanged Mac a Nawe; After this our Colonel gives
order presently to drive above two hundred milch Cowes toward them, telling
them there was the cowes we had lately taken from their dear friend Colonel
Owen o Rourke, when they were last beaten from their camp, hoping this would
have put more metal in them, since they durst not fight for rescuing their
friend, they being five times our number, and we unable to reach them as they
stood on those woody boggs, keeping a moss and a River betwixt us and them:
Whilst our Colonel parlied with them, his Lady from the castle came to us
(where we were drawn up over against the Rogues) furnishing us with good store
of meat and drink, which much refreshed us, having been upon service two
nights together, yet were our stomachs sharper set to have been at the Rogues,
then either to meat or sleep; but seeing the Rogues so unwilling to come on,
we were commanded on a sudden to draw toward the castle, which the Rogues
perceiving fell to stripping themselves, and with a great noise and a cry come
running toward us, and over the River unto the middle of a moss scarce Musket
shot from the castle, as if they would have gotten betwixt us and home; which
our Colonel perceiving, gives order to the Officers, commanding the Foot to
wheel about upon them, which the Rogues no sooner perceiving, but they
presently fell a running over the River, throwing one another into it; as they
crossed, our Musketeeres getting ground of them, gave sire amongst the thickest
of them, killed diveis, hurt many, chaste the rest near 3 miles over Mountains
toward Sligo, bringing home their chief Commander at that time his head, our
Soldiers being furnished with above an 100 of their Mantles, coats and
cloakes, 2 Drums, a many of their Arms, and good store of Meal and other
commodities which their Wives and boys found in their camp, we being told by
2 Prisoners that all the neghbouring Counties had set up their rests with a
resolution that night to have met, never to have given us over until they had
starved us or taken us out of our castle, but God of his wonted mercy thus
disappointed that damnable plot, without the loss of a man to us, to his
everlasting glory and all our comforts.

Notwithstanding our several sore marches the Week past, ^ay 22.
we were encouraged by the word of a Prisoner in hope of a special piece of
service, this night to venture upon a fresh march, where we were conducted
near 14 or 16 miles into the County of Sligo, guiding us amongst most
dangerous Rocks and glinns, intending to have betrayed us, as afterward he
confessed; nevertheless it pleased God to give us such strength and courage, and
sent us such a meeting with them, as we killed above 30 in three cabbins,
brought home a fresh Prisoner, above an 100 cowes, and near so many Sheep;
the cry and Country being up in all parts about us, yet never durst so much
as venture to rescue the cattle; At our coming home we hanged our guide, who
died a most desperate obdurate villain.

A party of Foot was sent toward Mounter Kenny, May 27
that night we killed 10 or 12 in their cabbins amongst the Woods, brought home
with us near 200 cowes an 100 Sheep, and in our return we were set upon by
Owen o Rourke, and the sons of M^c Nawe, being near 300 men, where it
pleased God we not only defended our selves and our prey, but also killed and
stripped a many of their best men, bringing home a Prisoner with a many of their
Arms.

This night a party of Horse and Foot are sent toward some Lands of Owen o
Rourkes called Cilkosh, where we kided 15 or 16 of his men, June 4.
brought home a Prisoner, with some few Cowes, Horses, Sheep and Goats.

A party of Foot is sent toward our Colonels Woods of Glansarne, June 12
where we killed 15 or 16 in those Woods, and brought home 4 Prisoners, with
some foure-score cowes, and near six-score Sheep.

Our Colonel having by virtue of a Commission, Inn 23
made use of some 20 of Mr. Parkes men in prosecution of Rebels, not thinking
him to be so base a Traitor in correspondency with them as afterward was
proved. This night our Colonel sends his party with 20 Beeves for the supply
and relieving Park and his castle, with orders that Parkes 20 men should
return with our party, there being twice more men with him within his castle
then was requisite for the defense thereof: But Park receiving the Beeves, and
getting his 20 men within his castle, would not suffer a man of them
notwithstanding our Colonels commission and orders to that purpose to return
with us.

Our Colonel much resenting Parkes presumption the day before, June 24.
this day sends his Lieutenant with a party of Horse and Foot, requesting
Park by virtue of our Colonels commission from the Lords Justices and
Counsel, to draw forth and muster what strength that castle could make,
leaving a competent number within it self for making good the walls; Our
Lieutenant orders being that so many should be left within the castle as his
judgment should think fit, and the rest to march along with our party upon
some special speedy piece of service intended, wherein Sir William Cole and
his Regiment had several times denied us assistance; This motion Park denied
to muster his men until he persuaded our Lieutenant to come within his castle,
where shutting the gates, he mustered near 60 able men, whereof our Lieutenant
demanded 30, which Park denied, not suffering a man of his to come within the
castle until ours marched away. July 11.


This night with Horse and Foot our Colonel thinks fit in person to visit
Mr. Park, who had so beastly neglected his Officers in contempt of the Lords
Justices and Connsells commission, fearing Park was inclining rather to submit
himself and his castle into the hands of the Rogues whom he held the stronger
party, and daily corresponded with them, which to prevent, we marched this night
about midnight to his Castle walls, requiring Park if he were a subject, that
upon his Allegiance he would come forth and speak with out Colonel, who after
some shufsling excuses and delays opens his gate, our Colonel commands him
speedily to draw forth what men he had within the castle, and making choice of
some 20 of them which he joined to his own party, caused presently to
apprehend Park upon strong presumption of his disloyalty and his former
contempts; Our Colonel presently puts in an Officer of his own with the
charge of that Castle and all in it, which being done, our Colonel marches
straight toward the Town of Sligo, Parkes castle being within 4 miles of it,
none of us that followed him imagining that with so small a party he would have
anned at such a march, but coming near to the Town, our Colonel commanding a
halt to be made, and the party to be drawn up in abody, using some comfortable
encouraging speeches, asking if our stomachs did serve us as his did, to
attempt the burning of the Town now so near it, which maintained so many
Rebellious enemies, who had joined in the burning our poor garrison, and so
many times encampt about us and sought our destruction; This motion was no
sooner made by our Colonel then cherefully embraced by us all, so recommending
our selves to his divine mercy, who had many times assisted and delivered us,
on we marched toward the dawning of the day, our Colonel having no other
Officers to assist him in this service, but his Sergeant Iaviston, his
Lieutenant and Ensign being most part of this year diseased and
unserviceable, our Colonel coming at the Bridge gives orders to the Foot
chearefully to follow their Sergeant with what silence and speed they were
able, and once entering the Town, no man presume upon pain of death to enter
any honse for plunder, but with sire and sword to destroy all we could come at,
calling all the street if any British Prisoners were amongst them they should
draw to us, as diverse did, Our Colonel with his Horse falling upon a many good
houses full of people on this side of the Bridge, where he burned and destroyed
all, appointing his Randevowes with the Foot at the South-west end of the
Town, where he crossed a Foard which brought him close to the Friery, where the
foot met and fired their brave mass house and Fryery, where it is said, we
burnt a many good things, which people had given in keeping for safety to the
Friars, and all their superstitious trumperies belonging to their Mass: It was
thought some of the Friars themselves were likewise burnt, two of them running
out were killed in their habits: As we finished this work, and giving God the
praise for our success, we were told by some Prisoners that O Connour Sligo
with what strength he could make in that County, was that night marched to meet
Owen o Rourke and the rest of his old comrades from the County of Cavan, for
the laying of a new camp about our Colonels castle, and the carrying away of
our new supply of Cowes; upon which news our Colonel held it fit to have
homewards, as we marched hourly expecting to be incountred; when we came within
3 miles of our Colonels castle, we descerned our Colonels Horse passiage
strongly to be beset (being a straight passiage) with a number of men, having a
Rocky-wood on our right hand, and a great bogge on the left, so that our
Horsemen by our Colonels orders are forced to try another way, where many of
them were bogged their Horses breaking from them; In the meane-time our
Foote-men courageously charged a great body of them near 300 which were laid
for us that way; Those who had beset our Horse-passages, observing our
Horsemen bogg'd, and our Foot engaged with 3 times our number, marched hard
after our Horsemen, where our Colonel amongst the rest was 3 times unhorst,
that day the Rogues playing hard upon him, being well known by his Horse and
habit, as some of their Prisoners afterward confessed; nevertheless, it pleased
God out of his wonted fatherly mercy, not only to deliver us safe out of their
hands being a small handful, not above 7 score Horse and Foot, who fought our
selves with near a 1000 of them from several quarters, still skirmishing with
us until we came near our Colonels castle, our Muskiteeres killing a many of
them, with the less only of 3, and some few hurt; Notwithstanding our
wearisome march and hot service that night in burning of the Town of Sligo,
where it is confessed by themselves we destroyed that night near 3 hundred
souls by fire, sword and drowning, to Gods everlasting great honor and glory
and our comforts.

James Wethersom a Scotch-man, married to an Irish-woman, being at Sligo, July 7
and confessing, himself to have been one of O Connours Soldiers, was this
day hanged.

A party of Horse and Foot was this night sent toward Killargy, July 10.
where the Rogues were strongly encampt within 4 miles to our Colonels castle;
we falling on them before day, there we killed and stripped above 20 of them,
brought home above 8 score of their cowes, were set upon by a number of them,
who thought to have reseued the cowes, gave us a most desperate charge, but we
killed 7 or 8 more of them, and brought home our prey with a many of their
Arms, we lost one of our best Muskiteeres in this service.

Our Colonel being advertized from the County of Fermanagh, (...) 25.
that Sir William Cole had lately taken in upon protection above an 100 Irish
Rogues, allowing them a Captain of their own Nation over them, quartering
them near to the way where our messengers used to pass toward Eniskillen,
which much troubled our Colonel, such a thing should be done by Sir William
Cole with whom he daily corresponded, without acquainting him with his warrant
or reasons for that act: hereupon out Colonel fearing least that such like
neighbors should be put upon him by Sir William Cole, this night sends a party
toward the borders of Fermanagh, where a many goodly Irish houses with an Iron
work were standing amongst the Woods, all which our Colonel this night caused
to be burned; In scouring those Woods we found a few cowes and a Prisoners.

Our Colonel having diverse times by Letters advertised Sir William Cole
whilst the Rogues lay encampt about him, (...) 26.
desiring some aid from Sit William Regiment being most part Scotch-men, whom
our Colonel had advised to submit to his command, being of that County which
he lived in, yet Sir William did never since the beginning of these troubles,
venture so much as one messenger to see what was become of us, for all our
Colonel constantly twice or thrice a Month did adventure messengers to him,
who was near 10 times our number: And we being advertized from Sir William
Cole himself by our messengers, that some Powder and Ammunition was sent from
Dublin and Londonderry to Donegall, for the supply of Eniskillen and us both,
Sir William promising by his means and his stronger party, that some course
should be taken for the bringing our Ammunition from Donegall as for his own,
which our Colonel relied upon: yet nevertheless Sir William did make that
means that his own was brought to Ballishannon within 12 miles to our
Colonels castle, and unknown to our Colonel sends a party of 4 or 5 hundred
to Ballishannon for his Ammunition, where he was well supplied with Salt, and
marched at this time with this party near to the borders of our Colonels Land,
within 6 miles to his castle, where our small party might have conveniently met
them, and have been supplied as they were, if their intention and wishes had
been as neighbourcly toward us, as we were really toward them, who by this
and other after carriages appeared rather to envy then to pity our extremities
whereof they were fully informed; yet hearing by our last messenger how God had
blessed and enabled us to do for our selves, and that store of cowes were to be
had in our county of Leytrim, whereof they heard that we got daily store: This
news it seems did more invite our neighbor Regiment then any stomach they
had to relieve us in our several distresses until this day; A party of near
400 Horse and Foot are sent with Sit William Coals Letters to our Colonel,
congratulating his several good services, expressing he had now in
accomplishment of our Colonels former desires sent these Gentlemen and
Soldiers, to be employed in scouring of the Country, and such other services
as by our Colonel should be thought fit, without limitation of time or other
end mentioned in his Letter; upon reading whereof our Colonel bids their
Lieutenant Colonel Acheson with the rest of their Captains heartily welcome,
there being in their company Mr. Deane Barkeley, who had marired Sir William
Coals Daughter, and had lately been relieved by Sir William from the Rogues,
in exchange of diverse arch-Rebels, Priests, Captains and others of great
consequence; This Mr. Deane so behaved himself at a conference betwixt our
Colonel and their Officers, as if he had come with absolute power from his
Father in law over this party, Officers and Soldiers, their Lieutenant
Colonel alleging they were sent thither by Sir William Cole upon information
of our messenger, that we were blockt up with a strong camp about the Castle,
and that his orders were to stay no longer with out Colonel then the next day,
allowing them peremptorily 48 hours and no longer to be from their Garrison,
they having in that time 40 long miles march through Woods and Mountains to
perform, let any man judge what service in the rest of that time was fit to be
ventured on: upon this our Colonel advized them, since their private orders
were such, contrary to the contents of Sir Williams Letters to him, that their
best course was for that night, Commanders and Officer to refresh themselves
with him in his Castle, taking order that their Soldiers should be quartered
and provided for amongst his Soldiers in their cabbins, which their Officers
would not yield to, much urging and opportuning our Colonel, that since they
were come to him, and that they found the Fields clear about him, as they had
been near 3 Months before that, which they knew well enough whatsoever they
pretended; that he should employ them upon some piece of service under his
command before they returned: Our Colonel telling them, God had hitherto
mercifully blessed his undertakings with his own handful, that he was unwilling
to engage the honor of what further service he intended upon such strict
orders, the success and event not fit to be limited with their time; Their
Officers still importuning that night to be employed, whereupon upon their
importunities, our Colonel resolved to try with the assistance of their
strength, the taking of the Castle of Drumahere, wherein was Colonel Owen o
Rourke, with diverse of the Irish Rebels of this County, hoping by that service
to have relieved Sir Robert Hanney with his Lady and children, who had been
long Prisoners in that castle, thinking Sir William Coals men being so earnest,
and once engaged in the hopes of compassing so honorable a piece of service,
they would not for shame have left it, and carried themselves so meanly whilst
we were upon the service as unworthily they did: Our Colonel not only in
hopes, but full of confidence and probable reasons, marches in person with his
Horse and Foot, leading them on near the Castle walls, where he entered his
Masons, Carpenters and other workmen with their instruments, who in short time
did make a breach, where he placed some few Muskiteeres; The Rebels
countermanding our work; play so hot upon our Muskiteeres as one of them were
killed, another deadly shot the rest were beaten from the work, our Colonels
men being wearied out, and having no seconding or assistance from Sir William
Coals great number, their Lieutenant Colonel having no power to command them
to relieve our men, whilst we were spending our lives and bloods in compassing
this service; Deane Barkeley is publicly discouraging the Officers and
Soldiers of Sir William Coals party, telling them they were not sent by their
Colonel and Governor to take in Castles, and that their time limited by their
orders was come, wishing them at their perils to draw homewards: Our Colonel
much grieved and ashamed to be thus engaged with the hopes of their help;
advised the Deane not to meddle with what was out of his Element, desiring to
dispute the condition of our estate with the Lieutenant Colonel and other
Officers of the Regiment. The Deane replied the Water was none of his Element,
and yet he could swim; and whosoever should command that party further,
should speak to him. Our Colonel thus discontented, contented, observing the
unworthy carriage of their Soldiers, who whilst we were upon service, their
Horsemen were rambling the Country, driving in Horses and Cowes, their
Foote-men running after Muttons, catching, killing and wasting under every
bush; Our Colonel endeavoring after the less of his men to pelswade them
only to lie that night about the Castle, knowing by the information of
Prisoners, they could not possibly have held out 2 days, if they had not
yielded that night, as since we are informed they intended, and did that night,
after our Colonel marched from thence, all of them leave the castle, leaving
Sir Robert Hanney with his Lady and children locked in a room all alone, till
the next day we were not likely to come any more, and that out Fermannagh
friend had left us in such disorder, who intended to have carried with them not
only what Cowes and Horses they had gathered in the forementioned manner
whilst we wore upon service, but also thought to have stolen with them diverse
of our Colonells cattle that morning they wero to part; wherewith our Colonel
being acquainted, perceived that their intended kindness and visit to him, was
only to have made use of his person and strength to have preyed our Country
for them, which he held no sitting employment for his personal service,
considering how unworthily they had carried themselves toward him in the time
of our distress, and particularly in this laft service; whereupon order was
given by our Colonel, that not only his own, cattle should be rescued from
them, but what else they had taken whilst he was in the Fields, telling their
Captains it was shame for them, they being 6 times our number, to offer to
take any thing from us, since they have made us the worse and not the better
for them: This much vexed Deane Barkeley, who pretended a Horse to be taken
from him, which he had caught himself whilst we were upon service about the
castle, our Colonel telling him, since he had deserved no better amongst us,
he should carry no Horse from thence to brag of; wishing the best 2 Horses on
his stable, with 500 punds in money had been sent his Father in law and
himself to Eniskillen, so that the Deane had not come to this march, who
carried himself more like a Devil then a Deane: For the. Captains and
Officers being ashamed of themselves, and observing our Soldiers to be but a
few, and daily employed, were persuaded by our Colonel for his Majesty's
service, and as a small supply for the safety of our castle and Garrison, to
lend our Colonel for some time 5 men out of every one of their Companies,
making up 30 men to him, and having received these men from the several
Captains, our Lieutenant is commanded by the Colonel for the better grace and
credit of their party, to march a part of their way with our Horse and Foot,
and as our Lieutenant and they were a parting, Deane 'Barkley had like to have
raised a mutiny, and have set their party and ours by the ears, threatening
those men left with their Colonel by the Captains consents, so as half of
them at that instant presently ran away from us with this unworthy carriage
of Sir William Coals party by the Deane of Cloghers, means. Our Colonel
acquaints Sir William Cole by a Letter, hoping he would have resented his Son
in laws arrogant and presuptuous carriage, and have sent us some supply of
more men, but far otherwise then we expected, Sir William in his answer,
rather justified his Son in laws actions, condemning and censuring his
Captains for the few men they had lent our Colonel, denying the former, and
acknowledging in this Letter for what he sent his party, desiring that those
few men which had not run away with the rest by his Son in laws
threatenings, should be speedily returned him, and accordingly they were: And
after this unworthy usage of Sir William Cole, our Colonels Soldier observing
the liberty and disorderly government and discipline of those Eniskillen
Soldiers, begun daily to run away to Eniskillon, where they found shelter
and employment amongst their Captains, to the great discomfort of our
Colonel, and the hazard of us all.

A party of Foot is sent to the County of Cavan, ^^gust 8.
where we killed above 20 Rogues, bringing home 2 Prisoners, and 7 or 8 score
cowes, and above 200 Sheep and Goats.

A party is sent toward Ballyshannon in the County of Donegall, ^^gust 22
where we killed 17 Rogues, and burned many houses in that Country, and brought
home a few cowes.

Our Colonel being advertized that some 2 miles on this side Sligo, ^^gust 25
a guard of Horsemen did daily come forth with their Reapers of corn, and
hoping to meet with them, this night a party of Horse and Foot was sent with
some guides to lie in ambush for them, where having layne till noone, none
appearing, that day our orders were to burn and prey what we could in that
country, where we burned of several Villiages, as Donoly, Formorley, Collrey
and Lisduff, with a many other straggling houses in the country, where we met
with 3 or 4 score cowes, and above an 100 Sheep. By this time the country
gathers, thinking to have rescued our prey and have beaten us, but it pleased
the Lord so in his wonted mercy to stand for us, as that day we killed above 40
of their best men, stripped them all, brought home a Prisoner, rerelieved the
castle of the New-Towne with a share of our cowes and Sheep, diverse of their
best Gentry, the o Connours, and the o Hearts being thus killed; We marched Horse
and Foot toward the Rosse in the county of Sligo, whence we brought a prey of
near 6 or 7 score cowes, and above 300 Sheep and Goats, where in our retreat
we were set upon by the greatest strength of the county, who were gotten into a
great head to the Town of Sligo, with intention that day to have laid a new
C^npe about our Castle, which this encounter diverted, we killing as was
afterward acknowledged by Prisoners near 60 of their ablest men, with two of
their famous Priests, Connour o Heart, and Donnell o Lynch, bringing home 7
Prisoners, 5 whereof were hanged the next day, one of them called Captain Cono
Connour and the other Cormack o Hoy who had been a Minister amongst our
Colonels Parishes, who since this Rebellion professed much loyalty, though a
kindly traitor, his Father being Viccar general in the county of Sligo, was
some: years ago quartered in the Town of Sligo for treasonable speeches
against the King and State.

The Colonel this day hears diverse shot of Ordinance toward Sligo, Septem^^^
10.
which put him in some hopes of some Army toward that place, or relief
toward us.

This night a party of Horse and Foot was sent toward the Seacoast to search
for a Prisoner, Septem^^^ 11.
for intelligence what shooting it was we heard the day before, where we fell
on, there the country gathered together to oppose the landing of men, where 2
Ships lay within the harbor of Sligo; we gave the Rogues the Alarm, who fled
all to a strength of an old Castle near the Seacoast, we brought home one
Prisoner, of whom we learned that some of the O Donnells and O Galloghers from
Vlster were joined with the county of Sligo Rebels to the number of 4 or 500
thinking those Ships carried men, Moncy, Victuals and Ammunition for out
reliese, but it seemed their greater errand thither, was to see for a Barque
which the Merchants of Sligo had loaded with several commodities with corn
and cattle from the Oyster-Island, where they landed some men, and burned
diverse houses, going to Sea afterward, and as yet unknown to us what they
were.

This night we marched again into the County of Sligo, September 27.
where within a little more then a mile to that Town, we burnt a great
village, Ennagh belonging to Andrew Crean the late Sheriffs of that County, we
killed a number of Corne-reapers, and brought with us a Prisoner.

By reason of our daily service, October 2
never any ways supplied or relieved now almost a year since the Rebellion
begun, our Colonel in this extremity, thinks fit this night to send the
most part of his men toward Eniskillen, for some Arms and Ammunition which
was sent thither by the convenience of Sir Robert Stewarts, guarding the
Eniskillen party from the Derry, wherewith Sir Robert worthily and lovingly
advertized our Colonel from Eniskillen with what was left for him there with
Sir William Cole, who had promised to give his best assistance for the speedy
conveying and guarding of those necessaries to us: But our party coming to
Eniskillen, relying upon the assistance of Sir William Coals Regiment, not only
for the guarding of our Arms and Ammunition, but also for the restoring and
returning our runne-awayes which had been unlawfully sheltered and employed
amongst them. Our Officer demanding a guard for both those purposes, is offered
the Arms and Ammunition if without a guard we would venture on them, our
runne-awayes are so concealed and dispersed amongst them, as no help is made
for us for them at all where there were 14 or 15 of them, Sir William Cole
never appearing amongst us, but his gates shut against us, and his bridge
drawn up as if we had been Rebels come to take in his Castle, not offering us
or our Officers so much as one bit of Bread, or cup of small Beer in his
Castle or Garrison, our Colonel having formerly entertained 500 of his
plentifully two nights though they wronged him; Thus not daring without a guard
to venture upon the Kings Arms and Ammunition with so weak a party so far a
march through Woods and Mountains, we were forced with no small hazard to make
what speed we could from whence we came; Our Colonel being advertized before
our coming that the Country was strongly gathered together to have laid for
us in our coming home, but we missed of our errand.

Most of this Week was employed by us Men, Women and Boys, in fetching in of
Corn from the Rebels, from the bordering counties of Sligo and Fermannagh,
with what was near us in our own country, whereof it pleased God we had a
good supply without the less of a man, woman or child, though daily threatened
with great bravadoes, yet they durst not cut any grain for themselves scarce
on this side Sligo bridge, where abundance of Wheat, Rye and Barley rotted
upon the ground for want of means and help for us to bring it from thence,
which Fermannagh men might conveniently have done both for their own supply
and ours.

Seven of our Colonels men left at New-Towne for a guard within 4 miles of
Sligo, ^ctober 9.
upon little Naggs chardged 50 or 60 reaping Corn near Sligo, where they
killed 4 of them, chased the rest, brought home a Prisoner, with 18 or 20
Horses and Carrs the Rogues had been drawing corn withal; The Prisoner being
brought to our Colonel, informs him that 2 Congans of the Vlster Rogues,
under the command of Captain Manus Mac Egnahan o Donnell, and Captain
Ferdinando o Gallogher were joined with Captain Teig Mac Phelomy o Connour,
who lay at a Town of o Connors called Broad Culline, some 12 miles from us,
with intention shortly to have a sling at our Castle.

Upon this intelligence, October 21.
our Colonel thinks fit this night to send a party of Horse and Foot to
prevent these Gentlemen's visit, where we met with them in the place our
Prisoner informed us, having good sport with them for a while in killing near
60 of them with all their 3 Captains, and Captain Teig o Connours Wife, his
Brother having been formerly a Captain, and brought hither Prisoner was
hanged, we brought home this day near 200 cowes with a Prisoner, burning the
Town of Broad Culline belonging to o Connour, with diverse other small
Villiages near it.

Our Colonel in expectation Sir William Cole and his Captains would now have
used some means to have guarded his Arms, Octob^^ 1
Ammunition and runne-awayes, as partly they promised within a week or 10
days of our last being with them, whereof seeing no performance, and our
former store in that kind, as also our salt being almost quite spent, and
understanding that Sir William Cole had lately been supplied from
Ballishannon: In this extremity most of our company is again commanded in a
party to Eniskillen, with Letters to Sir William Cole mentioning our
extremities, sending money by our Lieutenant for what salt could be had at any
rate, either for love or money, which orders of Sir William intended no better
to us then in our last march to that purpose, that we should our selves venture
upon the Arms and Ammunition, we were at a stand every way, and leaving it to
God and better times, to judge and revenge our usage upon these last Letters,
our Arms and Ammunition are delivered us with a Letter to our Colonel, but no
guard nor supply of salt to be had; Thus it pleased God to bring us safe home
with what we received, still deteyning our run-awayes, making use of them.

Our Soldiers being weary after their sore march for our Ammunition, Novem^^^
10.
the weather being fair, all the Women and Boys are sent toward Dromahere to
look for corn, where with a small guard of Horse and some firelocks, they
marched where they met with store of corn, coming all laden home in spite of
many Rogues that appeared to them upon several hills.

We are this day likely to be surprised by near a 1000 Rogues from the
counties of Fermannagh and Cavan, under the command of Sergeant Major Hugh Mac
Bryan Mac Gwire; thinking to have carried away all our cattle, presuming on
their multitudes against our handful, which they thought had not recovered
their last sore march from Eniskillen, and having layen in ambush all night,
expecting the drawing out of our cattle in the morning; but finding themselves
discovered by 2 of our Horsemen who scoured the Fields before our cattle,
these two men were so engaged amongst the Rogues that they were both killed, we
taking the Alarm, rescued our Cattle, where we had a sound encounter with the
Rogues, who were near 10 times our number, thinking to have svvallowed us up;
they giving the best fire, and coming the fierceliest for one charge, of most
that we met withal this year: but after charge we did pepper them both with
Horse and Foot, as that they made both aspeedy and disorderly retreat, we
breaking the leg of the only best Soldier and Captain amongst them called
Charles Mac Gwier who had long served the King of Spain, and led on some 4
score of their Musketeeres most desperately, and for his good service our
Colonel to cure him, caused him to be carried on a barrow to the gallows,
where he rayled at us all for that he could not obtain a Soldiers death, to
be shot at a post, having formerly been twice ransomed in two Kings services,
Spain and France, and this morning commanding 300 proper men, not thinking
that night to dye like a Dog on Manor Hamiltons gallows, saying, he
observed now God was against them, acknowledging themselves to be 10 times our
number, and that it was the Devil brought him from his former honorable
service to this base and miserable end. In this days service, we killed diverse
of the best men of both Counties, bringing home the heads of Shane Roe Mac
Gwire, which Col: Conaught Mac Flagherty Mac Huc, son in law to Mac A Nawe
who had been long our Colonels Prisoner till this day, he was hanged for
company with the Captain and his son in laws kind visit to him: We brought
home Prisoners, Phelomy Mac Pierce Mac Gwire, who had been Sergeant to the
Sergeant Majors company, who escaped very narrowly, himself being enforced to
quit his Horse, and to go away sore wounded by the benefit of a boggie Wood
near by him. Thus it pleased God to enable us to deal with these Rogues.

A party is sent toward the borders of Monter Kenny, ^^^ember
where we killed 14 or 15 Rogues, burnt a many of houses, brought home a
Prisoner with near a 100 cowes.

Being in great distress and want of Salt, ^^^ember
Sir William Cole having used us as before is mentioned, our Colonel resolves
this night to adventure a party toward Ballishannon in hope there to be
supplied: Our party marching in the nightime, is by the Rogues centryes
discovered: Nevertheless we marched freely to Ballishannon before day, where
Captain Folliot hearing our Colonels trumpet and our Lieutenant, sends out the
Boat for our Lieutenant, who delivering our Colonels Letter, desiring to be
supplied with some salt, Captain Folliot wishing he had sooner known our
Colonels wants either of salt or Ammunition, there being 2 Barrels of Powder
with Match and Lead proportionable sent from Derry to Donegall for our Colonels
use, with the like proportion for Sir William Cole, who acquainted our Colonel
therewith by his Letter, promising the like care should be taken by him for
bringing our Ammunition from Donegall as of his own, which Captain Folliot
said might as well, as easily have been done if Sir William Cole had but writ
so much to him, when by Folliots means his was brought to Ballishannon, from
thence by Sir William Coals party to Eniskillen; In which march they came
within 6 miles of our Colonels castle, so it is easy to be judged what
comfortable neighborhood or assistance, either for his Majesty's service or
our safety we have had from Eniskillen: After disputing this particular with
Captain Felliot he shows our Lieutenant what salt Sir William Cole had left
him, being not above 4 Barrels, whereof he sent our Colonel two, who expected
20, sending money and Horses to that purpose with our party^ by this occasion
we brought with us for our Ladies use a good woman called Vnye Hale; As we
marched homewards, we could perceive as we came within 6 miles to our Garrison,
the fields foul on all quarters, which set us the better upon our guard, not
daring to disperse our selves in gathering of Cattle which we observed to be
driven in our ways, thinking to have tempted us for the greater advantage
against us, we having gotten near 3 score which we drove before us till we
came near the borders of our Colonels land, where on a sudden we were
engaged amongst the Regues, who had laid a strong ambush for us being within
little more then push of Pike before we could perceive them, so as we were
presently engaged to push of Pike before our Muskiteeres could give fire, which
afterwads they did over our Pike-mens shoulders, the Rogues standingmost
desperately to it for almost half an hour, they being a picked party of the
best and ablest men that were of the borders of Fermanagh and Leytrim, most of
them O Flannigans, Mac Gwires and Mac Caffries, from the Barrony of Towro, with
the Mac Glannaghies, Mac Glanghlins o Freiles, and o Meaghens of the Dartrye,
and Rossonter, whereof we killed near 3 score of their properest and best men,
with their chief Commander, who had been a Spanish Soldier, called Bryan
Durrogh o Tressey, with diverse others of their Gentlemen whom our boys stripped,
bringing home a number of their clothes and Arms; This glorious victory broke
the hearts of the most daring dangerous men of both those Counties, to Gods
holy name be the praise and honor, who thus mercifully delivered us without
the loss of a man, though a many hurt with push of Pike and darts; The service
was performed upon S. Andrews day, for the credit of our Scottish-Patron.

A party is sent to scour the Woods of Rossender, and to search for corn,
Dece^^^^ 15.
whence we brought above an 100 Cowes, our women and boys being well laden
with good store of burnt corn, where we killed 3 Rogues and brought home a
prisoner.

This night our Colonel intends a party of his Christians to be kept at
Ballymote, ^^^^mber
where he hopes to burn of that Town, not doubting by Gods former favor and
mercy the performance thereof, had not a many of his Souliers been seduced to
a most damnable plot, to have run away to Sir William Cole, being encouraged
thereto by the report of a messenger our Colonel had lately come from thence,
informing what liberty his Soldiers had there, who would not be commanded by
Captain or Officer, which damnable plot had so taken amongst a many of the
party, that being marched but a small way, they pretend such faintness and
weariness, that the like was never observed amongst them; not knowing what the
mystery could mean, our Lieutenant is found contrary to his orders to march
back again, by this means was this service overthrown, for which our
Colonel thanks Eniskillen, on which retreat we encountered some Rogues,
whereof we killed 6 or 7, and brought home near 3 secre Cowes, which were no
very welcome present to our Colonel, in comparison of what service that night
he expected to have been done: This party no sooner came home, but our
Colonel discovered the whole plot, where he took such course with them as he
found the whole cause proceeded from Eniskillen, and the countenance was given
his run-awayes there.

A party is sent toward Clanlogh on the borders of Mounter Kenny, (...) 9.
where we killed diverse Rogues, bringing home 2 Prisoners, above 200 Cowes,
burnt a many houses in the Country, our women and boys to a great number
coming home loaded with store of burnt Corn.

We marched into the County of Cavan, (...) ^
where in the Laragane we burnt some houses, killed some few Rogues, brought
home a prisoner, and near 9 score Cowes.

We were guided by a Prisoner to the County of Cavan, (...)
where on our march through Glansarne, we apprehended a most Arch-rogue, called
Cormack o Quillan, who had all that year stolen a many of our Colonels Horses;
from the County of Cavan we brought this night near 200 very fair Cowes, most
of them as fat as if it had been at Michaelmas; Thus we retreated through
Glanserne, killing some 5 Rogues, our women and boys being loaded with Corn.

We marched toward Mounter Kenny, (...)
where this night we killed some Rogues, took Prisoner the Wife of Owen oge Mac
Murray, the chief man of that name, himself scaping narrowly, we brought home
3 score Beeves a many of them very fat.

We marched toward Dromahere, (...) 17.
hearing a great gathering was there making ready for a new Camp against us,
where on our march through a Wood within less then a mile to Dromahere, where
their new Camp lay over against it at Crewly, we brought from those Woods some
3 or 4 score principal Beeves, killed some Rogues, and brought home 2
Prisoners, returning one of them being a wench of some 10 or 12 years old with
a Letter of our Colonels Irish-Souldiers to their Countrymen in Camp, near
the Abbey of Crewley, the copy of which Letter here follows.

To the most unworthy cowardly Colonels, Captains, and such like ragged
Regiment now gazing for our Colonels Easter Provision near Dromahere and
Crewley.
MOst disloyal, dishonorable and unworthy Countrymen, we are much ashamed of
your base cowardlinesse, that makes us so long expect your threatening to steal
away our Colonels Cowes. If you had followed the counsel of that perjured
dastard Owen Mac a Bryan you had made more have, who thought it time to run
away himself after we found him in a bush, whilst we were upon service against
the Rogues your friends of Fermannagh, but if you make no great have, our Cowes
are few enough to eat till those be fat you now Herd for us near Cromahere,
where you lie destroying your own poor Churles, and devising lies to keep
them in heart, your selves keeping the Castle until we rouse you up as we did
the last morning, whilst we gave you a visit looking for our break fast. Tell
Teig and Turlogh Mac A Nawe with their Nephew Hugh that would be o Rourke, that
their Sister his niece fears there to Beeve in the Lent time, is like to bring
their two Sisters to their Father, and whenever they came within sight of his
Castle, where the sign steal Mac A Nawe two Daughters upon Manor Hamiltons
Gallows, which worship may be timely challenged by the Brothers and
Gr^^d-child. Commend us to that Lousy Lords Son Luke Taffe, and Bryan Mac
Donnoghy his base Brother in law, who the last year lost their own County, to
help to steal our Colonels Cowes, which many a lusty lad and poor Churl
with their Cowes and Sheep of that County has well paid for since, though
they be wise enough to keep themselves from danger until their turn come to
do sacrifice to our Gallows, which has well flourished since they were here
with their friends and Countrymen in hope to do themselves service at last;
The Country cry out they will complain to Owen Roe o Neale for your careless
blowing away your Powder, blessed and sent by the Pope to other purpose then to
shoot at our Colonels Castle from the top of Benbowe, thinking your braggs
will carry it here as in other places, where you are not so well tried or
known; So wishing your speedy conversion which is downfall, but rather
confusion, who have been the actors and instruments in this abominable,
barbarous and detestable Rebellion, advising your poor ignorant Countrymen
churles, to forsake longer following such lying and seducing leaders, and trust
to our means for ever, so once more fare-well-and be hanged,

You loyal disaffected Countrymen Shane Roe Mac Roy, Hugh o Fellan, Cormack o
Clery, Edmond o Kelly, Bryan o Fellan, Conner o Fynny, Cum ceteris in Culnia.

Castle Hamilton this 17 of February, 1643.

THis day being Wednesday before Easter, ^^rch 29.
having sent no party abroad since the 17th. of Feb: in expectation of Sir
William Coals men from Eniskillen, who our Colonel was informed were in great
distress there, both for Corn and Cattle, neither being to be had for
venturing in that County, wherefore our Colonel advertised Sir William Cole
and his Captains, that here was fair hopes to be supplied, if they would with
their party of 4 or 500 men, secretly have to us, who should be ready to join
with them for falling upon the Rogues camp, who lay near and about the Castle
of Dremahere, 6 miles from us, where the Rogues were plentifully provided in
the Camp, both from the County of Sligo and this County, having above 7 or
8000 Cowes about this time grazing about them, and that country full of Corn,
whereof both Eniskillen and we at this time stand in great need. The Captains
of Eniskillen in their answer, acknowledge the extremity of their wants and our
Colonels invitation, but are in such confusion and disorder amongst themselves,
as they neither denied to come or promise any thing plainly, when we
deferring, all this while unwilling to fear their Camp, or venture our
handful against 10 or 12 Companies commanded by Colonel Lucas Taffe, and his
Lieutenant Colonel Bryan Mac Donnoghye, with the assistance of Colonel Owen o
Rourke, who lies in the Castle of Drom here, but now seeing no appearance of
Eniskillen men, and our own Cowes and provision grown very short against
Easter, our Colonel is necessitated to venture with his own small party,
which adventure it pleased the Lord this day so to bless, as to enable us to
bring from the very Castle walls of Dromahere near 400 Cowes, with pretty
store of Sheeps, Goats and Mares, with some small supply of Butter and Meal,
fighting our selves through a great body of the Rogues, where we killed diverse,
hurt above 40, as appears by one of their Officers Letters found in their
Lieutenant Col: pocket, being killed by us 3 days after, chaste the rest into
Woods and boggs, bringing home our prey, and 3 Prisoners without the loss of a
man, one Muskiteere only hurt on the shoulder, so that if Eniskillen men had
been advised by our Colonel, we had undoubtedly had a fair pull of at least
7 or 8000 Cowes, with abundance of Wheat and other corn besides: what good
service might have been done upon the Rogues, how they can answer the neglect
of this and other such like service, whereunto they have several times been
invited and advertized by our Colonel, both for his Majesty's service, the
common good, and their own partcular relife, as more clearly it shall appear
hereafter, God sending us aid and indifferent Judges to hear us both.

Being Easter-eve, April 1.
our Hay for Horses growing short by reason of the number we and our Colonel
kept within the Castle all Winter, he is forced to venture 24 of his trowse
Geraldmes to graze near 2 miles from the Castles, with a guard of near 50 of
his men to take charge of his Plow-horses and his Cowes, hoping till after
Easter the Rogues being so lately beaten by us, they would not have ventured,
as this day they did, a great body of them appear within a short mile to our
Castle, before our Centries descried them; We taking the Alarm, most of our
best Horse and best Pike-men being so far from us, diverse others of our
Soldiers being employed about firewood and such like necessaires, so as we
are not able in this extremity to make up above 50 fighting men, if so many,
with which number we were commanded to endeavor the rescuing of the rest,
guarding our Horses and Cattle, having no other way or means to save all or
loose all; where it pleased the Lord so to direct us boldly to march toward
the Rogues as they were advancing toward our Geldings and Cattle, perceiving
our small number straglingly draw together, they with speed advance toward us,
marching in 3 divisions, their first division being led-on by their Lieutenant
Colonel Bryan Mac Donnoghy, and on the head of his own Company Captain
Francis Taffe, and Captain Cormaok o Hawes Company, which division consists of
44 Muskiteeres besides Pike-men, the second division is led only by their
Sergeant Major Teigreagh o Dowde; In the head of his own Company Captain
David o Dowde, and Captain Bryan o Hares Company consisting of 42 Muskiteeres;
The third division lead-on by Captain William Tyrrell, on the head of his own
Company Captain Bryan Mac Swyne, and Captain Roger o Conners Company
Consisting of 45 Muskiteeres besides Pike-men, which multitude thinking to have
swallowed up our handful, perceiving us draw up without Horsemen, thinking to
cut those off before we join with the rest, their Lieutenant Colonel leading
on most fariously along a Bridge, over a River, at the foot of the hill where
our men were drawn up, we perceiving them all cross the River, marching in a
loose body toward us, giving fire upon us, we seem a little to retreat, where
we got the benefit of a ditch for all our Muskiteeres to play out of, whereupon
the Rogues imagining we had taken the retreat, did with great shoutes cry out
as if they had already beaten us; but our Muskiteeres did from that ditch so
pepper them, that it is not to be believed what a sudden alteration our
handful made amongst their multitude, our Pike-men flying in upon them, where
one Mr. John Connigham himself was deadly shot with a Mukit bullet in the
body, who lived 2 days after; Thus having killed their Lieutenant Colonel, who
fought most desperately as ever man did, diverse being with shot and Pike beaten
to the ground, yet did he fight upon his knees, pity so great courage should
have been in so Arch a Traitor, who was thought, to have been one of the
greatest firebrarnds of Connaght in this Rebellion, and the bloudiest tyrant
aganist our Clergymen, having caused 3 of them to be murdered, Mr. Thowas
Fullerton, Mr. William Listowne, and Pattrick Dromond, who were bloudily killed
by his orders, when they first lay about this Castle; Yet blessed be God this
day who enabled us so to deal with them, as we put the Rogues after killing
their Lieutenant Colonel, to such a disorderly and confused retreat over the
River, where numbers of them threw one another into it, so as it is almost
incredible to speak or write what number of proper personable men as any
Ireland affords, were killed that day by our weak handful, to God alone be the
glory. The next day our Colonel sending forth to search the Fields, to see if
the Rogues had dared in the night time to carry off any of their dead bodies,
but it did not appear they durst meddle with any; whereupon order was given
for burying of them all, which was 2 days labor for 20 men, there being near
3 score found and buried, besides diverse which had been carried away by the
River, there being then a great slood in it. Thus it pleased God to continue
his former favors and mercy toward us, with this great and miraculous victory
without the loss of a man of ours, other then Mr. Conningham, our Women and
Boys coming home laden with Muskets, Pikes, Swords and Skeanes, enough to
Arm 7 or 8 score men, and in hope to get more that were drowned in the River.
And thus God has done for us without the help of Eniskillen, whom we long
waited for to have contributed for their supply and relief, and all these men
that were found killed, within Musket shot of our Castle.

A copy of such Letters and Papers as were found in the Lieutenant Colonels
Bryan Mac Donnoghy his Pockets, being killed near Manor Hamilton Castle, on
Saturday, April 1, 1643.
SIR,
I Believe you have heard of the great loss we have sustained this morning by
Manor Hamiltons Soldiers, I pray you to morrow come away your self and
dispatch provision for my Company, who must fast this night; your own Company
is extreme weak here; therefore have all the rest sent for speedily, that
they may be complete to morrow to march. This is all for the present, I rest

From the Camp at Crewly, March 29, 1643. Your loving Brother Co: Lucas Taffe.


NOble Sir, we are straightly commanded by our Colonel to have all our Company
to the full number here this night, and especially he does desire your own
speedy repair hither; and without you send for all your men upon sight hereof,
and give them strait charge to be here this night with us, you will otherwise
be ashamed for ever, seeing we are called upon speedy service: For my own
part, I thought you did regard the loss of me more then thus, to leave me here
all this while unappointed with Soldiers and Ammunition; for without Gods
great help, I had never come off alive from the last mornings service we had
with Manor Hamiltons Soldiers: I pray you as you love your own credit and
my life, send me the rest of the Soldiers; otherwise, if you will let me go
upon service without them, by Christ I will never be an Officer under your
command more. We have not a pound of Powder amongst us all left: Your 8
Musketeeres played their parts most gallantly, and discharged more shot then
half of the Regiment; but our Pike-men played the jade with us. Hugh o Hara is
shot in the Foot, and 40 more of our Regiment wounded, 2 only killed, none of
them yours: This is the hurt we received yesterday morning; so leaving all to
your best care and discretion, I rest

From the Camp of Crewly, the 30th. of March. Your obedient Lieutenant Cormack
Mac Donnogh,


SIR,
I Shall desire that you march toward the falling in of night, with all the
Companies on this side of the water, where I shall meet you: you are to leave
one Pike-man out of every Company, to guard the Baggage left at Crewly, who you
are to require to keep good watch upon such things as shall be left with them,
and not to spoil any thing belonging to the Abbey, as they shall answer it at
their perils; so till meeting I rest

Yours Co: Lucas Taffe.
Drumahere, March 31.

Bellisedera the 12th. of March, 1642.
WHereas feverall grievous complaints are daily exhibited unto us, that the
under-named persons do daily commit several incursions, massacres, robberies,
outrages and many other enormities and pillages within the County of Sligo,
contrary to his Majesty's Laws, the several acts of the supreme Provincial
and County Counsel to the contrary provided and enacted; These are therefore
in his Majesty's name, to will and require you Lieutenant Colonel Bryan Mac
Connagh and Sergeant Major Teig Reagh o Dowda, to attach the bodies of the
undernamed persons, and to that purpose, to command such of the Forces of the
County of Sligo as they shall think fit; wherein all the Captains, Officers
and private Soldiers of the Forces of the said County, are hereby required and
authorized; such of them as shall be hereto required, to be aiding and
assisting unto these, Lieutenant Colonel and Sergeant Major Teig Reagh o
Dowda, as they shall receive directions; and in case that the under-named
persons shall not willingly suffer themselves to be apprehended; then the said
Lieutenant Colonel and Sergeant Major are to deal with them like common
enemies, as well by death as otherwise; And these Lieutenant Colonel and
Sergeant Major Teig Reagh o Dowda, are likewise requited to commit the bodies
of the under-named persons, being so attached, unto the Castle of Ballynefada,
and there to leave them in safe custody, until they receive further directions
from us: And the Captains, Warriors and assisting to the said Lieutenant
Colonel and Sergeant Major Teig Reagh o Dowda in the execution of the premises
as they shall receive directions, whereof you and every of you may not fail at
your extreate perils, Dat' Anno superiore dicto.

Capt: Charles o Connour, Capt: Hugh o Connour Owen Mac Roe o Connour, Redagh
Mac Beryan o Heart, Donnell Mac Rory o Connor, Owen o Connour, Cahill duff Mac
Teigh, Boy o Connour, Shane o Heart, Teig o Heart, Rore o Hort, Gilpatrick o
Heart, Robe o Binningham, Teig o Connour Sligo, Farrall o Gara, Nony o Hara,
Andrew Crean, Phelemy o Connour.



SIR,
YOu may perceive by the Lieutenant Generals Letter, how I am commanded to
wait in these parts, God knows how long; but no longer then after I know the
distribution of this Army; If greater occasion then now appears unto us
require it not: though loath I was to be a suitor in my own behalf for my
repairing thither. Truly I have done in that particular more then behoved me,
therefore the managing of that Regiment until further directions is left to
your care to dispose of, to use and employ them in all manner of defense or
offense, as it to you shall seem most advantageous to his Majesty's service,
and the preservation of the Country. I shall also desire you to address your
self to the Counsel of the County, as well to participate of such occurrants
as I transmitted unto them, as also to forward the execution of some
particulers concerning the maintenance of your Forces, and the speedy levying
thereof, employing in your absence Sergeant Major Dowda to over-see and command
the Regiment, and to expedite all Country affairs: I hold it requisite that
one well armed Captain should always reside within the County. I pray Sir
advertise me by the bearer, how or in what restraint, Oliver o Hara was kept by
the Sheriff since my coming away, It did expect that by this he would cry mea
Culpa: but seeing he stands so stiffly upon his justification, I promise him
that I shall desire Justice against him, as also against the Sheriff, if he
have not gone according to his directions. I pray cause Sergeant Major Dowda to
be paid for his Powder, according to my promise unto him, and let me hear at
large from you, whether any man offers disobedience amongst you, that we might
take course with them: I hope you will not forget to rid poor Carberry of the
insolent power of the Northern, in which case I pray you be advised by your
County Counsel: The enclosed of the Lord of Elphin, I pray you endeavor if
your occasion will admit you the leisure to accomplish his desires therein;
This being all for the present, I am

Your faithful Brother Lucas Taffe.
Tuam the 26th. of Feb:

For my worthy Friend Mulmurry Mac Ternan Esquire, Found in his Pocket being
killed and stripped.
KInd Gossip, the only thing that keeps me from you, is the report that Sir
Frederick Hamilton promised to come last night, or this day to see me at this
Castle, which report has made me and all mine to watch all night: I pray you
have a care if you hear any such thing, to march hither with all post-hast
with your Company; And so I bid you farewell, and rest

Dromahere Castle, Feb. 21, 1641. Your own faithful Gossip Owen o Rourke.

A Copy of such Letters as were sent by the Rebels to our Colonel and to his
Lady, thinking to have terrified her; and a Copy of other Papers and Writings
found in the Pockets of their Priests, Friars and Captains, being killed and
stripped.
Madam,
I Am sorry it was never my fortune to be acquainted with your Ladyship, though
much desired: Now out of the respects I bear unto your Ladyships family, I
cannot but be grieved to think on the trouble that is like soon to fall on
you. We have here 23 Companies that are now ready to march toward you, and 15
Companies more upon their much from the uppermost part of this County, and the
County of Maio. I have for your Ladyships sake entreated the Captains of the
Army to write unto Sir Frederick, I should be right glad that he would embrace
the conditions sent him, for there are many resolved to loose all their lives,
or they will have Sir Fredericks head, notwithstanding their friends he has
prisoners. For the Army does protest and swear, they will have Sir Frederick
and Manor Hamilton Castle, though it cost the lives of thousands, and the
lives of his Prisoners, rather then to suffer him longer to remain within
their bosoms, especially carrying himself as he has done toward them, It is
but in vain to strive against the straeme. If I had not been well assured that
the Army now in Arms and ready to march, are too strong against any powers
this Kingdom can make, or readily come to help you, and that which
incourageth us most to take Arms, is the Justness of our cause, which is for
the maintenance of his Majesty's Prerogatives, our Liberties and Religion,
which is so much trodden under-foote, that most of all this Kingdom are
resolved to sacrifice their lives in defense thereof; And if we get not our
demands of Sir Frederick, take it on my word he will soon repent it: I should
be very sorry that any hurt should come to your Ladyship. I make no doubt but
you know how near a kin, which you will by the bearer, if you do not,
however I will remain

From our Camp at Sligo. December 13, 1641. Your loving Cosen and servant
Patrick Flunkett.

This Paper was found in Mulmurry Mac Tervans Pocket.
WE have agreed, that a supply of 200 Soldiers shall be presently pressed and
taken up in the Barrony of Dromahere, for the service now in hand against
Manor Hamilton Castle, according to the division hereafter expressed, witness
our hands, this last of January.

Owen O Rowrke.
THe two septs of Chlamloghins and Clanmurrayes are to maintain fou cscore
soldiers, Monuterkenny and Ballymackenagh thirty soldiers, Killargy and
Killimurry are to maintain fifty soldiers, Leeland and the parish of Dromlasse
are to maintain forty soldiers.



This Paper was found in a Priests pocket, being killed and stripped.
WHereas we are certified that the unexpected insurrection did arise in defense
of our good faith, and holy Mother, the Catholic Ramane Church, and of his
Majesty's prerogative Royal, both which being lately intended by the
Protestants of England and Ireland, to be aboment wherefore I Teig O Connour
Sligo, Collonell of the Jrish Regiment for the county of Sligo, do hereby
command all the inhabitants of the parish of Cadbry, as you are naturally
obliged to obey the Roman Chuch, to pay or cause to be paid unto father
Connor O Hary Pastor of the said parish, all such tithes and other duties as
he can sind out were unpayed to the former Minister of the said parish, and in
failing hereof I promise to assist him as I best can, as witness my hand this
17 of January.

NOble Sir Frederick Hamilton, I cannot forget that in times past there was a
mutual correspondency of love, and affectionate friendship between my father,
and your self, which on your part has been approved by several of your
favorable courtesies, which has left such an obligation upon me his son and
heir, as I cannot but wi^h your happiness before your hurt. Though the
general matter now in hand requires the contrary. I am preswaded you cannot
but know or imagine, as true it is, that there is so fast an union made and
concluded a among us all the Roman Catholics, as members of one body, we
have vowed to help one another, so that if one member receives hurt, the other
must apply his best endeavors for the cure, all tending to the defense of our
Christian Religion, and the preservation of his Majesty's most Royal power and
prerogatives, being the chief reasons of this our most Christian quarrel:
Therefore, when I saw the most miserable distractions and afflictions which my
most near Cousins, and Neighbors of this county suffered under this pretense
by your cruelty and means, my heart could not for the brotherly Christian
charity I own unto them, besides the several invitations and persuasions of
many of my friends and alliance, but make this present expedition. I have here
with me lying about me, besides a many more drawing toward you for the places
to seek redress and revenge of these great miseries and calamities you have
put upon them, which I wish to have in the gentlest sort I may. Wherefore, I
thought fit to acquaint you more for your own good, then any end of mine, That
I am here strong enough from the county of Sligo, having all the best, and
chiefest men of that county about me, besides the strength of the county of
Leytrim under the command of my Cousins, the O Rourkes whom you have much
harmed, who have procured by their friends from the county of Maio these great
supplies, daily drawing toward us, so that you will find it impossible for you
to resist, wherefore out of my unfeigned good will do advise you that before we
go to extremity, you will take the best course for your own safety and relief,
which great Potentates and Nobles are not ashamed to do, when they are in the
like extremities as we hold you to be, in desiring that you and we may agree
upon quatters and a Cessation of Arms, until Articles propounded upon either
side may be agreed upon, I desire to be free from giving way to shed your
blood, if otherwise I may compass my pretenses: If you will not make use of
this friendly offer instantly without delay, and before the county of Maio
Gentlemen join with me, I fear they being so near and great in numbers; I
shall hardly stay their hands from see^king revenge for killing and hanging so
many of their kinsmen, the O Rourkes, and others of their friends of this
County, whom you have destroyed, herein I will expect your present answer, and
desire that our messengers on both sides may freel pass^ without harm or
danger, as is usual in all leaguers, Mean time I shall remain

From our Camp near Manor Hamilton, March the 15 1641 Yours at pleasure and
hearts desire Teig O Connour Sligo Collonell.

This Letter answered thus.
YOur loyalty to your King, your faith to your friends once broke, never more
to be trusted by me, but revenged as God shall enable the hands of him who was
loving to your loyal Predecessors, whose curse will contribute to your
destruction, for extingishing the memory of their loyalties, Thus I rest with
contempt and scorn to all your base bragges.

Your scourge if I can. F. H.

For Captain John O^crean, March 1 1641.
Allowed to himself and company nineteen quarters of Land, in the parish of
Collroy.
BY the consent of the Collonell Teig O Connour Sligo, who appointed us to
allot unto every Captain of his Regimont, that are now encamped about Manor
Hamilton, and to stop the incursions of that Garrison we hold and think fit,
that every Captain to this purpose shall levy, and take up in every quarter of
Land that is allowed for his share forty nine quarters of meal unprest, and
twelve pence of money every week, for the relief of their companies, and for so
doing this shall be their sufficient warrant, as witness our hands, the day
and y^are above written.

Andrew Crean, Teig boy O Connour Connor O^ge O heart


These last two killed, and these Papers found as they were stripped.

We did beat them from their Camp finding this Paper in one of their dead men's
pockets. April 1


Whereas there has severall-warrants issued for the levying of threscore
quarters of meal^, in every quarter of land of a third levy, Comita^^^ Sligo.
which three several l^vies is within the Barronny of Carbery, for the
maintaining of the soldiers out of the said Barronny now encamped about Manor
Hamilton, out of which every soldier is to have for his means whilst he is
there fourteen quarts in meal, and twelve pence in money for every week and
more. And in as much as we find that there is meal already allotted as is well
able to maintain the said Army till the 15 of May next. We do therefore hereby
require all Captains, Collectours to surcease and keep their hands from
collecting any more meal or money then what was allotted in every quarter for
the said three levies, whereof the several Collectours and Captains according
to a former warrant, are to meet by a day to give up an exact account thereof.
Dated at Sligo, the 4 of April, 1642.


Teig O Connor Sligo, Andrew Crean Captain Conn O C^nnor since hanged there.

For the Lieutenant Collonell Brian Mr. Donnogh
SIR,
I Hope you have taken course in my absence to keep some of your forces in
action here, least tergiversation being ill construct by the gentry of this
County, not only having deprived them of your own aid, but such assistance as
they expected from Maio, or thus delaying will produce no better effect then
ruin and destruction, being now nearer unto it, then ever it has been
formerly. The County of Galway Gentlemen have of late petitioned to the Earl of
Clanrickard against the Lord Forbus, who has already committed several acts
of hostility, that his Lordship might persuade him to part quietly with his
forces, or to give them leave to stand for their own defense, the answer of
which was transferred to this day at Longreagh, where Clanrickard my Lord
President, and the chief of that county meet, and from thence my Lord President
goes to Galloway. Sir, what their resolution will be I cannot yet imagine, but
fear much so general a meeting will produce a strange issue tending to our
deserved ruin, which I commit to a higher power to prevent, then any
commission that comes from Parliament. The County of Maio forces is gathered to
Sethruell and intend to camp upon the confines of that County. My Lord of Maio
sent to us for aid, being well known to his Lordship how able we are to spare
any, he was pleased to write plainly if we had not in retribution of their
loss sustained in these parts parralelled his courtesies, that we should
expect no more aid from thence. A fair excuse, or a fit denial, sure the small
forces we have here are in greater danger, then that County which needs, not
fear any foreign invasion: we are I protest unto you not above three hundred
in number, not like henceforth to be at any rest or quietness. The Powder
bestowed upon Connaught, is brought partly to the county of Maio, and some to
the County of Galloway, resolved upon not to be touched, until our Provincial
County distribute it as they think fittest, when the Counsel is held. I cannot
well assure you, the report of the arriving of shipping at Sligo give we no
little occasion of fear which I pray with expedition to certify me. And if my
own repair, be any whit necessary upon the landing any new supplies, I will not
fail to post night and day unto you. I hope your Counsel have agreed to meet
often, being very necessary, especially now, I doubt not they will be soon
called upon to meet when ever I receive intelligence of the full and true
resolutions of the county of Galloway, I have seen late intelligence of England
of July date, concerning the King and Parliament, who are at great distance,
the Lord of heaven continue them so, until I send them an absolution. The
powder made at Laughlin is as good as any is in Ireland, we shall want no more
of that commodity, so we be furnished with all other necessaries. I pray Sir,
let my mother use all the have she can to have the ditch wholly scowred about
Ballymote Castle, before the bad weather overtakes it, I pray that I may have
every second day what occurrents those parts afford you. In the intervall I
present my service to our friends and rest

Castle Keagh the 18 of August. Your loving Collonell Lucas Taffe.


This letter was found in a Priests pocket that day we killed above 80 in the
County of Sligo.

The names of such as have been hanged at Manor Hamilton by Martial Law,
since the beginning of this Rebellion
December 3. Turlogh mac Clevor. Neale Mac Cluan. Mann^ O Gallogher Manns O Hoy
December. 12. Phelomy Duff Mac Cob
December. 18 Gelpatrick O Kan Brian O Moriice
December. 20. Turlogh O Cally.
January 2. Brian O Cannan. Con O Rourk the Collonells brother
January 8. Connour mac. Shane Glass Mac Laugblin the chief of his name.
Aug. 23. Owen Mac Garraghy. Cormack O Cornan.
August 31 Shane Mac Skerrie. John Spence.
September. 10. Captain Con O Connour. Credough Mac Derno. Cor Mac O Hay had been
a Minister. Teig Mac Goane.
September. 4 Brian Mac Diffet.
Septem. 17. Donnogh O D^wde.
Septem. 19 Grany O Dowgan. Patrick O Neale.
Febru. 2 ohn Wytherspin.
Febru. 11. Donnogh boy O Bane. Mewe Mac Laughlin.
Feb. 22. Owen Mac Thomas Murray.
Febru. 26. Ferrall Mac Kegan.
Mar. 15 Turmultagh Mac Garraghy: Subsheriffe deputy of Donegall. Cormack O
Hoyes wife. near kinswoman to O Conn^ur.
(...) 8. Hugh O Heart Donnell O Heart. Grany ny K^we. Ph^lomy mack A Naw
Gilpattrick O Mullane
(...). Laughlin O Degannian
(...). Call boy mac Garty. Donnogh O Heart
(...). Hugh O Flin. James Roch the chief Murcherer, of the British at Sligo.
Donnell O Clery. Hugh O Cullen. Glany O Regan. James Wytherspin.
July 12 James halfpenny.
July 26 Hugh O Fey
Novem. 4. Garrat mac A Na^ chief of his name.
Nov. 14. Cap. Charles mac Gwire
Nov. 16. Phelomy Mac Pierce.
December. 22 in Gwyre.
January 7 Edmond Mac Gawran. Turlogh Reagh O Mortelan. Brian O Cuer.
February 3 Cormack O Cuer. Cormack O Quillan.
Februar 18 Ka^ill mack Kan. Donnel mac Glannag^y, William mac Roregan.

Sir Robert Hannay his Letter and others being Prisoners at Sligo and sent to
Domahere Castle.
Honorable Sir,
WE the undernamed persons having suffered in all our whole estates and being
upon our banishment out of this Kingdom, under the safe conduct of Mr. Edmond
Bourk Ragagh, and Mr. Walter Bourk of Ardagh toward the North, but most
opposed at Castle Connour Enniscromne Escagh bridge, Dawne Neale, Arnaglesse
and Tomler go by several bands of armed m^n purposely set for our lives, were
not their extreme violence suppressed by the discretion, worth and care of
those two Gentlemen, and we taken prisoners by the mac Swines, brought before O
Connour Sligo, where we now remain, and intended to be sent unto the Castle of
Dromaheere to be kept until you Sir deliver such prisoners of the O Rourkes,
and others as you have in your custody, or to be dealt with, as you do unto
them, Sir, you are nobly disposed, so that in honor we hope the means of
relief, being now in your self, you will not suffer us to perish, who will ever
remain, Sir,

Yours truly obliged to serve you Robert Hannay, Andrew Adare, Alexander
Montgomery. William Liston, Thomas Fullerton.
THese be the names and number of Prisoners, Sir Robert Hannay, his Lady, his
two daughters, two boys, two men, and a Gentlewoman Mr. Andrew Adare, and his
wife and sisters son, Mr. Alexander Montgomery his wife and eldest son, Mr.
William Liston his wife and daughter, Mr. Thomas Fullerton and his wife,
Patrick Deomond, Mr. Adares man.

Sir after the writing of this Letter we are brought to Dromaherre, and order
left by the Captains to bring us unto the Camp at Manor Hamilton, where we
must suffer death, if those Prisoners with you Sir, be not delivered.



Sir Fredrick Hamiltons answer to the Letter aforementioned.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, whereby I am given to understand of your
treacherous surprisall, notwithstanding of your safe conduct promised, for the
which I am very sorry, but such is the treacherous falsehood of those disloyal
tray tours generlly throughout this whole Kingdom, that has made me vow and
swear in the presence of Almighty God, that I will never give nor take quarter
with them, or any of them, yea though my own sons who have descended from my
own Loins, were in your estate, I had rather they should die gloriously for the
cause of Christ, then I should so abase my self as to deal with such traitors
to God and his Majesty. Thus beseeching God Almighty to strengthen and
encourage you, that you may continue constant till it shall please God to give
you deliverance either by life or death. In the mean time I am persuaded that
they will use you with no worse measure, then their Prisoners, who were
apprehended by me in the action of Rebellion are used: So recommending you to
God, I rest,

Castle Hamilton January 19. 1641. Your very loving friend F. H.

By Letters from Dublin dated 26 of July and 2 of August from a good hand.
THe Lord Marquess of Ormond as I hear, has now writ to the State here, to
send him Bread and Cheese for 5000 men, for that he has no victuals for his
Army, and yet we hoped here, that those Countries would have afforded plenty of
victuals, and these sending still abroad, we being in such want at home, makes
our necessities desperate. There came lately to Town here, Lieutenant Colonel
Sentleger, son unto the late President of Muns^er, who came through Kilkenny,
having a pass for his safety from the Viscount Muskerry; he says that at
Kilkenny he saw and dined with the Popes Nuntio who is come thither, and has
brought to the Rebels 80000lb. This is likewise reported by others, who say
they saw him there; and it is much belceved here, Sentlegers business hither
as I hear was about the Cessation, to know by what authority it is to be done,
and how far procceeded in; what will be the issue of tha business is not yet
known.

Our Ammunition here grows very scarce, and if we be not suddenly relieved
from England, it will be an unanswerable reason for a Cessation; and then we
must either submit to the merciless mercies of these cruel Rebels, and to
their treachery, or else come for England, and endure those miseries and
afflictions there which God shall please to lay upon us.

Romember this, that that precious thing time; if it be over-past but a little
before relief comes to us, the Kingdom is not like to continue in his
Majesty's lgovernement as it now is, but as the Rebels will please to have it:
we now hear that Preston has dispersed his Army, and lodged his Ordinance at
Sir Luke fitz Geralds at Tecrohon in Mead, that he wants Carriages and
Ammunition, so that if we could prosecute this War, and had provisions before
Preston had again furnished himself, there would be good hopes of putting a
speedy end to this War, which otherwise will prove long, tedious, and of
excessive charge, and weary out all the English.

We now begin to despair of any help from the Parliament, hearing how unable
the Parliament is to send any, and that his Majesty so far prospers, that we
are in hope to have help only from him. We are now like a Candle burnt out, and
the snuff in the socket giving a little light some times, but ready every
moment to perish for want of a new supply of oil.

Upon Sunday morning about one of the clock, there was a great Alarm here in
Dublin, the Rebels had got into New-streete, and came up as far as the
pottle, and had pillaged diverse houses before we could make resistance, and set
some thatch houses on fire, some 20 one and other, the certainty is not so well
known though we dwell here, as I can assure you of it: the Rebels were as some
fay who saw them 300 Horse, a great Company of Foot, but how many we know not,
(God be blessed) they were beaten out, and about 20 of them killed, and some 6
or 7 of ours, they presently after burnt a great deal of Hay made up in Cocks
about Ragarr and Rasarnam, and a night or two after about Donna brook, our
Army being abroad we could not follow them, but thought our selves well that
the City was kept fafe, being much afraid of and suspicious the Papists within
us, though I cannot hear of any proof against any in particular.

The victuals which were brought us by Bartlet, are long sithence spent, and
we are now again in as ill case for want as ever, our Army being the greatest
that ever we sent out since this rebellion; they went near Edenderry which was
given up to us, but all pillaged, and the Crohan which likewise they had taken,
they left and burnt it, since which time our Army without doing any thing more,
came back to Killcock, where they have since been for some days past in great
necessities, and very many of our Soldiers dying in the Fields for hunger, so
that we fear it will consume in a short time to a small number, though in
these necessitous times we account them as though their numbers were full: The
Marquess came the last Thursday from them to Dublin, and yesterday went back
to them again; and as it is said here, the Army for a great part of them shall
be placed in out Garrisons, and the rest come to Dublin.

Brent is come over again with some Letters out of England, which were as I
hear delivered yesterday, the Vicetreasurer, and Sir John Temple, and Sir
Robert Meridith were committed to the Castle, and the Master of the Wards as I
hear, should also have bin so committed but that he is sick, and so his
committall respited till he recover his health. So I rest

Your very loving Friend S. M.

To my worthy Friend William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons in England, to be speedily communicated to the House.
Master Speaker,
THere is now some short time essl^^ed sithence here began a great rumor to be
spread amongst us (and much fomented in the mouths and ears of all sorts of
people) of a treaty for a Cessation of Arms to be concluded on betwixt the
forces settled in and about Dublin, and the Lynster Rebels, and that the same
was agitated and set on foot by virtue and force of several Letters from his
Majesty to the Marquess of Ormond, and that the business has been in a
great probability to take effect until of late some appearance of a breach
has fallen out betwixt them; what the substance or success of that treaty may
be, we in these parts have been kept utterly ignorant, and so far from being
(to our knowledge) comprehended therein, or concluded thereby, as that we have
not had the least notice thereof, but by the hands of the Rebels, to whom in
that, or any other particular, we have little reason to give credit, save that
at a late parley, which was held betwixt me and the principal Officers of this
Army, and the Lord of Muskery (who pretended to communicate unto us matter
tending to the public good;) we made such advantage thereof, as to obtain
leave to send a Gentleman of our own to the place, where this treaty was
related to be in agitation, who suddenly returned unto us, with assurance that
upon sundry specious overtures made by the Rebels such a Treaty had been entered
into, but that the same by the appearance of their delusive irreality was
broken off at present, and that the Marquess of Ormond was then marched into
the field with a good strength to prosecute the Lynster Rebels. And as we are
of opinion that extreme necessity did compel those of the Lynster Army to
harken to such a Treaty, so we cannot but avouch our own wants and general
distresses to be equal to, if not surpassing, the sufferings of any other part
of the Kingdom, And indeed albeit we are most faithfully zealous and desirous
to bestow our lives and fortunes on this cause and service; yet will our
general defects and necessities disable us to administer any advantage unto
it, being altogether unfurnished of such means, as might make our persons and
endeavors availeable, or considerable: And although we have lately received a
ship laden with Provisions, furnished out by the care and providence of that
Honorable House (for which we are desirous that you would return them our
humble and thankful acknowledgement of their great favor therein:) yet when
the same fell out to be divided amongst out whole Army, it amounted not to
above ten days provision for the common soldiers, so as I am again enforced
to lay the soldiers upon the wretched inhabitants of our several Garrisons,
who were altogether unable to sind either themselves or the soldiers a
subsistence, if some private Merchants had not been endueed to bring in
provisions upon their own account; which were sold out to the poor people, and
may make them subsist until the harvest draw on upon us, that we may expect to
gain something abroad, which then nevertheless we cannot hope to do, or to be
able to look out of our Garrisons, for the especial want of powder and
Munition, which is such as that our whole stores will be utterly exhausted, and
spent in mere watching without other service, in one month or six weeks,
having not for all our Garrisons and men above thirty Barrels of Powder, and
Match in no sort proportionable to it; So that I shall humbly desire that in
the first place we may receive at the least 200 Barrels of Powder with Match
and lead proportionable, if any service be expected at our hands.

In the next place, there is cast upon me a most heavy and insupportable
burden of satisfying and giving contentment to the Officers, who having now
neither money or Clothes (meat being as scarce and dainty with them as either)
do daily importune me for leave to forsake the service, which I could not
refuse to some few whom I had no means to relieve, nor can, but with
reluctance, deny unto the rest, seeing the contemptible and wretched condition
they live in, beneath the quality of Gentlemen, or indeed common soldiers in
other parts, and therefore I am enforced to deal with them by persuasions,
wherein I have hitherto proved so successful, and have found them so
faithfully devoted to this service, as that they are content at my entreaty to
wait for, and expect the order and direction of that Honorable Assembly, how
they shall be disposed of, or provided for: And hereupon have I prevailed with
the Admiral (whom we are all exceedingly obliged to, for his care and
willingness to advance this service) to employ this Pinnace expressly with
this dispatch to be communicated unto the House. And shall earnestly beseech
you, as you tender the good and preservation of this considerable and important
Province and Army, that you would effectually represent the substance of this
my Letter unto that Honorable Assembly, and obtain and return unto me such
full and ample directions and advertisements, what supply we are to expect, or
depend upon, or what other course we shall apply our selves unto, as that we
may (according to our general desire) so dispose of our selves as may best
suit with the liking and approbation of that Assembly, being confident that
they will only Order and Command us such things as may be fezible, at least
possible for us to observe: And now that we may not in the interim perish
before any supplies or directions can overtake us, or return unto us, (which
we shall be in great danger of) if we receive not a sudden resolution. I shall
make humble suit that this Pinnace may be dispatched back with all possible
speed. And seeing we have already received good benefit by the Assistance of
the Admiral; I shall also humbly desire that a course may be conceived to
continue him upon this Coast, and that he may be directed to comply with me in
all occasions of service, for that it is very probable we may by his help, when
we shall have supplies, take in diverse of the sea Towns, which had been
performed ere this time, if ever we had been in a condition (since his coming
to us) fit to March into the field. The enemy advancing lately to the siege of
Capperquin and Lysmore, which places (in regard I was unable to draw forth the
whole Army, through mere want of all kind of necessaries) I did endeavor to
streng then with men, and provisions, and to that purpose marched with a good
party of foot, and some horse to Tallow within two miles of their Camp, and
there lay to face them, and attempt the putting in of provisions into the said
several places: I had there an opportunity to have a perfect view of their
whole Forces, and did find as well by my espyals, as by my particular survay,
that their strength of horse did at the least treble ours (although ours
according to their several numbers, were indifferently full) and that they
were very competently armed, which gave me then occasion and resolution to
desire you would represent unto that Honorable Assembly how that Sir John
Pawlet, Knight, having by his industry and earnest desire to advance this
service, gotten a considerable number of serviceable men, well mounted
together, who have on all occasions been employed, and showed themselves active
and able in the performance of several services, I have for their
encouragement and for the keeping of them together, and for the strengthening
of our Horse issued some small quantity of Tobaccoes unto them, to keep them
alive, and promised to use my endeavors to gain them an entertainment; I
shall therefore earnestly desire you to represent unto the House, that if they
will vouchsafe to supply Sir John Pawlet with a small sum of money, and some
Arms to recruite and complete them (which are the only thing they want) and to
give me Order to enter them into pay and entertainment under his Command, that
there will be a very serviceable and considerable Troop raised for the
public service, and such an one as will bring a good addition of strength to
this Army. I have formerly of late directed most of my dispatches unto Sergeant
Major Jephson, a Member of the House, and an industrious solicitour for the
Province (to avoid your too much trouble) but now I must desire your favors
and furtherance in the return of this dispatch, (he being probably come
thence) in attendance whereon I remain

Cork 7. Aug. 1643. Your affectionate friend and servant INSIQUIN.

FINIS.

