THE Morning-Exercise (...) CRI^^^^^ATE: Several Cases of Conscience
Practically Resolved, by sundry Ministers, September 1661.

-- Commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor.
4.2. Vnicuique est liber sua conscientia, and ad hunc librum discutiendum and
emendandum omnes alii inventi sunt. Bernard. de Inter. Dom. p. 1072. c. 28.
(...). Polyb. Frag. p. 1029. LONDON, Printed for Joshua Kirton, and Nathaniel
Webb, and are to be sold at the Kings Arms, and at the Royal Oak in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1661.

To my most unfeignedly Beloved Parishioners of Saint GILES Cripplegate.
My Dear Friends,
THese Sermons, both preached, and printed are the mere product of love to your
Souls. I never yet (that I remember) went through the Parish without some
(though not sutably compassionate) heart-akeing yearnings toward my charge, to
think (and oh that I could think of it according to the worth of Souls) how
many thousands here are posting to Eternity, that within a few years will be in
Heaven or Hell, and I know not how, so much as to ask them whither they are
going. While God continues me your Watchman, I shall affectionately desire, and
sollicitously endeavor to keep my self pure from the blood of all men, Acts
20.26.
and that not only for the saving of my own Soul, by delivering my Message;
but that you also may be saved by entertaining it. I am willing therefore to
commend unto you some legible provocations to serious Piety, and therefore have
procured a contribution of help, that in the multitude of Spiritual
Counselors your souls may have safety. In short, Prove. 11.14.
my Brethren, give me leave to say, that if I had but the Apostles Graces to
help me in the manner, I can (without boasting) at present use the matter of
his Spiritually-passionate expressions; That I greatly long after you all,
Phil. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your love to truth and
holiness, may abound yet more, and more, in saving knowledge, and in all sound
judgment. That you may practically approve things that are excellent; and that
you may be sincerely gracious, and universally without offense till the day of
Christ. That you may be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. These (my Beloved) are and shall
be (through Grace) the constant desires and restless endeavors of

November. 14. 1661. Your most affectionate Soul-Servant Samuel Annesley.

The CASES Resolved.
SErmon 1. How may we be universally and exactly conscientious? Acts 24.16.
page 1. Sermon 2. What must and can Persons do toward their own Conversion?
Ezekiel. 18.32. p. 25 Sermon. 3. How may beloved lusts be discovered and mortified?
Matthew. 5.29, 30. p. 39 Sermon. 4. What Relapses are inconsistent with Grace? Heb.
6.4, 5, 6. p. 64 Sermon. 5. How may we be so spiritual, as to check sin in the
first risings of it? Gal. 5.16. p. 83 Sermon. 6. How Ministers or Christian
friends may, and ought to apply themselves to sick persons, for the^r good, and
the discharge of their own Conscience? Job 33.23, 24. p. 109 Sermon. 7. How must
we reprove, that we may not pa^take of other men's sins? 1 Timothy 5.22. p. 161
Sermon. 8. What means may be used toward the conversion of our carnal relations?
Romans 10.1. p. 187 Sermon. 9. What are the characters of a Souls sincere love to
Christ? and how may that love to him be kindled and inflamed? Ephesians. 6.24. p.
218 Sermon. 10. Wherein lies that exact Righteousness, which is required between
man and man? Matthew. 7.12. p. 248 Sermon. 11. After what manner must we give
Alms, that they may be acceptable and pleasing unto God? 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
p. 270 Sermon. 12. If we must aim at Assurance, what should they do, that are
not able to discern their own spiritual condition? 1 John 5.13. p. 305 Sermon.
13. What difference is there between the conflict in Natural and Spiritual
Persons? Romans 7.23. p. 323 Sermon. 14. What faith is that, which except we have
in prayer, we must not think to obtain any thing of God? Jam. 1.6. p. 334 Sermon.
15. Of the cause of Inward Trouble, and how a Christian should behave himself
when inward and outward Troubles meet? Genesis 42.21, 22. p. 351 Sermon. 16. In what
things must we use moderation, and in what not? Phil. 4.5. p. 381 Sermon. 17. How
may we have suitable conceptions of God in duty? Genes. 18.27. p. 415 Sermon. 18.
How are we to live by faith on Divine Providence? Psalm 62.8. p. 426. Sermon. 19.
How may we cure distractions in holy duties? Mat. 15.7, 8. p. 461 Sermon. 20. How
must we in all things give thanks? 1 These. 5.18. p. 478 Sermon. 21. How we may
get rid of Spiritual Sloth, and know when our activity in duty is from the
Spirit of God? Psalm. 119.37. vlt. p. 499 Sermon. 22. Wherein are we endangered by
things lawful? Luke 17.27, 28. p. 561 Sermon. 23. How must we make Religion our
business? Luke. 2.49. p. 572 Sermon. 24. Whether well-composed Religious Vows do
not exceedingly promote Religion? Psalm. 116.12, 14. p. 586 Sermon. 25. How are we
complete in Christ? Colos. 3.11. vlt. p. 611 Sermon. 26. How shall those
Merchants keep up the life of Religion, who while at home enjoyed all
Gospel Ordinances, and when abroad are not only destitute of them, but exposed
to persecution? Psalm. 120.5. p. 661 Sermon. 27. How is Hypocrisy discoverable
and cureable? Luke 12.1 p. 655 Sermon. 28. What must Christians do, that the
influence of the Ordinances may abide upon them? 1 Chronicles. 29.18. p. 677
The READER may be pleased to amend these Errors of the Press.
PAge 35. l. 27. read, deserved not death, p. 54. l. 32. is a very, 65. l. 25.
that I know, 71. l. 4. there is, l 14. course of sin, 89. l. 31. add in the
margin. Rule 2. 98. l 8. (...). 105.4. pustulous. 182.2 to Christ. 201.16.
(...). 211.19. (...). 219.6. amore. 228.14. hypostaticam. 236.16. (...) 257.7.
(...). 366.16 tight. 45 43. tight. 378. vlt. is always. 404.8. Matthew.
18.429.30. Prove. 18.10.

Some other mistakes there are in letters, as, president, for precedent, wrapped
for raped, and sometimes Greek words are false accented (as p. 32. marg. read
(...) and (...)) and one letter put for another (as p. 506 (...) for (...)) but
such like faults being easily pardoned and amended, we make no further
observation of them.

How may we be universally and exactly Conscientious?
ACTS 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men.


THis Sermon is but preliminary to some select cases of Conscience. And in this
Text you have a notable Anatomy of Conscience, wherein are these six things
singularly considerable.

1. Here Is the Index to the book of Conscience; The Eye to the portrayture of a
Christian, that according to your several standings, looks upon the Business,
the Time, the Manner, and the Cause of this account.

Herein (...).
] in this, i. e. in this business In hoc vulg. Erasm.
q.d. here I am arraigned as a Malefactor, charged with Sedition, Schism, and
Heresy, in this my Conscience acquits me. Herein do I exercise, etc. Again,

Herein] in, or at this time Interea, Bez. i. e. (...) De Dieu.
q.d. It Is but five days ago, since I was flapt in the mouth for this
defense, and I see those present, that so rashly, and illegally censured me,
yet now before more equal Judges, I bring the same defense. Herein I exercise
my self, etc. Again,

Herein] in this manner Aethiopic. fic. i. e. (...) De Dieu.
q.d. My manner of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own
Nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews, which knew me from the beginning (if
they would t^stifie) that I lived after the straitest sect of our Religion Acts
26.4, 5.
: And I am not conscious to my self of any crime in respect of their law,
either in my Judaism or Christianity Tirin. in Acts 23.1.
: or thus,

Herein] q.d. I have hope toward God -- that there shall be a Resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and unjust; and therefore Sir. Arab. propterea.
(...). De Dieu. verse 15.
with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self, for I know nothing by my self, yet
am I not hereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord 1 Cor. 4 3, 4.
. And therefore having an eye to the resurrection, and last judgment Propter
hoc i. e propter h^nc fiduciam. Grotius.
: I exercise my self to have, etc.

2. Here Is the Act with the quality included, [ I exercise (...) meditor, and
sometimes the same with (...). Budaeus.
] I am musing, and exercising my mind: I am learning and busying my thoughts,
the word also notes industry, and endeavor; pains and labor Operam d^,
elaborate concinno, orno, colo Steph
, q d. this is my meditation, my study, my work and employment to get, to keep,
and use, a Conscience void of offense, etc.

3. Consider the Subject of this exercise [my self] (...) utitur Paulus
significatione conjugationis. Heb. Hithpahel. Bez.
'twas himself, not only his hearers, he took on him the care of all the
Churches, but he would not have it charged upon him, that he kept others
Vineyards and neglected his own Cantic. 1. 6.
: he would be sure so to exercise himself, that he might not by any means,
when he had preached to others, himself be a castaway 1 Cor. 9.27.
.

4. Consider the Object of this exercise, and that is [Conscience] and (...).
pray consider the manner of expressing himself [to have a Conscience] to be
owner of a good Conscience Rut. against Lib. of conf. p. 1
: All men have a Conscience, but we may say of most, Conscience has them: they
have a Conscience, as they have a Feavor, or a disease; Conscience is
troublesome and disquiets them, they cannot sin so freely, as if they had no
inward gripes, and therefore they had rather be rid of their Consciences, then
be thus troubled with them But now the Apostle he would have a Conscience to
commune with, he would do nothing but what he is willing his Deputy-Judge shall
approve of.

5. Consider the quality of the Subject [void of offence] (...)
ie. without any thing which will not endure the scrutiny of both divine and
humane judgment Vatab in loc.
. The distribution notes the entireness, exactness, and excellency of his
Gospell-carriage: in his Religion toward God, and in his Conversation among
men (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
. He made it his business to live purely before God, and righteously among men
Calv. in loc.


6. Consider the Continuance of this exercise [allwayes] (...). i. e. (...).
Pis.
it is not only by fits and starts, when in some good mood, or under some
pangs of conviction, it is not only when arrested by sickness, or affrighted
by the apprehension of death, but always, at all times.

The words thus opened, the General Case that lies upon me to resolve is this.

Case.
How may we be universally, and exactly conscientious?

Universally, in respect of things; exactly, in respect of manner.

To answer this, (so far as I can crowd it into a Sermon) I shall present you
with these four things. 1. What Conscience is. 2. What it is Objects. 3. What
it is Offices. 4. What are the Kinds of Consciences; Wherein various directions
are necessary, for remedies and rules, which when laid together will resolve
the Case.

1. Conscience is man's Judgment of himself Ames. de. consci. l. 1. c. 1. p. 1.
, i. e. of his Estate and Actions Voet. Sell disput. part. 3 p. 827.
, The Description.
as they are subjected unto the judgment of God. I therefore close with this
description to wave the determination of that School-dispute, whether it be an
Act Durand. l. 2. did 39. p. 441. Aquin. 1 qu. 79, art. 13. p. 147.
, or an Habit Sanderson de Oblig. consc. prel. 1.. 17. p. 21.
, whether of the Understanding Plerique referunt ad intellectum. Baldwin cas.
consc. l. 1. c 3. p. 5.
, or Will Ibidem.
, or both Bresser de conscien. l. 1. c. 6 p. 23.
, whether it be a distinct Faculty Mr. Bernard his Treatise of Conscience p. 4
, or Power Huit upon Conscien. p 87.
, how far born with us, and how far acquired Sanders. ibid. P. 23.
. I willingly let pass all -- Imprimis observandum est, tantam esse virium
mentis nempe potentiarum, habituum, and actuum, inter se naturae cognationem,
tamque arctam quoad usum and exercitium conjunctionem, sive connexionem ut non
solum vocabulorum appellationes, sed and reales singulorum proprietatates, and
officia, reliquis promiscue and ind^scriminatim attribui soleant; idque non in
exotericis tantum poetarum, oratorum, aliorumque humanioris literaturae
authorum, (quibus licentius loqui permissum est) sed and in dogmaticis
Philosophorum and Scholasticorum scriptis -- Idem eodem p. 9. and in the last
paragraph of that lecture, absolvi tandem -- certe obscurius quam aut
voluissem, aut debuissem, si res aliter tulisset -- Profecto intricata est and
perplexa omnis (quod viri gravissimi jam olim conquesti sunt) de animae
intellectivae potentiis and facultatibus disquisitio^ -- quae capere se putant,
and quidem suo modo capiunt illiterat^ssimi quique homunciones; haec ipsa non
capiunt acutissimi philosophi -- qua in re nequeo satis admirari Dei Opt. Max.
infinitam Sapientiam, retundentis hoc pacto humanam superbiam, and
repraesentantis mortalibus, velut in speculo, inanem illam (...), qua sibi
videntur aliquid esse, cum nihil sint, misere decipi^ntes cor suum -- p. 35. 36.
, that does not further the design I drive at, viz. an universal and exact
conscientiousness.

For Conscience, the Hebrews ordinarily make use of two words, viz. [Heart] and
[Spirit] [Heart] in Prove. 4.23. Keep thy Heart (...) cor tuum.
, i. e. keep thy Conscience with all diligence; and so in the New Testament, 1
John 3 20. If our Heart (...).
, i. e if our Conscience condemn us. [Spirit] in Pro. 18.14. A wounded Spirit
(...)
, i. e. a wounded Conscience who can bear, and so in the New Testament, 1 Cor.
2.11. What knows the things of a man, save the Spirit (...).
of man, i. e. the Conscience of Man that is in him. But in English (as also in
the Greek (...).
, and Latin Con-scientia.
whence we borrow it) it is called [Conscience] knowledge with another, which
excellently sets forth the Scripturall nature of it, as Job 16.19. My witness
is in heaven, and Romans 9 1. I say the truth -- my Conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost. In both places, q.d. God witnesses with my
Conscience Sanderson ibidem and postea s^arsim.
. Conscience is placed in the middle, under God, and above man Perkins Vol 2 l.
1. p. 11.
. I will close this with Brochmand's description of Conscience Brochmand. T. 1.
Art. 1 c. 3. q 2. p. 7.
, to be a kind of silent reasoning of the Mind, whose definitive sentence is
received by some affection of the Heart, whereby those things which are judged
to be good and right, are approved of with d^light, but those things which are
evil and naught, are disapproved with grief and sorrow, God has placed this
in all men, partly to be a judgment and testimony of that integrity to which
man was at first created, and of that corruption that followed sin; partly that
God may have a Tribunal erected in the breasts of me, to accuse delinquents,
and to excuse those that do what is good and right.

2. The Object of conscience is very various, conscience has great employment
Mr. Bernard of cons. p. 56. and seqq.
and much business with the whole man, and with all his actions; it is like
those living creatures in the Revelation all over eyes; it looks to the
understanding 2 Cor. 1.12
; whether our wisdom be carnal or gracious; to the will Roman. 7.18
, whether it go beyond or fall short in ability of good performances; to the
affections, Romans 9.1.2.
whether the entertainment or refusal of the Gospel be the matter of greatest
joy or sorrow. It pryes into all our actions both toward God and man. Toward
God, whether in general our estate be good Heb. 9.14.
, in special whether our service be inward and 2 Timothy 1.3.
Spiritual, or only outward Heb. 9 9.
and formal. More particularly it surveighs all our duties whether we pray in
faith Heb. 10.22.
; whether we hear with profit 1 Timothy 3.9.
; whether through our Baptism, we can go unto God as unto an Oracle 1 Pet.
3.21. Interp. 72. vocabulo (...) utuntur quando in V.T. Israelitae dicuntur
interrogare os domini -- baptismus est, (...) -- responsio bonae conscientiae,
and etia^ interrogatio apud Deum, quia audet cum fiducia, Deu^ accedere and
interrogare, hoc est cum eo coll^qui cumque rogare pro sent aliis. Ge^hard. l.
c. T 4. de Sacram p. 180. 88.
; whether in the Lords Supper we have singular Communion with Christ Cor.
10.15.16
, in short whether we do and will stick close to Religion 1 Pet. 3.15.16
; as knowing, that if Conscience do not steer right, Religion will be
Shipwrakt 1 Timothy 1.19.
. Thus duties toward God are the great object of Conscience, but duties
toward man are the Secundary, and like unto it. Toward man in our whole
conversation Acts 23.1.
. Particularly, that we be obedient to rulers Romans 13.5.
, (and that which is in one place charged upon us for Conscience sake, is in
another place commanded for the Lords sake 1 Pet. 2.13.
) in short, that we be just in all our dealings Heb. 13 18.
, avoiding all justly offensive things 1 Cor. 10.29.
, words 1 Kings 2.44.
, thoughts Psa. 73.15.16
, that we express singular charity 1 Timothy 1 51
; especialy to souls Rom 9.1.2
, and this in prayer 2 Timothy 1.3.4
when we can do nothing else, and Conscience does not only do all this at
present urging to duty, or shooting or tingling under the commision of sin, but
it foresees things future provoking to good and cautioning against evil; and
also looks back upon things past with joy or torment, so that it is easier to
reckon what is not the object of conscience then what is; in a word, Every
thing of duty and sin is the object of Conscience.

3. The Offices of Conscience are likewise various. In general, the proper
Office of Conscience is discursively to apply that light which is in the mind
unto particular actions, or cases. The light which is in the mind is either,
the light of Nature, or the light of Divine Revelation. By the light of Nature.
I understand those common notions, which are written in the hearts of men,
which (as a brand plucked out of the common burning) are the relics of the
Image of God after the fall. Not only Scripture but experience evidenceth,
that those which are practical Atheists, that say unto god depart from us Job.
21.14.15
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, yet cannot get rid of his Deputy,
their Conscience: they carry a Spy, a Register, a Monitor in their bosom, that
does accuse and trouble them, they cannot sin in quiet Quod egi in corpore hoc
post modum importuna cogitatione verso in mente: and mu^toties gravius torqueor
in recordatione quam prius captus fuerem operis perpetratione. Bern. de inte^.
dom. c. 30 p. 1074.
. Those that are without or Reject the Sunshine of Scripture, yet they cannot
blow out Gods Candle Prove. 20 17.
of Conscience. By Divine revelation I mean both the standing rule of
Scripture Isa 8.20.
, and Gods extraordinary Nu. 12 6 7.8. Heb. 1.1.
discoveries of himself, whether by dreams or visions, or Prophesies, or other
Spiritual communications; all which thought (if they be from God) they are
acording to Scripture 1 John 4.1
; yet the former are afforded upon particular 2 Chro. 20.14 1 Kin. 13.20 11 Nu.
24. per totu^
Providence, and the last are the universal privileges of particular
favorites 1 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
: But it is the office of Conscience to apply all these, and that it does by
the discourse of a practical Syllogism Sayrus clav. Reg. l. 1. c. 3 p. 4.
e.g.

Whosoever believes John 3.39
, (i. e. accepts of Christ as Lord 1 Cor. 12.3.
, and Savior) shall be saved, but (may the gracious person say) I accept of
Christ as Lord and Savior John ^0.28.
. Therefore shall I be sav^d.

Or thus. Whosoever is unfeignedly willing to have his ^^tions brought to the
Scripture touchstone to be tried, whether they be ri^^^ for the matter, and to
the Scripture Balance to be weighed whether (...) are weight for the manner,
his deeds are wrought in God, i. e ^he is in a state of Grace, he acts by the
gracious assistance of the spirit of God John 3.^0.21
.

But (may the trembling Soul say) I desire nothing more then to bring my self
and all my actions to a Scripture trial Psa. 139, 23.24.
.

Therefore (he may conclude) I am in a state of Grace Psalm. ^6.1.2.
, etc.

Once more. Whosoever commiteth sin (i. e. maks a trade of Sin) is of the Devil
(i. e. is the Child of the Devil)

But (may every unregenerate Person, say Romans 6.20
) I make a trade of sin i. e. when I am a sinning I am in my Element, I am
where I would be, there is no work so pleasing to me.

Therefore I am the Child of the Devil Romans 6.16.
, i. e. I am in a estate of Damnation.

In the ( major or) first proposition, you have the dictate Habitualis cognitio
menti impressa, vary ab authoribus nur cupatu^, ut conscientia, conscientiae
dictamen, lex naturalis, scintilla rationis,(...), etc. Estius in 2. l. Sent.
distinct. 39. 2 p. 427.
of Conscience. John 3.8.
In the ( minor or) second proposition you have the Testimony conscientia
respectu propositionis, dicitur lume^ and lex; ^espectu assu^ptionis and
conclusionis, testis, sed respectu assumptionis aptissime vocatur index vel
liber; and respectu conclusionis maxim proprie judex. Ames. de conscien. l. 1.
c. 1 p. 3. 9.
of Conscience, and in the Conclusion, you have the judgment of Conscience
Propositionem dictat (...). assumptio per appropriationem vocatur (...).
conclusio est ipsa (...). Ibidem ^0.
: In the first the power of Conscience is very great, so great that it can do
any thing but make evil good Ibidem. Theses Theol. de Cons. p. 44. 18.
, for it can make an indifferent action good or evil 1 Martinus de verb. cons.
: and it can make a good action evil Martinius de verb. cons.
: therefore in things necessary it does so bind, that noe humane laws can
loosen, Acts 4.19. vix crediderim apud se fuisse Stapletonom cum hac effutiret.
Forum conscientiae dixit esse long majorem partem c^avium. Cham. ^ Paustr. T.
2. l. 11. c. 9. p. 205.. 23
and thereupon we are said to be downright debtors Romans 1.14.
, engaged servants Romans 6.16.
, spiritual bound Acts 20.22.
, lovingly constrained 2. Cor. 5.14.
, graciously necessitated, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Yea in a word, we can do no other (unless we will offer violence to our
Consciences) then do what God charge upon us as duty Acts 4.20.
. Thus far the dictate of Conscience. In the Testimony of Conscience,
Conscience examines, sifts, and tries our actions, this in Scripture is called
a returning into a man's own heart 1 King. 8.47. and reversi fuerint ad cor suum
ex heb
, a thinking of our ways Ps. 119.59.
, a speaking to our heart Hos. 7.2.
, a laying things to heart Jer. 12.11. (...) ponens super cor.
, a setting our heart upon a business Haggi 1.5. there it is (...) ponite cor
vestru^ super vias vestras.
, an examination and trial of our selves 2 Cor. 13.5. there is both (...) (q.d.
make as strict a scrutiny into your own hearts, as the Devil will do when he
tempts you) and (...) (be as loath to be mistaken in your graces, as a Usurer in
his coin)
; and thence the conclusion is inferred from the premises according to our
apprehension of the rule and account of our actions. Yet this is worthy of
special observation, that though both the premises be undeniably true, yet
there is nothing more ordinary, then for not only wicked To. 2.18.21, 22.
, but gracious persons (though upon different grounds) to deny the conclusion:
and the truth is, without the Spirits assistance by way of conviction to the
wicked, and relief to the godly, neither of them will prove any better
Logicians, then still to deny the conclusion. Graceless persons they will not
conclude against themselves: For, 1. They will not weigh the cogency of any
Scriptural John 3.20.
argument. 2. They have sucked in other self flattering conclusions Deuteronomy. 29.19.
: and 3. they are willing to put a cheat upon themselves Jam. 1.22. (...) falsa
argumentione uti and subdola supputatione fallere, as those in Matthew. 7.21, 22,
23 Brochm. in loc.
, so these will not conclude against themselves. And on the other hand,
gracious persons dare not conclude themselves so happy as the Scripture
represents them. 1. Through the prevalency of temptations Rev. 12.10. The Devil
accuses them to themselves, as well as unto God day and night.
, Satan frights them from their comforts. 2. Through the abounding of grace
Psalm. 126.1.
, they think it is too good to be true, especially considering 3. their sense of
unworthiness Luke 7.6, 9.
, what! they pass a sentence of absolution upon their souls! of approbation
upon their actions! No, they dare not: Through over modesty they will belly the
very spirit of grace. In short, the only remedy I shall commend to both sorts
is this, viz. Beg of God to persuade thy heart to close with convincing truth,
q. d.

Lord thou have told me in thy word, that if I come unto Christ, I shall in no
wise be cast John 6.37.
out: and if I love God, I may thereby be sure that God loves me 1 John 4.19.
.

But Lord, so far as I am able by searching to know my own heart, I desire
nothing more then to come Jerem. 3.21.
to Christ, to receive Christ John 1.11.
, to be one with Gal. 2.20.
Christ, to be conformable to Christ Heb 2.11.
. And Lord I dare say with Peter, thou that know all things, know that I
love thee; John 21.17.
if prizing thee above all things in the world Psalm 73.25.
, if restless longing Psalm. 119.20.
for further acquaintance, and more inward Psalm. 106.4.
communion; if pantings after the secrets of thy Psalm 25.14.
presence, and fear of nothing more then to offend thee Psalm. 119.1^0.
, be infallible evidences of sincere love, then I dare appeal unto thee, that I
love thee.

Therefore Lord persuade my soul thankefully to acknowledge that it is in a safe
condition. On the contrary, Thus

Lord thou have told me, that if I live after the flesh I shall Romans 8.13.
die.

But my heart and life undeniably evidence that I mind nothing but carnality:

Therefore Lord convince me that there is but a step Job 21.13.
, but a Psalm. 146.4.
breath between me and everlasting death.

Thus Christians do but suffer and help your Conscience to do its office, and
then shall you have rejoicing in your selves alone and not in Gal 6.4.
another. i. e. you will find cause of rejoicing in the testimony of your own
Conscience and not in others thinking you to be better then you are, nor in
your thinking your selves to be better then others. Thus you have the offices
of Conscience. I come in the last place to speak of

4. The kinds of Conscience I know are commonly reduced to these 4. B^rn. de
consc. p 1107.
viz. Good and quiet. Good and troubled. Evil and quiet; Evil and troubled. But
intending the resolution of the Case before me in speaking to Conscience under
the several kinds of it; I shall speak to 8 kinds of Consciences. The two
first, viz. the sleepy and the seared Conscience are peculiar to the worst of
men. The 4. next, viz. the erring, doubting, scrupulous and trembling
Consciences are almost indifferent to good and bad; only the 2 former have a
greater bias to bad: and the 2 latter have a greater tendency to Good: but the
2 last kinds, viz. The Good and Honest, and the Good and quiet Consciences are
peculiar to Gods choicest favorites. In treating of these, I shall endeavor
to acquaint you with the nature of each But here I must say with Aug. non
possum ut volo expl care quod sentio: tamen quid moliar dicere, peto ut non
ex^ectatis verbis meis sagac ssime si pot^stis intelligatis -- Odi definire --
nam facilius est mihi videre in alterius definitione quod non probem, quam
quicqua^ been definiendo explicare. Aug. T. 1. l. 2 de Ord. c 1. 2 p. 671.
, how to cure the evil, and how to obtain the good, and hereby the Application
will be entwisted with the Explication throughout my discourse.

I. The first and one of the worst kinds of Consciences in the world is the
sleepy Conscience, 1. The sleepy Conscience.
such is the Conscience of every unconverted person (that is not yet under
horror) their Romans 11.8. (...) Camerarius in loc.
spirit, i. e. their Conscience is asleep; that as bodily sleep binds up all
the senses and animal spirits, so this spiritual (or rather unspiritual)
sleepiness binds up the soul from all sense Privatio omnis sensus and
judicij. Illyr. In p^aed. loc.
of the evil of sin, and want of grace; and therefore in conversion Christ
does awaken Ephe 5.1^.
the Conscience. The Disciples of Christ have their spirits waking, when their
bodies Matthew. 26 41
are slumbring, i e. they have a gracious habit of watchfulness, when they are
overtaken with some carnal acts of sleepiness. Christ complains of unkindness
Cantic. 5.2.
, that his Spouse sleeps in the morning, when he knocks for early
entertainment; but the unconverted let Christ stand knocking all the day, till
supper time Revel 3 20.
, they will spend their day with their lusts; and if Christ will knock and wait
till the day of their life be almost spent, then they will pretend to open: but
how long must God call? How long Pro. 6.9, 10.
will thou sleep O sluggard? when wilt thon arise out of thy sleep? and they will
answer, Yet Concessio ironica ethopaeiam habens pigroru^ elegantissimam. Jun in
loc. q. videmus conscientia^ veluti veterno aut lethargo aliquam diu sepulta^,
etc. Episcop. Inst. theol. l 1. c. 3. p. 11. Causes.
a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. The
plain truth is, thougn wicked men cannot quite stifle their consciences q, yet
their Consciences do but as it were talk in their sleep, and they take no more
notice of them, then they do of their dreams.

Causes of a sleepy Conscience are (besides the sluggishness of our depraved
natures)

1. A spiritual intoxic^tion, all unconverted persons are drunk with the love
of sin, and therein behave themselves like Solomon's Prove. 23.34, 35. Jacet in
corona charch^sij, i. e. Galea ubi maxima se^titur maris agitatio. Jun in loc:
^ras the vulg. Version, which may serve for a paraphrase, quasi sopitus
gubernator amisso clavo. i. usu rationis. Tit.
drunkard that lies down to sleep in the heart of the sea, or upon the top of a
mast, in the very midst of the greatest soul danger: He does that daily which
Jonah did once, run away from G^d, and then composeth himself to sleep, Jonah
^.5.
when God is pursuing him with judgments; and dreams of nothing but impunity,
and happiness. Love of sin is the Devils Opium, whereby he casts the Conscience
into a dead sleep, that no arm but of Omnipotency can waken it. He meets with
something in the world, which he likes better then the holy ways of God, and
therefore will not seek God Ps. 10.4, 5, 11 13. Justitiam ut ille apud Platonem
Thrasymachus, appellat (...), elegantem stultitiam -- they sleep, and then
aiunt deum dormire aut oblitu^ esse eorum quae fiant in terris, etc. Aug.
Steuch. Eug. Enar. in loc.
, Gods ways are always grievous to him, -- he has said in his heart I shall
not be moved -- God has forgotten: he hides his face, he will never see it --
he contemns God, and says in his heart, thou will not require it. They wink,
and then conclude God does not see them.

2. Carnal conceits of grace and heaven. At the best, humane wisdom is their
highest Guide, their great and supreme Oracle; in their misshapen apprehensions
of their need of mercy, they are willing to be flattered, that it may be had
without such severities in Religion Quam minu tatum and pede tentim decline a
deo: and ita^ profundum. de scendat, ut super eam urgea puteus o^ sum mundi
prospiritas alludit and illudit, cum laudetur peccator in desideriis animae
suae, cum peccantium favor and pecc^re nolentium pavor nolens and dolens
arridet ei, etc Bern. l. de consc. p. 1109.
, as they are unwilling to undertake. Why should they be wiser then their
Neighbors? all men are not fools. Men as wise, and as learned, neither press
nor practice such strictness, and do you think they have not a care of their
souls? they do not doubt but they shall do as well as the best. Though poor
souls they know that wide is the gate, and broad is the way Mat. 7.13.14.
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat because
strait is the ga^e, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it. Mark that [that find it] he does not say Non dicit pauci
ingrediuntur quod difficillimu^, sed pauci inveniunt Par. in loc.
that enter into it, but that find it. Those that do not walk in the way of
holines^ vide. Auth. imperfec. oper. Hom 18. p. 72.
, it is impossible they should ever find it. The gate does not lead to the way,
but the way to the gate. Do not think to get to heaven first, and learn
heavenly mindedness after, yea heaven must now suffer Mat. 11.12.
violence; striving is the condition Luke 13.24. vide Stell. in loc.
of entering. Rouse up therefore, and shake off your worldly wisdom See
Abernethy's physic for the soul. c. 7. p. 92. etc.
, your ignorant self-love, your abuse of mercies, your contempt of God, and
your forgetfulness of death and judgment. But how shall we do this?

1. The first remedy I shall commend is Consideration. Cure.
Let the subject of thy consideration be with thou will (only I could wish it may
relate to eternity, whither thou art posting) and I shall not doubt of the
success. Let me for once insert a relation I heard between the preaching and
the transcribing of this Sermon. The Father of a Prodigal left it as his
deathbed charge unto his only Son to spend a quarter of an hour every day in
retired thinking, but left him at liberty to think of what he would, only
engaged him to spend a quarter of an hour in thinking. The son having this
liberty to please himself in the subject, sets himself to the performance of
his promise; his thoughts one day recall his past pleasures, another contrive
his future delights; but at length his thoughts became inquisitive, what might
be his fathers end in proposing this task: he thought his father was a wise and
good man, therefore surely he intended and hoped that he would some time or
other think of Religion: when this leavened his thoughts they multiplied
abundantly, neither could he contain them in so short a confinement, but was
that night sleepless, and afterward restless, till he became seriously
religious. O that I could persuade you to go and do likewise.

2. Observe what means thou shunnest as too startling, and make use of them for
thy awakening. This with the blessing of God will savingly awaken thee. O how
often has thy Conscience whimper'd, and thou have hushed it to sleep again!
What does thy sleepy Conscience most dread? an awakening Ministry? So far cross
thy Conscience as to attend no other: In stead of lullaby notions, improve
cutting Tit. 1.13. (...). redarguito praecite. Bez. -- Generalis cujusdem
religiosi ordinis, qui ut suos hortaretur, ne minus conscientiae studerent quam
scientiae; dixit majores suos, se vitamque suam direxisse conscientia: nunc
autem abbreviatam videri verbum istud, ac mutilatum prima syllaba, viz
succedente illi scientia; verendum deinceps ne and hoc verbum mutiletur prima
syllaba, adeoque relinquatur sola entia rationis, circa quae versatur saepe
speculativa tantum scientia, ac nudae speculationes. Brester. de consc. l. 1.
c. 7. p. 28. Sect. 57.
convictions.

The scared Conscience.
II. The second kind of Conscience proposed is, the seared Conscience. Such is
theirs, who have given up their names to Christ, but lift up their heel against
him, of which the Apostle speaks 1 Timothy 4.2.
, having their consciences seared with an hot iron, i. e. having a corrupt, and
Corruptam and putrifactam atque putredinem cum foetore semper emittentem.
Anselm in loc.
putrified conscience, that have the Devils brand mark Cauterio d'aboli
penetratam esse, ut indelebiliter eandom retineant conscientiam, etc. Cajet. in
loc.
upon it. Plainly, a seared Conscience is a rotten Abern. ibid. c. 8 p. 109.
, venomous, ulcerate, pestilent, filthy, gangrenate Conscience, that does not
perform any of it is offices, but is even past feeling; that is (or might have
been) in Christ's Hospital under cure of soul-distempers: but through indulging
of sin, not being able to endure the sharp Jer. 44.16. etc.
convictions, bitter reproofs, and clo^e exhortations of the word, he deadens
his Conscience unto an insensible senslesnesse, to this rank of profligate
sinners I refer all those that frequent (as well as those that reject)
Ordinances, that make a profession (as well as those that hate the profession)
of Religion, yet have a reserve of sin which they will not part with. Searing
(you know) is of that part which needs cure.

The causes Cause.
of a seared Conscience are, Conscience-wasting sins on man's part procuring
it, and divine withdrawing from the sinner on Gods part inflicting it. As there
are are some Morbus venenereus.
bodily diseases that follow bodily wickedness, so this Soul-disease is the
peculiar punishment of sins against knowledge. Methinks that Text is dreadful
Rom 1.28. See also v. 21.24 26.
: As they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to
a reprobate mind, etc. It Is observable Ecce quotiens vindicat Deus and ex
eadem vind^cta p^ura and gra^iora peccata consurgunt. Bed. in loc.
, the oftener they rebelled against the light, the more severely God punished
them; with that (which they counted) impunity, viz. he gave them up to their
swinge Tradidit Deus -- substractione gratiae -- traditione in potestatem
Satanae -- (...), in mentem reprob^m, act^ ve, and passive intelligendo, etc.
And a^l this to be such a recompense of their error, (...) quam oportu^t, i.
e. quam ex ordine justitiae suae Deus ipsis dehabeat retri^u^re. Par. in loc.
of 1. natural lust, 2. unnatural, and 3. of all unrighteousness. Custom of
sinning, takes away conscience of sinning.

For Cure. Cure.
Seriously set your selves against those peculiar ways of sinning which have
brought you to this. You know them, there is not any one that has a seared
Conscience, but he does (or easily may) know how it came so, your work (in some
respect) is not so large as in case of the sleepy Conscience, it is but one or
two sorts of sins that are eminently mischievous to your souls in this case,
though a seared Conscience is worse then a sleepy Conscience, yet as it is more
easily discernable, so it is but reasonable you should more speedily and
vigorously set upon the cure, take heed of accounting any sin small Cum
coeperit quis dicere; quid est si verbulum h^c unicum locutus fuero? -- Ex hoc,
quid id, quid illud -- Sensim incipit quis pedetentim in majora and graviora
prolabi, and sic deinceps -- in perfectam insensibilitatem decidit -- curate
levia, quoad levia sunt -- and virtutes and pecc^ta a parvis incipiunt, etc.
Dorotheus B. P. T. 4 p 769.
, lest at last you account not any sin great; I will commend one Text to you,
and close this particular, Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. In thy filthiness is lewdness,
because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more; till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I
the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not
go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent, etc. Sirs, God has been
your Physician, has used -- Instar medici, qui putridis non par^it cornibus --
non parcit, ut parcat: crudelis est, ut misereatur. Hieronym. in loc.
variety of remedies: if nothing will prevail, but you will industriously singe
your Consciences to make them senseless, as sure as God is true, he will My
fu^y to rest] i. e. non habeat, quod amplius faciat, etc. Sanctius in loc.
make you sensible of your sin by everlasting burnings.

I forbear enlargement, because in the following cases about the Mortification
of beloved lusts, about relapses, and how to check the first risings of sin,
you will have suitable directions to make your brawny Consciences tender. I
proceed therefore to those kinds of Consciences, none else will speak to, viz.

III. The Erring Conscience.
An erring Conscience Ames. de cons l. 1. c. 4. p. 8
is that which judges otherwise then the thing is. Conscience is sometimes
deceived through ignorance Dickson Therap. Sac. l 1 c. 1. p. 3.. 8.
of what is right, by apprehending a false rule for a true, an error for the
will of God: Sometimes through ignorance of the fact, by misapplying a right
rule to a wrong action; Conscience evil informed t^kes humane traditions and
false doctrines, proposed under the show of divine authority to be the will of
God; a famous instance you have of this in Jeroboams Be^gins. Prax cath.
dissert. 3. p. 244. 27.
case, he fears that if the people should go up to sacrifice at Jerusalem, then
he should lose his kingdom, this puts him upon enquiry, whether there should
not be a double Sanctuary, as well as a double Kingdom: hereupon a Council is
called, flattering Prophets come, they have dreams and visions, worthy of their
affections, suitable to their purpose: A decree is made q.d. it is sufficient
that you have hitherto gone up to Jerusalem, now behold your Gods, these calves
are like the cherubims of the Sanctuary, which are as ministering Spirits before
the face of God (that these calves had the shape of the Cherubims, you may
gather by comparing of Scriptures, that which is called the face of an Ezekiel.
1.10.
Ox in one place, is called the face of a Ezekiel. 10.14. and Ezekiel. 1.7.
Cherub in the other.) This seems to the people a satisfying warrant for them
readily Hos. 5.11.
to follow the Kings commandment. I might add another instance of the good old
Prophet, who was plausibly seduced to his bodily 1 Kings 3.8 18, 19, 2^, 26.
destruction. Now it is a great question (among the Papists especially) whether,
and how far an erring Conscience binds? One of their most learned Casuists that
I meet with, peremptorily determines that the law of an erring Conscience is
not dispensable by Ne quidem a Deo, multo min^^ ab homine. Bresser de Consc l.
5. c. 22. p. 555. 212.
God himself: Others -- Vt igitur bonum sit agere secundum Conscientiam
errantem voluntary and vitiose, oportet existimationem Conscientiae bonam
esse, and c^a recta ratione congrisente^, Azorius Moal. Instit. l. 2. p. 104.
, that it is good to follow an erring Conscience, when it has the credit of a
good Conscience, and is agreeable to reason. Others Sayrus Clav. Reg. l. 1. c.
4. p. 8 13.
that a right, and an erroneous Conscience both bind, though in a different
respect, a right Conscience as it is conformable to the Law of God, an erring
Conscience as it is thought to be the Law of God, a right Conscience binds
simply, an erroneous upon a supposition. Some distinguish ignorance into Quando
Conscientia erronea and invincibili ignorantia judicat al qu^d honestum esse,
quod honestum non est, tunc actus voluntatis, qui conformis est tali judicio,
b^nus and honestus est, etiamsi contingat objectum esse ^urpe, ita passim
Theologi; and probatur, quia tunc est conformis suae regulae, nam illud
judicium est proxim a regula quam sequi debet v^luntas. Becan. T 1. Theol.
Schol. pt. 2. Tract. 1. c. 4. q. 7 p. 219.
vincible, and invincible, and say, that when an erroneous Conscience through
invincible ignorance judges that to be honest which is not so, yet that
judgment is the next rule which the will is to follow. Others distinguish
(where all men are not able to discern the difference) between -- Neminem
obligat tamen ligat -- Durand. lib. 2. did. 39. q. 5. p 443.. 7.
binding and obliging. But in short, they generally determine the question in
the affirmative; Though some grant, that though Sylvestranus in l. 1. Seat. p
239.
we must do nothing against a true Conscience, yet we must depose an erroneous
one, and go contrary to it. And Others Nihil licet contra Conscientiam agere in
aliquo casu, nec tumen tenetur quilibet sequi Conscientiam suam in quolibet
casu. Gul. Parisiensis de vitiis and pec. p 280.
, though we must do nothing against Conscience in any case, yet we must not
follow Conscience in every case. The plain truth is, Error cannot bind us to
follow it Harris works pt 4. p. 28.
; an erring Conscience may so bind, that it may be a sin to go against it; but
it can never so bind, as it may be a virtue to follow it. To follow an erring
Robins. Obs. c. 47. p. 246.
Conscience, is for the blind sinner to follow his blind Conscience till both
fall into the ditch. The violation of Conscience is always evil, and the
following of an erring Conscience is evil, but there is a middle way that is safe
and good, viz. the informing of Conscience better by Gods Word, and following
of it accordingly.

The Causes Causes.
of an erring Conscience (besides Original sin, the effect whereof is
blindness in the Understanding. And the just judgment of God upon persons for
not entertaining, obeying, and loving the truth as it is in Jesus, besides
these, the causes) are reducible to these Three Heads Bresser l. 5. c. 23. p
556. Spa^sim.
.

1. Negligence of learning the will of God Discendi negligent a, orta ex
pigiritia. I^idem. 2. 7.
, through slothfulness, and love of ease, and low esteem of the ways of God. I
need name but one Scripture for both proof and illustration of this particular,
Eccles. 4.5, 6 The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.
Better is a handful with quietness, then both the hands full with travel and
vexation of Spirit, q d. He is a fool that puts himself into a posture of
idleness English An.
, that compoleth himself to do nothing, that thinks it better to be without
good things, than be at some trouble in getting them Pemble in loc.
.

2. Pride whereby a man is ashamed to consult others and to be taught by them
Pudeat ignorantem alios consule^e, and ab iis doceri. B^es. ibid.
, Those that are sincerely conscientious are not free from a kind of proud
modesty, in being shie of making inquiry into practical cases, there is
something of pride in their bashfulnesse to discover their ignorance, in asking
of questions for Conscience sake. But those that are ungodly, arrogate so much
to their own judgment, that (to speak their own boasting) they know as much, as
any man can teach them. But as wise as they are, a wiser then they calls them
Prove. 28.26. Qui suo fidit animo stultus est. Merc. in loc.
fools, and their folly misleads them.

3. Passion, or inordinate affection Bref. ibid. etc.
about that whereof we are ignorant. This warpeth our consideration, for he
that seeks truth with a byas, will run counter when he comes near it, and not
find it though he come within kenning of it Arch Bishop Lawd Ep. Ded. before
the relation of the conference.
.

You may gather the remedies from the opposites to these three causes of
error. 1. Be industriously diligent to know your duty. 2. Cure.
Be humbly willing to receive instruction. And 3. Let not your affections out
run your judgment. But there is one rule I shall commend, which if you will
conscientiously improve, you shall never be much hurt by an erring Conscience,
and I dare appeal to your own Consciences, that it is your indispensable duty,
you must use it, and it is so plain and easy you may use it.

Do what you know, and God will teach you what to do. Do what you know to be
your present duty, and God will acquaint you with your future duty as it comes
to be present. Make it your business to avoid know omissions, and God will keep
you from feared commissions. This Rule is of great moment, and therefore I will
charge it upon you by express Scripture. Psalm 25. v. 4. Show me thy ways O
Lord, i. e. those ways wherein I cannot err Mandata tua ostende, quae me non
permittant errare, etc. Remigius in loc.
. Teach me thy paths, i. e. that narrow path which is too commonly unknown
Semita dicta quasi semi via, quia angusto call ditigitur, nec vulgo nota est,
sed occulto itinere ambula tu^. Bruno. in loc. B P. T. 11. p. 96.
, those commands that are most strict and difficult, V. 5. Lead me in thy
truth, and teach me, i. e. teach me evidently that I may not be deceived; so
teach me that I may not only know thy will but do it Remig. ubi sup.
. Here Is his prayer, but what grounds has he to expect audience? For thou art
the God of my salvation, q. d. thou Lord wilt save me, and therefore do not
refuse to teach me. On thee do I wait all the day, i. e. the whole day, and
every day Arnobius in loc.
, other arguments are couched in the following verses, but what answer? v. 9.
The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way; i. e.
those that submit their neck to his yoke, those that are not conceited that
they can guide themselves better then he can guide them, he will teach them his
ways Non eos qui pracurrere volunt, quasi seipsos melius regere possint, sed
eos qui non eri gunt cervicem, neque reculeitrant. Aug. in loc.
, in necessary, great, and weighty matters they shall not err Ejusmodi error
nunqu^m accidit, vel certe non permanet; de rebus necessariis, magnis, and
gravibus -- Bergius prax Cathol. p. 247.
. Again Prove. 2. v. 3. If thou seek after knowledge, and liftest up thy
voice for understanding, v 4. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for
her as for ^id treasures, v. 5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the
Lord, and find the knowledge of God, v. 6. For the Lord gives wisdom: out of
his mouth comes knowledge and understanding, v. 7. He lays up sound wisdom
for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly, v. 8. He
keeps the paths of Judgment, and preserves the way of his Saints, v. 9. Then
shall thou understand Righteousness, and Judgment, and Equity, and every good
path. q d. Be but as diligent to get knowledge, as a covetous man is to get
money Cartw. in loc.
, and God will certainly give you such knowledge of his ways, as shall
preserve you from error -- Dominus clypeus erit iis, qui perfect^m, and
omnibus suis numeris constantem contemplationis rationem in hisce reconditis
divinisque rebus amplecti sint; quo ab erroribus tuti serventur, etc. Levi
Ghersom. in loc.
, and will teach you how to behave your selves both toward God and Man Eng.
Annor.
: One Scripture more, that in the evidence of three vitnesses, this rule may be
established, Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, q.d. Hinder not
your selves from learning truth through fear of erour -- Quam perperam and
stulte hedie permulti, dum errandi periculum metuunt, hac trepidatione sese
impediant ab omni discendi studio -- si Deo toti in obsequium simus addicti,
spiritum discretionis ab eo nobis datum ire ne dubitemus qui perpet^us sit dux
ac director, etc. Calv. in loc.
, for you shall never want the Spirits guidance, while you practically follow
his conduct Gul Parisiensis. Qui express docet -- ubi est invincibilis
ignorantia quoad nos. Deus sucou^ret, nisi culpa nostra ejus opem a nobis
avertamus -- quae sententia f^cit maxim ad providentiam Dei celebrandam.
Davenant determ. q 45. p. 213.
.

IV. The doubting Conscience.
A doubting Conscience is that which with trouble and anxiety suspends Brochm.
T. 1. c. 3. q. 3. p. 7.
its judgment, not knowing which way to determine. Doubtfulness of Conscience
is that ambiguity of mind which consists in a standing (or rather in a
wavering) balance, neither assenting nor dissenting Conscientia dubia,
stricte, negative magisque proprie, nil est aliud, quam ambiguita^. sive
suspentio animi censtituti in aqu librio, etc. Bress. l. 4. c. 1. p. 350.
. To speak strictly, a doubting B ess. ibid.. 5. V^x dubia conscientiae addita
sit dimin^ens seu alienans, haud aliter quamens rationis en^ d citur, etc.
Voetius pt. 3. p. 828.
Conscience is no Conscience, but only improperly, as a dead man may be said
to be a man. Conscience is a judgment of something done, or to be done: but now
where there is no assent, there is no judgment B ess. ibid.. 5. V^x dubia
conscientiae addita sit dimin^ens seu alienans, haud aliter quamens rationis
en^ d citur, etc. Voetius pt. 3. p. 828.
, but a privation of judgment; and therefore so fat as it may be called a
Conscience, it is an evil Conscience, at best troublesomly -- Si non malitia
turpi, saltem tristi. Voet. ibid
evil, and therefore ought to be deposed. Some term the acting upon a doubting
Conscience to be an acting besides Praeter conscientiam. -- Konig. de cons.
vide p. 13, 14.
Conscience; for they cannot be said to act according to Conscience, because
it is properly none, but aequivocally; nor do they act against Conscience,
because Conscience permits them to act thus and no otherwise: those act with or
against Conscience, where the judgment of Conscience is determined, to say this
is lawful or unlawful, and he acts besides Conscience, who remains fluctuating
and doubting, whether such a thing be lawful or unlawful, and yet does, or
omits it. Now the Apostle tells us, Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. By faith there we must understand that
persuasion and security of mind, whereby we believe and determine, that such a
thing pleases, or displeases God, is lawful or forbidden; it is not spoken of
justifying Minus (...) qui fidem istam explicant de fide justificante, and
salvifica, etc. Konig. ibid.
faith, as if men sinned in eating or not eating, because their sins were, or
were not pardoned; In short, in all duties that belong to practice we must be
unweariedly diligent to perceive the truth, that doubtfulness may be drivenh
away, for the more certain knowledge we have of those things we do, the more
confident we may be in the doing of them, and the more joyful afterward. What
therefore is the cause of doubting that it may be banished?

The Causes of doubting, which I shall speak of briefly (to say nothing of our
ignorance I speak of practical doubts, for of Speculative that proverbial
saying of Aeneas Silvius is undeniably true, cui plura nosse datum est, eum
majora sequi dubia. Plat na de vit. Pont. Pij. 2di. p. 3.8.
and weakness) are these Two.

1. Either want Voet. Sell. ^^sp. pt 3. p. 828.
, or aequality of reasons, that when we poyze and weigh things most
impartially, yet we are not able to come to a determination, but the mind is
still in suspense.

2. Doubts arise from some peculiar reasons. General reasons are not
sufficient to make a conscientious doubt; there must be intention of mind upon
some particular reasons that must be duly weighed, else we may be said to
doubt of what we scarce think of. They have not so good as a doubting
Conscience (and that is a bad one) whose doubts lurk in generals, who have
only some cloudy notions from without, or foggy mists from within, which they
take no due course to clear. Too many deal with their doubts, as Cripples with
their sores, which might easily be healed, but they make them a begging
argument; so the formal Hypocrites have always their doubts and fears (like
the L^pwings cry, far enough from her nest) about things general or of lesser
moment, which they might easily answer, and employ themselves in things more
profitable. Shall I tell you how? you cannot expect I should resolve the almost
infinite Qurt modit possit accidere conscientia dubin? Resp. Tot modis posse,
quot sunt genera questionum. Azorius Inst Mor. l 2. c. 18. p. 135.
particulars of doubtful cases, but I Will propose two remedies, which with the
blessing of God upon the conscientious improvement, will give you light for
smoke in things both Sacred, and Civil.

Cure.
1. About lesser matters this rule commonly holds good, viz. In dubio practico
eligenda est via tutior ex praecepto scilicet naturali. Est certa and revera
communis. Bress ibid. l. 4. c. 6. p. 371.. 45.
In things doubtful take the safest course. In things doubtful ordinarily one
way is clear, take that, e.g. I question whether such a recreation be lawful,
but I am sure it is not unlawful to let it alone; therefore to prevent the after
reckonings of Conscience, I will not meddle with it, but It Is generally taken
to be safest to take that way (in things controverted) wherein differing
parties agree, but that it is not always a good rule, See Archbishop Lawd's
Conference, p. 288. and scqq. In multis particularibus non tenetur home partem
tutiorem sequi: Sayrus clav. reg. l. 1. c. 13. p. 31. 9.
this rule will not reach all cases, therefore,

2. Bring the case to a point, wherein the stress of your doubt lies, but be
sure it be a case of Conscience, not of interest, or prejudice, but a case of
Conscience, such as you are unreservedly willing to be resolved in, that you
can in prayer (as it were) bring God a blanck to write what he pleases. And 2.
Pare off all those whibling demurs, and carnal reasonings which may puzzle,
but can never satisfy you. These things premised, 3. Write down your case as
nakedly as you can, with the grounds of your haesitation: in your writing, make
two Columns; on the one side write those reasons you judge cogent [for] on the
other side, the reasons you judge of moment [against] that whereof you doubt:
compare these together, and poyze them impartially, you will find that your
perplexed thoughts have another aspect when written, then when floating, and
that your own ink will ordinarily kill this tetter, plainly your selves will
be able to resolve your own doubts: but if not, this will ripen the boil where
it does not break and heal it, you will be ready for advice Vide Sayr. Clav.
Reg. Ibidem 6. and 7.
. In your consulting of others, do it with expressions equivalent to those of
the Jews to Jeremy (but with more sincere affections) Jer. 42. verse. 2. --
Pray for us unto the Lord thy God -- Verse. 3. That the Lord thy God may show us
the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do. -- Verse. 5. The
Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not Jer. 42.5, etc.
expressius est juramentum quo dicitur, Testis est deus, quam quo dicitur, Juro,
quia illud explicat rationem juramenti, etc. Estius in loc.
according to all things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us.
verse. 6. whether it be good or whether it be evil (i. e. seem it never so
disadvantageous or dangerous to us) we will they the voice of the Lord our God
to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of the
Lord our God. But be cause we have none can give infallible decision, therefore
refer your case to those that are likely to give a different resolution, and
thereby you will see how much is to be allowed to humane passion: request them
to write the grounds of their Determination, then compare these together,
especially the Scriptures and reasons. If you cannot out of these collect a
satisfying resolution (yet the case will be brought into a narrower compass;)
be unwearied therefore to take the same course again, apply your selves to the
same persons or others; [one] case thus thoroughly resolved will be singularly
useful for the scattering of all future doubts in all other cases: And though
this may prove a business of time, yet suspend your acting Contra legem
charitatis in deum fecit is qui cum dubium animum habeat, n^hilominus operatur
-- actus ad sui bonitatem, rectam cognitionem rei agendae requirit and
postulat. Azor. Instit. mor. l 2 c. 18. page 135.
till you are satisfied: though the duty in question be of greatest moment, yet
while you can approve your heart unto God, that it is neither love of sin nor
ease, it is neither slighting of Christ nor duty, but a restless
inquisitivenesse to know Gods mind in the case, your suspense (at the worst)
will be reckoned among your infirmities, and be compassionately overlookt. Can
there be any thing of greater moment, than to doubt of Christ's resurrection?
yet while Thomas John 20, 25.27.
doubted merely for want of evidence, Christ graciciously condiscends in a
non-such manner to give him satisfaction. To conclude this, whereto Phil 3.15,
16.
ye have already attained, walk by rule exactly, and if in any thing you be
doubtfully minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

V. The scrupulous Consc.
A scrupulous conscience is that which does determine a thing to be lawful --
Statu^t rem aliquam esse lic^tam, sed ideo in effectum minus deducenda^, quia
scrupulus aliquis, qui anxiam reddat conscient^am, ne f^^si an res ista sit
illicita K^nig de conse. p. 14.
, yet scarcely to be done, lest it should be unlawful. There Is some anxiety,
reluctance and fear in the determination. A scruple in the mind is as gravel
Scrupulus diminutivum a scrupus, lapillus est qui in calceo Hinc metaphorice
significat similem affl^ctionem animae seu conscientiae, 1 Samuel 25.31. non erit
-- in scrupulum cordis, etc. B^ess. de consc. l. 6. c. 1. p. 562.
in the shoe, it vexes the Conscience as that hurts the foot. A scruple is a
h^vering kind of fearfulness, arising from light Ames Ibidem. p. 16.
arguments that hinder or disturb the soul in performances of duties.

The difference between a doubting Conscience and a scrupulous Conscience is
this; A doubting Conscience assents to neither part of the question, a
scrupulous Conscience consents, but with some vexation.

Causes.
I shall name but two causes (forbearing to mention our ignorance and pride
which have a great influence upon all kind of Error, Doubts, and Scruples.

1. The first cause of scrupulousness is natural Scrupulus -- vel melancholia
vel (...) enatus -- Konig. ibid p. 15. -- item ex aegritudine and infirmitate
-- ex nonnullis causis quae cerebru^ exsiccant, ut sunt jejunium, v^giliae,
etc. S yr. cl. reg. l. ^. c 14. p. 42
, viz. a cold complexiion which is always timorous, those that are
phlegmatic, and melancholy are naturally fearful; and the reason is, that
through the defect of natural heat, the spirits about the heart are as it were
congealed, and the heart it self is straightened, whence by way of sympathy the
imagination has sad apprehensions of things, and such persons are pusi
lanimous and fearful.

2. The 2d and the chief cause is temptations. Satan if he cannot keep the
heart a secure prisoner, he will do his utmost to o^erwhelm it with fears and
jealousies, and he suits his temptations according to our temper Singulis
hominibus vitiis convenientibus insidiatu^, neque enim facile captivaret: Si
aut luxu ipsis praemia, aut avaris scorta proponeret: Si aut voraces de
abstine^tiae gloria, aut abstinentes d^ gulae imbecillitate pulsaret:-ergo in
tentationis ardore callide singulis infedia^s, ^icinos moribus laqu^os
absc^ndit. Gregor. mor. l 29. c. 14. p. 161. b.
. He does not tempt the riotous with rewards, nor the glutton to the glory of
abstinence, he does not tempt the coward to strive for victories, nor the
passionate to fearfulness. He does not tempt the melancholy to security, nor
the phlegmatic to great achievements. A due consideration therefore of our
natural temper, would mend our spiritual.

1. The first remedy I shall commend to you is this, viz. be not discouraged
with your scrupl^s, 'Pray' keep off from the other extreme, do not indulge
them, they naturally tend to much spiritual damage; they 1. are occasions of
sin. 2 They render the ways of God more strait, horrid, and impossible. 3 They
retard the work of Grace. 4. They hinder Cheerfulness in the service of God.
5. They quench the Spirit. 6 They unfit us for any D^ty. These may all serve
for arguments to strive against them: But yet, be not discouraged, for God is
pleased through over-powring grace to make good use of them. 1. To further
mortification. 2. To restrain us from worldly vanities. 3. To abate pride, and
promote humility. 4. To make us more watchful. 5. To make us strive to be more
spiritual. 6. To (little less then) force us to live more upon Christ: but you
must take the other rule if you would have these benefits.

2. Do what possibly you can to get Vide Bress. l. 6. c. 2-5.
rid of your scruples: but if you cannot get rid of them, act against them.
It Is not only lawful, but necessary to go against a scrupulous Conscience, or
you will never have neither grace nor peace. Should a Christian forbear
praying, or receiving the Sacrament every time his scrupulous Conscience tells
him, he had better wholly omit the duty then perform it in such a manner, you
would soon find to your sorrow the mischief of your scruples, but grace will
not leave him to his scrupulous humor. Be resolute therefore, and tell the
Devil, that as you do not perform your duty at his command, so neither will you
omit it at his bidding. Do by religious duties as they that are afraid to go by
water, or to go over a narrow bridge, they cease to fear when they have gone
often over: so by the performance of duties, your scrupulous fears will vanish.
Act against your scruples, 1. Positively, by disputing them down, and opposing
their reasons. 2. Negatively, by slighting of them, and not harkening to them.
In short, In all necessary known duties, always do what you can, when you
cannot do what you would.

VI. The trembling Conscience is that which is disquieted Dorotheus compares
our consciences to those pits that Abraham dug, and the Philistines stopped
them with earth, Genesis 26.50. Ob peccatum ut in aqua caenosa and turbida, nemo
potest in ea vultum suum contemplari. B. P. T. 4. p. 769.
, The trembling Consc.
and distressed with the (apprehended) hazard of the Soul's condition, that
does nothing but accuse, and condemn and affright the Soul. This, of any, needs
least enlargement, for every one that feels it, is rhetorical enough in
expressing it.

There Is a twin-cause of a trembling Conscience, viz. Sense of sin Psalm 51.3.
Psalm 40 12.
, Cause.
and fear of wrath Psalm 38.2. -- 8 Psalm. 88.3, etc.
. Never sin like mine! never heart like mine! never case like mine! Such are
the constant complaints of a troubled spirit. I meddle not now with that
horror of Conscience that follows prostigate Nemo a se, and extra se curret --
nullus sui asylum habet. Eus. Nieremberg. de a t. vol. l. 2. p. 158.
wretches, I shall speak something of it toward the close, nothing now.

For cure, Cu^e.
I can give but hints. Never keep the Devils counsel. Break through all
carnal reasonings to acquaint your selves with some faithful spiritual
Physician, or experienced Christian that may show you the methods of divine
grace, and what others 1 Cor. 10.13.
have successfully done that have been just in your condition. This premised

1. Notwithstanding (yea in the midst of) your saddest complaints, Bless God
for an awakened conscience, while there is hopes of cure. It is a good rule, Be
not too quick in administering comforts; but we cannot be too quick in provoking
Read 1 These. 5.18. with the verses next before and after.
to thankfulness. If you can at present be thankful that you are out of
hell, you shall e're long be thankful for assurance of heaven. This rule may
seem strange, but (upon experience) it is practice will discover it is excellency.

2. Observe, it is Gods usual method to bring the soul through these
perplexities to the most solid spiritual peace. Augustine -- Instabas tu in
occultis meis Domine severa misericordia, flagella ingeminans timoris and
pudoris, ne rursus cessarem -- ja^ pene faciebam and non faciebam: -- sentiebam
me ab iniquitatibus teneri, and jactabam voces miserabiles: quamdiu, quamdiu
cras and cras? quare non modo, quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae? --
Aug. Conf. l. 9. c. 11, 12.
excellently expresses his spiritual conflict, how God followed him with
severe mercy, till he made him instant for thorow-holinesse. God kept him
trembling, that he might leave dallying in soul-concernments. Believe it
Christian, God is now storing thee with experiences, which will be a useful
treasury throughout thy life. Therefore,

3. Do but hold on 1 Cor. 15 8. Nihil tibi utiliuif^re scias, qua^ ut cum
profunda quadam ac forti resignatione teipsum deo humiliter resignes in
omnibus, quae tibi evenerint. Sive dulcia ea fuerint, sive amara, sive
delectent, sive crucient, ita ut dicere possis: O deus adorande etiamsi in hac
vi^a istaque pressura ad extremum usque judicij diem permanendum mihi foret, te
tamen haudquaquam deserere vellem, sed constanter perpetuoque tibi adhaererem,
etc. Thauler. in histor. vit. p. 16.
in the vigorous use of all means of Grace, and reckon Gods keeping thee from
turning thy back upon his ways, when thou have no comfort in them, the secret
supports he gives, which thou take no notice of, count these for evidences
that the Spirit is at work in thy heart, and for pledges, that he will perfect
his own work. e g. Count thy growing importunity in prayer (or sorrowful
complaint for the want of it) a gracious answer of that prayer, which thou
think is disregarded. Count thy watching for a word to direct and support
thee, a notable efficacy of that word, which thou countest does thee no good.
Count thy restless dissatisfaction with every thing on this side God, to be a
love-token from God, to assure thee that God will be thy satisfying portion,
and in the interim ask those well-grown christians that are now in the
spiritually-sensible embraces of divine love, whether they are not glad that
God formerly took that course with them, which he now takes with thee, to bring
them to these joys. Be encouraged therefore, though thou have a sorrowful
Psalm. 126.5, 6.
seed-time, thou shall have a joyful harvest.

Thus having spoken of those kinds of Conscience that are either evil or
troublesome, and how to cure them. I now come to those desirable kinds of
Conscience, that next to Deity and heavenly Glory admit no hyperbole in their
commendation, viz. the good honest Conscience, and the good peaceable
Conscience, and how to obtain them.

VII. That Conscience is good in respect of its integrity, The good honest
Consc.
which gives a right judgment of every thing according to the word of God. I
grant that the law of Nature binds Romans 2.14.
, Ecclesiastical laws bind Mat. 23.2, 3.
, and Political laws bind Romans 13.5.
, but the Word of God is the principal rule Norma principalissima, etc. Konig.
p. 3, 4.
, which precisely binds the conscience in regard of it is Author James 4.12.
; There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. Fear Mat. 10.28.
not them which kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

VIII. That conscience is a good peaceable conscience that excuses 1 Cor. 4.4.
, The good quiet Conscience.
, absolveth Heb. 10.2.
, and comfort 2 Cor. 1.12.
as it ought, that conscience that is pacified Heb. 9.14.
by the blood of Christ, that does as Moulin Moulin, the comfort of a
Communica^t. p. 37.
relates of a dying man, to whom some say the Devil appeared, and showed him a
parchment, that was very long, wherein was written on every side the sins of
the poor sick man, which were many in number: and that there were also written
the idle words he had spoken, which made up three quarters of the words that he
had spoken in his life -- and his actions digested according to the
Commandments: Whereupon Satan said, See thou? behold thy virtues, see here
what thine examination shall be: whereunto the poor sinner answered, It is true
Satan; but thou have not set down all; for thou should have added, and set
down here below, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins;
and this also should not have been forgotten, That whosoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have everlasting life. But how shall we get such
consciences? Christians, be but persuaded to practice these (or such)
directions, and your Consciences will certainly be right, and seasonably be
comfortable

1. Take heed of every sin 2 Cor. 8.21.
, count no sin small Matthew. 5.21, 22.27, 28.
. Scrue up your obedience to every Matthew. 22.37 38.
command to the highest. Ferret out every sin to the most secret Romans 7.7.
corruption. When you have set your watch against the first risings of sin,
beware of the borders of sin, shun the very 1 These. 5.22.
appearance of evil. Venture not upon occasions Prove. 4.15, 27. Facile agitur
quod libenter auditur. Bern. de inter. dom. pa. 1082.
or temptations to sin, those that dare venture upon occasions as children upon
the ice Prove. 7.8. Numb. 25.2.
, shall find there is always danger, never any good. Morality it self will
teach (...) etc. Plutarch (...). p. 4^7.
you this lesson to keep clear of evil, if ever you would either be good, or
enjoy it, but seeing as on the one hand, there cannot be truth of grace, and
truce with sin, so on the other hand, while grace is imperfect, sin will have
(and make us feel it has) a Being. There Is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not Eccles. 7.20.
, therefore,

II. Forthwith set upon the healing duty of repentance, and upon every slip
into sin renew it Peccator omnium notarum cum sim, nec ulli rei nisi
paenitentiae natus Tertul. de poenit. p. 121. c. 12.
, speedily renew it. O that I could snatch you out of your state of
impenitency, and persuade you to daily actual repentance. To those that are
resolved to delay their repentance, I have sometimes given counsel suitable to
such resolutions, viz. the next sickness that seizes upon you, chide it away,
tell your disease you cannot awhile to be sick, say to it as Paul to Foelix Acts
^4.25.
, Go thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season I will call for
thee. If death summon thee, tell it you will not obey its summons, you have
other business to do than to dye, you have estates unsettled, and children
unprovided for, and you would repent too before you die, but you cannot yet
awhile. If this will not serve but die you must, charge your souls before they
go out of your bodies, not to come near the prison of impenitent persons,
charge your friends to lock up your bodies so safe, or bury them so deep, that
all the Angels in Heaven may not be able to dragg them to judgment. But alas
my Brethren! do you not think this wild counsel? and well you may. Yet unless
you could do something aequivalent to what this counsel amounts to, you are mad
to defer your repentance. What! cannot I keep pain from my body, nor the use of
reason in my Soul one minute, and shall I continue in my impenitency, that will
damn me the very moment of my death? I beseech you therefore for your own Souls
sake, that you may not be guilty of the worst self-murder, i. e. soul-murder,
speedily set upon repentance. And those of you that have repented, let your
repentance daily supplant sin, by taking it by the heel certainly to lame it,
though you can not take it by the head utterly to kill it. Though we cannot be
innocent (...). Nazienz. T. 1. orat. 15. p. 225. 236.
, let us be poenitent, and be very careful never to return Confessio peccati
professio est desinendi, etc. Hilar. in Psalm. 137 p. 595.
to sins repented of. That you may be serious in both these.

III. Compose thy self to live as under Gods eye, live as in the (more then)
sensible presence of the Jealous God. Remember, all things are naked and bare
before him, you cannot deceive him, for he is infinite wisdom; you cannot fly
from him for he is every where; you cannot bribe him, for he is righteousness
it self. Keep therefore fresh apprehensions of God in your thoughts; speak as
knowing God hears you; walk as knowing Talem te prepa a, ut tecum adsit Deus:
sit in ore: sit in cord: semper tecum eat: tecu^ redeat: nec recedat a te.
Nu^quam ^lle te d mittet, nisi p ior illum dimiseris, ubicunque fueris, nunquam
solus esse poteris, si Deus tecum erit. Bern. de int. dom p. 1065. c. 5. and
1091. c 66.
God is nearer to you, then you are to your selves. The 2 Chronicles. 15 1
Lord is with you while you are with him, i. e. you shall enjoy his favorable
presence, while you live in his awful presence. There Is one Psalm which 'twere
well if Christians would do by it, as Pythagoras -- Refert Galenus re^itasse se
sub initium et finem cujusque ^^ei. El^chma^^us Epil. Edit. p. 15
by his golden precepts, every morning and evening repeat it, it is David's
Molle^. in loc.
appeal of a good Conscience unto God against the malicious, suspicions, and
calumnies of men. [Do you but thus praesentiate God unto your selves, and God
will attest your integrity] Psalm 139. v. 1. O Lord thou have searched me and
known me, q. d. O Lord thou art the heart-searching God, who perfectly knows
all the thoughts, counsels, studies, endeavors and actions of all men, and
therefore mine; verse. 2 Thou know my down-sitting and mine up-rising, thou
understandest my thought afar off, q d. thou know my rest and motion, and my
plodding thoughts of both Estius. in loc.
, v. 3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all
my ways, q. d. thou fannest and winnowest me, i. e. thou discussest and triest
me to the utmost Ainsw. in loc.
, v. 4. For there is not a word in my tongue: but lo, O Lord, thou know it
altogether q. d. I cannot speak a word, though never so secret, obscure, or
subtle, but thou know, what, and why, and with what mind 'twas uttered
T^^inus in l^c
, v. 5. Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me, q.
d. Thou keep me within the compass of thy knowledge, like a man that will
not let his servant go out of his sight. I cannot break away from thee, v. 6.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is high I cannot attain unto it, q.
d. The knowledge of thy great and glorious Majesty and Infiniteness, is
utterly past all humane comprehension, v. 7. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? or whither shall I slay from thy presence? q d. Whither can I flee from
thee, whose Essence, Presence, and Power is every where, v 8. If I ascend up
into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there,
q. d. There Is no height above thee, there is no depth below Nulla altitudo te
altior: null u^ profundum te profundius. Hieron. in loc.
thee, v. 9. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the Sea, q. d. If I had wings to fly as swift as the morning light
Aurora solis p^aenuncia, momento totum hemisphaerium pervadit. Menoch. in loc.
, from the east to the west, that I could in a moment get to the furthest parts
of the world, v. 10. Even there shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand
shall hold me, q.d. Thence shall thy hand lead me back, and hold me fast like a
fugitive Deducat -- tenebit ut solent teneri fugitivi. Sa.
, v. 11. If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me, q d. Though darkness hinders man's sight, it does not thine. In
a word, look which way you will, there is no hiding place from God. For his eyes
are upon the ways of man, and be sees all his goings, there Job 34.21, 22.
is no darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. Therefore Christians, do nothing but what you are willing God
should take notice of, and judge in your selves whether this be not the way to
have a good and quiet Conscience?

IV. Be serious, and frequent in the examination of your heart and life. This
is so necessary to the getting, and keeping of a right and peaceable
Conscience, that it is impossible to have either without it. There are some
duties and graces, like those parts of the body, that may supply the defect of
other parts; or like some drugs in Physic, which when they cannot be had, some
of the like nature may serve: but this is like those, the defect whereof
nothing else can supply. The Heathens have grop't out this rule by the Gloworm
light of nature. Pythagoras gives it as a precept (...) Pytha. aur praec. n.
42. p 9.
, and Seneca backs it by examples -- Somnus quam tranquillus, altus ac liber,
cum aut laudatus est animus, aut admoritus, and speculator sui censorque
s^cretus cognoscit de moribus suis? ut^r hac potestate, and quotidie apud me
causam dico. Cum sublatum e conspectu lumen est, and conticuit uxor moris jam
mei conscia, totum diem m^cum serutor, facta ac dicta mea remetior, nihil mihi
ipse abscondo, nihil transeo: quare enim quicquaem ex erroribus meis timeam,
cum possim dicere: vide ne istud amplius facias, nunc tibi ignosco, etc. Senec.
deira. l. 3. c. 36 p. 599.
, of Sextius, who every night before he composed himself, to sleep, asked
himself what evil have thou this day healed? what vice have thou resisted?
wherein art thou better? O how sweet is that sleep which follows such a
recognition? of himself, who made every night a scrutiny into the words and
deeds of the whole day, he would neither pass by, nor hide any thing from
himself, he so ripped up his faults, that he would not pardon them to himself,
without a self-charge not to repeat them. Have you gone thus far? certainly, my
Brethren, not to outstrip them is inexcusable. It is a shame Pemble. p. 514.
to see the carelessness of most, that are better acquainted with any thing
then themselves; there are many that know the Histories of a thousand years
past, and yet cannot tell you the particulars of their own lives; Men well
acquainted with the mysteries of Arts and Nature, but utterly ignorant of the
secrets of their own Souls. How few are there amongst us, that can say with
David Psalm. 119.59.
, I have thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies? Nay, we
have a thousand matters to think on all the day long, the night too, the week,
the year: but who questions with his own heart what am I? what do I? how live
I? is the course I follow good and lawful? is that which I omit my duty, or
not? Is God my friend? Am I his? what hope have I of Heaven? Say I die to
morrow, to day, this very hour, where is my assurance I shall be saved? what
Apology can I make against the accusations of Satan and my Conscience? will
Christ be mine Advocate, when I shall stand in judgment? Have I grace, or have
I none? do I grow in grace, or do I decay? Am I better this year then I was the
last? what sins have I conquered now, that held me in combat then? what graces
have I obtained now, that I had not then? Christians do you do thus? If you do;
that is not enough, unless you do it frequently, daily. Every Evening ere you
sleep, review (...), etc. Basil. T. 2. p. 514.
your c^rriage in the day, what you have done, or spoke, or thought, that is
but ^o much as indecent. Whether your hearts have been intent upon Religion,
and indifferent to the world. Briefly, have special care of two portions
Crocius. Synt p. 1212. ex aliis.
, of your time, viz. Morning and Evening, the morning to fore-think what ought
to be done, and the evening to examine, whether you have done what you ought.

V. Be much in Prayer Psalm. 1^9.4.
, in all manner of Ephesians 6.18.
prayer, but especially in secret Matthew. 6.6.
prayer. Do not nonsuit your selves by the love of sin, and you shall
certainly be heard when you pray for Grace Heb. 4.16.
; believe it Christian, it is not thine inevitable 2 Cor. 12.10.
weakness, nor thy sensible dullness Mar. 14.38.40.
, nor thy lamented roavings Psalm 86.11.
, nor thy opposed distractions Genesis 15.11.
, nor thy mistaken unbelief 1 John 5.13.
; it is not any, nor all these can shut out thy prayer. If thou do not
regard Psalm. 66.^8.
iniquity in thy heart, therefore be encouraged, '^is the voice of your beloved
that says John 16.23, 24.
, Verily, verily I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing (to what you might
ask) in my name: Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full. But this
and the two next rules will be spoken to in the following Cases, I shall
therefore but little more then name them.

VI. Let every action have reference unto your whole life, and not unto a part
only Episcop Inst. theol. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3.
; propose some end to your selves in every thing Si aliquem excuntem domo
interrogaveris: quo tu, quid cogitas? respondebit tibi: non mehercule scio, sed
aliquos videbo, aliquid agam -- cursus est, qualis formicis per arbusta
repentibus: quae in summum cacumen, deinde in imum inanes aguntur -- domum cum
super vacua redeuntes lassitudine, iurant nescisse se psos, qua^e exierint.
Seneca de Tranquil. c. 12. p. 685.
, and let all your lesser and subordinate ends be plainly reducible unto the
great end of your living. The emphasis of the Apostles Exhortation is very
great 1 Timothy 4.7. (...) est proprie exerceri in gymnade. Grot. in loc.
, Exercise thy self unto godliness, q. d. Be as diligent in Religion, as thou
would have thy children that go to School to be in learning. Or thus, let thy
whole life be a preparation for heaven, like the wrestlers or combatants
preparation for victory. Or thus; strip thy self of all encumbrances that thou
may attend unto piety. Pleasures may tickle thee for a while, but they have
an heart-aking farewell. Thou may call thy riches goods, but within a few
days what good will they do thee? Men may flatter thee for thy Greatness, but
with God thy account will be the greater. Therefore always mind that, which
will always be advantage.

VII. Live more upon Christ then upon inherent grace. Do not venture upon sin
because Christ has purchased a pardon, that s a most horrible and impious
abuse of Christ: For this very reason there was no sacrifice under the Law for
any wilful wickedness, lest people might think they knew the price of sin,
as those do that truck with Popish indulgences and pardons. But that none may
be overwhelmed with the over-sense of their unworthiness, be it known to you,
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous 1 John 2.1.
, and our salvation is better, safer, more for Gods glory, and our comfort, in
his hand then in ours.

VIII. Be every way nothing in your own eyes Descendendo coelum ascenditur.
Drexel. de praed.
; it is the humble soul that thrives exceedingly, and alas what have we to be
proud Vnde superbit homo cujus co^ceptio culpa, nasci poena, labor vita,
necesse mori, quando vel quomodo, vel ubi, nescire? Bernard. de inter. dom. c.
53. Mallem non esse quam talis esse. Ibid. c. 33. Accuso me non excuso, nec
idcirco justus sum quoniamsi alter ita mea accusaret, sicut ego meipsum accuso,
patienter sustinere non possem. Ibid c. 34, etc. p. 1078.
of? Look we either at our constitution, or conversation; our conception
sinful, our birth poenal, our life toylsome, and our death we know not what;
but all this is nothing to the state of our soul. A Stoic could give this
rule, that if any one Epictetus c. 48. p. 276. Simp. com.
tell you of another speaking evil of thee, do not excuse thy self, but say,
he did not know me, or else he would have spoken worse. A Convert, when he once
comes to be sensible of sin, sees more cause to be weary of his life, then
proud of his graces. To rise and fall, confess sin and commit it; to see
others outrun us, that set out after us; to recover that time for communion
with God, which we trifle away in unobserved impertinencies; Surely for such
persons to be low and vile in their own eyes, deserves not to be called
humility, though the contrary be worse then devilish pride. Be persuaded
therefore to believe your selves of your selves in the use of Agurs (some
suppose Solomon's) words of himself, Pro. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish then
any man, etc. q. d. I do not make use of my reason, verse. 3. I have not the
knowledge of the holy. q. d. my knowledge of holy mysteries is very little; in
comparison of my ignorance, nothing. Be as willing that others should speak ill
of you, as you are to speak ill of your selves: and be as unwilling that others
should commend Multos vidisse qui potuerint perferre multa incommoda in corpore
and fortunis, qui autem potuerit contemnere lauds suas neminem. Luther. T. 4.
p. 149. com. in Gal. ex al.
you, as you are to commend your selves,

IX. Entertain good thoughts of God Psalm. 73.1.
what ever he does with you, what ever he requires of you, what ever he lays
upon you (...), etc. Epict. c. 38. Simpl. p. 212.
. We never arrive to any considerable holiness, or peace, till we lose Hoc est
totaelem dei voluntate conformitatem and consonantiam habere nimirum, nos totos
ei offerendo, ut quodcunque quandocunque quomodocumque ipse voluerit, de nobis
faciat ac statuat; idque fine ulla exceptione, and contradictione, and nihil
prorsus nobis reservando. Rodericius. exerc. perfec. pt. 1. tr. 8. c. 14. p.
355.
our selves in Deity, till our understandings be filled with admiration, till
our wills be in a sober sense, divine: till our affections be, in a spiritual
sense, transported. When we can at once unriddle Gods methods of Grace, and
make good constructions of Gods methods of Providence, making a spiritual
improvement of both, then we are not far from being universally and exactly
conscientious, there is yet one thing wanting, and that is employed in this, but
it must be eminently expressed.

X. Do all you do out of love to God. Spiritual l^ve-sickness is the souls
healthfullest constitution. When love to God is both Cause, Means, Motive and
End of all our activity in the business of Religion, then the soul is upon the
wing toward its rest. Then Ita sola bonitas dei movet ad amorem charitatis
erga proximum, sola ratio sanitatis movet ad utendum porione medica -- omnia
quae voluntati objiciuntur sint aut finis aut media, haec ob sclum finem appeti
-- media qua media, dicunt tantum relationem ad finem, non autem fundamentum
ipsius, tum quia contraria est puritati amoris, quo deo inhaerere debemus. Ita
enim, ut passim apud sol diores vitae spiritualis magistros videre est, amare
deb^mus deum, ut cum illo, etia^ sub illo nihil aliud amemus; sed omnia
duntaxat in illo: quia alias non amamus illu^ ex toto cord, sed aliud quidpiam
ab illo occupat cor nostrum Gibieuf. de lib. dei and creat. l. 1. c. 11 p. 66.
is our love to other things regular, when the alone goodness of God moves us
to love them; as the alone respect to health makes me use physic, the means
has no proper goodness distinct from the goodness of the end; those means
which were profitable, though they remain unchanged in themselves, yet they
become unprofitable by the alone change of the end, e. g. Health being
recovered, physic is unprofitable, which while we were infirm was profitable;
so we are not to love any means without relation to the end, because it is
contrary to the purity of that love which we owe to God; for we ought so to
love God, that with him, or under him we love nothing else, but all things only
in him, because otherwise we do not love him with our whole heart. e. g. In
men's loving their wives, and wives their husbands; in Parents loving their
children, and children their Parents, it is a rare pitch to love all these in
God; that is, to advance our love to God by them, and so far as any of them
draw off our love to God, to say to them as Christ to Peter, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me. Love is extended to good; the more good
therefore any thing is, the more it is to be beloved: But thou O Lord my God
(says Bradwardine Tu autem D^mine deus meus es omnis boni bonum, super omnia
bona bonus, bonum infinitissime infinitum -- quomodo tantum plus amabo te, quam
tu amas me, quantum tu es melior me? debeo amare te finaliter propter te, and
omnia alia propter te, tu autem non amas me propter me, nec caetera propter me
-- debeo etiam amare te infinite quodammodo intersive supra quod cumque bonum
finitum, tu autem non sic amas me. Debeo quoque amare te infinite quodammodo
extensive, volendo scil. potius quotcumque and quantacunque bona al^a, etiam
and meipsum non esse quam te, vel quam te semel offendere, tu vero non sic amas
me, quia non debeo sic amari, etc. Bradwardin. de causa dei. l 2. c. 34. p.
627. and seqq.
) art the Good of every good, good above all things that are good, a good most
infinitely infinite: how much therefore should I rationally love thee? should
not my love be proportionably infinite? I would I could so love thee: but how
shall I that am so very little and finite love thee infinitely! And yet without
so loving thee, how will there be kept any due proportion in loving thee, who
do infinitely exceed all other lovely things? I ought to love thee infinitely
as to the manner, though I cannot as to the act of my love, i. e. I ought to
love thee finally for thy self, or else I may love thee in some sort
infinitely, as to the Act, both intensively and extensively; in some sort
intensively, i. e. more intensely, more firmly, more strongly then any finite
good, because I love them but for thee. In some sort extensively, by comparing
all things, how many, or how great soever with thee, and loving thee before,
and above all, that I had rather all things in the world, and my self too to
have no being, then once to offend thee. But Lord thou love thy friends in an
unspeakable manner more then they can love thee. O therefore thou great Lord,
thou great Good, that fillest heaven and earth, why do thou not fill my very
little soul? O my soul that art so little, so miserable, why do thou not open
all thy little doors? why do thou not extend thy utmost capacity, that thou
may be wholly possessed, wholly satiated, wholly ravished with the sweetness
of so great love: specially, seeing thou art so very little, yet nothing less
will satisfy thee. O therefore my most loving God, I beseech thee tell me what
may most effectually draw out my love to thee, considering what prevention of
love, what privative, positive good things I receive from thee, infinite in
greatness, infinite in multitude: It is a wonder that any one can think of
these things and not be wholly swallowed up of love, wholly turned into love:
But I see Lord, it is easier to speak these things, and to write them down, than
to do them. Thou therefore most good and most powerful Lord to whom nothing is
difficult, give I beseech thee that I may more easily do these things in my
heart, then utter them with my mouth: Open, I beseech thee, thy most bountiful
hand, and enable me, that nothing may be more easy, nothing more sweet,
nothing more delightful, then most effectually, and most affectionately to
fulfill that which I speak about loving of thee. Lord give me leave a little to
presume above my hope, and to plead with thee about thy magnificent goodness:
humane friendship will not give the repulse to a poor, wanting, begging friend,
O therefore most liberal Lord help me that I may love thee. Christians it is
worth while to make it your business to climb up to this love-extasie. This you
will find to be a completing rule, an effectual means, and a singular exercise
of exact and conscientious walking.

I shall briefly name, (I intended largely to have pressed) two arguments or
motives to persuade the use of these directions.

1. You cannot possibly get rid of your Conscience Nec vi extinguitur nec
fraud, adeo alte inhaeret animo. Tutissimus licet homo sit, tamen securus non
est, ipsas tenebras nequitia, imo tuta omnia timet. multos fortuna liberat
paena, metu neminem. Exemplo sunt potentissimi Imperatores, and qui a^cani
licentiam nacti, sine arbitris, sine testibus, etc. Episcop. Instit. theol. P.
1. c. 3. p. 10, 11. Ipsa conscientia propriis stimulis agitatur atque
compungitur, and sui ipsa efficitur accusatrix and testis. Origin. (...). l. 2.
c. 11. p. 707.
, therefore be persuaded to get a good one, there is nothing more common then
for wicked men to do what they can to extinguish Conscience, they flatter it
with carnal reasoning; they b^ibe it with mock devotions, they wound it with
heinous provocations, they scar it with customary wickedness, they trample it
under foot by sinning in despite of it; they run away from it, and will not
endure to hear it, by diversions; and yet they can sooner turn their souls out
of their bodies, then Conscience out of their Souls: yea amongst all these
indignities, it is as fresh, and active, as if it were not thus abused, it does
but watch it is opportunity, when it will be heard, when 'twill make that which
was done perhaps 40 years ago, as if it had been but yesterday. What ails the
great Emperors of the world Insigne visum est earum Caesaris literaru^
initium; nam his verbis exorsus est. Quid scribam vobis P. C. aut quomodo
scribam, aut quid omnino non scriba^ hoc tempore. Dii me deaeque pejus perdant
quam perire quotidie sentio, si s^io. Adeo facinora atque flagitia sua ipsi
quoque in supplicium verterant. -- Tiberium non fortuna, non solitudines
protegebant. Tacitus Annal. l. 6. c. 6. page 146.
, that cause their terror in the land of the living, what ayls them to tremble
with inward contrition? is it a vain fear? why then do they not shake it off?
is it the fear of men? No, they are above humane punishments: Is it the fear of
shame? no, the sin perhaps was secret, at least man knows not the inward
consternation of their spirits. What Is the matter? O they are haunted by the
fury of their own Consciences. Would wicked men but blab the gripes they
sometimes feel, even then when they outface a Ministerial or friendly
reproof, there would need no more to be said to evidence, that a Conscience you
will have, which will first or last do its office.

2. Your own Conscience will be your best friend or your greatest enemy (of any
creature) unto eternity. There Is Vide Bern. de inter dom. c. 22. p. 1070.
no greater riches, no greater pleasure, no greater safety then a good
Conscience. Let the pressures of the body, the hurry of the world, the
affrightments of Satan be never so great, they cannot reach the Conscience. A
good Conscience singularly chears the dying body, joyfully accompanies unto God
the departed Soul^ triumphingly presents both Soul and Body unto the desired
Tribunal. There Is no more profitable means, nor surer testimony, nor eminent
Conveyor of eternal happiness then a good Conscience. And on the contrary,
there is no greater torment then of an evil Conscience: though its gentler
checks may be disregarded, its louder clamours will make you tremble. O Sirs,
what will you do, when Conscience shall upbraid you with your abuse of mercies,
incorrigiblenesse under judgments, contempt of Christ, and hatred of holiness?
you cannot now endure to hear what Conscience has to say, how will you endure
it unto eternity? if one that killed his own Father Parricidium vindicaturi
Pelusii pro flagitij dignitate, nullu^ hactenus torturae ingenium per duxerunt;
non culeum, non vivicomburium: saevius quid cogitarunt, piae, scilicet, matris
naturae ferula^, conscientiam, ad summae attrocitatis exemplum docti novam
saevitiam didicerunt, parricidam sancientes triduo cogi spectare occisi
cadaver, ut sic puniretur enormissimo omnium supplicio, admonitione facinoris.
Jo: E^s. Nie^^^berg de art vol. l. 2. page 156.
, could not in some Egytians account be more cruelly punished, then by being
compelled to behold the murdered body for three days, what a torment will it
be to be forced to behold every sin, with every aggravation unto eternity? here
in bodily sickness there is some intervalls to revive the Spirits; but hereafter
there will not be a moments intermission of unexpressible horror unto
eternity. The Conscience shall roar under infinite wrath, and the sinner shall
be kept from annihilation under it by infinite power.

1 Cor. 15.34.
Thus I have in a weak manner performed my promise in speaking to several
kinds of Consciences, with remedies and rules; which laid together, will I
think amount to sufficient instructions, How we may be universally and exactly
conscientious? viz. 1. Get your Consciences awakened from their natural
Lethargy 1. 2. Preserve them tender from acquired searednesse Heb. 3.13.
. 3. Rectify their errors as you would get cure of blindness Ephesians. 4.18.
. 4. Resolve their doubts as you would a claim to your lands Romans 14.5.
. 5. Break from your scruples as from thieves on the road Isa. 35.3, 4.
. 6. Lay your head in Christ's bosom to cure your trembling Isa. 40.11.
. And then for the (7.) integrity, and (8.) quiet of your Consciences. Observe
the rules proposed, as punctually as you would Physicians bills in a tedious
sickness. 1. Avoid sinning as you would a train of gunpowder Job 18.15.
. 2. Be as quick in your repentance as in the cure of a Pleurisy Zeph. 2.2.
. 3. Live under the apprehended presence of the jealous God Ezekiel. 11.5.
. 4. Examine you hearts, as Princes sift out treason Lam. 3.40.
. 5. Pray for suitable grace, as starving persons cry for food Psa. 143.7, 8
. 6. Let every action be as an arrow shot at a mark 1 Cor. 10.31
. 7. Think of God as of a wise Physician Job 40.2.
. 8. Be as vile in your own esteem as you are in the eyes of a captious enemy
Ephesians. 3.8.
. 9. Live upon Christ, as the Child in the womb lives upon the Mother Gal. 2.20.
. 10. Love God (as near as possibly you can) as God loves you Psalm 18.1, 2
.

But if these rules, though thus contracted, be too many, and too long to be
always remembered, that you may not be overcharged with that which should
never be forgotten: I shall commend to you some (Spiritually) chymicall
extractions, and (if I might so express it) Spirits of directions, that may be
to your Souls in your pilgrimage toward Heaven, as your Ship-provisions in a
Sea-voyage, generally sufficient, when others cannot be had. Plainly practice
these memorialls of direction in all your conscientious walking.

I. Consult duty not events. There Is nothing in the world for us to do, but to
mind our duty. Curious speculations (...) Clem Alexandr. Strom. lib. 6. p. 664.
that tend not to holiness, may be reckoned among your superfluities: but
mis-giving predictions of what may or will befall you in the discharge of your
duty, may be reckoned among your grosser iniquities: and to venture upon sin to
avoid danger, is to sink the Ship for fear of Pirates, and must be reckoned
amongst your greatest follies, your worst of sins. Is not their reason
(questionless their Conscience is) dangerously distempered, that practically
argue, this way of duty may probably procure man's displeasure, and therefore to
prevent that, I Will take the course which will certainly procure Gods
displeasure. Besides by-ways will not lead you to the place you aim at (...)
p. 471. 466.
, but on the contrary, keep your Consciences from being violated, and you
cannot be miserable. O how calm and quiet, as well as holy and heavenly would
our lives be, had we learnt but this single Lesson; to be careful for nothing
but to know, and do our duty, and to leave all effects, consequents and events
to God. The truth is, it is a daring boldness for silly dust to prescribe to
infinite wisdom, and to let go our work, to meddle with Gods: he has managed
the concernments of the world, and of every individual person in it, without
giving occasion to any one to complain, for above this five thousand years, and
does he now need your counsel? Therefore let it be your only business to
mind duty. Aye, but how shall I know my duty? take a second memorial.

II. What advice you would give to another, take your selves (...). Epictet. c
33. Simp. p. 158.
. The worst of men are apt enough to lay such burdens on other men's Mat. 3.4.
shoulders, which if they would take them upon their own, they would be rare
Christians. e. g. The very outcry of those that revile Godliness, who deal by
the miscarriages of Professors, as the Levite by his Concubine, quarter them
and divulge them; even they expect that those which make a strict profession of
Religion, should be beyond exception blameless; and they [even they] scorn
those that make any defection from their professed strictness. And on the
other side, those that are holy they expect, that even graceless persons,
should bear reproof, receive instruction, and change the course of their lives.
In middle cases then between these extremes, what exactness will serious
Christians require, where the byas of their own corruptions does not misguide
them? David was twice 2 Sa^. 12.5, 6, 7 2 Samuel 14.4, 1^.
surprised to pass sentence against himself by remote parables, (wherein he
mistrusted not himself to be concerned) wherein this rule's too short, add a
third.

III. Do nothing on which you cannot pray for a blessing. Where prayer does not
lead, repentance must follow; and it is a desperate adventure to sin upon hopes
of repentance. Every action (and cessation too) of a Christian that is good, and
not to be refused, is sanctified by the word and 1 Timothy 4.5, 6.
prayer. It becomes not a Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
Christian to do any thing so trivi^l (...). Athanas. qu. ad Antioch. p. 361.
q. 77.
, that he cannot pray over it, and if he would but bestow a serious ejaculatory
prayer upon every occurrent action, he would find, that such a prayer would cut
off all things sinful, demurr all things doubtful, and encourage all things
lawful. Therefore do nothing but what you can preface with prayer. But these
rules are all defective, I Will therefore close with an Example that is infinitely
above defects.

IV. Think, and speak, and do what you are persuaded Christ himself would do
in your case, were he upon the earth. The heathen they proposed unto themselves
the best examples they (...) Epictet. c. 51. Simpl. p. 282.
had, and therefore let us follow the best of Mica 4.5.
ours There are many rare examples in Heb. 13 7.
Scripture; but we may say of them, as it is said of most of David's Worthies,
whose highest commendation was with this diminution 2 Samuel 23 19, 23.
, they attained not unto the first three. I propose therefore neither great nor
small, but the King of Saints Rev. 15 3.
: it becomes a Christian rather to be an Example 1 Pet. 2 12.15. 1 These. 1.7.
, then to follow one: But by imitating of Christ, you will come as near as it is
possible to the first three, for your fellowship shall be with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ 1 John 1.3.
through the spirit of holiness, who alone can teach you what it is to abide in
1 John 2.27.
Christ, who was, and is, and ever will be our absolute copy Heb. 13.8.
O Christians! how did Christ pray, and redeem time for prayer Mar. 1.35. and
6.16 Lu. 6.12. John 11.42.
? How did Christ preach, out of whose mouth proceeded no other but gracious
words Luke 4.22.
, that his enemies could not but admire him John 7.46.
? at what rate did Christ value the world, who did and taught to renounce it
Mar. 10.21-27.
? what time did Christ spend in impertinent discourse, who made their hearts
burn within them, whom he occasionally fell in company with Lu. 24.17 -- 32.
? How did Christ go up and down doing Acts 10.38.
good to man, and always those things that were pleasing to John 8.29.
God? Beloved, I commend to you these four memorials, to be as so many scarlet
Josh. 2.18 21
threads upon every finger of the right hand one; that you may never put forth
your hand to action, but these memorials may be in your eye. 1. Mind Acts 9.6.
duty. 2. What Is another duty in your case, is Romans 2.21.
yours. 3. What you cannot say, the Blessing of the Lord be upon it, do not
meddle Psalm. 129.8.
with it. But above all, as soon forget your Christian name (the name of a
Christian) as forget to eye Christ Psalm. 123.2.
, and what ever entertainment you meet with from the profane world John 15.18,
etc.
, remember your Exemplar 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.
, and follow his steps: who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth,
who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judge^h righteously.

What must, and can Persons do Toward their own CONVERSION?
Ezekiel. 18.32. Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.


THe words are part of that serious Exhortation begun in the 30. ver. Repent
and turn your selves from all your transgressions: continued in the 31. ver.
Cast away all your transgressions, and make you a new heart and a new spirit,
and concluded in this verse, Wherefore turn your selves, etc.

In the former part of the verse, the Lord says, I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, I had rather men should come to the knowledge of the
truth and be saved, then die in their sins and perish through their
impenitency, Wherefore, or therefore turn your selves.

The Exhortation in these words, is backed with a reason of great, yea the
greatest strength, viz. Life, turn and live, that is, ye shall live comfortably
here, and happily for ever hereafter.

There be four Propositions deducible from these words: 1. That man is turned
from God. 2. That it is man's duty to turn unto God again. 3. That the Lords
willingness that men should rather live then die, should be a strong Argument
to move them to turn. 4. That those who do turn shall live.


I shall wave all those great Truths and come to that which the words seem to
import, viz. A power in man to turn himself. It is a good rule which Glassius
in his Philologie gives us, In Philol. l, 3. p. 290.
That active Verbs are given to those things which do not properly and by
immediate influxe, do that which they signify, Sed certa tantum ratione
concurrunt. God, said to Moses, Lift up thy rod stretch out thy hand over the
sea and divide it, Exodus 14.16. Moses had not power to divide the sea; but,
because there was a certain concurrence of Moses using the rod according to
divine direction, therefore it is attributed unto Moses, whereas it was the
work of God alone, for verse. 21. its said, The Lord caused the sea to go back.
So in the work of Conversion, because man does something about it, therefore he
is said to turn himself although the action be peculiar to the Lord, Jer. 31.18.
Ephraim says, Turn thou me and I shall be turned.

The Query here is, What can, or ought persons to do toward their own
Conversion?

Something first is to be spoken of man's power, or can; and then something of
what man ought to do.

For the 1. of these: There is a threefold power considerable, an Active, a
Passive, and an Obediential power.

1. An active power, as in fire there is such a power to warm; in a good Tree
there is such a power to bring forth good fruit. This kind of power is denied
to be in man, Mat. 12.34. How can you that are evil speak good things? if they
cannot speak good things; much less can they do good things.

2. A passive power, as in Wax to receive the impression of the Seal, and in
wood to receive the engravings of the Carver. This power is not found in man: 1
Cor. 2.14.
Paul says expressly, The natural man, or souly man (...), receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, and (...), neither can he. A stiff dead hand
receives nothing, neither can it.

3. An obediential power, which consists in a capability to receive what form
or impression soever the mighty God by his power shall put upon a creature,
such a power is in a stony heart to become flesh, its capable to be made
fleshly when God puts forth his power. This is the power granted by Divines to
be in men, and it is a very low power.

The sacred Writ is plentiful in setting out the impotency of man, it tells us
that,

He is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be, Romans 8.7.

That he cannot please God, Romans 8.8.

That he cannot come to Christ, Joh. 6.44.

That he can do nothing without Christ, Joh. 15.5.

That he cannot believe, Joh. 12.39. chap. 5.44.

That he cannot love God, 1 John 4.20.

That he cannot do good, yield good fruit, Jerem. 13.23. Matthew. 7 17.

That he cannot think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Man's liberty or power is referrible to Natural, Moral, or Spiritual things: To
the first he has great strength: To the second some: To the third none. A man
freely does natural and moral things, he can live soberly, and chastely, quoad
externos actus, as to outward acts, he may abstain from gross sins, Theft,
Murder Drunkenness, etc. he may come to the Congregations freely, hear the
word, and not stop his ears as the deaf Adder does, but as to spiritual acts,
qua tales, he is impotent.

For the better understanding of the Querie, What persons can do toward their
own Conversion, I shall lay down several Theses or Conclusions, which I shall
make good by Scripture as I proceed.

1. Conclus. 1. All dispositions and inclinations to spiritual good which man
had at first in his Creation are lost and ruined by the Fall, Romans 8.7. The
carnal mind is enmity against God: its so far from having inclination to God,
or the things of God, that its not only an enemy, but enmity against God, and
Jer. 2.21. the Lord says, I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right
seed; how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto
me? they had lost their original sap and were degenerated into a wild Vine, and
could not bring forth good Clusters.

2. Conclus. 2, Man being altogether averse from good, the servant of sin and
death, sold under sin, Satan's captive, and dead in sin, is not able by his own
strength and power to convert or prepare himself thereunto, Romans 3.10, 12. Romans
8.2. Romans 7.14. 2 Timothy 2.26. Colos. 2.13. Romans 5.6. Joh. 6.44, 65. there must
be the Fathers giving, and drawing, his gift and power, otherwise there is no
coming to Christ. Men are, without Christ, in their natural conditions, Ephesians.
2.12. they are dead to his life and righteousness.

3. Conclus. The Lord calls for humane endeavors, and would have men do more
then they do, (...), this word signifies negotiari in aliqua re ad Lucrum.
Budaeus.
Luke 19.13. to those had the Talents, he says, Occupy till I come, be
pragmatical, bestir your selves and improve your talents, so that at my return
I may find you gainers: and he hid his Talent in a Napkin, is branded for a
wicked servant, ver. 22. and for a wicked and sloathful servant, Mat. 25.26.

4. Conclus. Men may do more then they do, Isa. 64.7. There is none that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee: they did not shake off luke-warmness
and lasiness, and rouse up themselves to take hold of God by faith and prayer.
Its the complaint of Christ that he was hungry, and they gave him no meat,
thirsty, etc. they might have done those things, and bestowed their estates
upon Christ's members, as well as others. Its evident men may do more then they
do, for that they do not that in their healths, which they do in time of their
affliction; then they will early seek God, Hos. 5.15. Weak ones do more then
stronger, many of weak parts act beyond those of larger abilities. Many
complain in their sickness that they have lost time and not done what they
might: where is the man that dares plead it before the Lord, that he has done
all he could? Because men do not what they might, the Lord may not only deny
grace unto them, doing something, yea, doing much, but justly condemn them,
because they did not what was in their power. It is a common saying among
Papists, Jesuits, Arminians and others, Nos negamus ullos unquam suisse been
citentes bono naturae propter deum itaque non dubimus esse aliquod meritum
congrui. Chamier. panstr. Cath. T. 3. l. 14. c. 4.
facienti quod in se est, gratiam non denegat deus. This is no sound
foundation, for it supposes some men do act to the uttermost of their power.
But [Whoever yet did all that was in his power?] whoever went so far, as that
he might not have gone one step farther? Did ever any read, hear or pray so
much, but he might have read, heard and prayed more? Jehoram might have waited
on the Lord longer, 2 Kings 6. ult.

5. Conclus. Humane endeavors are not required to cooperate with Gods grace,
and so make it effectual, but his grace, makes their endeavors effectual when
he pleases; Physical means make not Gods power effectual, but his power makes
them effectual, and so its in men's endeavors, It is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16.

6. Conclus. All that men do before Conversion is not in vain, fruitless and to
no purpose. When Rehoboam and the Princes humbled themselves at the preaching
of Shemaiah, they were reprieved and delivered from destruction, 2 Chro. 12.12.
Ahabs humiliation did adjourn the judgment, 1 King. 21.27.29. The Ninivites
found favor with God upon their fasting and repentance, Jon. 3.8, 9, 10.

7. Conclus. All the Actings and endeavors of men whatsoever they be, are not
formaliter dispositions or preparations to conversion, so that conversion must
necessarily follow upon them: For there is no necessary connection between the
actings of Men, and divine Grace. The Lord has no where said, if you act so
far, or be so disposed, qualified, or prepared, I will convert you. If Gods
grace did depend upon men's Actings, then those that are most Civil and Moral
must be taken, and those who are profane and rebellious must be left; but
Pharisees were excluded, when Publicans and Harlots were admitted. Great
sinners sometimes are brought in, who did nothing toward their conversion,
when those did much are shut out. Mary Magdalen a great and infamous sinner is
taken, when the foolish Virgins were refused; they were Virgins free from the
spots and pollutions of the world, they had lamps, professions, they did much,
they went out to meet the Bridegroom, they gat oil into their lamps, they
went to the door, and they cried Lord, Lord, open to us, Haec sunt opera
preparatoria, quibus se effert. Paulus Jun. in locum.
and there was no opening to them. What preparations had Paul to this work of
conversion? he was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an injurious person, these
were his dispositions and preparatory works he had toward his conversion, 1 Timothy 1.13.

8. Conclu. Those that live under the means of grace, the administrations of
Law and Gospel have some operations and gifts of the Spirit (which some call
common preventing and exciting Grace) whereby they are enabled to do many
things toward, and in order to conversion. The Scribe that was teachable, and
answered Christ discreetly, was not far from the kingdom of God, Mark 12.32,
34. He was nearer unto it, than those had not the means. The preaching of the
Gospel is to make the converted meet for Glory, and the unconverted meet for
Grace, to prepare and bring them to regeneration. I have begotten you through
the preaching of the Gospel, says Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 4.15. The
preaching of it wrought much in them, before conversion it self was wrought.
Balaam living under the Law, and amongst or nigh the people of God, was much
enlightened, and greatly convinced, insomuch that he desired to die the death of
the righteous.

9. Conclus. No actings of men, or qualifications in men, are causes of
conversion, do merit it, or make them congruous for it. They are not antecedent
causes, or so much as Causae sine quibus non, but the Lord does according to
his Prerogative work sometimes where they are not, as Ezekiel. 16. When thou wast
in thy blood, I said unto thee live. There was no cause, condition, or
qualification in them to beget affection, or move the Lord to do ought for
them. It was the time of his love, and he said, live.

10. Conclus. What ever the endeavors and dispositions of men be, they are
only by way of order before Conversion, they are only antecedaneous thereunto
on man's part, not necessary on Gods part, who can, and often does work where
there be no such previous acts or dispositions, as in the dry bones in Ezekiel,
they had no disposition or power in them to rattle and come together, neither
had the dead womb of Sarah any power or virtue in it to conceive.

11. Conclus. Acts of men toward Conversion, are not to be rested in, as any
satisfaction for sin, as making the person acceptable to God, or as
inducements of God toward conversion; Qui nobis ipsis nihil a deo meriti
sumus, quibus deus nullam gratiam, nullam mercede^ debet se. si jure nobiscum
agat juxta conditione^ servoru^. Brugensis in loc.
but we must acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants, when we have done
all that is commanded us, Luke 17.10.

12. Conclus. Man's quickening, believing, repenting, or turning, are not acts of
man in part, and partly of God, but they are wholly of God, and from God. You
has he quickened, Ephesians. 2.1. they were dead, and could not quicken themselves,
it was He, the Lord: So no man can come to me except the Father draw him, John
6.44. This drawing or causing the soul to believe in Christ is wholly the
Fathers work. Nisi donum dei esset, ipsa ad deum nostra conversio non ei
diceretur, Deus virtutum converte nos. Aug. de gra. and lib. Arb. Jam. 1.17.
August.
And Ephraim says; Turn thou me and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. he could
not turn himself; if the Lord had not done it, it would never have been done.
Paul says, It Is not in him that wills, etc. but in God, etc. The will and deed
are of him, not of man, Phil. 2.13. It is the Lord who is causa totius entis.
Every good and perfect gift comes down from above, it is not a perfect gift if
man contribute to it. The saying of the Father is sound: Velle habemus, sed
been velle and in part, and in toto est a gratia.

13. Conclus. Man in the first act of conversion is merely passive. Those who
believe are borne not of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God; nothing of man's will comes in. Not ultimum dictamen intellectus did set
the will on work here, but the Lord begat them of his own will, Jam. 1.18. So
that man's will is not semiviva and semimortua, but penitus extincta ad bonum
spirituale, and so ad hoc to this of Conversion, as the vital faculty is gone
in a dead man.

14. Conclus. Man's will being first converted to God, and by God himself,
converts it self also unto God, acta agit, as a child's hand in writing being
acted by the Masters hand, it writes. Hence man may be said to turn himself,
for the will being healed and made good, of unwilling willing, it has an
intrinsecal principle of willing good, and so dominion over its own acts,
whereby it turns it self to God. Where there is the Fathers drawing first,
there is presently the Souls coming.

These Conclusions being laid down, I shall show you what men can do toward
their conversion: but first I must inform you that conversion may be taken two
ways.

1. Strictly for the infusion of grace into the heart and will of man, whereby
he is regenerate, and his will made good, here man and his will being merely
passive (for in this act voluntas nec est libera nec voluntaria) he can do
nothing toward his own conversion in this sense.

2. It may be taken pro tota serie auxiliorum quibus ad eam movemur. For all
helps and means which further us that way; and in this sense it is affirmed,

That men may do much toward their conversion, they may materially dispose
themselves thereunto.

1. They may do as much as heathens have done, or would have done, had they
lived under the same means, and had such motives, as they have. The Lord tells
Ezekiel that if he had sent him to a people of a strange language; that was to the
Gentiles, they would have hearkened unto him, Ezekiel. 3.6. they would have
received him and obeyed his doctrine. It is certified from the mouth of Christ,
That if the mighty works done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, had been done in Tire
and Sydon, they would have repented, Matthew. 11.21. And that the men of Niniveh
should rise in judgment with the then present generation, and condemn it,
because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater than
Jonas was there, Matthew. 12.41. If one Sermon of Jonas who was one of the lesser
Prophets prevailed so much with Heathens, why should not many Sermons of
Christ, who is the chief of all the Prophets, prevail as much, if not more with
Christians? vae torpori nostro, what will become of us? Rahab showed kindness
to the people of God, and that was antecedaneous to her conversion. Herod heard
the Word gladly, Mar. 6.20. And Pharaoh desired the prayers of Moses and Aaron,
Exodus 8.28.

2. They may sit under a powerful Ministry, coming with reverence before God,
not offering the sacrifice of fools, but hear the Truth without being
contentious against it as they were, Romans 2.8. They may let the Truth have a
full stroke at them and their corruptions, They may receive the love of the
truth, 2 These. 2.10. and not hold it in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. So that
they will not suffer it to have influence into their affections, and to break
out into action.

3. They may hearken to the voice of Gods judgments and rods, when they are
abroad upon themselves and others. No man should despise the chastisement of
the Lord, but every one should hear the voice of the Rod, and who has
appointed it. The Prophet Isaiah tells us, Chap. 16.9.
That the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, when the
judgments of the Lord are in the earth. Discite justitia^ moniti and non
temnere numen. Virg. (...).
His judgments are the best Schoolmasters, and teach many good lessons. Waldus
was taught by the hand of God upon one of his sociates to become a new man.
When Manasses was in affliction, he besought the Lord, and humbled himself
greatly, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. Vexatio dat intellectum, when the Lord does box and
buffet us with his judgments, our understandings are opened and fear falls
upon us: and though this fear be servile at first, yet it may end in filial,
the spirit of bondage may become the spirit of Adoption.

4. They may observe the difference is made in men's lives after conversion from
that which was before. Conversion is a strange work, it makes a man another
man. They in Peter thought it a strange thing that men left their old courses.
Ego non sum ego. 1 Pet. 4.4.
In conversion Wolves are made Lambs, and persecuters Preachers. How was it,
that when Paul preached, all that heard him were amazed, and said, is not this
he which destroyed them who called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent that he might bring them bound unto the chief Priests? True, it
was he unconverted did so, not he converted, now he was another, a new man, now
he was a Christian, and had other principles and practices than before; there
was a great change wrought in him, and so in Mary Magdalen. Observation of such
examples have their use and energy: Praecepta docent and ducunt, exempla
trahunt.
For Examples are strong traces to draw men from wicked practices. Why
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as the Jews, said Paul to Peter, Gal.
2.14, Peter's example was the compulsion. There is a kind of compulsion in
examples, not violent, but alluring and attracting. The example of the
believing wife may win the unbelieving husband, 1 Pet. 3.1. A prudent gracious
Wife gains much upon a graceless Husband, by her modesty and obedience.

5. They may see what equity there is, that they should serve the Lord being
his creatures, and servants, and not only serve him, but so serve him as they
have served their sinful lusts, and something more, seeing they depend on him.
I speak after the manner of men, says Paul, Romans 6.19. It Is rational, just
and equal, that as you have yielded your members servants to uncleanness,
(...).
etc. so now yield them servants to righteousness, unto holiness, it is
reason, justice, and equity that you should do so. Should not men take as much
pains for heaven, as for hell, for their souls as for their bodies, for the
Lord Christ as for creatures? should they not be as diligent to weaken their
lusts as they have been to strengthen them? should they not be at as much cost
to maintain the pure worship of God, as the inventions and traditions of men?
It Is a complaint of the Lords, Isa. 55.2.
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not? They might have spent their money, labor, time, and
strength, and as much for true bread which would have fed their souls, as they
did for that which was, as no bread, Luke 15.16.
but rather husks for swine.

6. They may remove and abate sin in part, which is done by the contrary.
Knowledge removes ignorance as light does darkness, grief abates pleasure, and
fear boldness in sinning: Patience keeps under passion, and fasting tames
unruly lusts. When the strength of a Fever is abated by physical means, a
man is disposed toward health: and when a man has gotten Moralities (which he
may do) and by them made an abatement of his sins and lusts, he is materially
disposed to grace; as the ground when plowed is for seed, though the seed be
not yet sown.

7. They may do materially what Converts do. There is no act considered in its
mere nature and kind, which a true Christian may perform, but one unconverted
may perform also, and have many like dispositions unto those they have. They
may love God, It Is clear, 2 Timothy 3.4.
they loved God, who loved pleasures more than God. They may have Faith: Simon
Magus believed; they may hate sin in others, Acts 8.13. 2 Samuel 13.22.
if not in themselves. Absalom hated Amnons uncleanness, they may delight in
God and in his ways, Isa. 58, 2. They may have a zeal for God, and such a a
zeal as may prevail more with them than temporal things. The Jews were so
zealous of the Law, Romans 10.2.
and for the traditions of the Elders, that they would have ventured their
lives for them: so Paul before his conversion, how zealous was he? Acts 22.3,
4. Gal. 1.14.

To come more particularly and closely to the question. Though Conversion be
wrought in an instant, yet men have some praevious dispositions thereunto, who
live under the sound of the Gospel, and obtain such knowledge as works in
them several things, which I shall show unto you from Acts 2.37, and 38. v. And
when they heard this they were pricked in their heart, and said, men, etc. Many
preparative d^spositions or qualifications they had unto repentance or
conversion, but they had not yet repented; for Peter says, notwithstanding
these, repent.

1. Men may be convinced of sin as these were, they found they had transgressed
the law of God, and were guilty before him, for they were pricked in their
hearts. Men may have strong convictions of sin, and not converted from sin.

2. They may mourn for sin, and grieve that they have done such and such
things. These men had crucified the Lord Christ, put an innocent person to
death, (...) acutum animi dolorem significat. Piscat.
saw themselves in an ill condition, and thereupon mourned and grieved sorely,
as the word pricked intimates; they had such grief as pained and afflicted
their hearts. There Is a How set upon Ahabs humiliation by the Lord himself:
See thou how Ahab humbles himself, 1 King 21.29.

3. They may be filled with fear, and dread the threatenings and punishments of
God due to sin. This was the case here; they had provoked the Lord against
their souls, felt their consciences condemning of them, apprehended the
judgments of God near unto them, and so were possessed with much fear lest the
Lord should destroy them, and therefore say, Men and brethren what shall we do?
We know not whither to go, where to hide our selves, or what to do, that we may
escape the things we have deserved, and fear.

4. They may confess their sin, renounce it, and reform much; these Auditors
of Peter being pricked in their hearts, said, What shall we do? We have sinned,
and that greatly, we confess and acknowledge it before God and you, it was a
cursed act of ours, and we abhor it, we will never do so hereafter. They were
sick of sin, and vomited it up, as they in Peter, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and would change their minds and manners, and walk in any way the Apostles
should direct them. The Merchant, Mat. 13.46. sold all that he had for the
pearl before he bought it. This selling all is made by some Interpreters to be
his restraint from all inward sin, and his conformity to all outward duties.
This was much, and yet not more than unconverted persons may attain unto. Herod
reformed many things, the foolish Virgins went far, as was said before, they
were Virgins free from spot and pollution, they had Lamps, visible professions,
they went forth to meet the Bridegroom; they had some faith in him, and
affection to him, else they would not have gone forth.

5. They may justify the Law and the Lord; should he condemn them, deal
severely with them; what shall we do say these persons? we are guilty, we have
broken the Law, which is holy, righteous, and good, and so is God likewise, who
is the Author thereof, if therefore we be condemned, and must bear the curse
and punishment of the law, we must both justify the Lord and it. Men may
accept the punishment of their iniquity, and justify the inflictors thereof,
man has no cause to complain of the punishment of his sins. It Is brought in by
way of objurgation; Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore does a living man complain for the punishment of his sins? He may
complain of his sins, not of his punishment. Many Malefactors after sentence
passed on them, do justify both Judge and Law.

6. Men may seriously consider the nature of their sin, what circumstances it
is clothed with, what aggravations it admits, what crimson and skarlet is in
it; what light, love, mercies, means, engagements it is against. What shall we
do say these troubled souls? We have sinned against the light of nature, the
Law of Moses, our own consciences, the love of God and Christ toward sinners,
in that we have crucified Christ a man approved of God, whom we knew had done
many miracles, wonders and signs, Acts 2.22. and deserve not death, oh what
shall we do, our sins are so dreadful?

It Is in men's power to lay to heart what wrong an infinite blessed holy God
has by their sins, what mercies they keep from them, how greatly they defile
them, what miseries and mischiefs they bring upon them, what a weight of wrath
hangs over their heads for them. They may consider what checks of conscience
they have stifled, what motions of the Spirit they have withstood, what
precious seasons of grace they have neglected and slighted, what pains they
have taken to satisfy a lust, how dear it has cost them, how careless they
have been of their souls, what a separation their sins have made between God
and them. They may mind and meditate on it, that man's life is short, the
pleasures of sin but for a season, that there is absolute necessity of turning
to God: Except you repent, you shall all perish. That turning is acceptable to
God, else he would not call for it, nor make such gracious promises to it, as
are in holy Writ.

7. They may come to it, to see no help in themselves or in any creature
whatsoever, What shall we do? say these wounded men, we cannot help our selves,
we have no playsters that will stick, no medicines which will heal; we are
wounded in our Consciences, and as our hands, so theirs are too short to help
us; its not in humane power to bind up our breaches, What shall we do? men may
see themselves helpless, that they are without strength, shut up under sin,
guilt and unbelief, children of wrath, and in a lost condition, the Law cursing
them and sentencing them to suffer.

8. They may arrive to a resolution of doing or suffering any thing to be
saved: What shall we do? we are resolved if we may find mercy, and live, to do
whatever shall be commanded, to suffer whatever shall be imposed. The pride of
their spirits was broken, their hearts become teachable and tractable, and
their resolutions high for any thing to be done or suffered, so was it with the
Jailer, Act. 16.30. when men are in storms at sea, or on their sick beds at
home, they resolve if God will spare them, to do or suffer any thing for God
and his ways, and their own salvation.

9. They may cnoceive fair hopes of mercy. The Lord Christ being held out in
the Gospel, and freely offered to sinners, this breeds hope in them, a general
and preparatory hope: What shall we do? you told us that God had raised up that
Jesus we crucified, and made him Lord and Christ; and that whosoever should
call upon his name should be saved, therefore we hope there is mercy for us.
Thus had they a hope kindled in them, Act. 2.21.
and Peter in the two next verses strengthens their hope, saying, Repent and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the promise is to you and to your
children.

10. They may thirst after, and pray for the mercy hoped for. Such a
qualification was in these men, What shall we do? you men of God we are a
thirst, and do entreat you to tell us where we may have water to quench our
heat, mercy to pardon our sins, balm to cure our wounds. The Publican in Luke
has left us his short pithy and affectionate prayer, to imitate being in this
case and state, Lord, says he, be merciful to me a sinner. He was sensible of
his sin and of his want of righteousness, he had hope of mercy, and thereupon
came to the Temple to pray; and prayed earnestly for mercy, and Conversion is
none of the least mercies of God, or least needful for a sinner.

11. Men being come thus far, they are to wait upon God for doing the work:
when the pots were filled with water, the water was not made Wine, till Christ
put forth his mighty power; neither were the men who lay at the pool of
Bethesdah cured, till the Angel came down and stirred the waters: so a man in
this case is to wait until the Spirit of the Lord come in, and omnipotenti sua
vitate, or victrici delectatione overcome his will, and set it for the Lord,
and spiritual things: when this is, the work is done, and done without violence
to the will; for its an omnipotent presence prevails with the will, and its
immediately made willing in the day of this power.

By these forementioned things men are in a proximity or nextness to
Conversion, but not converted. It must be an higher power then our own, which
lifts us up into an higher nature or state then we are in at present. Though
men may do much upon moral persuasions: yet not so much as to make themselves
Converts, or spiritual, of Animal or Natural. Previous actions and preparative
dispositions, may make a man a picture of a Convert, not a true or living
Convert.

Having shown what persons can, and may do toward their Conversion, it remains
to declare what they ought to do.

The word must or ought, the signification of (...) in Greek imports two things.

1. Necessity, there must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19. its no man's duty to broach
or bring in Heresies, but they must be, its necessary for the discovery of men
approved.

2. Duty, God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth, its men's
duty so to do, Joh. 4.24. It was the Pharisees and Scribes duty to pay tithe of
Mint, Anise and Cummin, etc. therefore, says Christ, These things ought they
to have done, etc. Mat. 23.23.

Now then what persons can do, they ought to do: First there is a necessity of
it, we must do what we can; else we are sloathful and unfaithful, and our
damnation will be just, one thing is necessary, viz. to turn unto God that our
souls may be saved, here it will hold good, Turn or burn; if it be necessary to
prevent burning in everlasting flames, its necessary to turn, and so to do the
utmost we can toward the same.

Secondly, its our duty; Strive to enter in at the strait gate, says Christ,
he commands it and lays this injunction upon all, (...) strain, be in an agony,
as Christ was in the work of man's redemption, so let men be in the works of
their Conversion, put forth themselves as they did in the Olympic Games, the
Wrestlers and Runners exerted all their might to obtain, and so must men about
the work of their Conversion. The Lord who has no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, says, Turn your selves and live. There is life in turning, and what
should not men do to preserve or obtain life?

The Lord has two great ends in saying thus: Turn your selves and live ye,
although he know man is not able to do it.

1. That we may see how corrupt and impotent our nature is, and so break the
strength of humane confidence thereby, Quicquid nobis praecipitur a deo, ad
illud faciendum sufficientem potentiam habemus. Dixit Pelagius, quod homo
s^lius liberi a^bitrii viribus potest perficere dei mandata. Bradwardinus de
causa dei, l. 2. c 4.
and bring us to be sensible of, and thoroughly to bewayl our condition. It is
not so as some think and speak, viz. that whatever God commands, man has power
to do: what man ever kept the Law since the fall of Adam? and is not the Law
given by way of command? if man could keep the Law, we might be justified and
have life by it, Romans 8.3. Gal. 3.21. but the Law can neither do the one nor
the other, and why? because man has not power or strength to keep it.

2. To put us upon looking out for help from whence the command comes. Hence
is it that what the Lord commands us to do in one place, he promises to give
in another, Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. and God says,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart. In the former verse to
the Text, they are commanded to make themselves new hearts and new spirits,
which they could not do, therefore in Ezekiel. 36.26. the Lord promises to give
and put the same in them: Repent and turn your selves, Ezekiel. 14.6. and chap.
36.27. Ideo dat praeceptum ut exci^et desiderium and praestet auxilitum. Leo.
I will put my Spirit into them, and cause them to walk in my ways, the Spirit
God would put in, should turn them from their Idols, and own ways, and cause
them to walk in his ways. The Lord does therefore command such things, that our
desires and endeavors being quickened, he may reach forth help unto us.

Therefore let us apply our selves to all these means and ways by which the
Lord works Conversion. Let us make use of all the ways forenamed, and
especially hear the word preached and pray, Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be
turned, and see to it that we use the means in good earnest; we may do more (as
has been showed) than we do. Its the counsel of him who was wiser than other
men, that whatever our hands do find to do, we should do it with our might,
Eccles. 9.10. that is, with our whole might; God must have the heart, the whole
heart, and the fervency of it, Romans 12.11.
Be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, lasiness and luke-warmness will not
promote the work, fervor and diligence may further it much, see Prove. 2.3, 4,
5, 6. and remember what the Lord Christ has said, Ask and ye shall have, seek
and ye shall find, knok and it shall be opened unto you.

How may beloved Lusts be discovered and Mortified.
MAT. 5.29, 30. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee: for is profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish,
and not that thy whole body should be cast into Hell.

And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee: for it is
profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy
whole body should be cast into Hell.


MY Text is a part of Christ's Sermon on the Mount: I shall not hold you long in
the Context or portall, but only pass through unto the words that I have read.

In the verse before our Savior tells us, that Whosoever looks on a woman to
lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart. This was
spoken in opposition to the Scribes and Pharisees, and may be urged against
many carnal Protestants, that have but gross conceits concerning the Law of
God; and in particular, that the outward act of uncleanness only is the
breach of the seventh Commandment; Thou shall not commot adultery. Now our
Savior corrects this mistake: That whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart; not will do it, but
he has done it already: there is a speedy passage from the eye to the heart:
And because the eye and the hand are many times used, as principal incitements
to this sin, our Savior gives his Disciples and us this serious and holy
advice in the words that I have read, If thy right eye offend thee pluck it
out, and cast it from thee, etc.

The words contain a double Exhortation, together with a double Reason and
enforcement.

1. A double Exhortation: if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast
it from thee: if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee.

2. A double Reason and Enforcement: For it is profitable for thee, that one of
thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into
hell: and so again, ver. 30.

In the handling of these words, I shall first speak to them by way of
Explication, and then by way of Observation.

1. For the Explication of them, I would entreat you to take into your thoughts
these particulars.

1 We must enquire into the meaning of these two expressions, the right eye,
and the right hand: most Expositors by far carry it, that these words are to be
expounded improperly and figuratively: and here I shall not acquaint you, how
Popists Writers abound in their own sense, concerning these words: there are
sweet truths, that kindly and freely, without straining may be deduced from
this Scripture; like the Be, I would not tear the flower I light on.

There are two Interpretations given of this place, that I shall take notice of,

1. There are some that by right eye, and right hand understand our nearest,
and dearest comforts which we have in this world, which must be parted with for
Christ's sake, yet not absolutely, but upon this consideration if they offend;
If thy right eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee, if thy right
hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: Now this is bona
expositio, a good Exposition, as our Divines distinguish, but not recta
Expositio, a right Exposition: agreeable to the analogy of faith, but not
suitable to the scope, and design of our Savior in this place. Therefore,

2. There are others, that by right eye, and right hand understand beloved
lusts, as hard to be parted with, as right hands, or right eyes: our Savior
mentions the right eye, and the right hand, because they are most prized, as
having more then ordinary of spirits and natural heat, and so more fit for
action; I am sure this may be said concerning the right hand.

Indeed I conceive it an hard matter to prove, that by divine appointment one
hand should be more useful then the other: but as God has given us two eyes,
and two ears, so two hands, to use both indifferently, and that if need
required the one might supply the loss of the other: if any, methinks the left
hand should be preferred, because it is nearest the heart, the fountain of
life, and activity: but Christ takes them, as he finds them, as he does in many
other cases, and as we have ordered the matter, the right hand is more active
and strong then the other, and so more precious: but to our purpose.

Some, I say, by the right eye, and the right hand, understand our beloved
lusts; it is the usage of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, in a figurative
way to express corruption by the parts and members of our bodies: so St. Paul,
Romans 7.23. I see another law in my members, Romans 7.23.
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law
of sin, which is in my members? and the same Apostle, Col. 3.5. Col. 3.5.
Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. as the members of the natural body need
castigation, 1 Cor. 9.27. 1 Cor. 9.27.
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, so the members of the
sinful body need mortification: and here in the Text sin is expressed by the
right eye and the right hand.

2. If thy right eye offend thee, in the Greek it is (...), scandalize thee,
hinder thee in a way of duty: for you must note, that obedience and holiness is
often in Scripture represented unto us, by a way to give you one place for all,
Psalm. 119.1. Psa. 119.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord: and men
are said to be offended, when something causes them to stumble, or fall in this
way. S^n is as it were a block or a stone, at which men stumble and fall: let
him which thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

3. Pluck it out, and cast it from thee; cut it off and cast it from thee, a
Metaphor taken from Chirurgions, whose manner it is, when the whole body is
endangered by any part, to cut it off ne pars sincera trahatur: but before I
leave these expressions, take notice of the Emphasis that is in them, in these
particulars.

1. It Is not said suffer thy right eye to be plucked out, or thy right hand to
be cut off: but thou thy self, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, cut it off
and cast it from thee: to note two things.

1. That we our selves must engage in the mortifying of our lusts: Sinners with
their own hands, must pull out their own eyes. It Is not enough to cry unto God
for help, and in the mean time, to be careless and idle, as if nothing were to
be done on our part: mortification is a work incumbent upon us, although we are
empowered thereunto by the Spirit: If ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. Romans 8.13.
we must mortify, although by the Spirit; the duty is ours, though the
strength be Gods: so here, if thy right eye offend thee, thou thy self pluck it
out, and cast it from thee.

2. That we must be a willing people in this, as in all other duties: a
Christian dies to sin, is not put to death.

2. It Is not said if thine eye offend thee, observe it more then ordinary, look
narrowly to it, but pluck it out. To note, that nothing less is like to do our
souls good, then the mortifying, the killing, the cutting off of our
corruptions. Let a man's hand be cut off it is a dead member immediately. It is
not so with plants when they are cut off from their roots, they will grow and
sprout again: and so it is with the most inferior sort of sensitive creatures,
for instance, cut worms into several pieces, every part will live, and stir;
hence the learned call them insecta. When the head of a fowl is separated from
its body; it will live and flutter for some time: but this cannot be said of
the most noble sort of creatures: this is a sure rule in nature, Vnitas and
indivisibilitas est comes perfectionis, multitudo, and divisibilitas
imperfectionis. Union is a sign of perfection, divisibility of imperfection:
the more perfect any being is, the more united it is to its self, and the less
any part of it can live nisi in toto, but in the whole! so that this phrase is
a great elegancy, to note the killing of our beloved lusts, if thy right eye
offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, etc.

3. It Is not only said pluck it out, but cast it from thee, to note, that it is
not enough for a man to leave his sin for the present, but he must renounce it
for ever. We must not part with sin, as with a friend, with a purpose to see it
again, and to have the same familiarly with it, as before, or possibly greater.
Amantium irae amoris redinte gratio est, the falling out of Lovers is the
renewing of love. We must not only shake hands with it, but shake our hands of
it, as Paul did shake the Viper off his hand, into the fire! pluck it out and
cast it from thee.

Thus much for the Explication of the words, for I shall have occasion only to
deal, with the former part of these two Verses at this time.

2. I am to give you the Observations, I shall speak but a few words to some of
them, that I may reserve my self, for that which I mainly intend.

1. Observe.
That the eye, and the hand are excellent, and useful parts of the body of man.

You see here our Savior singles out these, from all other parts, as being
very precious, if thy right eye offend thee, etc. if thy right hand offend
thee, etc.

1. As for the eye our Savior tells us, that it is the light of the body: Mat.
6.22. the light of the body is the eye: what is the world without the Sun, but
a dark melancholy dungeon? what is a man without eyes? but monstrous and
deformed, monstrum horrendum, inform, cui lumen ad emptum: the two eyes are
two luminaries, that God has set up in the Microcosme, man's little world:
Zech. 2.8. Gal. 4.15.
when God would express his tender love unto his people, he calls them the
apple of his eye; he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye: and the
like phrase St. Paul makes use of, when he speaks of the love of the Galatians
unto himself, I bear you record, that if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your eyes, and have given them to me. I have read of the Emperor
Adrian, that with an arrow, by accident, put out one of his servants eyes; he
commands him to be brought to him, and bids him ask what he would, that he
might make him amends: the poor man was silent: he pressed him again: he told
the Emperor, he would ask nothing but he wished that he had the eye which he
had lost; intimating that an Emperor was not able to make satifaction for the
loss of an eye.

Oh be very watchful over this excellent part! make a covenant with your eyes,
Job 31.1. Shut your eyes from seeing evil, Isa. 33.15. Set no wicked thing
before your eyes, Psalm. 101.3. as the Apostle says in another case, Does not
even nature teach you: God has made a covering for the eye, that opens and
shuts with a great deal of easiness, to teach us, that it is expedient
sometimes, that the eye be closed, and not holden open to every object.

2, As for the hand: it is the prime part for action, Aristotle calls it (...),
an instrument of instruments: without this, there could be no Cities, no Towns,
no Merchandise, no Husbandry, no Manufacture; without this man would differ but
a little from the beasts that perish: for what would his reason stand him in
stead, if he had not an hand to improve it? The Naturalists observe, that man
could neither do nor say, without this useful and necessary part: for if a man
did not eat with his hands, he must, as a brute feed with his mouth, and by
that means the lips would become so thick, that he would not be able to speak
with any distinctness, and indeed we find by experience, that they that have
thick lips have an imperfection in their speech.

Jam. 4.^.
Oh improve this excellent part for God, a good life is expressed in Scripture,
by a clean hand: cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
double minded: it is the greatest absurdity imaginable to plead a good heart,
as many do, and yet have a foul, and wicked hand* this is as if a man should
say, here is a tree that bears ill fruit, but it has an excellent root.

2. Observe.
That offenses are from our selves: or the cause of stumbling and falling is
from our selves: some lust or other, some right eye sin, or some right hand
sin; if thy right offend thee, etc. sin unmortifi'd will very much endanger a
man's falling: truly if you would not have your right eye, or your right hand
offend you, you must offend them: pluck it out and cast it from thee; cut it
off and cast it from thee, if you would see clearly in Gods way, ye must pluck
out your right eye, if you would walk evenly in Gods path, you must cut off
your right foot.

3. Observe.
That sin is properly and to all intents and purposes our own.

If thy right eye offend, etc. if thy right hand offend, etc. the Apostle
writing to the Colossians, Col. 3.5.
speaks thus, Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, etc. these sins, were their
members: the whole body of sin is ours, and the members of that body are ours;
there is a great difference between our natural body, and our sinful body: our
natural body is ours quoad usum, with reference to our use, but it is Gods,
quoad creationem, with reference to its creation. The body of man was
originally and fundamentally created: now there is a twofold Creation.

1. When a being is made of nothing, this is called by the learned creatio
immediata, an immediate creation.

2. When a being is made of something, but that something is materia inhabilis,
matter altogether indisposed for the producing of that effect, and so is
little, if any thing more then nothing, with reference unto that which is made:
materia est aliquid in se, nihil tamen respectu opificii: thus when God made
the woman of a Rib, when Christ turned water into wine, when God made man of
the dust of the earth, it was a creation, and this is called by the Learned,
creatio mediata, a mediate creation, and our natural body still in a way of
generation is Gods creature, but our sinful body is our creature: hence the
Apostle mortify your members which are on the earth, and our Savior in the
Text, If thy right eye offend thee, etc. so that sin is properly and to all
intents and purposes our own.

4. Observe.
That although all sins are our own, yet there are some sins that in a more
especial manner may be called ours; namely, our right eye sins, and our right
hand sins, or if you will: Every man has his proper, particular iniquity, his
beloved sin.

If thy right eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it from thee: If thy right
hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee: and the handling of this
Doctrine will suit the Case, that is my task this morning, viz. How may beloved
lusts be discovered and mortified?

In the prosecution of this Observation, I shall follow, by Gods assistance
this method.

1. I shall enquire why sin is expressed sometimes in Scripture, by the parts,
and members of our body, as in this place by the right eye, and the right hand.

2. I shall show you, that our right eye sins, and our right hand sins, our
beloved lusts, may in a more especial manner be called ours; or that every man
has, his proper, his particular iniquity.

3. I shall enquire how this comes to pass, that particular persons have their
proper and particular sins.

4. The Use and Application.

1. I am to enquire, why sin in Scripture is expressed by the parts and members
of our body, and particularly here by the right eye, and the right hand?

1. You must note that the whole mass of corruption in Scripture, is called by
the name of the old man, and the body of sin. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed. Romans 6.6.
It is called the old man! in every young man, there is an old man, and it is
called the body of sin: now if sin in the lump and bulk be a body, then
particular sins may fitly be termed the parts and members of this body.

2. Sin may be thus expressed, because as the natural body makes use of its
several parts, for the managing and carrying on of those works that are
natural, so corruption makes use of several lusts, for the effecting and
promoting of those works that are sinful.

3. According to their notion, that hold the soul by creation, as I conceive,
sin is conveyed into the soul at first by means of the body. Certainly the
soul of man is pure, and undefiled, as it comes out of the hand of God. I do
humbly propose to men of learning, whither that rule, corporeum non agit in
incorporeu^, or that a body cannot defile a spirit, is not further to be taken
into consideration. We find by experience, that as the soul communicates its
affections unto the body, the body has life, and sense, and motion from the
soul, that of it self is a liveless lump of clay: So the body again has a
very great influence on the soul, and can, and does communicate its distempers
unto it. For instance, those that have sanguine bodies are inclined to lust,
those that are choleric, unto rashness and passion; those that are
melancholy, unto suspicion, and tenaciousness; those that are phlegmatic, unto
dullness and cowardice. So that sin may be in the body dispositive before it be
enlivened by the soul, though not formaliter; my meaning is, the body may have
a disposition to defile the soul, before it is united unto the soul; and if so,
no wonder if sin be expressed by the parts and members of our body.

4, Corruption looks at, and shows it self by the sinful actions of the
body, and therefore may have its denomination by the parts of it.

Hence it is, that the Apostle, when he had concluded that the Jew, and the
Gentile were both under sin; to make this manifest, he tells the Romans how sin
discovered it self in the outward man: Romans 3.13, etc. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues have they used deceit,
the poison of aspes is under their lips, etc. We read in Scripture of the sins
of the flesh, as well as of the spirit. Having therefore these promises dearly
beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit: the sins of the spirit like so many plague-sores break out into the
flesh. Wicked men are all over bespotted, and beleopar'd with sin: Lying is a
spot in the tongue, pride is a spot in the eye, wrath a spot on the brow,
bribery a spot in the hand, Idolatry a spot on the knee, yea they are called
spots and blemishes, 2 Pet. 2.13. not spotted but spots, sin it self is a
spot, and like fire, it turns the subject it has to deal with, into its own
nature. One part of the body in Scripture is called a world of iniquity. The
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: How much iniquity is there in the world,
Jam. 3.6.
when in this little member there is a world of iniquity.

Thus much shall suffice to have been spoken to the first thing propounded,
viz. why sin is expressed sometimes in Scripture, by the parts and members of
our body.

My second work is to show you, that our right-eye sins, and our right hand
sins, our beloved lusts may in a more especial manner, be called ours, or that
every man has his proper, his particular iniquity: If thy right eye offend
thee, etc. If thy right hand offend thee, etc. Look as it is with good men,
though they have the seeds of every grace in them, yet some one may be said to
be theirs in an eminent manner: Abraham was eminent for obedience, Moses for
meekness, Job for patience: Thus it is with wicked men, though they have the
seed of every sin in them; yet some one may be said to be theirs in an
especial manner. Wicked men in Scripture are as it were marked out for
several sins, calculo nigro: Cain for his murder, Simeon and Levi for their
treachery, Corah and his company for their conspiracy, Nebuchadnezar for his
pride, Manasses for his cruelty, Balaam for his covetousness: or look as it is
in the natural body, though every man has blood, phlegm, choler, melancholy,
yet some humor or other is predominant, from which a man has its
denomination; so it is in the sinful body, some sinful humor, or other has
the predominancy: most men have some peccatum in deliciis, some sweet morsel,
that they roll under their tongue, which they will by no means spit out, or
part with. It would be no hard matter to show you, that several Nations have
their proper and peculiar sins, as the Spaniard theirs, the French theirs, the
Dutch theirs. Look into the Scripture and you will find, that the Corinthians
had their sin, which is thought to be wantonness, and uncleanness; and
therefore the Apostle, in the Epistles that he writes to them, uses so many
pressing arguments against this sin. The Cretians are branded for Liars, the
Jews for Idolaters: So your Towns have their sins, Villages theirs, Cities
theirs; possibly Londons sin, may be loathing spiritual Manna, neglect and
contempt of the Gospel, a non-improvement of Ordinances.

3. I am to enquire, how this comes to pass, that particular persons have
their proper and particular sins.

1. Men have particular temperaments and constitutions of body, and therefore
they have their particular sins suitable to their temperaments and
constitutions: You heard before, how particular temperaments inclined men
several ways. Creatures in the general are naturally delighted with those
things, which are fitted, suited and accommodated to the genius, and frame of
their respective natures. As in the same plant, the Be feeds on the flower,
the Bird on the seed, the Sheep on the blade, the Swine on the root: the same
seeds are not proper for the sand, and for the clay. Every thing thrives most
where it likes best; so it is in this case, that sin is like to thrive most in
the soul, that we make most of, that we are most delighted in, that suits best
our complexions and constitutions. We must be careful here, lest we strein
this too far, with some Physicians and Epicureans that hold the soul to be
nothing else, but the temper of the body: but questionless this has a very
great influence on the better part. Hence some have adjudged it not fit, for
illegitimate persons to be admitted into Ecclesiastical orders: and you know
under the Law, by the appointment of God himself, a bastard was not to enter
into the congregation, to the tenth generation.

And I humbly conceive, that a toleration of unclean mixtures is not only
against Religion, but against principles of polity and government: the children
of filthy persons, for the most part proving degenerate, ignoble, lascivious,
and by that means become the blemishes, the ulcers, the plague-sores of the
body politic, Kingdom, and State whereunto they do belong.

2. There are distinct and peculiar periods of times, distinct and peculiar
ages, that incline to peculiar sins; for instance, childhood enclines to lenity
and inconstancy, youth to wantonness and prodigality, manhood to pride and
stateliness, old age to frowardness: you know diseases make men fretfull, now
ipsa senectus morbus, old age it self is a disease: If we take not heed, the
sinful body will grow strong, when the natural body grows weak. I have heard
of a good woman, something enclinable to passion, that used to say, I must
strive against peevishness when I am young, or else what will become of me
when I am old? And so Covetousness is a sin, that old age is very much addicted
to. Windelin in his Moral Philosophy, cap. 25. discourses learnedly, Cur senes
sint magis avari quam juvenes? when God is taking people out of the world, they
cling fast about it, and cry loath to depart, truly this no good sign. You know
men that are a sinking, and in a desperate case, lay hold on any thing.

3. Men have distinct and particular callings, that incline them to particular
sins: For instance, a Soldiers employment puts him upon rapine and violence.
And therefore John the Baptist, when the Soldiers demanded of him, what shall
we do? tells them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, Luke 3.14.
and be content with your wages. A Tradesmans employment puts him upon lying,
deceiving, overreaching his brother: Ministers, upon the occount of pleasing
the best, as we many times Catechrestically call them, or the greatest of the
Parish^, are tempted to flattery, to please men, to sow pillowes under their
peoples elbows. Magistrates and Judges are tempted to bribery and injustice, if
great care be not taken, their very calling and office may prove a snare upon
that account.

4. Men have distinct and particular ways of breeding and education, and upon
that account have their particular sins. The child that hears his Father and
Mother swear, is like to swear too. That child that has frequently wine, and
strong drink given to it by the Parents, when it is young, it is likely may get
a smatch of it, and love to it, and so prove intemperate, when it is old.
Joseph by living in the Court of Pharaoh, learned to swear the Court Oath Man
is (...) a creature very much given to imitation. Examples have a very great
influence on men, both in reference to virtues and vices, especially to the
latter, we catch sickness one of another, but we do not catch health: For
instance, the Scripture speaking of the son of Jeroboam, tells us, 2 Reg. 15.9.
that he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as his fathers had
done, he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Isra^l to sin. He writ after his Fathers copy, and therefore the sins of his
Father in a particular manner is taken notice of by the Spirit of God in that
place. So 2 Samuel 6.20. 2 Samuel 6, 20.
you have an account of Michals jeering of David, because he danced before the
Arc, and you will find that she is called there not the Wife of David, but the
daughter of Saul. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and
said, how glorious was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day
in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows
shamelesly uncovereth himself! Now why is she called there the daughter of
Saul? because she had learned this wickedness from her father: We have woeful
experience of this in our days. Formerly people could say, Ps. 44.1. We have
heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, Psalm. 44.1.
what works thou did in their days, in the times of old. Truly the people of
this generation may say, we heard our fathers swear, and curse, and scoff, and
mock at the ways of God, in reason we may expect men's manners to suit their
education.

Thus much shall suffice to have been spoken to the third particular propounded
to be discussed, that is to say, how it comes to pass, that particular persons
have their proper and particular sins, and thus much also for the doctrinall
part.

4. The fourth and last thing is the Use and Application of this to our selves.

Use 1.
For Lamentation and Humiliation in the presence of God this day: we trouble
our selves about other men's sins, Magistrates sins, Ministers sins, as the
Pharisee^, Lord I thank thee; I am not as other men are, an Extortioner, an
Adulterer, etc. or as this Publican.

And in the mean time, where is the man that considers his own iniquity, his
right eye sin, or his right hand sin: there are great outcries amongst us, what
have others done? but who smites upon his thigh, and says, what have I done? We
search every where, save where our Rachel sits upon her Idol.

Possibly some poor soul may say, did I know this particular sin, this right
eye sin, or this right hand sin, the Lord knows, I would quickly pluck out the
one, and cut off the other, and that brings me to

Use 2.
Of Examination, how this sin may be discovered; now to this purpose, take
these marks, or rules.

1. It may be known by the loves and tender respects the sinner bears unto this
sin: strong love for the most part, has but one single object; affections
are like the Sun beams in a burning glass, the more united they are in one
point, the more fervent: A wicked man has a particular affection for his
particular lust. As Abraham cried, Oh that Ishmael may live in thy sight! So, a
wicked man, oh that this sin may be spared! This is his Benjamin: the soul is
ready to say, here is one sin must be plucked out, and here is another sin must
be cut off, and must this beloved Lust dye also? all these things are against
me. The sinner seems to repent of sin, and to condemn sin, and himself for
sin: but when the time of Execution comes, the man is very tenderhearted;
here is a reprieve for this sin, and there is a pardon for another sin; oh it
goes against him to cut the throat of his darling lust! ( It Is a woeful case
when a man will undertake to pardon his own sin: this is crudelitas parcens,
sparing cruelty); and if it fall out, that his beloved sin dye a natural
death, that is, if the Adulterer for instance, cannot actually engage in bodily
uncleanness, as formerly upon the account of old age, he follows it to the
grave, as we do our dear friends, and heartily mourns that he and his dear lust
must part.

2 It may be known thus; that sin that distracts us most in holy duties, is our
beloved sin: you may know that cold is natural to the water, and that it likes
that quality best, because let it be made never so hot, it will be still
working it self to its own proper temper. Souls possibly may sometimes be
warmed at an Ordinance, but they quickly cool again, and are still working
toward their proper lust, the sin they like best. You may take notice in
Scripture, that God to speak after the manner of men in an especial manner,
remembers the sins of wicked men in the performance of holy duties. Hos. 8.13.
They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offering, and eat it, but the
Lord accepts them not. Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their
sins; as if a Felon or Murderer convict, should escape out of prison, and
afterward presume to come into the presence of the Judge; this brings his
Felony or Murder into remembrance: and herein their punishment is visible sin.
They remember their sins in their duties, and so will God. The people of God
themselves are tainted with this, Pride was the Disciples master sin; and
whilst they were healing Diseases, and casting Devils out of other men's bodies,
the proud Devil was stirring in their own souls: and our Savior gives them a
rebuke for that, Luke 10.20. In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject
unto you; but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven. Luke
10.20.


3. It may be known by its domination, its commanding power over all other
sins: look as there is a kind of government in Hell, such an one as it is:
Beelzebub is called the Prince of Devils; so in a wicked man's soul one sin or
other is still uppermost, and keeps the throne: all other sins do as it were
bow the knee to this sin, hold up the train of this sin: are obedient servants
to this sin, it says to one go and it goes, and to another come, and it comes:
for instance, if covetousness be the beloved sin, lying, and deceiving, and
injurious dealing will serve that: If Ambition, temporising and sinful
compliance will serve that: If Adultery, sinful wasting of time, and estate,
and body will serve that. If Vainglory be the Pharisees great sin, devouring
widows houses under pretense of long prayers, will serve that. As it is with a
man's body, when it is hurt or maimed, all the ill humors will flow to the part
that is ill affected. Hence it is, when a man is first wounded, he feels but a
little pain, because he suffers only upon the single account of the division of
the part: but after wards the pain is increased, for then he suffers doubly,
upon the account of the division of the part, as also by the conflux of ill
humors. When the soul has received some gash, some hurt more then ordinary
by its particular sin, all the sinful humors will make haste to feed that
iniquity: so that this is the sin that carries it and bears the sway in the
soul. In a word: the sinner has the curse of Cham as it were pronounced upon
him: a servant of servants is he, his other sins are servants to his beloved
sin, and he himself is a slave to them all.

4. That sin that Conscience in a particular manner, does chide a man for, that
it is likely may be his particular sin, the Greek word for Conscience is (...),
it signifies a joint knowledge, or knowledge with another. It takes notice of
things together with God. Conscience is Gods deputy, Gods spy, Gods
intelligencer, pardon the word, in our bosoms, an exact notary, of whatever we
think or do, a co-witness with God, as St Paul is bold to call it, Romans 9.1.
Now would thou know thy beloved sin? hearken to the voice of Conscience: does
that condemn thee for pride, for passion, for worldliness, for persecuting the
ways of God? Oh remember, it is Gods Viceroy, honor it so far as to weigh, and
consider thoroughly what it says, it is likely, this may be thy particular sin,
that which dishonours God most, if Conscience be any thing tender will trouble
thee most: many a man deals with his Conscience, as Felix did with Paul,
hearken to it a while, whilst it tells them of their lesser faults, or that they
are sinners in the general, but when it rebukes them for their darling lust,
though they cannot say, go thy way, as Felix to Paul, yet hold thy peace, and
when I have a convenient season I will give thee the hearing!

5. It may be known by being impatient of reproof. Herod hears John Baptist
gladly, till he preached against his Herodias: this is a noli me tangere; touch
me not. The Plant-animal, or the sensible Plant so called, when it is touched,
shrinks up, and contracts its self; the sinner shrinks when he is touched in
the sore place. The eye is a tender part and apt to be offended, if you meddle
with it. This is the reason why people are enraged against a powerful,
soul-searching, soul-saving Ministry: most men are for Mountebanks, and
Quacksalvers, that make use altogether of Lenitives, and healing Plasters, but
as for your faithful Chirurgions that according to Art, will probe and search,
and cleanse the Wound, they cannot away with them, I hate him, says Ahab of
Michaiah, He never prophecies good concerning me, but evil: only I shall add
this, that man, especially that Minister that reproves another for his sins,
had need to be blameless as much as may be himself: Rom 21.2, 21, 22.
thus the Apostle intimates, Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? that man that is a teacher of others should teach himself, so much the
more, we teach others when we deliver unto them Rules and Precepts, unto which
they are to conform, we teach our selves, when we obey those Rules, Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery, etc. that man that has
a beam in his own eye, is not likely to pull out the mote that is in his
brothers.

6. It may be known by this: it makes a man notoriously partial in his own
case: David could allow himself another man's wife, and could condemn one to
death, for taking away another man's Lamb.

7. It may be known, by the covers, and cloaks, and fair pretenses, that the
sinner has for this sin. Uncleanness, and intemperance, are but tricks of
youth, and sowing his wild Oats: Luxury is magnificence, covetousness is good
husbandry, pride is a piece of nobleness, and grandeur of spirit: yea, which is
more, it is humility, you have some that disparage themselves in company, and
they call this humility, when in truth, it is the height of their spirits; like
the Archer, that draws back the arrow, that it may fly so much the higher, and
so much the further. It Is strange blindness, or deceit, or both, to call not
yellow, or some middle color, but black white: yet thus it is with many; they
shape their darling lust, like those virtues, unto which they are extremely
contrary. Every wicked man is sins advocate, and will plead its cause gratis.
Oh says Judas, to what purpose is this waste, Mat. 26.8.9. Joh. 12.6.
This ointment might have been sold for much and given to the poor: this he
said, says another Evangelist, Not that he cared for the poor, but because he
was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. Beware of speaking
any thing, toward the justification of your selves in any way of wickedness:
you know the malefactor is condemned before he is put to death, and so it is in
the case of sin, cum peccator justificatur, peccatu^ condemnatur, when a sinner
is justified, his sin is condemned, and after condemnation follows execution:
Job 31.3^. v. 40.
Job vindicates himself in this particular: If I covered my transgressions as
Adam, by hiding mine iniquities in my bosom, etc. then let thistles grow
instead of wheat: as if he had said, I did not hide mine iniquity as Adam did,
I did not cover my transgression, I was open and ingenuous: the Psalmist says,
Bl^ssed is the man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered, but
then it must be by Gods hand, not ours.

8. If there be any one sin more then other, that the soul does readily close
with, that is its beloved sin: its right eye sin, or its right hand sin.
Sampson, when all the world could not take away his strength, Prove. 7.21.
is easily persuaded by Dalilah. See how Solomon expresses the Harlots dealing
with the young man: with much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him: the most she could do was to flatt^r
him, and yet notwithstanding it is said she forced hi^: sin works altogether by
enticement; Every man is tempted, Jam. 1.14.
when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed, yet it is so powerful that
it amounts to a force, as the request of a King amounts unto a command.

9. That sin which a man wishes were no sin, is like to be his b^lo^ed sin: the
case of the young man in the Gospel is considerable to this purpose, says our
Savior, If thou will be perfect, go sell that thou have, and give to the poor,
Mat. 19.21, 22
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me. Ver. 22. When the
young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful; that is ^he was very much
troubled, that there was such a truth as this, Psalm. 14.1.
that the world for Christ's sake was to be parted with. So Psalm. 14.1. The fool
has said in his heart there is no God: Oh says the fool, That there was no
God, that there was no heaven, that there was no hell, Atheism was the beloved
sin in that case: first men wish there were no Deity, and then they judge so,
and say so, Carnal affections after some time settle in opinion and judgment:
it is possible for men by ways of unrighteousness, by a constant course of
cheating and cozening, so far to shut up and imprison, their natural light, and
so to muffle their reason, and understanding; that at length they may cheat,
and baffle their own souls, and think it a piece of justice, and righteousness
so to do.

10. That sin which we think of first in the morning, and last in the evening
is like to be our beloved sin, God is the chiefest good, the prime object of
our love: and therefore as he is Alpha and Omega in himself, so is he also unto
his people, the beginning and the end, the first and the last: they begin the
day with him, Psalm. 139.18. Psa. 139.18.
When I awake, I am still with thee: they end the day with him, thus the
Spouse, Cant. 3.1. Cant. 3.1.
By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves: you have mention of both
these, Esaias 26.9. Esaias 26.9.
With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me,
will I seek thee early. Now this sin that I am treating of like that (...),
that lawless person that we read of 2 These. 2.8. 2 These. 2.8.
that man of sin, ver. 3. opposes and exalts its self in the soul above all
that is called God, and sits in the seat of God. A beloved lust is usually
the sinners first and last, Psa. 36.4.
he gives it entertainment first in the morning, and takes his leave of it last
in the evening: yea this darling sin must be entertained and made much on in
the Bedchamber: the Psalmist speaking of a wicked man, Psalm. 36.4. tells us, he
devises mischief on his bed, for the most part that as a very friend, that we
admit to our bed-sides.

11. That sin which most infests us, and troubles us in our solitudes, and
retirements, that is our beloved sin, my meaning is when a man is alone, in his
Closet, or in the Fields, and his thoughts run a drift: that sin which of
themselves they move toward, and close with, that may be his beloved sin; the
current of the soul is that way. Oh Christian mark the workings of thy heart in
private, and thou may possibly make some discoveries. When a man retires
himself into some solitary place, it is usually absurd to trouble him: it is a
friend indeed, that falls in with him, and offers his company in that case,
that sin is more then ordinary beloved by us, that interposes in our privacies.

12. And lastly, that sin, that we are willing to endure greatest hardships and
sufferings for, that is our beloved sin: for instance, suppose Covetousness be
the darling sin, what base absurd, unreasonable offices will it put a man upon:
how scraping, and niggardly and dunghill-like will that man live, in his Town,
or in his Parish; and expose himself to scorn and contempt from every one that
knows him. Suppose Ambition be the beloved sin, how will a man in that case,
swear and forswear and temporize, and like the Boat-men, look one way and row
another: almost any thing for preferment. If Uncleanness be the man's particular
sin, how will he destroy his body, disgrace his name; overthrow his estate, for
the gratifying of his lust? I dare aver, that the worst and basest drudgery
imaginable, to scour Kettles and Dishes, to tug at the Oar, to dig at the
Mine, are honorable employments, in comparison of this.

Use 3.
Is for Exhortation, and Direction, Col 3.5.
to press you to the mortification of your beloved sin, and show you how it may
be mortified: let me take up that Scripture again, mortify your members, which
are upon the earth, that is, let every sin be mortified; for you must know, as
death is to the members of the natural body, so is mortification to the members
of the sinful body. Now in death the soul is separated not only from one
member, as it is in a paralysis, or numb Palsy, but from all, even from the
principal parts of the body as well as others: so it is in spiritual death, there
is a separation of the soul not only from this or that sinful member, but from
the whole body of sin, from the principal parts and members of this body, as
well as others: the right eye is dead, the right hand is dead, it must needs be
so, the one is plucked out, and the other is cut off.

A Christian must deal by his darling lust, as the Israelites dealt by
Adonibezek, they cut of his thumbs, and his great toes, so must thou deal with
this sin, hack it, maim it, that it may not be able to go nor stand, nor act,
nor stir, if it were possible: and for that purpose take these directions.

1. Labor to have your heart steeled, with an holy courage, and resolution
against this sin, it is upon the account of baseness and cowardliness of
spirit, that people fall by the right hand of their spiritual enemy: shall I
give you some instances for this? does the Devil tempt thee to uncleanness, is
that thy right eye sin, or thy right hand sin? take up St Paul's resolution, 1
Cor. 6.15. Genesis 39.9. Psalm. 39.1.
Shall I take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot?
(...), God forbid? Joseph's resolution, How shall I do this wickedness, and sin
against God? does the Devil tempt the to blasphemy, or to perjury, or to lying,
or to any other sin of that nature? take up the Psalmists resolution, I said I
will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will keep my mouth
with a birdle, while the wicked are before me. Art thou tempted to Idolatry, to
deny the truths of Christ, to make shipwreck of faith, and a good Conscience?
take up the three childrens resolution, Be it known unto thee, oh King, Dan.
3.18.
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image, which thou have
set up. Every man should be a Prince over his lusts, and like Joshuas Captains,
should put his feet upon the necks of them: here courage, resolution, severity
is very successful: and in special exercise your revenge on your beloved lust:
fight not against small, or great comparatively, but against this kingly, this
master sin.

2. Let your repentance be particular for your particular iniquity: it is not
enough to confess your sins, in the lump, in the general, but in prayer, you
must take particular notice of your right eye sin, your right hand sin: thus
David was particular in his repentance, Against thee, thee only have I sinned
and done this evil in thy sight: Psalm. 51.4.
this evil of murder, and this evil of adultery, pointing as it were with the
finger to particular sins, L^k. 19.8.
Zacheus makes a particular confession, of that wrong and injustice, that he
had been guilty of: Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and
if I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold: this particle if in that place, may not be a note of doubting, but
supposition, if I have taken, that is, seeing I have taken from men by false
accusation? si Deus est animus, seeing God is a Spirit.

3. Beware of those things that may occasion the commission of this sin: for
instance, if thou art prone to the sin of lying, keep a door before thy lips:
if to gluttony and drunkenness, when thou go to a feast, put a knife to thy
throat. We use to say proverbially occasion makes a thief, this is true also in
other cases, occasion makes a liar: occasion makes a drunkard, it is a sign of
a naughty heart to dally with occasions to sin, Look not thou upon the wine,
Prove. 23.31.
says Solomon, when it is red, when it gives his color in the cup, when it
moves it self a right: it is not simply unlawful to look upon wine in the
glass, but if this may occasion intemperance, here is a law laid upon our
looks: that command which forbids a sin, forbids also those things that have a
tendency thereunto, as is observed by learned Commentators on the decalogue,
sometimes this is expressed in Scripture, the Commandment that forbids
Adultery: takes in all causes and occasions thereunto: thus Solomon speaking of
an Harlot, Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door
of her house: Harlots like pestilential diseases, make the houses infectious
where they are, and therefore come not nigh the door of her house: 1 These 5.22.
Avoid all appearance of evil: I know there are some that dislike the
translation of (...) by appearance, and rather think it should be expounded
sort or kind; but whether the word is taken in a Logical notion, in the whole
book of God is very questionable, and therefore why we should depart from the
current and stream of Exposit^rs, and the sense of our learned Translators, I
know not. When God would forbid the sin of injustice, selling wares by false
weights, mark how it is expressed, Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse
weights, Deuteronomy. 25.13.
a great and a small. It was a sin not only to sell wares by one sort of
weights, and take wares in by another: but to have a great, and small weight in
his bag, God would not have us come near the sin of injustice. Hence also is
that caution of St John, Little children keep your selves from Idols; 1 John,
5.21.
if you would avoid Idolatry, beware of Idols, he that would not hear the bell,
must not meddle with the Rope.

4. Pray unto God, that thou may not fall into such a condition, as may draw
forth that corruption, that thou art most prone to: this was that which undid
Judas, he was naturally inclined to unjust gain, and he had the Office of
carrrying the bag; and thus his lust was drawn forth. When a man is apt to be
high-minded, it is a snare to be in an high place: when a man is passionate, it
is sad to converse always or mostly with those, that are kindle-coals: that by
provocations and unworthy carriages, are casting fireballs into a man's soul,
and be having a gunpowder nature is in a flame presently. And the nearer the
relations in this case the worse. It is sad when my next neighbors house is on
fire, but it is worse when mine own is on fire: it is a promise made to the
people of God, that all conditions of life, and all passages of providence
shall work together for their good; and therefore the contrary, when our
conditions and relations make for the worse, especially with reference unto our
souls, it must needs be very sad.

5. Learn to suspect things that are delightful, Genesis 3.6. The woman saw that
the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes. Carnal
pleasures are forbidden fruit, Agrippina poisoned her husband in that meat he
loved best: the Devil tempts us with dishes sweetly poisoned. Love and delight,
pari passu ambulant, walk together, and keep the same pace: many a man has
been undone by riches and honors, and worldly comforts like the Be that is
drowned in its own honey. Christians be careful; Every one of us has Eves
sweet tooth in our heads.

6. Labor to act that grace in especial manner, which is contrary to thy
beloved sin: for instance, if passion be thy darling sin labor to act the
grace of meekness, if excess the grace of temperance, if uncleanness the grace
of chastity: let me tell you, where grace is helped by nature, upon the account
of a man's temper and constitution, there a little grace will go far: but when
grace is to be employed against nature, it had need to be strong and active:
your Watermen in some cases take their ease, and their Boats will go of
themselves, but when wind and tide is against them, then they must labor at
the Oar, hic labor, hoc opus.

7. Keep a watch over thy heart, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of life: so our Savior, Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, thiefts, false witness, blasphemy.
Godliness is but a fancy till the heart be reformed: Psa. 78.34, 35.
we read in the book of Psalms of Isreal's turning unto God; when he slew them,
then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after God, and they
remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer: but was
their conversion right? no, Ver. 36. They did flatter him with their mouth, and
they lied unto him with their tongue, and whence was this? Ver. 37. Their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant: therefore
mortify sin in its rise, in its first principle, lay the axe to the root,
there is more sap in the root, then in the branches; there is more sin in the
heart then in the life: one stroke at the root, of the tree, conduces more to
the deadning of it, then many at the body, or the boughs, or any other part
whatsoever.

To quicken your industry in this, know, that the motions of original sin, as
they are permanent, so they are exceeding violent, and impetuous. I remember
the learned Davenaunt, de justitia habituali and actuali, cap. 5. gives this
difference, between the remission of actual and original sin: when actual sins
are forgiven, says he, penitus tolluntur, quoad maculam and reatum, both as to
their guilt and filth: but it is not so with original sin, the guilt is done
away, but the stain remains; this is a sin that dwells in us, that abides in
us, and abides by us; we shall not be rid of the body of death, till the death
of the body! sin is an ill tenant, it will not out till the house fall upon its
head: now the certainty of the inherence of this sin, is an argument of the
more efficaciousness of its operation, modus operandi, sequitur modum essendi:
Unquenchable fire burns more fervently, then that which may be extinguished;
the reason why the Angels at this day do the will of God, in a more eminent
way, then the Saints on earth, is, because they have such a principle of
holiness, as cannot be lost to eternity, whereas the Saints on earth have a
weaker principle of holiness, which may unhappily be abated, though it be
recruited again: the reason why the soul of an healthful person, moves and acts
with more vivacity, and energy, and power, then the soul of a sick man, is
because in the latter, it may be departing, and taking its leave of the body,
or at lest may be in danger so to do, whereas the former, being a man of an
hayle and good constitution of body, the soul may act, inform enliven it many
years.

8. Get a respect to all Gods Commandments, Psa. 119.6. then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. The reason why men
indulge any one lust, is, because they pick and cull their duties, and so
indeed, serve not the will of God, but their own choice. Oh, how many are
there, that answer the Lord with half obedience, like the Echo, which makes
not a perfect respondence of the voice, but of some part thereof. Many make
such a difference amongst the Tables, as if only one side, or one part were of
Gods writing: Oh Sirs, this will not do; this will undo, the man that like
Agrippa, does but almost believe, almost repent, almost conform to the will of
God, that man shall be saved proportionably, almost. One sin unrepented of will
cause you to miscarry to all eternity: one crack in a bell may make it
unserviceable, untunable, and till it be new cast it is good for nothing: one
wound may kill your bodies and so may one sin your souls. Oh Christians, what
had become of you and I? if Jesus Christ had satisfied the justice of God for
all but one sin? there is a text in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18.27.
that is usually taken for a place of the greatest mercy in the whole book of
God, When the wicked turns away from his wickedness, that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. You have
to the same purpose, ver. 21, 22. of the same Chapter, but pray mark what
follows, ver. 28. Because he considers, and turns away from all his
transgression that he has committed, no mercy to be expected from this
Scripture, unless a man turn away from all his transgressions, 2 Timothy 2.21. the
vessel of honor is distinguished from the vessel of dishonor, by this
character, that it is sanctified and prepared for every good work: Luke 1.6.
and this is the commendation of Zachary, and Elizabeth, they were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments, and ordinances of the
Lord blameless. Halting in Religion is a troublesome, deformed dangerous
gesture; and there is no cure for this, like cutting off the right foot.

9. Lay hold on Gods strength for the mortifying of thy beloved sin: surely
this is no easy work; see how it is expressed in Scripture, sometime it is
called the mortification of our members; is to mortify a part of the body an
easy work? sometimes the circumcising of the foreskin of our hearts, Deuteronomy.
10.16. did the Sichemites count circumcision an easy work? by crucifying of
the affections, and lusts, Gal. 5.24. was crucifixion an easy death? and here
in the text, it is called a plucking out the right eye, and cutting off the
right hand: the Apostle Paul in the forementioned place, tells the Romans, if
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, you shall live. He who
is the fountain of spiritual life, is also the principle of this spiritual
death: this is a work to be done by us, but through the Spirit. Hence in
Scripture God is said to do this: Romans 8.13, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed: and the
Apostle expresses this by circumcision made without hands: Col. 2.11.
intimating that it is not a work of man's hands, but Gods.

Q. If any ask me, but how shall we lay hold on Gods strength?

R. By faith, great things are attributed unto this grace, because it lays hold
on God, and sets God at work, 1 John 5.4. This is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith: it overcomes not only the honors; and riches and
pleasures of the world, but the lusts of the world, of which you have mention,
1 Job. 2.16. says is a self-emptying grace, a poor beggarly hand, rich only in
receiving from another: something like David's sling and stone against Goliath
lusts: but in the name of the Lord of Hosts, and by his strength, even a babe
in Christ through faith shall overcome the world: I must tell you that
Hannibal, and Alexander, and all the glorious Victors that we read of, were but
fresh water Soldiers, in comparison of one that is born of God.

I shall only to what I have said, add a few Motives, to quicken you to your
duty, and so commend all to Gods blessing.

Motive 1.
Right-eye sins; and right hand sins are the greatest hindrances of the souls
closing with Christ. When you flea any creature, the skin comes off with ease,
till it comes to the head, and there it sticks, more then ordinary skill is
required to get it thence. Now I must tell you the sin that I am dissuading you
against, is, not only the eye sin, and the hand sin, but the head sin, and here
conversion sticks. The sinner forbears many sins, and performs many duties: but
when it comes to this, Oh master, says flesh and blood, pity thy self,
beware what thou do; what, be thine own Executioner? pluck out thy right
eye? cut off thy right hand? A man's sin is himself; to deny ungodliness, is to
deny self this is a kind of (...), self-murder: No man ever yet hated his
own flesh. Is there no getting to heaven, unless a man leave himself behind?
this is durus sermo, an hard saying: As Naaman the Syrian, 2 Reg. 5.18. When my
master goes into the house of Rimmon, to worship there, and he leans on my
hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in
this thing: So the sinner, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. Mark
10.20, 21.
The young man in the Gospel tells Christ, that he had kept all the
commandments from his youth: but when Christ said to him; One thing thou
lackest, go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasures in heaven, and come and take up thy cross and follow me:
here he sticks, verse 22. he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for
he had great possessions, or his great possessions had him; Alas, this poor
young man little thought, that notwithstanding his forwardness to keep the
Commandments, he was under the power of worldly lusts. Oh sirs! there is great
strength in a river, when it runs smoothly, and without noise.

Motive 2.
As these sins are the greatest hindrances of the souls closing with Christ, so
they prove the greatest trouble to the soul afterward. Your Eye-sin will prove
your eyesore, yea and your heart-sore: My meaning is, your con^cience will
suffer most upon the account of this sin all your days. Thus Job, cap. 13.26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities
of my youth. When a man's conscience is disquieted and tormented for the sins of
his youth, then he may be said to possess them: yea it may occasion not only
grief, but guilt. Of all sins, this is many times most unmortified even after
Mortification: Soldiers that have received wounds and bruises when young, have
smart^d by them when they have been old. There are many good souls, that after
cure have gone to heaven, halting on the old maim.

Motive 3.
The mortifying of our darling lust, our right-eye sin, and our right hand sin
is a choice evidence of regeneration: truth of grace has as much as any way
been declared thus. Acts 19.19.
Paul after conversion, becomes a Preacher of that name, which he before
blasphemed. Those of Ephesus that were given to witchcraft, and sorcery, after
their conversion, brought their books together, and burned them before all men:
and many other instances of the like nature are urged by Divines to this
purpose. Cranmer that had subscribed the Popish Articles with his right hand,
afterward as a piece of revenge, put that hand first into the flames. A true
Convert, of all sins, will be revenged most upon that, by which he has most
dishonored God. His right eye, and his right hand shall smart for it; the one
must be plucked out, and the other must be cut off, as we say of hunger, he
will kill that, which otherwise would have killed him; I speak much of
mortification and death to you this morning: Christians be not afraid: to dye
thus does not argue imperfection: there is corruption perfectiva, a corruption
that tends to perfection: I was alive says Paul, Romans 7.9.
without the Law once: but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I
dyed. This is expiring unto life, just as an Embrio expires after it becomes a
child.

Here I would add two Cautions under this head.

1. The forbearing of any outward act of sin whatsoever, is no evidence of
Mortification, or Conversion: Sin may be restrained when it is not mortified, a
chained Lion is a Lion still, a Swine washed, is a Swine still. In some sense
you may be said to be a new man, and yet you may not be a new creature. This
may come to pass partly from the sense of temporal inconveniences, partly
from the clamours of natural conscience, or from fear of wrath. Such
principles as these are not strong enough to kill sin, or to heal the Soul, but
are like those odours which we use, to raise men out of a fit of the Falling
sickness, but does not at all cure them of the disease.

2 The mortifying of our darling sin is joined with an universal hatred of all
sin: A true Convert hates every false way, as the Psalmist phrases it, sin is
often expressed in Script by abomination: it is so to God, it should be so to
man; anger is only with reference to particulars, but hatred is (...) against
the kind; a godly man hates sin as sin, and therefore he hates every sin; the
Devil hates goodness, as goodness, and therefore he hates all goodness, a
quatenus, ad omne valet consequentia, a man may be angry with sin, and not kill
sin: but as he that hates his brother is a murderer, so he that hates sin is a
mortifier. When the right eye is plucked out, and the right hand is cut off,
the whole body of sin has its deaths wound. The man that keeps himself from
his iniquity, will keep himself from every iniquity: the heart with one
hole-reserved for sin is not sound.

Motive 4.
Mortification is a duty becoming the best of Saints whilst they are in this
world. I told you in the beginning of this discourse, that the Text was part of
Christ's Sermon upon the Mount; and if you consult the first and second verses
of this Chapter, you shall find that it was preached to Christ's own Disciples,
Vir bonus and pius, Gal. 5.24.
non est qui carnem non habet, sed qui carnem suam mortificat: a good man is
not one that has no flesh, but he that has crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

It is with our sinful body, as with our natural body: If you cut a Wenn or
any Excrescence of that nature, it will grow again, and again, and it will be
an hard matter to be rid of it all your days: So though every day we be paring
away our lusts, yet they grow again.

To close all, Go on and persevere in the subduing and killing of thy beloved
Lust: Mortification is a work once done, and yet in this life it is always a
doing: There are some things that consist of an iteration of multiplied acts;
as in Wedlock, persons are actually married at once, the Husband surrenders
himself unto the Wife, and the Wife surrenders her self unto her Husband, and
yet if they live together, sutably to that near relation; marriage is as it
were renewed every day: there is a continual surrender of themselves each to
other: So it is here, when the soul is first converted, the beloved sin is
mortified, and yet there is a continual mortification of it: this is a duty
that consists not in any one act, though never so good, never so vigorous: but
it is a continued act of the whole life. It Is not killing sin at one blow; the
strength of sin decays by degrees, it begins in the weakening of sin, and ends
in the destroying of sin. Sin dies a lingering death, therefore let us go on in
this great and necessary work. You know Sampson denied, and denied Dalilah for
some time, and would not discover where his strength lay: but not holding out;
he lost his strength and his life to boot: beware of Apostasy. Crabs that go
backward are reckoned amongst unclean creatures, Lev. 11.10. Factum non
dicitur, quod non perseverat is a maxim, a Will not finished, is no Will: a
Deed, unless it be signed, sealed, and delivered, is no Deed. The Sacrifice
that was offered up unto God, was not to want so much as the tail, Lev. 3.6.
True Christians hate sin so perfectly, that they cannot be quiet till it be
utterly abolished. First, they go to God for Justification ne damnet: then for
sanctification, ne regnet, then for glorification, ne sit. Let us be faithful
as to this spiritual death, that we may receive a crown of life. Amen.

What Relapses are inconsistent with Grace?
HEB. 6.4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost;
And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come: If
they shall fall away, to renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify
to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.


I Could say (Beloved) of the Interpretation and Application of this Scripture,
before I begin to open it (containing the Doom and sad Sentence pronounced
against Apostates and Relapsarians) as once Daniel did to the King, before he
opened his mouth to give the sense of his Ominous Dream, Dan. 4 19.
The Dream be to them that hate thee, and the Interpretation, to thine enemies;
yet shall I not wish so much ill to our worst enemies; but the Text, be to them
that hate God and the Interpretation, only to the enemies and despisers, or
despitors of his grace.

It is one of the most startling Scriptures in all the Bible, and one of the
most Terrible flying fiery Roules in all the Book of God, utterly consuming the
house of the hypocrite Apostate with the timber thereof and the stones thereof,
and dreadfully affrighting his truly Religious neighbor who trembles at Gods
Word.

The Novatians or Cathari abused this place of old, Genesis 40.
to shut the Church-doors and gate of grace, upon such as had fallen after
their profession of Christianity. And many poor souls and troubled consciences
have as often quite perverted, or misunderstood it to the shutting up the gate
of heaven, and door of hope against themselves, after their bitterly bewailed
falls or slips: but both unjustly.

But as Joseph's Interpretation once of the same nights dream, when rightly
applied, did rid the Butler, out of his misapprehended fears, and only left
the more secure Baker under that execution which the other apprehended, but
himself never dreamt of, so neither this nor any other Scripture speaks a word
of terror to any sin-troubled soul, that trembles at Gods threats. But all the
Prophets Prophecy good with one consent to these, and my word shall be like
one of theirs.

It was indeed once a joyful sight which Jacob beheld at Bethel, Gen 28.12. A
ladder whose foot stood on the earth and the top reached to heaven, and Angels
ascending and descending upon it.

But here we see a Ladder whose top spires toward heaven, but the foot rests
in hell, where (seeming) Angels of light ascend, or such new strange Gods
ascend as the Witch once saw out of the earth) but black Apostate Angels
descend, Intrat Angelus, Exit demon. 1 Samuel 28.13.


I am to speak of the Case of Relapses, and my Text is the fairest glass to
discover so foul a sight as I know.

Here we have the rise and fall, the first and the last, the better and worse
part of an Apostate-hypocrite described.

1. The former, his Rise, his first and Better part set out in five
Particulars. 1. Enlightening. 2. Tasting the heavenly gift, as of some common
faith, or repentance, or the like. 3. Partaking of the Holy Ghost (which is not
to be understood of the sanctifying graces of the Holy Ghost, but the common,
or extraordinary gifts, as of Tongues, etc. of the sanctifying Spirit) 4.
Tasting the good word of God, 5. And the powers of the life to come. He says
not (...), or (...), but (...), ut cum edificium male sartum prorsus corruit.
Paroe, in loc.
Had they had to these five steps two other more, sincerity at the bottom of
the Ladder, and perseverance at the top, they had been safe.

2. The later, his fall, his last and worse part, is set out in four Things.

1. His fall is a break-neck, fatal downfall. They fall away] It is not an
ordinary slip, or stumble, but a downright, not fair fall, but a foul given
them by Satan, such a fall as his own was at first.

2. The irrecoverableness of that fall, they are past grace, and grace and
mercy has done with them; They cannot be renewed to repentance, as is said of
Esau, there is no place for their repentance, though he sought for the blessing
with tears, Heb. 12.17.

3. The certainty of that irrecoverableness, in that it is said to be
impossible, etc. he does not say, it is hard, or unlikely or seldom seen, but
is absolutely impossible (...), it was never seen or ever shall be. Impossible
not so much ex natura rei, as some things are utterly impossible which imply a
contradiction, as that true should be false, good evil, light darkness; these
impossible because inconsistent with the nature of the things themselves. But
impossible ex instituto Dei, because inconsistent with Gods decree and declared
will, as impossible as we say, An elect, or true believer should perish, or an
impenitent person be saved, so we mean impossible by reason of Gods
irreversible decree concerning such.

4. The cause that makes all this dead-sure and seals the stone of this
certainty. Seeing they crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God, and put
him to open shame, and make no account of the blood of Christ, and the grace
and promise of the Gospel, and of the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and are
therefore said to sin against the Holy Ghost, because they directly slight,
resist and oppose the gracious office and workings of the holy Spirit.

But I must stay no longer upon the words, by reason of that brevity expected
in this Exercise.

Religion, to decay and Apostatize from grace. To have had some work of the
Spirit, and the Word upon their hearts, so as to have light, and love, and
taste, and gifts, and savor, and seriousness, and hopes, and fears, and after
all to cool and give over: Oh how desperate is such a case!

To go to hell with so much of heaven, Oh what a hell is that! Heb. 10.26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. But a certain fearful looking for
of judg^ment, etc. 2 Pet 2.20, 21, 22. For if after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse
with them then the beginning; for it had been better for them not to have known
the way of righteousness, then after they have known to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them, etc.

Such a thing there may be; possibly the Text supposes it that such may fall,
and fall away, totally and finally, only pronounces an impossibility of their
rising again.

Some are said to fall from grace, Gal. 5.4. the stony and th^rny ground did so
in a parable. Demas, Judas, Saul, Hymenaeus did so in good earnest. A great
Apostasy was foretold in the first days to let in Antichrist, 2 These. 2.3. And
in the reign of Antichrist more. 1 Timothy: 4.1. all are warned, Let him that
stands take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Heb. 12.15. Look diligently lest
any fail of, or fall from the grace of God. Some of John's hearers after a while
left him, Joh. 5.35. Many of our Saviors hearers quite left him, Joh. 6.66.
Many of Paul's supposed converts were turned away, all they of Asia, 2 Timothy 1.15.

Some have left their Love, Rev. 2.3. Some left the Faith, 1 Timothy 5.12. Some
have turned after the world as Demas, 2 Timothy 4 10. Some have turned aside after
Satan. 1 Timothy 5.15.
And would to God there were no Example to be given in our age and observation,
it is that which the professors of a true Religion are more subject to, then
those of a false, Jer. 21.1. Has a nation chang^d their god, which yet are no
gods: but my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit.

Now there are three falls to which men are subject.

1. Some fall as wood or Cork into the water sink at first, Mat. 14.31. Act.
27.20, and 44.
but get up again, being helped by the hand of divine grace, as Peter, or
brought off by a miracle of mercy, as Paul and his company after all hopes of
safety were quite taken a way.

This the fall of the godly.

2. Some fall as lead or stone into the bottom of hell, as Pharaohs host into
the bottom of the sea, and never rise again, Exodus 15.
having neither promise of God, nor seed of God to raise them up again, 1 Timothy
1.19.
but make a final shipwarck of faith and conscience, and of their souls
together.

This the fall of the wicked.

3. There is a mixed fall common to both, which is like the falling into an
Epidemical Disease whereof many dye, and as many recover, of which in their
order.

There are four kinds or degrees of falling, which the people of God are
subject to; And four kinds or degrees to which the wicked are subject; and each
latter is worse then other in them both.

1. The first and lightest fall of the godly, 4. Falls of the Godly.
is that in their daily combat between flesh and spirit, set out Romans 7. at
large, and Gal. 5.17. We cannot do what we would, but fail or fall short after
our best endeavors. Our duties are imperfect, graces defective, our gold and
silver drossy, our wine mixed with water. Sin deceives, surprizeth, captiveth,
slays, yet reigns not all this while. It is not I, but sin that dwells in
me. I consent to the Law, I delight in the law of God, even in my inner man,
etc.

These falls or slips are unavoydable and involuntary, there is no Saint but
complains of them, no duty but is stained with them. In our clearest Sunshine
we see a world of such Moats which yet hinder not the light and comfort of our
Justification, and destroy not Sanctification. True grace consists with these,
Velimus, nolimus Irruunt in nos Egyptiorum muscae. and obstrepunt Ranae in
Cubilibus Regiis. Prove. 24.16.
yea is not separated from the assaults and induelling of such motions. Will
we, Nill we, said Bernard, We are pesterd with swarms of these Egyptian flies,
and have these frogs in our inmost chambers.

We are none of us Supralapsarians in this sense, but Sub-lapsarians all, yea
and Relapsarians too. The just falls seven times a day, by this infirmity and
rises again, and takes no harm, but is kept humble and depending thereby.
Every son and daughter of Abraham is kept bound under this spirit of infirmity,
to their dying day.

This first fall is but like the fall of a mist in a winter morning, the Sun
gets up and it is a fair day after.

This is the first fall: The second is worse, which is

2. An actual and visible stumble as to offense of others, yet occasioned by
some surreptitious surprise of temptation, for want of that due consideration
which we should always have, this Gal. 6.1. the Apostle calls a man's being
overtaken with a fault, who is to be restored with a spirit of meekness,
considering we also may be tempted: such falls (or slips rather) all or most
are subject to (...), Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all. We sometimes
trip, or slip, or miss our hold, so the word signifies, and so down we come,
but not out of choice. Thus did Peter slip or halt, Gal. 2.14. when he did
Judaise, out of too much compliance with the Jews, whom therefore Paul did
rebuke and restore. Thus the Disciples slipped, when they in zeal to Christ
would have fire fetched down from heaven upon those that would not receive them,
Luke 9.54, 55.
whom Christ set right with a spirit of meekness.

These slips or falls are like those of him whose foot is wrenched, or out of
joint, whence he halts till it be set right. Thus Peter is said to halt; Gal.
2.14.
he did not (...), only not, (...): but when Paul had set his wrenched foot, he
went upright ever after. Hence that word (...), Gal. 6.1. restore] is a
Surgeons word, to set him right, as a bone out of joint. He that shall be
censorious and severe against these two first kind of falls incident to most,
let him as Constantine said to Acesius the Novatian Bishop, Get himself a
ladder, Socr. l. 1. c. 7.
and climb up to heaven by himself, he should have but a few come there else.

3. The third fall is much worse, a fall from the third lost, whence like
Eutichus they are taken up dead for the present, but they come to themselves
again. These are falls into grosser and more scandalous sins which do Vastare
conscientiam, set the stacks or Cornfieldsd of Conscience on fire, whereas the
other two forenamed (especially the former) are such as Tertullian calls
Quotidianae Incursionis, these are very dangerous, and befall not all
Professors (they had not need) but now and then one falls into some scandalous
sin, but they not usually again into the same sin after sense and repentance of
it. Thus fell David and Peter into foul flagitiousness, but not deliberately,
nor totally, nor finally, nor reiteratedly. Sin raged indeed, and seemed to
reign for the present, Moses hands grew weak, and the hand of Amaleck prevailed
for the present: But a seed of God was in them, 1 John 3.9.
and they could not sin unto death, but were renewed to repentance, and their
sins are blotted out.

This fall is like the fall of the Leaf in Autumn; life remains safe; a Spring
in due time follows, though many a cold blast first.

4. There is yet one worse fall than these former incident to a child of God
too, to be of the decaying hand, and to remit and lose his former fervor and
liveliness.

And it may be he never comes (as the second Temple) up to the former pitch and
glory. Ezra 3.12; 1 King. 11, 4, 9, 10.
Thus Solomon's zeal and love was abated in his old age, as his father David's
natural heat was in his age, that he needed an Abishag to lie in his bosom,
Incepit melius qu^m definit, Vltima primit cedunt, dissimilis h^c puer, ille
senex.
so was Solomon's spiritual heat cooled by the many Abishags that lay in his
bosom: and though he was beloved of his God, his Sun set in a cloud, his last
was not like his first. Thus Sampson, after many triumphs over the Philistims,
was at length circumvented and betrayed into their hands, who bound him, put
out his eyes, made sport with him, who though his hair and strength grew again,
and he dyed in the Quarrel, and dyed a Victor, yet never did he regain his
sight or liberty to his dying day. These kind of decays are dangerous, and make
the people of God go mourning to their dying day, and they are saved as by
fire. But are not inconsistent with grace.

This is like the fall of the hair in aged persons, life yet remains, but
strength, native heat, and radical moystness decay, and the hair never grows
alike thick again.

These are the fallings of the children of God, and there are four worse than
these follow, of the unregenerate, and each worse than other.

The 4 falls of the ungenerate. 1 Samuel 4.18.
1. The first whereof is a final fall (but not a Total at first) but
insensible by degrees, sensim sine sensu, grow worse and worse, as the Thorny
ground, choked with cares, or drowned with the pleasures of the world. This
proves like Elies fall, they fall backward, break their necks, and dye of it,
and may with him be much lamented and pittyed, but they are dead and lost.

2. Some fall totally and finally, but not premoditately and voluntarily at
first, but are driven back by the lion of Persecution and Tribulation in the
way, Mark. 4.17.
and they retreat. These endure for a season, as the stony ground; and leaving
God, they are for ever left and forsaken of him. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

This is like the fall of Sisera at the feet of Jael, Judge. 5.27. At her feet
he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell; where he bowed,
he fell and lay down dead.

3. Some more fearfully, Totally, finally, voluntarily, deliberately, but not
yet maliciously. Thus Demas is supposed to fall, who of a forward Disciple or
Teacher, is said to have become after an Idol Priest at Thessalonica (so
Dorotheus reports of him.) Thus fell Saul, who having rejected the Word of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 16.14.
the Lord rejected him, and the spirit of God departed from him, and an evil
spirit from the Lord troubled him.

Of these three last I may say as Elisha to Hazael of Benhadad, 2 King. 8.10.
These may certainly recover, howbeit, says he; the Lord has showed me that he
shall surely dye. These have not yet crucified the Son of God afresh, nor done
despite to the Spirit of grace, therefore it is not impossible they should be
renewed again to repentance.

These are like Sardis, Rev. 3.1.2, 3. may have a name to live, but are dead:
Their works not perfect before God, ready to dye, yet are called once again to
Repentance, otherwise certain destruction threatened.

But this is like the fall of Haman, whose doom was read by his wife and best
friends. Esth. 6.13.
If once thou beginnest to fall, thou shall not recover, but shall certainly
fall irrecoverably.

And these end fearfully usually, and unpittyed spectacles of Gods wrath, to
astonish and warn others as Spira once.

4. The fourth and last fall follows, which is like the opening of the fourth
Seal, Rev. 6.8.
and the fourth horse appears, a pale horse, and he that sat on him is called
Death, and Hell followed with him. When men fall Totally, finally, voluntarily,
and maliciously: Thus Simon Magus, Julian the Apostate, Hymaeneus and
Alexander, whose names are in Gods black book. Here the Gulf is fixed, and
thee is a nulla retrorsum hence. These are not to be renewed by repentance.

This fall is like that of Jerichos walls, Josh. 6.20. Jer. 51.58.
they fell down flat with a curse annexed, or as Babylons walls, with a
Vengeance, both without hope of repairing. Or like the fall of Lucifer the
first Apostate without offer, or hope of offer of grace any more for ever; or
like the fall of Judas, who falling headlong burst asunder in the midst, Acts
1.18.
and all his bowels gushed out.

There is also another kind of fall of a mixed or middle nature, The mixed fall.
and to which side of the two, Godly or Reprobate, I should cast it is not so
easy to determine. A reiterated fall into some foul act or curse of sin,
and herein I must proceed as warily as the Priest of old in a doubtful case of
Leprosy, whether to pronounce Clean or Unclean, Lev. 13, 4, 5, 6, etc.
and by his rule I shall go. He was to shut him up seven days, and look upon
him better ere he could give his Definitive sentence. If therefore

1. I see the sore be but skin deep,] Lev. 13.4. and 34. and have not corrupted
the blood.

2. If it stand at a stay and spread not further] v 5.6. So also v. 23.28.34.37.

3. If all become white] by repentance and mortification I shall pronounce him
clean. It is a scab, it is but a scab, verse. 6. or a scall, v. 34 It is no
deadly Leprosy.

But on the other side, 1. If it be deeper then the skin] (having taken the
heart with the love and liking of it) v. 20.25.30.

2. If it spread further and further] by renewed acts, verse. 8.27.36.

3. If there be proud raw flesh in the rising, verse. 10.14, 15. and the man
presumptuously live in it, and plead for it, I shall pronounce him unclean, it
is an old Leprosy, verse. 11. It is not the spot of Gods children. Deuteronomy. 35.5.


Concerning Relapses, I shall desire you to take notice of these eight
observations.

1. It is very observable that the holy Ghost is very sparing in setting down
in the Scriptures instances in this kind, well foreseeing how apt flesh and
blood is to abuse and pervert such Examples to their own destruction: Such
examples are as Simeon said of Christ, Luke 2.34.
set for the fall and rising again of many, and are a sign spoken against. How
have David's and Peter's falls emboldned many to fall and live in sin. There is
not one instance in all Scripture of any Saint that laid violent hands up-
himself, lest any should presume to do the like. But one Example of late
Repentance accepted, lest many should presume, yet one lest any should despair.
Those falls are not set as Landmarks to guide you, but as Sea-marks to warn
you.

2. It is certain Paul returned not to persecute the Church after his
Conversion, or Manasses to re-erect Idolatry, or Matthew to the Receipt of
Custom after he was called thence.

3. Nor did David and Peter fall again into the same soul act of sin after
they had truly repented.

4. They were only wicked ones as Ahab, Pharaoh, Saul, Jeroboam, who persist
and return to sinful courses, from drunkenness to thirst, from thirst to
drunkenness. Of Jeroboam it is said; After this (the Prophets warning, his Arm
smitten, his prayer thereupon, the recovery upon the Prophets prayer) Did he
return again, 1 King. 13.33.
and made of the lowest of the people Priests of his high places, etc. Neither
warning, nor judgments, nor mercies could work any amendment in him.

1 John. 3.9.
5. It is as certain that he who is born of God does not commit sin, so as to
make a trade of it, returning to his Vomit: But he that is born of God keeps
himself, 1 John 5.19.
and the wicked one touches him not. He has paid too dear for such a
miscarriage, it was not so light a matter to lie under Gods wrath, lose his
former peace, nor was his comfort so soon restored, and Gods favor regained,
that he should hazard all anew, and buy Repentance at so dear a rate.

Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20.
6. Very dreadful is that threat of God: If there be among you man or woman --
or a root that bears gall and wormwood: And it come to pass, when he hears
the words of this Curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart, adding drunkenness
to thirst. The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in
this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
heaven. And the Lord shall separate (and single him out) unto evil, etc.

7 Obs. Relapses into sin are like Relapses into a Disease after hopes and
beginning of recovery, if by taking cold, or want of heed taking or other
disorder the disease return, and the man down again, this is worse than the
first ill fit, and long ere such recover. But if as soon as he get a little
strength he fall into a new Relapse, we reckon his case very doubtful, if not
desperate.

8. Yet it is not to be denied, but there are some sins of humane infirmity
which though repented of, a godly person may be again overtaken with and
foiled, yet not his last end worse then his beginning. Thus was Jonah overtaken
with his passion a second time, Abraham with his excusatory lie, Mat. 20.25.
with Luke 22.25.
the Disciples after a former rebuke a second time contending for superiority.

The first fall in this kind I should liken to a sad and dangerous fall, by
which one has broken a bone in his leg or arm, which though it put him to much
pain is well set again, and he becomes as strong as before, but more wary while
he lives, David speaks of his fall into sin, that it was as a breaking of his
bones. But a second fall, Psalm. 51.
is like the breaking of the bone the second time, which is more hardly set,
and put to more pain, and it may be the man feels it at times to his dying day.

But a third or more frequent relapse, is like the putting of an arm out of
joint, again and again, not being well bound and looked to in time, becomes
habitually loose and never keeps the place: so it is here, Crebrous and
frequent acts of sin beget an habit, and custom in sin, and then as soon may
the Ethiopian change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13.23.
as one accustomed to do evil, ever learn to do well.

Bernard describes the steps of sin, how it comes to its height. First time it
is importable, next time heavy, Prima importabile, processu temporis grave,
paulo post leve, postea placet and suave est, ad extremum, quod erat
imp^rtabile ad faciendum, est impossible, ad continendum, Bern. de Cons. Ex
voluntate perversa facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur
facta est necessitas, Aug. cons. l. 8. Ad illum modicum, quotidiana modica
addendo in eam consuetudinem lapsa erat, ut prope eam plenos mero caliculos
inhianter hauriret. Conf. l. 9.
no more importable, then easy, then light, then sweet, at last necessary; and
what was at first importable to be committed, is now impossible to be omitted.
And St. Austin confirms this by a story of his own Mother, who by sipping of
the Cup at first when she filled the Wine, learnt at last to take almost whole
Cups, Qui modica non spernit paulatim decidit, is his good note upon it, he
that makes a small matter of small sins, is in the ready way to fall into the
greatest. Every new relapse into a former sin, is like the adding of a new
figure to the first cipher, which raises the sinners account ten or an hundred
times more.

Therefore if thou have been overtaken once, stop and be humbled, and say once
I have spoken or done amiss, but I will not answer to plead for my self; ware
the second time, the second fall, as the second blow makes the fray: but if a
second time, say you twice, but I will proceed no further: Job. 40.4, 5. Esaias
5.18. Eccl. 4.12. Esaias 24.27, 28
but be sure thou take heed of drawing sin with a threefold cord, or cart-rope:
this threefold cord is not easily broken, take heed of a third act; fear and
the pit, and the snare are before thee: Oh bold and presumptuous sinner: if
thou escape the fear (of the first act) thou may perish in the pit (for the
second) but if thou escape the pit, thou will be taken in the snare (the third
time) upon the ungodly, God raineth snares, Psa. 11.6.
God gives once to a reprobate mind, and they are gone. Think not after a third
or fourth act of presumptuous sin, to go and shake thy self (by prayer and
repentance) as Sampson once, Judge. 16.^0.
and that thy strength may return to thee to be delivered from these
Philistines which lie in wait for thee, he did so but wist not (till he found
it by woeful experience) that the Lord was departed from him; so may it be with
thee, therefore be warned.

Heb. 12.15. the Apostle Items us to look diligently lest any fall from the
grace of God, the Angels did so at first, and Adam soon after, and that which
was Morbus Angelicus then, is Morbus Anglicus now. The Lord may complain of us,
as justly as ever he did of Israel, My people are bent to backesliding from me,
Hos. 11.7. and Esaias 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more, ye will revolt more
and more: and Jer. 8.5. Why is this people slidden back by perpetual
backeslidings? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. This is, and of
late has been the case and Epidemical Disease of England. It is no new thing
to see the sons of fallen man to fall, and fall away. Saul, Joash, Amaziah,
Judas, Demas, Alexander fell away of old. Of all Israel that came out of Egypt
with Moses and Aaron only two, Caleb and Joshua followed God fully, Numb.
14.24. Of the four grounds in the Parable only one held out. Many of John
Baptists hearers left him and fell away, Joh. 5.35. Many of Christ's hearers and
disciples, Joh. 6.65. Many of Peter's, 2 Pet. 2.20. Many of Paul's, 2 Timothy 1.15.
and 1 Timothy 5.15. Many of John the Evangelists hearers, 1 John 2.19. They went
out from us, because they they were not of us, for had they been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out that they might be
made manifest, that they were not all of us. But none of these were ever
sincere Christians and sound at the heart.

We wonder not to see an house built on the sand to fall, or seed not having
root wither, or trees in the parched Wilderness decay, Jer 17.6. or Meteors
vanish, or Blazing-stars fall, or Clouds without rain blown about, or Wells
without springs dried up. So for Hypocrites to prove Apostates no strange
thing, and utterly to fall away. There are four wills some have observed. 1.
The Divine will never alters or turns. 2. The Angels will has turned, never
returns. 3. The will of man fallen turned, and in conversion returns. 4. The will
of Apostates after that grace received and abused turns away and never returns;
but becomes like the fallen Angels.

2. Even Godly and gracious persons are subject to fall, and therefore must not
be secure, they must work out their salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2
12. they are bidden to fear least they should fall short, Heb. 4.1. Stand fast,
1 Cor. 16.13. Take heed least they fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Look diligently least
any fail of (or fall from, so is the other reading) the grace of God, Heb.
12.15. Take the whole armor of God that they may be able to stand, Ephesians. 6.12.

Even the very Elect have this root of bitterness and seeds of Apostasy within
them. Even Peter had sunk if Christ had not put forth his hand to save him from
the water, Mat. 14.31. and had been winnowed as chaff, Luk 21.31, 32
if Christ had not prayed for him that his faith should not fail.

Let not him therefore that puts on his harness boast, as he that puts it off,
1 King. 20.11.

3. Yet a truly regenerate soul, a plant of Gods planting by the water side; a
plant or graffe grafted into Christ, and rooted in Christ can never fall away
totally or finally: Peter could not when Christ prayed for him. The Elect
cannot, Mat. 24.24. In the general Apostasy of the Christian world, and the
greatest persecutions under Rome-pagan and Rome-pseudo-christian (Antichristian
both times) when all the world wandered after the Dragon and the Beast: they
who had their names written in the Lambs book held out, and warped not, Rev.
13.8. and 17.8. The elect are as Mount Sion that cannot be moved, and are as
fixed stars that fall not. The house on the Rock stands firm in all weathers.
The Tree by the waters side, Jer. 17.8. Seed in good ground, Mat. 13. They who
have a seed of God in them cannot so sin, 1 John 3 9 And they that are born of
God, 1 John 5.18. They who are in the hand of Christ, none can pluck them out,
Joh. 10.28.

Yet as to the fallings of the Elect (not presuming to tell you the minimum or
summum quod sic) we shall make those concessions, or observations.

1. We grant that the godly, as well as others, are subject to this
falling sickness, having seeds of Apostasy in them; and would certainly fall
irrecoverably, if left to themselves. In te stas and non stas, Aug.
By strength (his own) no man shall prevail or stand, 1 Samuel 29.

2. Grace received truly sanctifying is not for his measure so great, Widows
oil kept from decay, fed by a spring of Auxiliary grace; as Joseph's bow abode
in strength by the arm of God, and his bough green and fruitful, Genesis 49.22,
23, 24. Gratia gratiam postulat. (...), 1 Cor. 15.10.
sed by a well of living water: so that it is not the grace in us; but the
grace with us: grace supervening, and additional which keeps us from falling.
Even the good ground were it not for the influence of the Sun and Rain, would
prove as the stony and Thorny Ground.

Amalek, sometimes Israel prevails, and this war lasts not as that between the
house of Saul and David for certain years: but as that between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all their days. 2 Samuel 3.1. 1 King. 14.30.


Paul sometimes as in the third heaven, cries out, We are more then Conquerors,
who shall separate us from the love of God, etc. sometimes as under foot, cries
out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death.

Peter; yea, lie long as David: it is hard to say how low they may fall, and
how long they may lie, yet sin not unto death; as the Sun is for many months
absent from some Climates, yet returns again; so that they may then say with
the Church, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall I shall arise,
Micah 7.8.
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Abraham twice denying his wife, the Disciples twice contending for supremacy.
And as I will not say how often thy brother trespassing, and repenting is to be
forgiven, not to seven, but to seventy times seven so I cannot say how often
through infirmity a sinner trespassing, and returning with repentance may be
forgiven, Gods mercies and thoughts being so far above man's.

Carnal, sold under sin, a forced slave to it, Romans 7.14. 3. As if nothing had
been done yet, and all was to do, he begs, O God, create a new heart in me,
Psalm. 51. 4. He may be apt to conclude against himself, I never did yet truly
believe or repent; and which is worse with Thomas, I never shall believe. 5. In
this case he lies bound as Peter, Joh. 20.25. Act. 12.6, 7.
and cannot help himself till the Angel comes and strikes off the bands, and
opens the iron-gate. 6. And as to comfort he may be at an utter loss, walk in
darkness, Esaias 50.10. judge himself cut off, Ezekiel. 37.11. his hope perished,
Lam. 3.18. God hiding his face, Satan showing his teeth, casting forth a flood,
and shooting in a peal of fiery darts, Curse God and dye. Thou art mine as sure
as death, as sure of damnation, as I my self. Then how does a poor soul mourn!
I am forsaken and quite cast out of sight, I am as a bottle in the smoke (of
hell) like a broken vessel, or fire-band reserved for hell, as possible for
this Venice-glass said that destressed Gentlewoman Mrs. Honywood, not to be
broken when it falls on the ground; as for me to escape the damnation of hell.
God can do much says he, but does he show wonders among the dead, Psalm. 88.10.
Then pray he would, but cannot, hope he would but cannot, believe he would but
dare not, fear he would not, but must, resolve he would to cast himself upon
God, but he sees his resolution set another way, and he cannot he thinks change
it, therefore does he not go about it. To God he says, I am cast out of thy
sight, Psalm. 31.22. To Satan Vicisti Satana, Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
to despair I yield, but call not for quarter, nor beg I mercy, to affliction he
says I am in the belly of hell, Jon. 2.2.
the weeds and chains of hell wrap me about, to Ministers and other friends he
says, Stand away, go not about to comfort me, Esaias 22.4. To promises and
experience he says in his haste, All are Liars.

Yet may the tide turn, Gratia nec totaliter intermittitur, nec finaliter
amittitur. Actus omittitur, habitus non amittitur; actio pervertitur, fides non
subvertitur; concutitur, non excutitur, defluit fructus, latet succus; jus ad
regnum amittunt demeritorie, non effective Pride. Effectus justificationis
suspenditur, at status justificati non dissolvitur, Suff. Bri^
and the Sun of Righteousness arise after a long winter, and continual night as
in those remote Climates, who sit in the region and shadow of death, and come
with healing under his wings; and he may cry out, Rejoice with me, I have found
him whom my soul loves; the lost sheep is found by the good sheepherd, the
lost Savior is found, Luke 2. the lost star seen again, Mat. 2. And the
utterly despairing hopes of salvation are disappointed by a safe, though
hazardous coming to land, Acts 27.20. and 44.

For Gods election stands firm, and his love is unchangeable, and his gifts
without repentance; and the undertaking of Christ is to keep his to the end,
that none shall pluck them out of his hand; and whom he gives himself for, he
presents them spotless and blameless before his Father.

Therefore are the Godly as firm and safe from utter falling away, as Mount
Sion from being removed, or an house on a rock from being subverted.

Here follows an Use of Terror, and speaks to four Sorts.

2. Use of Terror. Hic videmus quanta sit Apostasiae atrocitas, nihil ad eam
hemicidia, adulteria, surta, etc. Par. in lo.
1. This Text is thunder and lightning against Apostates. Awake you drowsy
Professors. There is no sin like Apostasy: Adulteries, Manslaughter, Theft,
Idolatries, etc. nothing to this, No impossible written over them, they have
been renewed to repentance, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Mary Magdalens seven unclean
spirits; and Manasses ten or more, not so bad as the unclean spirit going out,
and a return with an Ogdeas malorum spirituum, as Irenaeus calls it, with seven
other spirits more besides it self. Thou art in the highway to perdition, to
the sin against the Holy Ghost. Sins and judgments meet together in this sin.
The Cataracts of upper and nether springs, all the windows of heaven and
fountains of the great deep, (as in that great deluge, Genesis 11.) are broken up
to drown thee in perdition. Thy sins making way for more judgments, and this
judgment making way for more sins, till between these two seas thy soul (as
that vessel, Act. 27.41.) is eternally shipwrackt.

If thou art not altogether past feeling, crucifying the Son of God afresh, and
treading his Blood and Covenant under foot. I sound this Trumpet to warn thee
or to deliver my own soul, Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
thy first works. Rev. 2.5. Be watchful and strengthen what is ready to dye,
Rev. 3.2. Haste, escape for thy life, look not behind thee, as was said to Lot,
or as Jonathan in another case, 1 Samuel 20.38.
Away, make speed, haste, stay not.

2. This speaks terror to Professors fallen, or lying in scandalous sins, you
cannot sin at so easy a rate as others, you know your Masters will and do it
not, therefore shall be beaten with more strips. You are as a City set on an
hill, Luke 12.48.
your fault cannot be hid, no more than an Eclipse of the Sun, when the Moon or
other Stars totally Ecclipsed, no notice is taken of them. 2 Samuel 12.14. 1 Samuel
2.24.
You make the enemies of Religion blasphem, or deride godliness, you make the
Lords people to transgress, your sins are more infectious then others, your
repentance had need be extraordinary not only for pardon which you happily may
obtain, but for the scandal which others may take which you cannot possibly
prevent.

3. Terror to such as after conviction and engagements under affliction and
distress, after some prayers, vows, and a begun, or resolved reformation
return to former courses, as they after what they promised in their distress,
Jer. 34.15, 16. Returned when delivered and started aside like a broken bow.
The new broom of affliction swept the house clean for the present, but
afterward the unclean spirit returns, and this washed Sow is wallowing in the
the mire again.

4. Such as lapse and relapse into the same sin again, as Pharaoh, Jeroboam,
and those Antichristian brood, Rev. 9.20, 21. which repented not,
notwithstanding all judgments, convictions, confessions, promises go from evil
to worse; from affliction to sin; from sin to duty, and from duty to sin;
repent and sin, sin and repent; Jer. 9.3.
and from repenting of sin in distress, go to repent of their repentance when
delivered, Pharaoh unsaith all he had said, and says his repentance backward;
as the door turns and returns on the hinges, is sometimes shut, by and by
open again; so these in no constant posture, their goodness like a morning dew,
a little devotion in a morning, for all companies till night comes, then a
little evening dew again; Amphibia that live in both Elements, Modo Ecclesias,
modo theatra replentes, Aug.
now you fee them at a Sermon, anon at a Playhouse, as Solomon's Harlot
sacrificing in the morning, prostituting her self to all filthiness at night,
or as Solomon's drunken beast, that has had knocks and blows, yet being
besotted with his drink, or company, says, Prove. 7.14, ^5. Pro. 23.25. Esaias
56.12.
They h^ve stricken me and beaten me, but I felt it not, when I awake I shall
seek it again; or as Esays debauched watchmen, who having drunk sufficiently
one day, say they will do as much to morrow, and more too, and so had their
drinking matches and rantings from day to day.

The third Use is of Discrimination, 3. Use.
to discover who is clean and who unclean in respect of falls and relapses; and
to put a difference between the holy and profane, which is the proper work of
a faithful Prophet: to some we are to open the door of hope, to some to shut
it: Ezekiel. 22.^6. 1 John 5 17.
every sin is not a sin to death; every disease not the Plague; every Ulcer not
a Leprosy.

1. There are some who have fallen into foul sins, and they think their case
desperate, because of the greatness of their sins; but their sin is not the sin
against the Holy Ghost, because not committed after light, taste, partaking of
the Holy Ghost, etc. but in the days of their ignorance, as Paul once, some
fall foully after conversion, as Peter, but not deliberately, maliciously, and
both these may be the spots of children, they see the plague in their heart,
feel the smart, these have foul scabs, 1 King^
but they go to Jordan and wash, go to the fountain opened for sin and
uncleanness, and then though their sins be as scarlet, Esaias 1.
they shall be as white as snow, though red like crimson, they shall be as
white as wool.

2. There be some Relapses through humane infirmity, which are truly bewailed,
this is not the sin against the Holy Ghost neither. Come into the Camp, I
pronounce such clean: For 1. there is no raw flesh of pride and presumption in
them. 2. All is turned whi e, by true repentance: it is a scab, Lev. 13.4, 5,
6, 14.
and but a scab. 3. It is but skin-deep, the heart was not tainted. 4. It
stands at a stay. These four signs show it to be no Plague of Leprosy: such
are not to be shut up, or put out of the Camp. And God as he pardons
iniquity, transgression and sin, so he promises to heal and pardon their
backeslidings, Hos. 14.4. Jer. 3.22.

3. But there are others that make a trade of sin, drink up iniquity like
water, Deuteronomy. 24.19, 20
that add Drunkenness to thrist, and fall and rise, and rise and fall: they
lapse and relapse, and slide away as water, shall I say such shall have peace?
No, what peace to such so long as their sins remain, the wrath of the Lord, and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and he shall blot out his name from
under heaven.

Call not this a Scab, this is the Plague of Leprosy, this is more then
skin-deep, Lev. 13.10, 11, 14, 15. Psalm. 68.21.
this does not stand at a stay, here is proud raw flesh, this is an old sore,
thou must out of the Camp, thou art unclean. God will wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of him that goes on still in his trespasses:

I shall to conclude give a few short Directions, to prevent Falls and
Relapses, but cannot now enlarge upon them.

1. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. This is the old and great
receipt, Mat. ^6.41.
and daily experimented with every ordinary Saint, probatum est, watch in
prayer, watch after, watch when alone, watch when in company, especially
against ill Company and all occasions of sin.

2. Keep conscience tender, and shun the first motions, and occasions of sin;
if thou find thy self given to appetite, put a knife to thy throat, is the wise
man's counsel, if to wine look not on the glass; if to wantonness, come not near
her corner: the consecrated Nazarite must not only forbear the wine, but the
grape; and not only the juice, but the husk and kernel of it. Number. 6.4.


3. Take heed of having slight thoughts of sin, as to say, as long as it is no
worse, it is the first time, it is but now and then, a great chance, when I
meet with such company, and many have such foolish pleas, and so play at the
mouth of the Cockatrice Den till they are stung to death.

Deuteronomy. 29.19.
4. Of having light thoughts of Gods mercy, I shall have peace, I shall have
mercy when I do but ask, At what time soever, will save me: we cannot out sin
the mercy of God, when sin abounds grace superabounds etc. The Lord faith he
will not spare such, nor be merciful to them.

5. Take heed of reasoning from Gods temporal forbearance, to eternal
forgiveness. Eccles. 8.11, 12.
Because sentence is not speedily ex^cuted against an evil doer, his heart is
fully set in him to do evil: but though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and
his days be prolonged, etc. yet it shall not be well with the wicked at last.

6. Take heed of presuming of thy own strength, I can, and I mean to repent, I
can when I will, and I will when time serves: Qui promitt^t poenitenti veniam,
non promittit pecc^nti poenitentiam.
I trust I am not so bad, that God has not given me over; many have gone
further then I, why may I not repent at last hour?

7. Take heed of a mock-repentance, saying, I cry God mercy, God forgive me, I
sin daily and repent daily, when I have sworn or been drunk, I am heartily
sorry. Is not this repentance? I answer no, Repentance is quite another thing:
the burnt child, we say, dreads the fire. Thou have smarted for suretiship and
have repented of it: thy friend comes again and desires thee to be bound with
him once again, thou replyst, I have paid dear for surtiship already, I have
repented of my folly, I have resolved to come into bonds again no more, no not
for the best friend I have, thou art importuned by many arguments, but,
peremptorily refusest: urge me no more, I have vowed and resolved against, and
have made an oath, I would never be taken in that fault again. Now I believe
thee, that thou have truly repented of suretiship, why do thou not thus, when
thou art enticed unto sin again? why do thou not say? I have smarted,
confessed, bewailed, been heartily sorry for my former folly: now speak no more
of it, Psa. 119.106. Psa. 119.115.
I have sworn and will perform, it, to keep Gods commandments. Away from me ye
wicked, I must keep the Commandments of my God. This would be somewhat like
true repentance. But take heed of a mock-repentance, lest as true repentance
meets with a true pardon, thy mock-repentance should be answered with a
mock-pardon, as Tertullian excellently says, There be some that say (says he)
their heart is good, De Paenitent.
they fear God, grieve for sin, though yet they fall into sin, they can, salva
side and metu, peccare, etc. sic and ipsi salva venia in gehennam detrudentur,
dum salvo metu peccant. They can live in sin nevertheless notwithstanding their
faith and repentance, and God can damn them nevertheless notwithstanding his
mercies and promises and pardoning grace. True repentance among other
companions is always attended with these three, what carefulness, what
indignation, what fear has it wrought in you?

8. Consider sin reiterated rises high, adds another figure to increase thy
account, Is the sin of Peor too little for you (old sins in ignorance) but that
you must this day again turn away a new. The Lord keeps an account how often
and how often, thou hast-committed such and such a sin, Josh. 22.27, 28 Am. 1.
and 2. chap. Number. 14 22.
at length says for three transgressions, and for four I will not turn away
their punishment: when Israel had seen Gods works forty years, and tempted him
ten times, he swear they should not enter into his rest. In the Law if an Ox
did gore a man, and the Master knew not of it, the Ox should dye not the
owner: but if the Ox was wont to push with his horn, and the Master was told
of it, Ox and Master were both to dye. Exo. 21.28, 29


Lastly, though I will not say to thee, who art a frequent Relapsarian, it is
impossible, as to the malicious relapser, yet I say, Remember that every time
the bone is broken the more danger; and though thou may possibly after a
second breaking have it well set, yet thou may at times against weather,
specially when in years feel it to thy dying day, thy sins will lie down with
thee in thy grave; Job 13.26.
and in sickness and trouble thou will possess the sins of thy youth. I
conclude all as St. Jude concludes his Epistle, Now to him that is able to keep
you from (all) falling (and relapses) and to present you faultless before his
presence with exceeding joy: to the only wise God our Savior, be glory and
majesty, dominion and power, now and for ever, Amen.

How may we be so Spiritual, as to check Sin in the first risings of it?
Gal. 5, 16. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh.


THe Case of Conscience to be discussed this Morning from these words, is --
How a Christian may be able to check sin in the first risings of it?

And without controversy great is this Myste- of godliness, and if any other,
of inestimable use and moment in the practice of Christianity. As the title
which Solomon inscribes on the Frontise-piece of that divine Poem of his, the
Canticles, is, (...), the Song of Songs, and as Aristotle calls the Hand the
Instrument of Instruments, and the Mind the Form of Forms: so may we with as
just a reason style this holy skill, of arresting, and intercepting sin in its
earliest motions and overtures, the Art of Arts. Could the Chemists ever
compass their grand Elixir, it were but a poor and cheap trifle, in comparison
of this grand Secret of the School of Christ. So that the Case of Conscience
before us, (like Diana of the Ephesians) is great and illustrious amidst it is
fellows.

My Text presents us with it resolved in this excellent Rule of sanctification,
Walk in the Spirit, etc.

Wherein we have, 1. The principle and root of sin and evil, the flesh with its
lusts. 2. The opposite principle and root of life and righteousness, the Divine
Spirit. 3. The terms and bounds of a Christians conquest, how far he may hope
for victory -- Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: 4. the method and
way of conquering -- Walk in the Spirit, of each a word.

1. The principle and root of sin and evil, the flesh with its lusts. The
Apostle means (pardon the phrase) a spiritual flesh, not that of the body,
but the mind. The immortal souls of men, through their Apostasy from God, the
blessed source, and original of all goodness, are become carnal, Romans 4.7 There
is a principle of evil radicated in the very nature, interwoven in the very
frame and births and constitution of all men; a bias that turns us off in
large and wide aberrations from the paths of life and happiness, but with
notorious partiality seduceth us into the ways of sin and death. This the
Scripture calls the Ephesians. 4.7 22.
old man, Romans 7.23, 24.
the law of sin in our members, and the body of death, etc.

The wiser Heathen, felt by the very dictate of Reason, that humane nature was
not either as it should be, or as they, could have wished it, what me^neth else
that (...), Plut, in (...).
or (...) that hanging, and flagging of the souls wings, that drooping of her
noblest faculties and that fatal unwieldiness, and untractableness of the will
to virtue, which the Platonists so much complain of? and what means that
(...), that reluctance to the divine life, and that impetuous hurry and
propension wherewith they felt themselves driven headlong toward folly, and
sensuality?

This flesh in man, this corrupt and depraved nature, is perpetually fly-blown
with evil lustings. This body of death, like a rotten carcass, is constantly
breeding vermin, as a filthy quag-mire, a noisome Mephitus or Camarina, sends
out stench and unsavouriness. This Region of the lesser World (like Africa in
the greater) swarms with monsters, it is the valley of the shadow of death, a
habitation for dragons, and a Court for Owls, where dwells the Cormorant and
the Bittern, the Raven the Scrich-owl, and the Satyr, if I may allude to that
of the Prophet, Isa. 34.11, 12, 13, 14. The Apostle sets down elegantly the
whole pedigree and lineage of evil, Jam. 1.15. Then when lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Lust is
the root of bitterness, fruitful in all the unfruitful works darkness, and
these like the Apples of Sodom and Clusters of Gomorrah if you gather them,
crumble into the dust and ashes, of death, they are fruits nigh unto a curse,
and whose end is to be burnt. That is the first. The old Adam, Heb. 6.8.
the flesh with it is lusts.

2. We have here the second Adam who is a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. There
is in good and holy souls an immortal seed, a principle of life and
righteousness, an antidote to the former poison, for the law of the Spirit of
life which is in Jesus Christ has made us free from the law of sin and death,
Romans 8.2. Philo the Jew, or whoever was the Author of that noble tract in the
Apocrypha, Wisd. 7.6.
called the Wisdom of Solomon, styles it -- The unspotted Mirror of the power
of God, and a pure influence flowing from the glory of the Almighty. Every one
that is in Christ is 2 Cor. 5.17.
a new creature, Joh. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.
born again, 2 Pet. 1.4.
an^ made partaker of the divine nature, for it is the royalty of that King of
Saints -- Rev. 21.5.
Behold I make all things new. The divine Spirit that great and heavenly
Archeus is busy in holy souls, that mighty principle of life, is
counter-working the flesh, and its lusts. So that now the weapons of a
Christians warfare are mighty thr ugh God, for the pulling d^wn of strong
holds, and the captivating every imagination, yea bringing every thought into
the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5, 17.

3 Here are the terms and bounds of the Spirits conquests in this present life,
at which a Christians hopes and endeavors must take aim, not the extirpating,
but subduing, not the not having, but the not fullfilling the lusts of the
flesh; the flesh will be lusting, that accursed womb will be conceiving in the
regenerate themselves. But here is the Christians privilege, that while he
walks in the Spirit, those conceptions shall prove abortive.

4. The words entirely, and in sum, present us with the method and way of
conquering, with the art of circumventing sin in the first avenues, and
approaches of it. Walk in the Spirit, etc. this is the (...), the great and
Achillaean Stratagem against the powers of darkness, the true and only course
we are to take, if we would strangle the brats of night and hell in their very
birth, and crush the Cockatrice's egg, whilst it is hatching, and before it
excludes the Serpent.

So that in fine the Observation which resulteth, is this:

The best expedient in the world not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, is to
walk in the Spirit, which what it imports, I come now to show.

1. Walk in the Spirit, i. e. in obedience to Gods Commandments which are the
Oracles of the Spirit; that this is excellently preventive of fulfilling the
motions to sin, appears Psa. 119 1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the
way, who walk in the law of the Lord: Blessed are they that keep his
testimonies, they also do no iniquity, again a little lower, ver. 9.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word. Aristotle that great Dictator in Philosophy, despaired
of atchieving so great an enterprise, as the rendering a young man capable of
his (...), his grave and severe lectures of morality; for that age is light and
foolish, yet Cereus in vitium flecti monitoribus asper Hor. ar. Poct.
headstrong and untractable. Now, take a young man all in the heat and boiling
of his blood, in the highest fermentation of his youthful lusts, and at all
these disadvantages, let him enter that great School of the holy Sp^r^t, the
divine Scripture, and permit himself to the conduct of those blessed Oracles,
and he shall effectually be convinced, by his own experience, of the incredible
virtue, the vast and mighty power of Gods word, in the success it has upon
him, and in his daily progressions, and advances in heavenly wisdom. Let me
invite you then this day, in the Prophets words, Isa. 2 5. O house of Jacob
come ye, and let us walk in the light of the Lord, and what that is David tells
us, Psa. 119.105. Thy words are a light to my feet, and a lamp to my paths, and
Hos. 6.5. His judgments are as a light that goes forth. Order thy steps by
his word, and thou shall not tread awry, let the Law of thy God be in thine
heart, and sin which is the transgression of the Law, shall not come nigh thee:
walk in this broad daylight of the Sun of Righteousness shining in the
Scriptures, and thou shall have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. This was the practice, and experience too of the man after Gods own
heart, I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee,
Psalm. 119.11. It is good writing after the copy of so great a Master, Go thou
and do likewise.

2. Walk in the Spirit, i. e. as becomes those in whom Gods Spirit dwells, as
if the Apostle had said, the part which ye are now to act, O ye Christian
Galatians, it is that of new creatures: see that ye keep the Decorum. Demean
your selves like the children of God, who are led of the Spirit of God, Romans
8.14. Be true to your part fill it up, adorn it, and then sure enough, ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, for that were to act the part just contrary
to what you sustain: (...).
as he that is to represent upon the stage some generous and heroique person,
cannot do the least base and sordid thing, but he breaks his part, and
digresseth into the garb, and posture of a vile and abject person: whilst he is
true to his part, he cannot possibly do any thing that is absurd, and
mis-beseeming.

Some of the Nethinim stood continually Porters at the door of the Temple, to
keep out whatsoever was unclean, and hereunto the Apostle palpably alludeth, 1
Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not that ye are the temples of God, and that the Spirit
of God dwells in you: now if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God
destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. So then that which
the Rule amounts to by this interpretation is, Walk in th sp rit, That a good
man's soul is a Temple which God inhabits, the Ph^losophers acknowledge; and
that the honor and worship rendered to him in a pur^ and holy mind, is
incompa^ably more worthy and acceptable, then all the cosiliest s^crifices and
offerings in Temples made with ha ds, how magnificent soever. (...). Hicrocl.
in ^ythag. aur. carn. p. 28.
i. e. Walk as becomes the Temples of the holy Ghost, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh.

8. Walk in the Spirit, i. e. Fulfill the counsels and advices of the Spirit,
and you shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Every renewed soul is the
Scean and Stage, wherein the two mightiest Contraries in the world, the Spirit
and the Flesh, i. e. light and darkness, life and death, heaven and hell, good
and evil, Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon with his, are perpetually
combating hand to hand. And well is it for a Christian that the holy Spirit is
lusting in him against the flesh, (...), God takes thy part, Christian, (...),
etc. Arrian in Epictet. l. 2. c. 17.
the spirit of the Lord of Hosts is with thee, if thou do not sin and
grieve him away. Follow but thy Leader, be prompt and ready to start at the
Divine signal, when the holy Ghost displays his Ens^gns, then (...), March
presently forth under those mighty and victorious banners, and thou shall
become Invincib^e. * When a Christian goes out thus to warfare, following the
Almighty conduct of his God, he must needs proceed conquering and to conquer.
My soul follows hard after thee (says David) thy right hand upholds me,
Psalm. 63.8. The Original is (...), My soul cleaves after thee: As if he had
said, Go, lead on my God, behold I follow as near, as close as I can, e
vestigio, I would not leave any distance, but pursue thy footsteps, step by
step, leaning upon thine everlasting arms, that are underneath me, and
following thy maunduction. Lot had almost perished in Sodom, for lingering when
his God hastened him away, Genesis 19.16. But Sampson (till then invincible) awoke
too late from the bosom of his Delilah, when the Philistines had shaved his
seven locks: And he thought to go out and shake off their cords wherewith they
bound him, as at other times, but the Lord was departed from him, and they took
him and put out both his eyes, Judge. 16.20, 21. A Christ^an is more then a man
when he acts in concurrence with his God, ^sal. 27.1. The Lord is my light and
my salvation, whom shall I fear, the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? But if he resists the holy Ghost, he does not only grieve
him, but will if he go on resisting, quench him, and then he is all alone, and
becomes heir to the curse of Reuben, Genesis 49.3, 4. he who was a while since,
the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power, is now weak as water,
and cannot excel.

The proverb tells us (...), There is a great deal of Time in a little
opportunity. It is good striking while the Iron is hot, and lanching out whilst
wind and tide serve. Open all thy Sails to every breath, and gale of Gods good
spirit. Welcome every suggestion, reverence every dictate, cherish every
illapse of this blessed Moni^or, let every inspiration find thee, as the Seal
does the Wax, or the spark the tinder, and then (as the Spouse tells her
beloved) or ever thou art aware thy Soul will make thee as the Charet of (...)
i. e. a free, and willing people.
Aminadab. Step into the pool, when the Angel stirs the water, John 5.4. Keep
touch with the motions of the spirit, and all is well.

But if these three Rules are too general, and remote, I shall now lay down
some more particular, and exact directions for checking the beginnings of
sin, and these are of two sorts (as Physicians have their Prophylactiques and
their Therapeutiques) Some for prevention of the fit and paroxysme; others for
the cure, and removal, when the symptoms of it are upon thee

1 Before the Paroxisme comes, prepare and antidote thy Soul against these
lusts of the flesh by observing these advices.

Eliphaz to Job, cap. 22. verse. 21. Acquaint thy self now with God, and be at
peace. Get thy heart fixed where thy treasure is; have thy conversation in
heaven, and thy fellowship with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ:
Flee to thy God to hide thee. He that dwells in the secret place of the most
high, shall abide under the shadow of the A^mighty. Surely he shall deliver
thee from the snare of the fowler. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and
under his wings shall thou trust, his truth shall be thy shield and buckler,
Psalm. 91.1, 3, 4. Arise with thine arisen Lord, and seek the things that are
above: Set thine affections there; where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
If the Soul is not where it animates, but where it loves, awaken thin^, and
kindle it into holy passionate Ecstasies of love, that thou may live in
heaven all day long, and (which is the privilege of the upright, Psalm. 140,
13.) dwell in the presence of that God whom thy soul delights in. The Tempter
cannot reach thee there.

Be much in converse with God, and the Devil will have litttle converse with
thee; or if he have, it will be to little purpose. How was the Majesty of King
Ahasuenus incensed at that affront of Haman, when he threw himself upon Queen
Esters bed -- what will he force the Queen in our presence? Esth. 7.8. Keep but
in the presence of thy Lord, thy King, thy Husband, and the Ravisher will not
offer to force thee there; or if he do, it will be but in vain. How secure is
that Soul that lives under the deep, and warm, and constant sense of Gods
being it is all in all? What a munition of rocks is this against all assaults
and incursions of the Tempter. They are our tame and common Poultry, whose
wings sweep the ground as they fly, and raise a dust: but the generous Eagle
soon mounts above this smoaky lower Region of the Air, till she makes the
clouds a pillow for her head. Put on, Christian, thy Eagles wings (which are
the same with those Doves wings which David pray's for, Psalm. 55.6.) and flee
away, that thou may be at rest. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. Isa. 40.31. When the
soul is once but upon the wing heavenward, O how easily then does it soar
away above this region of smoke and dust, above this Atmosphaene of earnality,
and fleshly lustings, into the pure and free Ethereal air, the blessed
serenity and rest of Gods life and kingdom, which is righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. it is cold iron that shows its
rusty scales, they disappear when it is red hot. Get but thine heart on fire
heavenward, be but ascending thither Eliah like, in a flaming Chariot of holy
longings and paintings after God, and the lustings of the flesh shall no more
appear to deform thy beauty, then the rust of iron appears, when the metal is
Candent, i. e. all over of a light and glowing ardour. The Rule then is, Be
sick of love to thy dear Master, and Lord, and thou shall not be sick of sin.
Stir up spiritual and holy lustings in thy soul after the love and favor, the
grace and image of thy God, and thou shall not fulfill the lustings of the
flesh.

Study thoroughly the unchangeable natures, the eternal laws and differences of
moral good and evil. To open this; There are some things of a middle and
indifferent nature, neither good nor evil in themselves: But if God commands
or forbids any of these, they are then good or evil indeed, but only because
or whilst he does so. The Ceremonial Law of the Old Testament stood in these
things, and is now abolished by the same Divine authority which enacted it. And
it is now the glory of Christian Religion, that (excepting the two Sacraments,
and a very few other positive institutions for great and weighty causes
reserved) the Evangelical Law of the New Testament consists of such preceps as
carry their own Credentiall letters, and are built upon moral grounds of
everlasting equity and righteousness. Wherefore the Romanists deserve very ill
of Christian Religion; nor are the Lutheran Churches to be excused, who of
their own heads impose so many indifferent things now in the service of God
under the Gospel, and that for no other reason, but because they will;
consequently rendering that yoke a hard one which Christ left easy, and that
burden a heavy one, which he would have light.

But now moral Good and Evil are not only such because God commands the one,
and forbids the other, but because the things themselves are so, essentially
and unalterably. As Mathematical truths and proportions are not such only
because God will have them so, but because the nature of the things cannot be
otherwise. Almighty power it self (reve^ently be it spoken) cannot make two
parallel lines or surfaces meet, though extended infinitely, or the three
angles of any straight-lined triangle, amount to any less or more then two
right angles in Geometry, or in Arithmeticke alter the proportions between two
and four, to any other then that of double and half, or between three and nine,
then that of a root and square, or (to name no more) is it possible that a
Seventh in Music should ever become a Concord, or a Unison, fifth, or eighth,
a Discord, for these things are in their very nature fixed, and unchangeable,
they must be what they are, or not be at all. Thus there is an eternal Reason,
why that which is good should be so, and commanded, and why that which is evil
should be so, and forbidden, which depends not so much on Gods will, as on his
nature. For if God could will, that good should be evil, and evil good, he
could deny himself, and change his own unchangeable Divinity which is
impossible: And therefore I look upon that opinion of a modern Ziglovius.
Dutch Author (though I would be so charitable, as to believe he knew not, and
therefore meant not what he said) as overthrowing all Religion: The thing is
this, That God may if he please out of the vast sovereignty of his Will,
command all that wickedness which he has forbidden, and make it out duty;
also forbid all that holiness which he has commanded, and make it become
sin to us.

For my part, I would choose rather to be an Atheist, than to believe there is
such a God as this in the world. But I am sure the holy One of Israel cannot do
so, not through any defect, but through infinite plenitude, and redundance of
all perfection. Ex. Gr. There is an eternal fitness and comeliness that a
reasonable creature should love, and honor and obey it is Creator, and
contrarily an eternal horridness, and indecencie, that an immortal soul should,
forget, contemn, and affront the Father of spirits. Now to affirm that God can
dispense with the former, nay make our fear of him, or delight in him to be a
sin, and punish it with everlasting torments; and to affirm that God can wink
at, or allow the latter, much less command Atheism, Blasphemy, Pride,
Unthankfulness, etc. or make Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Revenge, Sensuality, to
become duties and graces, and reward them with everlasting happiness, this were
to utter the most hellish blasphemy, and the most impossible contradictions in
the world. The heathen Plato (in those divine discourses of his, his Eutyphro,
and Theaetetus, and otherwhere) may well rebuke the madness of such Christians,
as this bold and vain speculator. The sum of this Rule then is, deeply possess
and dye thy soul all over with the representation, of that eve^lasting beauty
and amiableness that is in holiness, and of that horror and ugliness, and
deformity that eternally dwells on the forehead of all iniquity. Be under the
awe and majesty of such clear convictions all day long, and thou shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. For the mind of man, is wont to conceive,
before it is own apprehensions and Ideas of good and evil, as Jacobs sheep did
before the Rods in the Gutter. If thy notions of good and evil, be right and
clear, thy lustings and desires, will be from evil, toward good, all the
conceptions of thy soul, and their births will be fair, and unspotted. But if
thy apprehensions be speckled, confused, and ring straked (like his Rods) the
conceptions of thy mind, thy lustings, will be so too, so great a truth is that
(...), that dark ignorance, and folly lies at the bottom, as the root and
foundation of all wickedness, (...), etc. Plato in Theateto.
every immoral man is a fool, even when he commits a known sin, yet then he may
be said, not to know what he does, Luke 23.34. All the Reason in the world
takes the part of holiness, and sin has not one jot of true Reason to plead,
or allege in its own beh^lf.

Understand thy self, be no stranger to thy own breast, know the The wise man's
eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2.14. it is a
true and sober maxim of the Platonist, Demophil. in (...).
(...), as far as a man is ignorant of himself, so far forth he is to reckon
himself guilty of madness and distraction. The Satyrist complains of this -- Vt
nemo in sese tentat descendere, Juvenal.
nemo. Dare to unlock thy bosom, to ransack every corner of thy heart, let thy
Spirit accomplish a diligent search. Feel the pulse of thy soul, visit it
often, ask it how it does. Surv^igh thy self, and blush to leave any terra
incognita, any region of thy mind undiscovered. God has charged and entrusted
every man with his own soul, and what folly is it (...) to be busy in what
does not concern thee, and neglect what chiefly does so, the affairs of thy own
mind? is any thing nearer thee, or of such consequence to thee as thy self? O
let thy charity then begin at home. Thou owe this duty to thy self, to take
an exact account daily of the posture, and order of thy inward man. With how
great confusion does the Spouse acknowledge this neglect, Cant. 1 6. They made
me the keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard have I not kept. If ever
thou would be dextrous in suppressing the first risings of sin, enquire, what
advantages the tempter has against thee? where that nescio quid tenerum and
molle, lies in thy soul (as Cicero calls it) against which temptation plants
it is chiefest battery, and artillery? what thine own iniquity is, Psalm. 18.23.
which is that (...), the sin that does so easily beset thee, Heb. 12.1. See
what grace is principally wanting in thee, which is weakest? in what instances
thy greatest failleur betrays it self in which of thy passions and affections
thou art most peceable, and what lustings of the flesh they are, which give
thee, the frequentest ala^mb, and threaton the greatest dangers? be making
these researches and explorations daily, compare thy heart with the Law of the
eternal God, and with the dictates and maxims of thine own conscience. See,
where thy greatest discrepancy, and non conformity to these from time to time
arises, and this (like Pathologie or understanding the disease, and the
constitution of the patient) will hugely minister and condence to the exact
method of Physic, either for prevention, or for cure.

etc. without regret, their consciences are seared as with an hot iron, as the
Apostle phraseth it, 1 Timothy 4.2. they have so inured their souls to the
grossest wickedness as the Psylli a people of Africa whom Plutarch mentions,
had their bodies to the eating poison, that it becomes as it were natural. But
a good conscience has a delicate sense, it is the most tender thing in the
whole world, it feels the least touch of known sin, and grieves at the grieving
of Gods good Spirit, not only for quenching, or resisting, or rebelling against
the Holy Ghost, but even for grieving the holy Spirit of promise whereby it is
sealed to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.80. The most tender hearted Christian,
he is the stoutest and most valiant Christian. Happy is the man that fears
always, but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28.14.
it is the truest magnanimity, and heroique courage in our spiritual warfar to
tremble at the least iniquity. A Christian is never fitter to endure hardness
as a faithful soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3.
then when his conscience is most tender. To be such a coward as not to dare to
break any one of Gods Commandments, is to be the valiantest person in the
world, for such a one will choose the greatest evil of suffering, before the
least of sinning; and however the jeering Ishmaels of the world, be ready to
reproach, and laugh one to scorn, for this niceness, and precise scrupulosity
(as they term it) yet the choice (if God be but wiser then vain man) is a very
wise one.

Keep an exact guard upon thy heart, Prove. 4.23. let the eyes of thy State
viri; quae caussa viae? quive estis in armis. Virg. Is it grief, or is it joy,
or hope, or fear, or love, etc. that is now upon the march? demand the Word of
it, ask whether it have a Pass from God, and conscience; Catechize it, examine
it, search it; speak to it in the Centinel's and Watchman's phrase, (...), show
me your Ticket. Tell me my desire, my love, my fear, my anger by whose
authority art thou now up, and in motion? if they are able to produce a good
warrant, from Gods Commandments; or from the dictate of reason, and conscience,
let them go on in Gods name; they are about their business. But if they cannot,
arrest them as idle vagrants, nay as enemies to thy souls peace, and charge
them upon their allegiance to their superiors, that they stir no further.

Be daily training and exercising all thy graces. Have them always in
battel-^ray, be in a military posture both defensive, and offensive. Stand
constantly to thine arms, for thou have to do with two enemies that will never
give thee any truce, or respite, the (...) and the. (...) (as the Jews call
them) the flesh within thee, Jer. 17 9. and the Tempter, that destroying Angel
of the bottomless pit, without thee, 1 Pet. 5.8. the Christian warfare is
(...), a war never to be altered, it admits of no peace, no cessation. The
Soldier of Christ must never lay down his arms, but expect to be upon
continual duty, and travel, till the great Lord of Hosts, under whose banner he
now figh^^th, is pleased to remove his Quarters from that Army Militant here on
Earth, to that blessed and triumphant in the Heavens.

Elenchs of Temptation. I mean in unmasking the Sophistry and Mystery of
iniquity, in defeating the Wiles, and Stratagems of the Tempter, and in
detecting, and frustrating the cheats and finesses of the flesh with its
deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.23. 2 Cor. 2.11. No small part of spiritual wisdom lies
in the blessed art of discovering and refuting sins fallacies and impostures.
If ever thou would prove famous, and victorious and worthy honor and
reverence, in thy spiritual warfare, be well seen in the skill of fencing, know
all thy wards for every attaque. Provide thy self with answers and retorts
beforehand, against the subtle insinuations, and delusions of thine enemy, Ex.
gr. If Satan tells thee (as he often will) that the sin is pleasant, (...),
Musae.
ask whether the gripings of conscience be so too, whether it be such a
pleasant thing to be in hell, to be under the wrath of an Almighty Judge. If he
tells thee, no body sees, thou may commit it safely; ask whether he can put
out Gods all-seeing eye, whether he can find a place empty of the divine
presence for thee to sin in, or whether he can blot out the Items out of the
Book of Gods Remembrance. If he tells thee it is a little one, ask whether the
Majesty of the great Jehovah, be a little one, whether there be a little hell,
or no. If he talks of profits and earthly advantages that will acrew, ask what
account it will turn to at the last day, and what profit there is, Mat. 16.26.
if one should gain the whole world and lose his own soul, or what one should
give in exchange for his soul. When sin like Jael, invites thee into her Tent,
Judge 4.11, 21. and 5.25, ^6
with the lure and decoy of a lordly treatment, think of the nail and hamm^r
which fastened Sisera dead to the ground. Be not caught with chaff, lay by thee
such memoires, such answers and reparties as these, wherewith thou may reply
upon the Tempter: that the God of truth has other manner of pleasures,
profits, honors to court thy love, and reward thy service with, then the
father of lies, viz. true and real, solid and eternal ones; what are the
pleasures, that are sin for a season, to be compared with the rivers of Gods
pleasure, that are for evermore at his right hand? and what is a little wealth,
that thieves can steal, a despicable heap of riches, which like a flock of
birds a lighting a little while in thy yard, will take wing presently and fly
away, to be named, with the unsearchable riches of Christ, or that inheritance
of the Saints in light? or what is the painted bubble the fading, though
beauteous Rainbow, of earthly hunour and grandeur, to a weight of glory, to an
incorruptible crown of righteousness, that fades not away, to a Kingdom, which
it is the Fathers good pleasure to reserve in the highest heavens for every
sheep, and every lamb of his little flock, and (to name these Considerations by
cluster) remember, that the greatest wisdom is to do, not what in some poor few
regards is, but what is absolutely lovely and desirable; that what is best of
all, is best for thee to love, and mind and prosecute; -- (...), Pythag. carm.
that a good conscience is a continual feast, that God alone is enough, and
without him, nothing for thy happiness: that thy soul is worthier thy care,
then thy carcass, and the life to come, then this, that eternity is more
valuable then time; that not the opinions of men lulled asleep in
voluptuousness and sensuality, but Gods estimate, but the sentiments of the
holiest, best and wisest men, or (if you needs will) of the worst and vilest,
when conscience is awakned, when they come to lie a dying, and when they shall
stand before God at the last day, are to be prefered as the wisest. That
everlasting happiness cannot be bought too dear, but repentance and shame, may
easily. That the hardest doings or sufferings for Christ, are infinitely easier
then everlasting misery. That heaven, and glory, will more then recompense all
thy self-denials, and mortifications, all thy watchings, fastings, etc. and in
the mean time, the very hope of it, besides the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, and his love and grace, and the comforts of his Spirit, will
certainly sweeten all the tediousness of thy way to heaven, with inexpressible
redundance of satisfaction, yea sometimes with joy unutterable and full of
glory. In sum, that God is a good Master, and his service perfect freedom, for
besides the glorious recompense to come; thy work, Christian, is even now it is
own reward. If ^hou believe strongly such Aphorisms as these (and he is
madder then any in Bedlam that does not believe them) it will be no hard
matter, by Gods blessing and assistance, in their strength to put to flight the
armies of the aliens, at least to shield thy self against the volleys of fiery
darts, which at any time the Tempter shall pour upon thee.

Withdraw thy self if possible from the occasions of sin. It is good standing
out of harms way: do not gaze upon temptations, but pray with David, Psalm. 73.^.
Lord turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37. If thou
perceivest thy feet are almost gone, thy steps had well nigh flipt, it is
surely high time for thee if thou can to run away; nor will it be reckoned
thy cowardice, but thy valor in the day of thine account, thus to retreat from
the enemy. It is a very wise man's counsel concerning the haunts and converses
of the profane, Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pase away, Prove. 4.14,
15. again concerning the strange woman, Remove thy way far from her, and come
not nigh the door of her house, chap. 5.8 and again concerning occasions of
intemperance, be not among wine bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of flesh, chap.
23, 20. and ver. 31. Look not on the wine when it is red, when it gives it is
color in the cup, when it moves it self aright, i. e. when it sparkles and
vapors in the glass, when it laughs in thy face, and invites thy lip, then
shut thy eyes, lest sin steal in upon thee. Do not imitate the silly Lark which
by the pleasing contemplation of the little piece of glass, that glisters in
the Sun, while the Fowler twirles it about, is enticed nearer and nearer,
forgetting or overseeing the net, which ere long overwhelms it. Vouchsafe not
to admit the Tempter to a Parle; the Poets fable Ulysses to have stopped his ears
at the enchaunting voices of the Sirens. Be thou as the deaf Adder to that
great Charmer: the best entertainment thou can give him, is -- Get thee
behind me Satan.

P^riit judicium cum res transiit in affectus. One distempered with the morbus
arcuatus, the Jaundise, black or yellow, is apt to impute the color his eye is
vitiated with, to every object; who would trust such a judge of colors? or the
palate of one in a Feavour, to distinguish of Tastes? it is a good rule under
the disorder of temptation (...). Never credit thy own apprehensions at such a
time. If thou take thy self yielding in the least, start back with
abhorrence, and chide thy rashness, appealing from thy present distracted, to
thy ancient and wiser self, from thy self asleep and disordered, to thy self
awake and sober, at other times. Jonah's judgment was weak and childish
(though a Prophet) when he was under that temptation of impatient anger, Jon.
4.9. I do well to be angry, a saucy and bold answer to his God! he should not
have trusted his present sentiments, for he was not himself. As one that
bespeaks an awakning, will over night desire his friend, not to give ear to
him, though (says he) I plead earnestly to sleep a little longer, yet do not
regard that, for I tell you of it before on purpose, and I shall thank you when
once I am up, for not letting me have my will. Thus tell thy self aforehand,
that though under a drowsiness, and slumber of spirit, thou art ready to plead
for the flesh, and to feel some inclinations to fulfill it is lusts, and art very
loath to let them go unsatisfied, yet, if thou art but resolute, not to comply
with thy own foolish and unreasonable desires, thou will heartily thank thy
self. I mean be entirely glad, when thy eyes are open, that thou have overcome
thy self, and that Wisdom and Reason, and Conscience have got the day. Resolve
to remember this when temptation comes the next time to assault thee, and play
the man.

Having laid down these directions, by way of prevention against the time of
conflict, to prepare the soul aforehand, that in the assault it may not be
vanquished, I come now to a Christians behavior in the fit, and paroxysme it
self, when the lusts of the flesh are stirring, and the great Rule to be
observed here, is this:

As soon as ever thou perceivest thine affections, and lusts begin to grow
inordinate, and thy inferior appetites to rebel, take thy self to task
forthwith, and resist them withal thy might. Do not stay a moment, delay is
unutterably, dangerous: who but a mad man that sees the Stable or Barn hard by
his dwelling house just beginning to catch fire, would stand still, and say let
it alone a little, I would see what will come of it; woe or three minutes
indulgence to the flame, will embolden it without expecting his leave or
permission any longer, to devour, and rage, and consume, and carry all before
it in despite of his mightiest resistances; when a little at first might have
saved that vast damage, which his folly and loytering has occasioned. How
contemptible were those fires at first, that in few hours have triumphed over
stately Palaces, and turned sometimes vast Cities into heaps of dust and ashes?
how small an infirmity and distemper neglected has ushered in the most fatal
sickness? and how often has a trifling bruise or strain, bin preface to a
Gangrene, and the pick of a pin, or thorn not looked after time enough,
enforced the cutting off a leg, or arm, nay proved mortal, and uncurable?
advantages to good, like Arithmetical progressions rise slowly, in fair and
even intervals, but advantag^s to ill, like Geometrical, grow up presently from
little to vast excesses. -- Facilis descensus Averni.
Sed revocare gradum superasque evadere ad auras
Hic labor, etc. Virg. Aen. 6.
Motion to ill is downwards, Galilae^, and after him Gassendus, and others,
have demonstrated, that heavy bodies in their descent, do in equal times
transmit unequal spaces, continually increasing according to the progression of
odd numbers, Ex. gr. If in one pulse, a Bullet fall perpendicularly, one inch,
in the next, it will three inches, in the 3d 5. in the 4th 7 etc. till the
swiftness grow immense and un^^utterable.
and like the descent of heavy bodies, collects a new impetus, and moves every
step, with a swiftness perpetually increasing, and (if not stopped early) soon
irresistible. Mischief springs apace, grows tall and large, and adult suddenly,
as Jonah's gourd did, in a night. Our passage in sin is with wind and tide
increasing; but in holiness, with both against us. To seek the things above is
a supernatural motion, and therefore difficult, but the contrary, is natural
and therefore easy, (...), as the Philosopher well determines, evil is now a
kin to us since our degeneracy, and has vast advantages on its side, if once
it gets an allowed harbor, and entertainment in our breast.

The Enquiry then before us, is by what Methods a Christian ought to address
himself to battle, in this spiritual warfare, how he may so bid defiance to his
enemies, as to daunt and vanquish them. Let these Rules therefore be observed
for resisting and quelling thy lusts, and inordinate affections in their first
Salleys, and in the commencement of the insurrection.

Ille regit dictis, animos and pectora mulcet. Virg. Aen. 1. God has made
Reason, the Magistrate of the little world, he has given it a commission to
keep the peace in our souls. And so far as our minds are illustrated, and
governed by right reason, so far do they partake of the image of God, of whose
glorious mind one of the best and clearest conceptions, we can have is, that it
is infinite and eternal Reason. Do thy passions begin to rise in arms? do they
grow disordered and unruly? let thy reason come out to them, and ask whether
they know their Master? And let thy soul blush, with infinite scorn, that ever
these base slaves should usurp the throne of their rightful Lord, and unman
thee, by deposing Reason which is all thou have to show, that thou art not a
beast. What an extreme silly thing is a man in passion? nothing can be more
ridiculous and contemptible. Out of love and pity to thy self, O man, do not
affront and disgrace thine immortal soul any more, by suffering any malapert
and saucy passion to outrage and assasinate thy Reason, that was a generous
Rule of Pythagoras -- (...), Pyth. in Carm.
let a man use great reverence and manners to himself. Be ashamed (friend) to
do any vile or dishonest action before thy self, though no body be conscious,
yet thy soul is, and thou can not run away from that, what good will it do
thee to contradict the dictates of thine own mind? is it possible for thee to
be at peace, when thou fallest out with thy self? thou justifiest all the
injuries in the world that others do thee, for thou do thy self daily
injuries ten millions of times greater, then the greatest others can do to
thee. Whoever thou art that despisest thy own Reason, and permittest every
silly lust to abuse thee, by scorning that, thou art a false Traitor, to thy
own soul. There are but a very few men that are in their wits, the far greatest
part of mankind, in the greatest matters, in the highest concernments of a man,
are besides themselves; for a man's own self, must be a reasonable creature, and
therefore not to govern ones own mind, and affections by Reason, is to be mad
and distracted; if he that looks not to his family is worse then an infidel,
what then is he that looks not to his mind? what confused Chaos are most men's
minds, -- rudis indigestaque moles? Ovid.
a man makes a fool of himself as often as he prefers his passion before his
reason; the Philosopher gives us the sum of this Rule excellently, Ca^m Pythag.
(...). Accustom thy self to act every where like a reasonable creature.

If thy distempered affections, and lusts, slight the authority of thy Mat.
4.4, 6.10. by producing Scripture to confront him, It is written, etc. Ask thy
heart if it knows that hand, whether it dares rebel against the express
commands, statutes, and ordinances of the living God. Bring out of the Register
of conscience, the Laws of him that made thee, oppose some clear text of holy
writ, that comes into thy mind, against that very lust that is now rising Ex.
gr. if it be carnal fear, Isa. 51.12. If love of the world, 1 John 2.15. If
revenge, Romans 12.19. If impatience under affliction, James 1.12. If diffidence
in Gods promises, Numb. 23.19. If immoderate anger, Ephesians. 4.26. If pride and
arrogance, and self-assuming, Matthew 5.3. and 11.29. etc. Happy is the man that
has his quiver full of such artillery! whose conscience is rich in these
Memoirs! Store thy mind with this sacred treasure, Mat. 13.52.
that as a Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, thou may (upon all
occasions) bring forth out of thy treasure things new and old. Hold such
Scriptures as are point-blanck contrary to the Temptation, before thy
conscience, if it would turn away, compel it to look upon them, and think, I
am Gods creature, I must obey him. Did ever any rebel against him and prosper,
Terence.
eine ego ut adverser? Is it wisely done of me, to resist my Maker? to try
which is strongest, a poor worm, or the Almighty God? And if the love of Gods
commands will not constrain thee, let the terrors, the thunders, and lightnings
of his threats persuade thee, which are all levelled against wilful sinners.
And it is not safe standing (surely) in the very Canons mouth. Peruse those two
Scriptures, and tremble to venture on any known breach of the Law of thy God,
Deuteronomy. 28.58 and Isa. 45 9.

Jer. 17.10. Heb. 4.13. Show it the Majesty of the Lord, see how that is
described, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3. Ask thy soul whether it sees the living God, that
sees it? Whether it is aware whose eye looks on, Genesis 16.13, 14. Whether it
has no respect for God himself, who stands by, and whose pure and glorious
eyes, Hab. 1.13 pierce through and through thee. Tell thy heart again and
again, that God will not be mocked; that he is a God of knowledge, 1 Samuel 2.3.
and by him actions are weighed; that he is a jealous God too, and will by no
means clear the guilty. Bid it consider well and look to it self, for God will
bring to light every hidden thing of dishonesty; he that now sees, will judge
it. Speak to thy unruly lusts as the Town Clerk of Ephesus wisely did to the
mutinous Citizens, Acts 19 40. Sirs, we are in danger to be called in question
for this days uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an account of
this tumult.

real arguments be slighted, try whether an argument ad hominem, drawn from
sense, will prevail. Awe thy lusts then with the bitterness of thine own
experience. Consider how often thou have rued their disorders; what dismal
consequences have followed upon their transports, and how dearly thou have paid
heretofore for thy connivance at them. Bethink thy self on such a fashion as
this. The Other day I was angry, and behaved my self uncomely, put the whole
company, or family out of order, disobliged such a dear and faithful friend, by
my rashness and folly, in uttering hasty words before I weighed them. O how did
I repent me afterward? how shamed, and abashed, and confounded was I, when I
came to my self? So at another time thus and thus I miscarried my self, and
these are the fruits and cursed effects of my yielding to the beginnings of
sin, and shall I go now and repeat my madness? Had I not smart enough for my
folly before; but must I needs play the fool and the beast again? Ask thy self
what thou ailest to forget all the sighs and groans, and bitter tears that thy
lust has already cost thee? and yet would the impudent sin be committed once
more? (...): where are thy wits, man, Theoret. in Cyclop.
if thou go about it. Sic notus Ulysses? Was it so sweet a thing to lie
under the horror and agony of a wounded conscience, and under Gods rebukes in
secret the last time, that thou must needs venture again? Why, will thou hurt
thy soul, and become a Devil to thy self? Why will thou needs break thy peace,
by consenting to sin, and not only so, but torment thy self, and kindle a hell
in thine own bosom? and all this in despite of all thy warnings? Ictus
Piscator sapit, the burnt child dreads the fire: But it seems thou art in love
with misery, and weary of thy joy and comfort. Thou have a mind to be cursed,
wretchedness and woe and death are it seems grown so amiable in thine eyes,
as to become thy deliberate choice. Thus upbraid thy self, and do it so long
and loud till thou fetchest thy soul again to it self, out of that swoon and
lethargy which besotteth it. Give not over chiding and reproaching thy self,
till thou make thy heart sensible and considerate.

Labor to cure thy lustings and affections in the first beginning of
Haemorragic or bleeding at the Nose by breathing the basilique vein in the arm,
or opening the Saphaena in the foot, so may we check our carnal affections, by
turning them into spiritual ones, and those e^ther,

1 Of the same nature, Ex. gr. Catch thy worldly sorrow at the rise, and turn
thy mourning into godly sorrow. If thou must needs weep, weep for some what
that deserves it. Be the occasion of thy grief what it will, loss of estate,
relations, etc. I am sure thy sins are a juster occasion, for they brought that
occasion of mourning upon thee, be it what it will, that thou art now in tears
for. Art thou troubled at any danger, full of fears, heart-aking, and
confusion? O forget not the Mother-evill, sin, let that have but it is due
share, and there will not be much left to spare of these affections for other
things.

Is thy desire, thy love, thy joy too busy about some earthly trifle, some
temporal good thing? Pray them to look up a little, and behold thy God, who is
altogether lovely, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. and let everlasting shame stop
thy mouth, if thou dare affirm any thing in this wretched world worthy to be
named once with the living God for Rivalship, and competition in thy heart,
(...) Max. Tyr. dissert. 1.
sure I am he is the fountain and measure of all goodness. Let but the first
and sovereign Good, have its due of thy love and desire, thy delight and joy,
and the remainder will be little enough for thy creature comforts. Oh how great
a folly is it to dote on husks, and overlook the bread in thy fathers house,
Jer. 2.12, 13.

2 Turn thy carnal affections into spiritual ones of a contrary nature. Ex.
gr. Allay thy worldly sorrow by spiritual joy. Try whether there be not enough
in Alsufficiency it self, to compensate the loss of any outward enjoyment,
whether there will be any great miss or want of a broken Cistern, when thou art
at the fountain head of living waters, whether the light of the Sun cannot make
amends for the expiring of a candle. Chastise thy carnal fears by hope in God.
Set on work the grace contrary to the lust that is stirring, if it be pride and
vainglory in the applause of men, think how ridiculous it were for a criminal
to please himself in the esteem, and honor his fellow prisoners render him,
forgetting how guilty he is before his Judge. If thou beginnest to be powered
loosely out, and as it were dissolved in frolic mirth and jovialty, correct
that vainness and gayety of spirit by the grave and sober thoughts of death,
and judgment, and e^ernity.

Pray continually, lift up thy heart to God with sighs and groans unutterable:
Oh that thou would rend the heavens and come down! Tell him thy lusts are his
enemies, as well as thine, tell him they are too strong for thee; beg of him
that he would interpose, and make bare his arm, and get himself a glorious
name. Awake, Isa. 51.9.
awake, put on strength, O arm of the Lord, awake as in the ancient days, in
the generations of old. Art not thou it that has cut Rahab, and wounded the
Dragon? Entreat him, of all love, to pity thee, even by his very bowels, and
not to let the enemy triumph over thee. Tell him thou know not what to do,
but thy eyes are toward him. Bemoan thy self before him, and plead his glory
with him, and his truth and faithfulness. Spread his own gracious promises in
his eyes. Psalm. 27.14. Isa. 40.28, 29, 30, 31. Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7.

Such Ejaculations or Meditations as these are mighty useful, Gods children
find them so in the very paroxisme and assault. But if the Temptation continue,
get into thy Closet, and humble thy self greatly before thy God, throw thy self
at his feet, tell him thou will not rise till he has given thee a token for
good, no, thou art resolved there to lie hanging on him, and not to let him go
until he bless thee. O how welcome is every honest heart to the father of
Spirits, when it comes on such an errand, and in such a manner to the throne of
grace! God cannot choose but melt in pity and tenderness over his poor desolate
ones, when he sees the anguish of their souls. How can I give thee up O
Ephraim, my bowels are troubled for thee, Jer. 31.20. Isa. 49.14.
they will not give me leave to forget thee. Is Ephraim my dear son, I do
earnestly remember him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Give
not over wrestling like Jacob, Genesis 32.26, 27, 28. till thou risest Israel, one
who have power with God and prevailest. And it is worth observing, that the
Lord takes pleasure to be called the mighty God of Jacob, and the Lord God of
Israel, as if he reckoned it an honor, that once the worm Jacob wrestled with
his omnipotence, and overcame him, he seems to glory in his being conquered,
and chooses that for his name, and for his memorial throughout generations
which is an everlasting monument, that a poor frail man got the day of him. So
much does the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous prevail.

Perhaps sometime it may be requisite to join secret fasting with thy prayer.
It may be the Devil that tempts thee is of that kind, that will not go out but
by prayer and fasting, Mat. 17.21. Thus Daniel lay prostrate at Gods feet, till
a hand touched him, and set him upon his knees, and the voice said to him, O
Daniel greatly beloved, etc. Dan. cap. 10. verse. 2, 3, compared with 10, 11.
and with 18, 19. verses.

When thou have done this, Rise up, and buckle on the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6
16. Cloth thy soul with an heroic confidence, in the power and faithfulness
of thy God, and in the name and majesty of the Lord of hosts, bid battle to thy
lusts, and to all the powers of darkness. Prove. 7.16.
Take heed of going out in thy own single strength, for lust has cast down
many strong men wounded. While thou art k^eping thine own heart with all
diligence, forget not by faith to bring the great keeper of Israel in. If any
other man could have kept his own heart, sure the man after Gods own heart
could have done it. Virg. Aeneid.
-- Si Pergama dextra, Defendi possent etiam hac defensa fuissent. But the
matter of Vriah and Bathsheba stands on record to all posterity to the
contrary: For except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain,
Psalm. 127.1. Do not venture to grapple with the roaring Lion, but in the
strength of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who is also the Lamb of God, and
the great shepherd of Israel, Isa. 40.11.
that carries his lambs in his bosom; and whether should the pursued Lamb
betake it self, but into that shephea^ds arms? In time of trouble (spiritual
as well as other) he will hide thee in the secret of his Tabernacle, in his
pavilion will he hide thee, and set thee as upon a rock, Psalm. 27.5. He never
fails the eyes of them that look up to him, nor makes his people ashamed of
their hope. What time thou art afraid trust in him. His name is a strong tower,
Cast thy care upon him, and expect the same pity from thy God, which the men of
Iabesh-Gilead found from Saul, when Nabash (the barbarous Ammonite) would have
put out their right eyes, To morrow ere the Sun be hot ye shall have help, 1 Samuel 11.9. If the King of Isreal's bowels yerned over those poor men, shall not
the bowels of the God of Israel over those that fear him? Yes, upon his honor,
truth and faithfulness, (...) Serpens hebr.
he will not suffer that cruel Nahash (to allude to the signification of the
word) that old Serpent, to have his will upon them: if he does not come to day,
he will to morrow ere the Sun be hot. Lift up your heads therefore O ye gates,
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.
Who is this King of glory? The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in
battle, Psalm. 24.7, 8. Thus was Joseph rescued from the Archers, that shot at
him, and sorely grieved him. His bow abode in strength, and the arms of his
hands were made strong by the arms of the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49.23, 24.

1 Information.
I come at length to the Use.

We are to learn hence, That our souls are not as they came out of the father
of Spirits hands, they appear as it were wrong risen in the world, and begin to
tread awry the very first steps they measure on the stage of Earth. All the
symptoms of degeneracy are upon them. The best of men that ever yet blessed the
earth with their Residence upon it (except that Son of man who was only so by
the mothers side, being by the Fathers the only begotten Son of the eternal
God) had flesh lusting in them unto sin. Which is as convincing an Argument,
that humane nature is blemished, and infected, that it has received a (...) a
stain and venom, as the (...) are of a pestential disease, whose breakings
out, display the contagion within. If the Carbuncle and the Tokens proclaim the
Plague? or the spots discover a pestilential fever? or the Variolae (those
postulous efflorescencies, which we commonly name the Small Pox) argue the
praecipitation of the blood, by some latent malignity? Certainly the lustings
of the flesh in all men, demostrate that the very nature of man on Earth is now
blasted, and corrupted.

Methinks the Divine perfection, and our own imperfection are the two greatest
Sensibles in the world, both of them equally, that is, immensely clear, and
discernable. For, the former is no less illustriously undeniable, then is the
being, light, and beauty of the Sun in the Firmament at noon day: And the later
is no less evident and conspicuous than the obscurity and horror of
Midnight-darknesse. Not to see the one is to be (...) without God in the world,
and not to feel the other (for it is like the Egyptian darkness, Exodus 10.21.
that may be felt by all that are not past feeling) is to be without or besides
ones self.

Now since all the reason in the world consents to the truth of that Aphorism
of the Philosopher (...) that the best and most excellent mind is the parent of
the Universe, Hierecles most divinely concludes, (...) in Carm. Isa. 57.20.
and an Almighty everliving goodness is the Source, and root of all things,
since heaven and earth say Amen, and again Amen, Hallelujah to that Oracle of
the Psalmist, The work of God is honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111.3. And all
that God made was very good, Genesis 1.31. No wonder if it puzzled all philosophy
(...); Whence humane nature came to be thus vitiated and debauched? What are
the fountains of this great Deep of sin within us, which like the troubled
Sea, is perpetually thus casting out mire and dirt? Sure enough so universal
an effect as this calamity of mankind, must have a cause as universal.

The S^cinians here and others will have us believe that we all are born, as
innocent as Adam in Paradise; that is (say they) in an aequilibrium and perfect
indifferency to good and evil, assigning no other cause of the general
corruption of men's lives and manners, but the infection of example, and evil
custom, which is methinks as wise a guess, as to affirm the Wolf and Vulture
to be bred and hatched with as sweet and harmless a nature, as the innocent
Lamb, or loving Turtle, but only the naughty behavior, and ill example of
their ancestors, and companions have debauched them into ravennousnesse, and
ill manners.

The Manichees (as St. Austin tells who was himself for several years before
his conversion of that heresy) thought that all the evil in the world sprang
from an Almighty and an eternal principle of evil, counter-working, and
over-bearing God; whom they held the opposite eternal principle of goodness.
But since the very formal notion of God, involveth infinite perfection, and
that of sin, mere imperfection, it is a perfect contradiction, that evil
should be infinite, if good be so; It were to make imperfection perfect, and
mere impotency Omnipotent. Therefore there can be but one God, who is Almighty
goodness. And as possible it is, that the Sun should darken the world by
shining, as Almighty goodness should do any hurt in the world, or make any
evil. God is the Author of all the good in the world, but sin and misery are
of our making, Hos. 13.9.

Much wiser than either of the two former, was the conjecture of the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, though Heathens, who having nothing else to
consult (as want^ng the divine Revelation of holy Scripture) but their own
faculties embraced the conceit, that all humane souls were created in the
beginning upright, and placed by God in happier mansions, in purer and higher
regions of the Universe, until at length they did (...) as Hierocles phraseth
it, i. e. till they fell from the divine life, and became inhabitants of
earthly Tabernacles, bringing their fallen and degenerate natures along with
them. This opinion had of old the general consent of the Jews, as appears
Jo. 9.2. and yet has, as Men. Ben Israel in his Book De Resurrectione
mortuorum, witnesses. Among the Christians Origin is in the number of it is
Sectaries, in his books (...), and some few of the Ancients.

But as much as is necessary for us to know about this great enquiry, God has
(blessed be his goodness) sufficiently revealed in the three first Chapters of
Genesis, compared with Psalm. 51.5. Eccles. 7.29. Romans 12 5, etc. And he is as
wise as he need be in so great a point, that knows how to understand these
Scriptures according to the Analogy of Faith, and consistently with the Divine
perfections, and that so believes them, as to put that and no other sense and
interpretation upon them, which is worthy of the glorious attribute, and
excellent Majesty of the living God: Although some difficulties will remain
perhaps insuperable to us, in this our present estate on earth.

Exhortat.
I have already in some measure discovered the Mysteries and secrets of this
blessed art of checking sin in the beginnings of it. Let me now persuade the
practice of these holy Rules, let us resolve in the strength of Christ to
resist these lustings of the flesh. (...) Hom.
Take the exhortation of the Apostle, watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit
your selves like men, 1 Cor. 16.13.

Let me press this with a few considerations.

1. The more thou yeeldest the more thou may. Sin is unsatiable, it will
never say it is enough. Give it an inch, it will take an ell: See the sad
example of Peter denying his Lord, Matthew 26. 1. He was only timorous, he
follows afar off, verse. 58. 2. At the next step he denies his Lord openly
before them all, verse. 70. 3. He adds an oath to it, verse. 72. And lastly,
verse. 74. he falls a cursing and swearing as if he meant to out-sin the vilest
there. It is no wisdom to try conclusions between fire and Gunpowder in the
heap. Who but a fool would unlock the door of his house, when it is beset with
Thieves, and excuse it, he did but turn the key, that was all. Why, he need do
no more, to undo himself, they will easily do all the rest.

2. It is the quarrel of the Lord of Hosts, in which thou fightest, Caesarem
vehis and fortunam caesaris.
let thy courage rise in proportion to the goodness of thy cause, and the
honor of that great Prince and Captain under whose banner thou servest. Upon
thy good behavior and address in Arms, depends much of the renown and honor
of Christianity. A cowardly Souldidier is the reproach of his Commanders. Thou
have a noble General, O Christian, that has done, and finished perfectly what
ever concerns thy Redemption from the powers of darkness. To him that over
comes will he give to sit on his throne, even as he overcame, and is set down
on his fathers throne, Rev. 3.23. Do valiantly and worthily. Follow thy
victorious Leader, let all that know thee, see that Religion is no mean and
feeble thing, that the School of Christ breeds the excellent of the earth, that
the Divine life is the most powerful principle in the world, that the Spirit
of God in thee, and his grace, (...) stronger then all thy lusts and
corruptions. Not he that talks m^st, or professes most, but he that acts and
lives most as a Christian, shall be the man whom the King delights to honor.

3. The lusts of the flesh are thy greatest enemies, as well as Gods, they
war against thy soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. To resist them feebly, is to do, not only
the work of the Lord, but of thy Soul negligently.

4ly. It is easy vanquishing at first in comparison, a fire newly kindled is
soon quenched, and a young thorn or bramble easily pulled up. The fierce Lion
may be tamed, when a whelp: but if thou stay a little, there will be no dealing
with a Lust any more, than with (...) salvage Beast of prey. Grace will lose,
and corruption get strength continually by delaying.

Fifthly, If thou resistest, the victory is thine, James 4.7. And (...) my
Text, Walk, etc. and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the f^^sh Tho^ caust
never be conquered, if thou will not yield. Stand but (...) thou art
invincible, while thou art unwilling, all the Devil^ in hell cannot force thee
to sin. Temptation puts on it is strength, as the will is. Cease but to love the
sin, and the temptation is answered. Indeed if thou chusest to be a slave, thou
shall be one. Nothing but thy own choice can undo thee.

Sixthly, Consider what thou do, if thou fulfillest the lusts of the flesh, 1 Samuel 15 23. Heb. 6.6.
thou provokest thy Heavenly Father, rebellest against him, and Rebellion is as
witchcraft, and stubbornness as idolatry. Thou crucifiest Jesus Christ afresh,
and put him to open shame. Is this thy love, and thanks to thy Lord, to
whom thou art so infinitely beholding? Can thou find in thy heart to put thy
Spear again in his side? Has he not suffered yet enough? Is his bloody passion
nothing? must he bleed again? Ah monster of ingratitude! ah perfidious Traitor
as thou art, thus to requite thy Master! Again, thou grievest thy Comforter,
and is that wisely done? Who shall comfort thee, if he depart from thee
grieved? Or is it ingenuous, thus unworthily to treat that noble Guest, to
affront Gods sacred Spirit to his very face? and in despite, and mockery of
him to side with his Enemy, the flesh? Is this thy kindness to thy best
Friend, thy faithful Counselor, thy infallible Guide, thy Minister, and
Oracle, thy sweet and only Comforter? What need I add, that thou breakest thy
peace, woundest thy conscience, forfeitest the loss of Gods countenance, and
make a gap in the divine protection for all evil to rush in at.

7ly. And lastly, Consider the invaluable benefit of resisting, of not
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh in two great instances.

First, Unutterable joy and pleasure will be shed abroad in thy Soul, as often
as thou gettest the day. I know no greater triumph then that of a Christian,
when he is more then conqueror through Christ that loves him. O the peace, the
joy, and holy glorying in the Lord, and in the power of his might, that a good
man is even ravished, and caught up into the third Heavens with, when the Lord
covers his head in the day of Battle, and lifts it up above his spiritual
enemies. To vanquish ones self, is a nobler exploit than to subdue a City, Pro.
16 32. Nay, a vaster Conquest, then if one could, with that great Macedonian
Captain, atchieve the empty title of the vanquisher of the world.

2. Every Conquest will increase thy strength and dexterity against the next
assault. So that when the vanquished lust recruits it is forces, thou will be
able to outvie thy self, and become more dextrous every time.

Nay, the mortifying of one earthly member (like the cutting off a limb from
the natural body) will make the whole body of sin tremble, all the rest of thy
Lusts will fare the worse, and by consent languish. So that every victory over
any one corruption, weakens that, and all the rest, and breaks the way for
future Conquests.

How Ministers or Christian Friends may, and ought to apply themselves to Sick
Persons, for their Good, and the discharge of their own Conscience?
JOB 33.33, 24. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand to show unto man his uprightness; then he is gracious unto him, and
says, Deliver him from going down into the pit, I have found a ransom.


THese words are part of Elihu's discourse uttered by way of Reprehension and
Conviction to Job, and by way of Vindication and Apology for God in his
dealings with men; and although he premiseth this, that God gives no account
of his matters, ver. 13. yet he does ex abundanti, give an account for God, and
makes a defense, or gives a rationale of Gods proceedings with men, etc. where
he shows that it is not man's torment or ruin that God desires, but his
reformation and amendment: and that it may appear how sincerely and fervently
he desires it, he shows that there are several ways and means which God uses,
which are most powerful and likely to produce it.

1. He speaks to men in dreams, ver. 15, etc.

2. (When that will not do) by afflictions, ver. 19, etc.

3. To make those afflictions more intelligible and more effectual, he sends a
messenger, etc. this is the business of the Text, if there be with him, etc.
wherein you may observe two parts.

1. A supposition, ver. 23. If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter,
etc. 2. A position, ver. 24. Then he is gracious to him, etc. the words may be
called the sick man's cordial, or his restorative, wherein you may observe: 1.
The patient expressed in the word him. 2. The disease, his danger, and misery
-- he is going down to the pit. 3. The Physician who is described: 1. Ab
officio, by his Office, a messenger. 2. Ab opere, by his work, an interpreter.
3. A praestantid, a rare man, one of a thousand. -- multis e millibus unus. 4.
The Physic, to show unto a man his uprightness. 5. The cure, then he is
gracious, etc. where are considerable:

1. The quality of it, the kind of the cure, deliver him from going down to the
pit, i. e. from mortal sickness.

2. The spring of it, Gods grace, he is gracious.

3. The meritorious cause of it, I have found a ransom.

4. The declaration of it, he says, etc.

The difficulties are neither many nor great, yet some things there are which
need explication, If a messenger] an Angel, i. e. by office, not by nature, for
so the word is often used in Scripture, both in the Old Testament, Mal. 3.1.
Behold I will send my messenger, Heb. (...) my Angel, which the infallible
interpreter, the Lord Jesus, tells us was meant of John the Baptist, Mat. 11.10.
This is he of whom it is written, Behold I send a messenger, etc. and in the
New Testament. Rev. 2. and 3. where the Pastors of the several Churches are
called Angels, and so it is most fitly understood here, both because, God did
then and still does most generally use the Ministry of men rather then Angels
in counselling and comforting afflicted men, and because he is called one of a
thousand, a phrase which implies as his excellency and fitness for that work,
so the insufficiency of most of the same kind for it, which must not be charged
upon the meanest of Gods elect Angels.

An interpreter] viz. of the mind and will of God; Christ is the great
interpreter, Joh. 1.18. but he when he ascended on high gave forth this gift,
and left us interpreters in his stead, Ephesians. 4.11, etc.

To show unto a man this righteousness] i. e. man's own righteousness (to say
nothing of the other senses) for, it is the sin and unrighteousness of a man
which causes his disease, and the sense of that sin which makes his disease
bitter and formidable: sin is the sting of every affliction: now then omnis
curatio fit per contraria, all cures are wrought by contraries, when therefore
a faithful Messenger or Minister of Christ having made the sick man sensible of
his sin, and afterward of the pardon of it, and when he comes to discover to
him his righteousness, uprightness, holiness, then God is gracious, etc.
although it is not at all impossible that here may be a reference to Christ's
righteousness, for Job is no stranger to that, and the word ransom carries an
evident relation thither. So that both may be conjoined.

Then he (i. e. God) is gracious: God is always gracious in himself, in his own
nature, but he is gracious to none, but in his own way and upon his own terms,
God is not gracious to unrighteous and unholy persons: but when men return from
their sins, etc God is gracious, and says, i. e. God says, Deliver him, -- he
says so to his Minister, he gives him commission to deliver him, i. e. to
declare him to be delivered, God delivers men authoritative and realiter,
Ministers only Ministerialiter and declarative: it is an usual phrase Ministers
are said to do, that which they declare God will do, Jer. 1.10. I have set thee
over kingdoms and nations (says God to Jeremiah) to root out, to pull down,
and to destroy, i. e. to declare that I will do it.

I have found a ransom -- I have received satisfaction, i. e. in the death of
my Son, which was a ransom satisfactory for the sins of his people. And farther
it is by virtue of this ransom that Gods people are delivered, not only from
hell, but from any other miseries. Indeed as Divines distinguish of the
resurrection of the godly, and the wicked, so the temporal deliverances which
wicked men receive they are the effects of common providence; but those which
Christ's members receive, they have as the fruits of Christ's purchase. And well
says God, I have found a ransom: for it was beyond the wit of men or Angels to
find out such an admirable way for man's salvation: Thus you have had the
coherence, division, and sense of the words.

There are several Doctrines which these words would afford, but I shall
forbear the very mention of them, and only speak of this one, which falls to my
share.

Doct. That the seasonable instruction of sick and languishing persons, is
awork as of great advantage, so of great skill and difficulty.

I need not spend much time in the proof, yet something must be said of it:
there are two branches,

1. It is of great advantage. 2. It is of great difficulty.

1. That it is a work of great advantage. It is convenient to say something of
this, because I take it to be a common mistake of many persons, they are apt to
think; that sickbed applications are in a manner useless and ineffectual: it
may be a discouragement which the Devil proposes to Ministers or others to
make them neglect this work, or be formal in it, especially when the persons
are ignorant or profane: the Devil may suggest the invalidity of a sickbed
repentance, the customariness and hypocrisy of sickbed desires, etc. now to
obviate such suggestions, consider these things.

1. That the instruction of sick persons is Gods institution, so you see in the
Text -- a messenger, i. e. one sent of God, to this purpose: now Gods
institutions are not in vain: every institution of God carries a promise in its
bowels to him that does not ponere obinem, that does rightly use it: Ministers
or Christian friends may go about it with much comfort, for it is Gods work, as
he said, Have not I commanded you, etc. it is one of those ways (as you see in
the Chapter) which God ordained to reclaim sinners: and when you attempt it,
you may expect Gods concurrence. You may pray in faith for Gods assistance in
his Ordinance.

2. Gods mercy is proposed by himself, and may be offered by Ministers, even to
languishing persons: it is true, it must be done cautiously (as you shall hear)
but it may be done, God does indefinitely tender his mercy to all, and we must
not limit where God limits not. Ministers may safely follow Gods evample; and
whereas it may be thought that such men only come to God as driven by
necessity, You must know that God is so gracious, that he receives even such
whom mere necessity drives to him, and indeed all true converts are first
persuaded to come to God by the sense of their own necessities, though
afterward they are elevated to a more noble disposition: God never rejected
any upon this ground: how many came to Christ merely in sense of their bodily
maladies, and were sent away with spiritual cure: Christ received her that came
not to him, till she had in vain tried all other Physicians. So in that parable
of the Prodigal (wherein God is pleased to represent the methods of his grace
in the conversion and salvation of sinners) you shall find that God does not
reject that poor prodigal, because he was forced home by that, Durum, telum
necessitas, by insuperable straits and difficulties.

3. Sickbed repentance is not wholly impossible (though it be hard) sickness
is one means that God uses to work repentance, God can work repentance even
upon a sick bed, and it is God that must do it, even in health; and to speak
truly and strictly, although the means of repentance be more probable, and the
truth of repentance more discernable in health then in sickness, yet the
practice of repentance is as hard a work in health as in sickness, seeing in
both cases it is the great work of the omnipotent God, who has ever challenged
it as his royal prerogative to give repentance? whatever those hosts gratiae
Christi (as Austin calls them) say to the contrary, so that in short, with men,
repentance is always impossible, can the Ethiopian change his skin or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil,
Jer. 13.23. but with God it is always possible. And yet to prevent the abuse of
this, by a presumptuous putting off repentance to the time of sickness, and
death upon this pretense, I must add, that such as put off repentance on such a
pretext do seldom meet with it. God does seldom give repentance to such
persons: and it is a general observation of all serious Divines; that late
repentance is seldom true, though true repentance is never late, it being the
just judgment of God, that they that intend to mock God by putting off
repentance should deceive themselves, and die without repentance.

2. That it is a work of great difficulty might easily be demonstrated, but
that will appear in the further prosecution of it all along, only there are two
Arguments which the Text suggests.

1. That it is a work which God has put into the hands of his chief Officers,
his Ministers, who ought to be the most accomplished persons of all others,
etc. this is one of those works for which God has vouchsafed such singular
gifts unto his Messengers.

2. That it is not every Minister neither who is fit for this work, and
therefore here it is required, that he be one of a thousand.

But this I shall pass over, and come to that which is allotted to me, the
resolution of this great and important case of Conscience: How Ministers or
Christian friends may and ought to apply themselves to sick persons for their
good, and the discharge of their own consciences. I take it to be one of the
hardest parts of the Ministerial works to make seasonable applications to such
persons. I shall therefore endeavor to answer it, though not so fully as the
point deserves, yet so far as the brevity of this Exercise will permit, in
these eight Propositions or Directions.

1. Endeavor must be used to understand the state of the sick person; As
Physicians do by sick persons, they enquire into the manner of their life,
diet, etc. it is a great step to the cure to know the Patients temper, because
as bodily so spiritual Physic must be suited to the temper; and disposition,
and condition of the Patient. And as Physicians take pains in this by
conference with friends and by examining the Patient, so should Ministers by
discourse with religious acquaintance, and by searching conference with the
sick person, endeavor to find out the truth, for why should not men be as
accurate in healing men's souls, as their bodies? since the very Heathen could
say, That all our care should be translated from the things of the body, to the
soul, so Epictetus in his 6; Chapter, (...), etc. and as for the body men prize
those Physicians most that best know their temper, etc. so should sick persons
prefer (caeteris paribus) that faithful Minister that has most knowledge of
them, etc.

2. The great business is to bring the sick man to a true sight of his state
and condition: indeed this is an happy thing, whatever his condition be, if his
conditio be sound and good, then it is an happiness to know it, that he may
have the comfort of it, if it be bad, yet it is an happiness to know it, that a
man may be capable of counsel, and put into the way to amend it: it is true,
evil men, like persons much in debt, care not to look into their books, and
understand their debts, but they must be brought to it. And the worse thy
condition is the more art thou concerned to discover it, for to be ignorant of
thy condition, if it be good, only hinders thee from comfort, but if it be bad,
it hinders thee from salvation: you and they must both consider, that as the
heart is always deceitful, so then especially for three reasons amongst others.
1. Then men are impotent and unable to examine themselves, their natural parts
are weakened, the eyes of their mind clouded: their mind is diverted by bodily
pains that it cannot attend, and so may sooner be cheated. 2. Then men are
sloathful and listless as to all spiritual exercises: if even good men are
sloathful in their most healthful times, how much more evil men in times of
sickness? the listlesness of the body generally makes an answerable impression
upon the faculties of the soul, that being a received truth amongst Physicians
and Philosophers, and ratified by daily experience that mores animi, sequuntur
temperames (...) tum corporis. 3. In times of sickness men are greedy of
comfort, and so will catch even at a shadow, etc. upon all these grounds there
needs the more caution, to set before his eyes the folly and misery of
self-deceit, especially in everlasting matters.

3. Ministers and others must take great heed lest while they avoid one
extreme, they run upon another, which is a common error in practice, some for
the prevention of despair, have made such unseasonable applications of comfort,
as have begotten presumptuous hopes. Others again to prevent presumption have
so indiscreetly aggravated things as to render them hopeless, and so careless,
etc. there must therefore be a prudent contemperation of things together: as
the wise Physician mixeth several ingredients, he puts in indeed things of a
sharp and corroding nature, which may eat out or remove the noxious humors,
but adds to them things of a more gentle temperature which by their leuity
may correct the acrimony of the former: God himself sets us a copy by the mouth
of Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.20 You have done all this wickedness, there is the
corrosions, he faithfully discovers that, and does not dawbe with them, yet,
lest the disease should rather be exasperated then removed, he adds this
healing counsel, yet turn not a side from following the Lord, and this Cordial
v 22. The Lo^d will not forsake his people: and Ezra follows it, Ezra 10.2. We
have trespassed against God, and have taken strange wives, yet now there is
hope in Israel concerning this, now therefore let us make a covenant with God.

4. The same methods are not to be used to all sick persons: you might as well
give the same pill to all diseased persons, whereas that which would cure one,
will kill another; you may as well make one suit for all bodies: discreet
Physicians diversifie their applications, according to the difference of the
Patients disposition and condition; so here, and there are many differences to
be eyed here.

1. Difference of tempers whether tender, or rough and stubborn, as you read it
is the husbandmans discretion that the fitches are not threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither is the cart-wheel turned upon the cummine, but
the fitches are beaten out with a staff and the cummine with a rod, Isa. 28.27.
so it must be the discretion of a Minister, to have respect to the different
tempers of men, in his applications to them: it is said of Christ he taught the
Disciples as they were able to bear.

2. Difference of education and conversation, some have been nuzzled in
ignorance, others brought up in the knowledge of the truth, not considering of
this, occasions much mischief: Discourse to an ignorant person of the necessity
of faith and repentance, you lose your labor often times, he conceits he has
believed and repented; for he takes faith to be a believing, though without any
grounds, that God has pardoned him, and repentance a crying God mercy, etc.
one must consider where foundations must be laid -- and where we need only
raise superstructions: some have had a loose and profane education, others
civil and religious: the former require more terror, the latter more caution,
lest they deceive themselves.

3. Difference of guilt. Great difference is to be made in the handling of
sinners of a smaller size, and inveterate sinners: as God expects, so Ministers
must endeavor that sorrow may bear some proportion with the sin -- Peter
having sinned grievously wept bitterly Mat. 27. last.

5. It is a very bad guide to follow the counsels or desires of sick persons,
or their carnal friends. It fares with faithful Ministers, as with honest and
able Physicians, that are many times ill thought of by the sick man and foolish
friends, when they put him to pain, or trouble, they charge him with cruelty
and delighting to torment the poor man unnecessarily, and it may be think of
discharging him, and getting a Physician that will deal more gently with him:
whereas indeed he is the sick man's best friend, and many times should he not
pain him, he would kill him: so is it here, Come to a sick man, he cries,
Comfort for Gods sake, so say his friends, and they think all is done, if they
can get comfort: why you shall have it, but in due time, you shall have ease,
health, etc. but you must be contented to wait for it, and expect it in due
order, first you must be sick, often times, that physic is the best, which makes
you sickest; you shall be healed; but, if you would proceed regularly and work
a true cure, you must first have your wound searched, and then healed, else you
have only a palleative cure, and the wound will fester inwardly: and it is an
horrible mistake of sick persons they think comfort is all they are to look
after, I tell you, it is not present comfort, but everlasting happiness, you
must make your business to get: it is not Augustus his (...), to die quietly,
like a Lamb (as the vulgar phrase it) but a Scripture (...), to die the death
of the righteous: it is not so much a calm, and sweet, and easy passage (the
fishes have that, when they swim down the sweet stream of Jordan, into the dead
sea, where they perish) but a safe harbor one may go to heaven in a storm, and
to hell in a calm; and which is better, judge you: those wretches in Psalm. 73.
have no bands in their death, and yet death has dominion over them. Comfort is
not the great business you need.

6. The same course for substance is to be taken for the conversion of sick and
healthful persons, etc. there is but one way to heaven, for all persons; and
therefore consider with your selves what you would do, if they were in health,
and what were necessary then, why that same course you must take now: and if it
be more troublesome to sick persons, they may thank themselves for it; who
neglected the time of their health, etc. indeed sick men are apt to favor
themselves, and to think God will accept of less from them, then others,
whereas, if possible, they have need to do more then others, and to make the
more haste, having the less time for their Work.

7. The greatest care must be to keep sick persons from those errors whereby
such persons commonly miscarry, such as these,

1. Insensibleness of their danger, whereas the first step to a cure is to know
ones malady. It is a dreadful thing to see poor ignorant and unconverted
sinners, at the very brink of the pit, ready to drop into hell, and not at all
affected with it, etc. If ever you mean to do them any good, you must awaken
them out of that mortal sleep or lethargy lighten their eyes with a conviction
of their danger, lest they sleep the sleep of death.

2. Willingness to be deluded. You may know it thus: If a dawbing Minister, or
friend offers comfort, how greedily they catch it: They will receive comfort
upon any grounds, nay upon no grounds, but upon the bare words, it may be of a
time-serving and man-pleasing Minister. But let a serious and faithful
Minister come to them, and show them their sad, and sinful, and hazardous
condition, and demonstrate it by irrefragable arguments, they will not yield to
it. But as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 3.5. (...), this they willingly are
ignorant of. You must possess them with the folly of such a temper, the
unavoydable misery of self-deluding persons, etc. and the dread of
disappointment when too late.

3. Carelessness and listnesness; This is the temper of many, knowing the
difficulty of believing, repenting, etc. and remembering their own guilt, they
cast off the care of that, which they think will be to no purpose, etc. You
must therefore possess them with the necessity of Christian carefulness; what
madness it is to be careless now, which is the only season of caring to any
purpose; etc. What folly it is to free themselves from the care of a few days,
to ascertain to themselves everlasting care and torment, etc. Also you must
possess them with the benefit of this care, and laying it to heart, etc. That
it is Gods course in opening the heart, to stir up this care.

4. Resting in generals. Dolosus versatur in generalibus. This deceives many
into Hell: You may discourse excellently against sin in the general, and raise
in them some passion against it, yet not profit them at all, etc. For true
repentance takes notice of particular sins, etc. And as generals have no
existence, but in the particulars according to principles of Philosophy: So it
is sin in particular, which does primarily affect the heart of a true penitent.

5. The concealment of some hidden way of wickedness, I believe, has sent
many to Hell, they would never make their disease known, through fear of shame,
etc. As some persons have died of those diseases which they have smothered. It
is true, a man is not bound to make confession of all his sins to a Minister,
as we rightly assert against Papists: but yet all Divines grant, that in many
cases it is both expedient and necessary to acknowledge thy wickedness to men,
and to say nothing of those cases wherein it is sometimes necessary, nor of
many reasons which make it frequently expedient. I shall only instance in one,
which is sufficient of it self many times; that the Physician knowing more
exactly thy malady, may more effectually proportion his remedy. Possess them
with this in such cases, How infinitely better it is to have some shame before
a friend, who will cover your shame, and hate to reproach you with it, then
before all the world. Cconvince them, what folly it is to be unfaithful to
themselves, etc.

8. Take heed of healing the souls of sick persons slightly, this we are very
apt to. 1. From the sick man's greedy desire of comfort. 2. From the expectation
and desire of carnal friends. 3. From our own careless hearts, that love not
to put our selves to any trouble or reproach (which we shall meet with, if we
be faithful in this case) however take heed of it. Ier. 8.11. They have healed
the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace. This is the case: A soul (whether in sickness or in health)
must first be wounded, then healed. There must be sorrow and travel ere the Man
child be brought forth. There must be true repentance and godly sorrow -- deep
sorrow (They dawb, that tell you otherwise, and make God a lyar^^) Great
heaviness of heart, etc. Repentance is neither a short, nor a superficial
work. -- Persuade them to wait Gods leisure, and in Gods way for the cure, not
to precipitate your work: Persuade them not to be afraid of sorrows, troubles,
etc. but rather to fear the want of it; for here is a common and a fatal
mistake, most men are afraid of sorrow, and labor to drive away sorrow:
Whe^eas indeed sorrow is the midwife of all true joy. Tears of penitential
sorrow, are the streams that lead us to the Rivers of pleasure, which are at
Gods right hand: It is none other then the gate of heaven, the fountain of
comfort: And on the contrary, to be a stranger to godly sorrow, is one of the
dreadfullest signs of a lost soul. The laughter of such a person, is a Risus
sardonicus, a deadly joy. Labor more to work a solid, than a sudden cure.

There are other directions I thought to have given, but these may suffice, and
I will conclude all with two or three Uses, first to Ministers, then to people.

1 To Ministers. Hence we may learn the great difficulty of the Ministerial
work, we see one reason why Paul said, Who is sufficient for th^se things? O
what a sin and shame is it to see what persons venture upon this work? that
such undertake to be shepherds of Christ's Flock, that are hardly sit to be set
with the dogs of the flock? Father forgive them, they know not what they do.
Many act, as if they thought this were all the work of a Minister to make a
few Sermons, read some Prayers, etc. No, no, a Minister must be thoroughly
furnished to every good work, He must be apt and able for every work: This,
among others. O what Angelical abilities does it require! Acuteness to discern
the sick man's temper, knowledge to understand the nature of all Spiritual
Diseases, the Symptoms, the Prognostics, as also the Antidotes and Remedies.
Wisdom to make suitable, speedy Applications. O how hard a case is it! Many
sick men can neither endure morbum, nor remedium, neither the disease of their
souls, nor their remedy, etc. A Minister had need know all things, understand
all persons, discern the subtilties of men's hearts, and not be ignorant of the
wiles of the Devil.

How many knots must he be able speedily to untye? How many cases must he be
able to give speedy resolution too? And he must be supposed to have laid up
with great industry, because he must bring forth out of his Treasure, things
both new and old. O the difficulty! It is a sad thing to consider, that many
souls do perish not only vi morbi, by the force of their Disease, but also
errore medici, by the error of their Physician, by the mistakes of their
Ministers: And as Galen speaks of physic for the body, it is also true of the
physic of the Soul: In medicina nihil exiguum, In physic nothing is little, a
small error there, may occasion fearful mischiefs: So a small mistake in
souls concernments, may occasion a souls everlasting ruin.

2. To people: Is it of such difficulty? O labor you to do your work in
health, while time and strength last, before the evil days come, etc. It is a
serious Admonition of Gregory's in his Book Decura pastorali salus corporis
quando ad been operandum accepta despicitur quanti sit muneris amissa sentitur:
He that neglects the time of health for the doing of his great work, he shall
feel the worth of it by the want of it. I beseech you let me reason with you:
Why will you run an hazard, when you may go a safe way? Consider what woeful
straits you will bring your selves too, if you do not ponder your ways, and fix
your thoughts, and afflict your hearts, You kill your souls; if you do, perhaps
your bodies, etc. what a dreadful Dilemma is this, etc. The Physician charge
you not to trouble your selves with sad thoughts, lest you overthrow your
bodies: and the Minister, If he will be faithful, must charge you to trouble
your selves, lest you lose your souls. O consider now; now you may consider,
you have the use of reason, then reason maybe lost, etc. Now God will accept of
you, then it may be he will reject you, as Prove. 1. Now yau are at leisure to
consider, then sufficient unto the day will be the evil thereof. And therefore
be persuaded to improve the time of health. It is the general custom of sick
persons to send for Ministers to prepare them for the future life, when they
despair of the enjoyment of this present life. A learned man wittily observed,
that as they say, ubi desinit Philosophus, incipit Medicus: So it may be said,
Vbi desinit Medicus, incipit Theologus, where the Physician ends, the Divine
begins. Thus they begin to live at the end of their life: But you, if you be
wise take this counsel (and o that my words might prevail with you) desire to
speak with able and godly Ministers in the time of your health: That, that is
the acceptable time; Then may they give counsel freely, and you may follow
their counsel thoroughly. That was the course of those Converts, Acts 2. They
did not tarry till their souls were ready to breath out themselves into
eternity, but in the time of their health applied themselves to Peter, etc. Men
and brethren, what shall we do?

2. Make such applications to your friends in health, as you must do in
sickness (if you mean to discharge your duty to God, or friendship to them) you
will give them and your selves too great ease and advantage by it, etc.
Remember what obliges you to do it in sickness, obliges you also in health;
you are your Brothers keepers, you have all, curam animaru^, cure of souls. And
as Ministers are bound to this work virtute officii, by virtue of their office,
so you are bound to it, ex lege charitatis: And surely if every one of you, are
bound to deliver your neighbors Ox or Ass, when you see it falling into a
pit, much more are you obliged to have compassion upon their souls, when they
are going down to the pit, from which there is no redemption.

How must we REPROVE, That we may not PARTAKE OF OTHER MEN'S SINS?
1 Timothy 5. part. 22. v. Neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy self
pure.


THIS Epistle is a Scripture Directory for Church government. In this Chapter
there are certain general Rules, or Canons Apostolical, which S. Paul enjoynes
Timothy to observe;

1. About Church-Widowes, how they must be qualified, to the 17th. v.

2. About Church-Elders, how they must be ordered, to the end.

1. About their maintenance and encouragement, v. 17, 18.

2. About their Credit and Reputation, v. 19.

3. About their Reproof and Correction, v. 20.

4. About their Admission and Ordination, Text.

Lay hands suddenly on no man. Some understand this of the hands of
Absolution, others of the hands of Benediction, others of the hands of
Confirmation, Salmeron. Guil Chrysos. Theoph. Theod. Calvin.
but ^est and best, of the hands of Ordination, i. e. Ordain no man, admit no
man into this Sacred and weighty Office and Function of the Ministry,
suddenly. Suddenly, ie. not before natural capacity, not without comp^^ent
ability, no^ unless qualified with piety, industry, Paraeus. Estius.
gravity. The danger follows, Neither be partaker of other men's sins.

1. Not of their sins who would importune thee to Ordain unworthy persons,
Consentiendo by consenting.

Estius.
2. Not of their sins who do Ordain unworthy persons, Imitando, by imitating.

3. Not of their sins who are Ordained, being unworthy persons, and that,
Oecumenius.


1. Not of their sins before Ordination, Approbando, by approving of them.
Estius in loc.


2. Not of their sins after Ordination, Confirmando, by confirming them in
them. For, says the Apostle in the next verse but one, Some men's sins are open
beforehand, going before to judgment, i. e. the Crisis, or Test, or Censure,
or Judgment of the Church: and some follow after. This is the Grammatical
sense and Logical Analysis of the words.

But beloved, I must take leave to handle the words in a greater latitude and
extent: For certainly this Caution is not intended to Ministers only, neither
is it to be confined to the Case of Ordination; but as Christ said upon another
occasion, What I say unto you, I say unto all. So here, what Saint Paul writes
to Timothy, he speaks to all; a private Christian as well as a Minister, a
Churchmember as well as a Church-Elder must be sure to take heed, that he be
not partaker of other men's sins. The Case of Conscience to be discussed this
morning is this;

Case.
How must we reprove, and not partake of other men's sins?

Cant. 4.2.
And indeed this Case is complex and double, it bears twins.

1. About Participation of other men's sins. 2. About Reproving of other men's
sins.
I must beg leave to project and manage my discourse Sermon-wise, and so
commend to your Christian meditation this Truth and Doctrine. In the
explication whereof I shall handle the former Case, and in the application the
latter.

Doctr. It ought to be every man's care, not to partake of any man's sin.

Neither be partaker --

In the handling of which I shall endeavor to show you,

1. How a man may be guilty of other men's sins, or how many ways a man may be
said to partake of other men's sins.

2. Why a Christian must be careful not to partake of other men's sins.

3. To apply it.

1. How a man may be said to partake of other men's sins: To this I answer,
There are many ways whereby we contract the guilt of others sins: Lord, says
David, who knows how often he offends? I will name some of them.

There are eight ways especially noted in Scripture, by all which a man is
made partaker, and becomes guilty of the sins of others.

1. By contrivance, by plotting and contriving of sin, by provoking and
soliciting others to sin; and this is in an high degree to be guilty of other
men's sins. Thus Jonadab was guilty of Amnons Incest by his subtle contriving
of that wickedness, by being a Pander to that Villainy, 2 Samuel 13.5.

When a man shall wittingly and willingly spread a snare in his brothers way,
and either drive him in by provocation, or decoy him in by allurement, he
makes himself a partaker of his sin. E g. to provoke a man to Passion, to
tempt a person to Drunkenness and uncleanness, to put a man upon Murder and
bloodshed, to draw souls into Error, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. this is to
espouse and adopt the sin, and to make it a man's own.

You know the Story there, 2 Samuel 11. Vriah was slain with the edge of the
sword, David was many miles off when Uriah was slain, he died in the battle,
Joab put him in the front, and the Ammonites slew him: but now because David
plotted and contrived all this, the Scripture tells us that David was the
Murderer. 2 Samuel 12.9. Thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the sword, thou
have slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. Though the blade was
the Ammonites, and the hilt might be said to be Joabs: yet the hand was David's,
and the deed was David's. The Ammonites slew him, but David murdered him. S.
Paul tells us, he was a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious, 1 Timothy
1.13. Why Beloved, we do not read of any blasphemy that S. Paul uttered in all
the Bible: Oh but, says he, I compelled the Saints to blaspheme, Act. 26.11.
There was his blasphemy in compelling others to blaspheme.

Beloved, to incite and provoke any to sinful practices, to seduce and
solicit any to loose doctrines and erroneous opinions, it is to be doubly
guilty of those sins, once by infection, and again by instigation.

Hence is that frequent expression among the Fathers concerning Arrius the
Heretic, that look how many souls he had seduced to his heresy and blasphemy,
so many several additions of torments he had in hell, as guilty of all their
sins: Oh man, whoever thou art that make thy neighbor drunk, by putting the
bottle to his mouth, that call to thy brother, saying, ^ast in thy lot
am^ngst us, and let us have one purse, that inticest the soul of the simple
with a Come, let us take our fill of loves, and solace our selves until the
morning. I tell thee, thou art guilty of all their sins, and may justly be
punished with all their plagues: for this, Christians, is a most Devilish
practice, to tempt and provoke others to wickedness. All sins indeed are
devilish sins, Per modum servitutis; but some sins are devilish sins, Per modum
imaginis, in all sins, men bear the Devils yoke, 1 John 3.8. but in some sins,
men bear the Devils image.

Five Sins especially the Scripture brands as devilish Sins, and this is the
chief. 1. False accusation, 2 Timothy 3.3. men shall be false accusers, Devils,
says the Greek. 2. Ly^ng, John 8.44. you are of your father the Devil for he
is a liar and the father of it. 3. Pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. not a novice, lest puffed
up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. 4. Persecution,
Revel. 2.10. the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, i. e. devilish,
men-persecutors. 5. Temptation, as this is, Get thee behind me Satan, says
Christ to Peter, when he tempted him, Ma^th. 16.23. He that shall either hinder
another of doing that good which is commanded, or shall further another to the
doing of that evil which is prohibited, is justly chargeable with both their
Sins.

2. By compliance, by consenting and complying with Sin and Sinners, so a man
makes himself partaker, though he has no hand in it, yet if he has a heart in it,
though he does not act it, yet if he likes it, and loves it, and approves it,
though he does not persecute Gods Saints and Ministers, yet if he says, Aha!
aha! so would we have it, it is enough to make him guilty before God.

Saul, he had no hand in Saint Stephens death, he did not cast one stone at
him; but because he looked on with approbation, and stood by with consent, Acts
8.1. Saul was consenting unto his death, therefore was he esteemed guilty of
his blood and murder, and so himself confesses, when God had awakened him, and
humbled him to repentance, Acts 22.20. When the blood of thy Martyr Stephen was
shed, I was consenting to his death, and so charges himself as guilty of it.

God looks not upon the outward man so much as upon the heart, according to the
frame and inclination of the heart, according as the pulse of the heart beats,
so is every man in the account and esteem of God, if Sin has once stormed the
Fort-Royall of the heart, though it never appears in the outworks, the
Garrison is lost: That which is upon the stage of the heart after consent, is
as truly acted in the sight of God, as that which appears in the outward man
by commission. Matthew 15.19. Out of the heart proceeds murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies. Why beloved, from the hand
proceeds Murders and Thefts, Ephesians 4.28. from the eye proceeds Adulteries and
Fornications, 2 Pet. 2.14. and from the tongue proceeds f l^e witnesses and
blasphemies, Psalm. 120.3. Oh but the heart is the forge of all.

You may murder a man with a thought, as they say the Rasilisk will with a
look, such a poisonous thing a wicked heart is; and let me tell you it is the
heart-murder, and the heart-adultery, and the heart-blasphemy, and the
heart-iniquity, that God especially judges, according to that famous place,
Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, to give to every man according to his
ways, i. e. according to what I see acted and done upon the stage of the
heart, says God; he does not only judge the actions, but he judges the very
intent^ons.

3. By connivance, by a sinful dissembling, flat^ering and winking at others
in their wickedness and sins, so men become guilty of others sins Isa. 9.16.
The leaders of this people cause them t^ err; it is in the Hebrew the blessers
of this people cause them to err. Beloved, (...) Beat fican es populum.
the blessers of men in wickedness are the leaders of men in wickedness; he
that shall wink at, and fla^ter men in Sins when he knows in his conscience
that they do wickedly he makes himself Captain and Master of mis-rule among
them And thus we are too prone to be partakers of Magistra^es sins, and
Governors sins, and great men's sins Patrons sins, and Landlords sins. If the
Grandees of the world profane the Sabbath, dishonor God, rant and swear, and
scoff at Religion; out of a base cowardly spirit, or out of a carnal covetous
heart, we flatter them and let them alone, it may be applaud them as he said Tu
fa hunc Dominum, te facit ille Deum, do but make him a Lord, and he
straightway makes thee a God; as if we were not to dist^nguish between the
persons of men, and the vices of men, or as if so be we more feared a mortal
man, whose breath is in his nostrils, than we do the immortal God, who can
frown us into hell in a moment: Oh th^s is to be deeply guilty of other men's
Sins. See how sharply God by his Pro^het taxes and reproves this dawbing in
those wicked upholsters, that sow pillows to every elbow, Ezekiel. 13.17. and so
forward. Read it at leisure.

I fear this has been the Sin of former Times and Governments, God grant it may
not be the Sin of present and future Ages, for men to connive at any that
promote their own interests.

Alas, my brethren, methinks the interest of Piety, and the interest of
Conscience, and the interest of the eternal God, judge of quick and dead,
should swallow up all the interests of the world. If Nebuchadnezzar himself
should set up a golden Image, and would have it worshipped, I tell you it is not
treason for Sidrach, Meshech and Abednego to say, We are not careful oh King
to answer thee in this matter, Dan. 3.16.

Besides, let not men deceive themselves, for such persons as can so easily
betray the interest of God, will never be afraid, if opportunity serve, to
oppose the sovereignty of man, whose authority he bears, and are not indeed
Hushai's, but Ziba's, not David's friends, but David's flatterers.

4. By sufferance, by permitting the sins of others, so we become guilty, by
suffering others to sin, whom we are bound in duty, and may be able by
authority to hinder: and thus as in the former particular, we are guilty of
Magistrates sins, in this particular Magistrates oft-times become guilty of our
sins. Kings and Rulers, and subordinate Magistrates become oft-times deeply
guilty of their peoples sins, namely, by sufferance, by tolerating Errors, and
Heresies, and Blasphemies on the one hand, or by suffering wickedness and
profaneness on the other.

That Ruler or Magistrate that shall suffer either loose opinions, or
principles, that are contrary to sound doctrine, to be broached, or loose ways
and customs, that are contrary to the power of godliness, to be observed, and
shall not use his authority to prevent and suppress them, he contracts to
himself the guilt, and draws upon himself the mischief of all those Sins and
Enormities: Just as he that licenses a Book to the Pr^ss, if there be any
faults of ignorance, or error, or poisonous opinions, they may be justly
charged upon him and laid at his door, though he is not the author, yet
because he is the licencer, though he is not the Parent, yet because he is the
midwife. So if there be any heresy and blasphemy tolerated in a place, if
there be any profaneness and ungodliness suffered among a people, because it
has the Magistrates Imprimatur, and he suff^^s it to pass the Country without
whipping, therefore he is highly guilty.

Sabbath-breaking abounds, let it pass, says the Major of a Town;
drunkenness abounds, let it alone says the Justice of peace; profaneness
abounds, let it go, says the Minister. Sirs, if it should be thus, this were
to bear the Sins of a whole Parish, and a whole County, and a whole Nation upon
a man's back at once. See that Rev. 2. to this purpose. Where you find the sins
of the people charged upon the Governors for their permission and toleration,
both sins of Doctrine and Practice. Of Doctrine, Rev. 2.12, 14, 15. Unto the
Angel of the Church of Pergamus write. I have a few things against thee,
because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, so have thou
also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicola tans, which thing I hate. This
is charged upon the Angel, the Overseer and Governor of the Church, he should
have hindered it, and he did tolerate and permit it, and it was his Sin; and so
of Practice, Rev. 2.18, 20, Unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira, write, I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel,
which calls her self a Prophetess to teach and seduce, etc. To suffer
Jezabel to teach in a Nation, is to suffer painting, and wantonness, and
uncleanness: these were the Sins of Jezabel, and to permit them is to partake
of them.

Object. But some may object and say, Why does God then permit Sin to be in the
world? he might hinder it, and he might prevent it, if he would; there could be
no wickedness acted under the Sun, but by Gods permission; the Devil could not
tempt Job, nor Satan could not fifth Peter without leave and commission from God
neither could any wicked man act his villainy and spit out his venom, without
Gods sufferance. If permission of Sin be a partaking of Sin, how shall we
vindicate God from the imputation of unrighteousness?

Answ. 1. This was Marcion's wicked and malicious cavil at Gods providence
about the first Transgression; Why would not God, who foresaw the issue, hinder
Eve and the Devil from conference and communion together, that so Sin might
have been prevented, and the World bin everlastingly happy? unless (says he)
God was either envious and would not, or weak and could not hinder it. To which
^ert^llian replies, Because God was arbitrary and free in his g^fts. Austin
answers, Because it was his will. Prosper and Hilary reply, The cause may be
unknown, it cannot be unjust. All which is enough, Os obturare, to muzzle that
Heaven-daring mouth of Blasphemy. But afterward Austin answers, That though sin
be the worst thing in the world, yet the existence of sin is not ill; as poison
would do no hurt if men would not meddle with it; but that satisfies not our
case. Therefore,

2. Though God has authority, and is of ability to prevent and hinder the
Commission of sin, yet he is not bound in duty so to do. God's under no tie
and obligation, but his own purpose and pleasure, Deus non tenetur Legibus, God
is a Law to himself. Herein lies the guilt and evil of man's permitting of sin,
he is bound in duty, as well as furnished with ability, and authority to
prevent it; and therefore his permitting of sin, is a partaking of sin, Exodus
22.18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live; man is bound to hinder
profaneness and wickedness, if he can but so is not God; though he is of
infinite power and ability to restrain it, or to remove it, yet he is not
bound in duty; and so it is no unrighteousness in God to suffer sin. Sin is the
transgression of the Law, but where here is no Law, there is no transgression.

3. It is no unrighteousness in God to suffer sin, when he may hinder it,
because he can by his infinite Wisdom order it to his own glory; he suffered
Pharaoh to harden his heart, that he might be glorified on Pharaoh, Romans
9.17. Pharaoh's sin turned to Gods glory, as he makes all penal evils work
together for our good; so he makes all sinful evils concur to his own glory.

4. It is no unrighteousness in God to suffer sin, because he can turn every
man's sin to a greater benefit and advantage, Genesis 50.20. You thought evil
against me, says Joseph to his Brethren, but God meant it unto good; he can
bring good out of evil, and light out of darkness. God suffers Toads and
Serpents to live, because they are useful, they suck the noxious and hurtful
gusts from herbs and flowers, and so make them wholesome for man's use: So God
permits sin in the world, because he knows how to make it useful; he can make
an Antidote of the Vipers flesh. He did by an excellent and rare Chemistry
extract the greatest Mercy from the greatest Mischief; the grea-Good from the
greatest Evil; the Salvation of Mankind from the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ.

5. By influence of bad Example, by setting loose and bad Examples for others
to imitate: So men are guilty of others sins, as namely, when Children sin by
the Examples of their Parents, those very Parents are guilty of their Childrens
sin. So we have some Families that inherit the lusts, as well as the lands of
their Ancestors; Parents swear and curse, and so do Children; Parents are
Drunkards, and so are Children; Parents are unclean, and so are Children; as
they make them rich by their Livings, so they make them wretched and debaucht
by their lives; this is to make themselves partakers of all their sins. So when
people sin by the looseness and licentiousness of their Minister, that Minister
is guilty of those very sins that the people so commit; which made Austin,
though a very holy man, so exceeding jealous of himself in this case, that that
was his constant Prayer, Libera me Domine a pecca is meis alienis, Lord, says
he, deliver me from mine other men's sins; those sins that others have
committed through my carelessness and incogitancy.

And indeed Examples are more cogent and influential a great deal than
Precepts. The Adulteries of Jupiter, and other Pagan gods did mightily draw the
people to imitate their wantonness; and Augustine gives the reason, Magis
intuebantur quid fecerat Jupiter quam quid docuit Plato; They more minded what
Jupiter did, than what Plato taught.

Jeroboam the Son of Nebat is said to make Israel to sin, that is his brand. How
did he make Israel to sin? why by his Law he commanded them to sin, but by
his practice and Example he made them to sin; he set up Calves in Dan and
Bethel, and whole herds of people ran a lowing after them. So it is said of St.
Peter, that he compelled the Gentiles to Judaize, Gal. 2.14. Epistola
Hieronymi intra opera Augustini, Epist. 11.
Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? How did St. Peter
compel the Gentiles to Judaize? not by any thing he preached to them, says
Hierome, but by his Example, non docentis imperio, sed conversantis exemplo. A
stone you know thrown into the water, makes it self but one circle, aye but
that one perhaps begets a score, or an hundred: so it is here, he that sets an
evil Example, sins not alone, he draws hundreds it may be into sin after him.
He is like a man that sets his own house on fire, it burns many of his
neighbors, and he is to be answerable for all the ruins.

6. By inference from a bad Example, or by imitation, so a man is guilty of
another man's sin, not only by Pattern, in setting bad Examples, but also by
Practice, in following bad Examples; and thus, that man that will be drunk,
because another was drunk, or that breaks the Sabbath, because others do the
like, he is not only guilty of his own particular sin, but he is guilty also
of their sins whom he imitates and follows, and the reason is, because bad
Examples are not Landmarks for us to go by, but they are Sea-ma^ks for us to
avoid. Hence you shall find in Scripture mention made of Children by imitation
as well as by nature, and people by imitation, as well as by nation, and Kings
by imitation, as well as by succession. I Will give you an instance of all these.
Look into that Judges 18.30. The children of Dan set up the graven Image, and
Jonathan the Son of Gershom, the Son of Manasseh, he and his Sons were Priests
to the Tribe of Dan. Here Jonathan an Idol-Priest, is called the Son of
Gershom, the Son of Manasseh, i. e. the Grandchild of Manasseh. Now it is
clear in Scripture, that Gershom was the Son of Moses, and not of Manasseh,
Exodus 2.22.18.3. 1 Chronicles. 23.15. And so Jonathan must be the Grandchild of
Moses, and not of Manasseh. But the Jews and learned Critics tell us, that he
is called the Grandchild of Manasseh, for a double reason. 1. Because the
Scripture consulting the honor of Moses did conceal his pedigree as to Moses,
for it had been a disgrace to Moses, to have had upon record an Idol-Priest in
his lineage; And 2. Which is to my purpose, he is called the Grandchild of
Manasseh, and that by (...), and anticipation, because he followed him in his
Idolatry, he was no whit like Moses but rather imitated Manasseh, and so he
is called his Grandchild.

For the other instance, see Isa. 1.10. Hear the Word of the Lord ye Rulers of
Sodom, and give ear unto the Law of our God ye people of Gomorrah. Why
beloved, these that the Prophet speaks to, they were the people of Judah, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Why does the Prophet call them the people of
Gomorrah? even for this reason, they did imitate those filthy Sodomites, and
Gomorrhites in wickedness and wan^onness, and looseness, and so became guilty
of their sins, and worthy of their names.

The last instance you have in 2 Ch^on. 28.19. The Lord brought Judah low,
because of Ahaz King of Israel. Ahaz, all know, was King of Judah, and not King
of Israel, but he is called King of Is ael, because he imitated the wicked
and Idolatrous Kings of Israel, he was not so by succession, but he was so by
imitation.

Hence it is that God is said to visit the iniquity of the Fathers upon the
children, because they make themselves guilty by imitation; and this may be a
key to unlock that place of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Deceivers are worse,
but the deceived are worse; if they see a bad example, and will not avoid it,
but copy it, they are worse than worse The deceiver is guilty of the deceived's
sin by Instigation, and the deceived is guilty of the deceivers sin by
imitation.

And this is the woeful, intricate, perplexed Labrinth, into which sin does
precipitate careless and ungodly Sinners. If thou committest that sin, which
none before committed but thee, thou art guilty of all the sins of future
Generations by thy Example, as Adam was in the World, and Jeroboam in Israel.
And if thou committest any sin, because others have committed it before thee,
thou art guilty of all the sins of former Generations, by thy imitation; and so
sin never goes alone; a single sin is as great a soloecism in Divinity, as a
single thank is in Grammar and Morality; and that you may know Christians, I do
not speak without Book in so saying, witness that dreadful place, Mat. 23.34,
35, 36. Wherefore behold I send unto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes,
and some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall
scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute from City to City. Mark, that upon
you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the Earth from the blood of
righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias the Son of Barachias whom ye slew,
though slain in Jehoash reign, almost nine hundred years before, yet ye slew
between the Temple and the Altar. Verily I say unto you, all these things shall
come upon this Generation, and why? because they sinned after the similitude of
their Fathers transgression. Oh what matter of humiliation is this to every
soul that continues in any known sin.

7. By countenance; by delightful society and company with wicked men to
countenance them, so we become partakers of their sins, 1 Cor. 5.11. compared
with 13. But now I have written to you not to keep company. If any man that is
called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or
a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat; Therefore put
away from among your selves that wicked person. As you would avoid the sin,
avoid the sinner: Eating does denote intimate fellowship and familiarity, and
we cannot be intimate with such without contracting their gu^^t to our own
souls. It Is true indeed, all commerce with such is not forbidden, for then, as
the Apostle says, we must go out of the World, verse. 10. but intimate society
is upon this account. And therefore the Apostle, or at least the Translatour
does here seem Critically to distinguish between companying, and keeping
company, verse. 9. compared with 11. I wrote to you in an Epistle not to company
with Fornicators; but now I write to you not to keep company, Company we may,
yea we cannot avoid it, but keep company we must not with wicked men. As
elsewhere the Holy Ghost distinguishes between sinning, and committing sin; He
that is born of God does not commit sin, says St. John. The holiest man on
this side Heaven cannot but sin, says the same Apostle, aye but he that is
born of God does not commit sin; sin he does, but commit sin he does not, i.
e. he does not delight in it, he does not use it, he does not make it his
practice. So here

We read in Scripture where wicked men have often fared better for the godly,
as Laban for Jacob, and Potiphar for Joseph, and Ahab for Jehoshaphat, etc, but
we never read that godly men fared better for the company of the wicked, but
rather worse, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep
the Commandments of my God; it is a very hard matter to keep wicked company,
and to keep the Commandments of God together.

The Lacedaemonians would never suffer a stranger to be with them above three
days, for fear of infection and corruption with their evil manners. And verily
those that are strangers to God, and godliness, should be as little as may be
our companions.

8. By Maintenance, by upholding and encouraging men in their sins, though thou
never committest them thy self, yet thou art guilty, 2 John 11. He that
bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Though thou do not
commit it, yet if thou do applaud it, and rejoice in it, and say it is well
done, thou art a partner; if thou art not the Mother of it, yet thou art the
Nurse of it; if thou art not the Father of it, yet thou art the Guardian of it,
and God will lay the brat at thy door, as sure as if thou had begot it.

Thus I have done with the first thing, how we become guilty, or how many
ways partakers of other men's sins: There are many more might be named, as by
hindering good, by excusing evil, by administering occasion, by not reproving,
not mourning, not reclaiming, etc. But these and many more that practical
Authors handle, they are but underling-sprigs from the great branches that I
have opened.

2. Why a Christian must be careful to avoid, and not to partake of other men's
sins. The reasons of the Doctrine.

Answ. Out of a threefold Principle.

1. Out of a Principle of Charity to our Brethren.

2. Out of a Principle of Pity to our selves.

3. Out of a Principle of Piety to God.

1. Out of charity to our brethren, that we be not means and instruments to
promote their ruin and destruction: for, to partake of other men's Sins, though
it does more burden us, yet it does never a whit ease them, but does rather
harden them, and confirm them in their practices, for company in sin makes men
act it with the greater confidence. Now this is to do the Devils part in the
habit of a friend. Sirs, we must be charitable, Charity is the golden rule,
charity is the bond of perfection; now if it be a piece of charity to help up
our brothers Ox or Ass when he is fallen into a ditch, Exodus 23.4. Sure it is
more charity to do as much for his soul, Jude 23. Others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire. Sin is the deep ditch of the soul, and Sin is the
Hell fire of the soul, as it were, here should be lifting and plucking indeed.

The neglect of this duty of keeping one another from Sin, the Scripture calls
an hating of our brother, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine
heart, thou shall not suffer sin upon him. I observe in company, that if many
persons sit together by a fire, and a spark fly upon any one of them, every
one is ready to shake it off and beat it off; and why should not we be as
friendly and charitable to men's souls, when Sin, which is as Hell flakes, lies
smothering in their consciences, or burning upon their souls?

2. Out of pity to our selves, that we may keep our selves from the blood of
other men's souls, and secure our selves from the judgments of other men's sins.
For the former, says St. Paul, Acts 20.26, 27. I take you to record this day,
that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God: had the Apostle connived at, or consented to
their sins, God would have made inquisition for the blood of their souls at
his hands. For the latter, says Jacob, Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. Simeon and Levi are
brethren, instruments of cruelty, are in their habitations. Oh my soul, come
not into their secrets, unto their assembly, mine honor be not thou united,
Why? Oh, I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel; he would not
have an hand in their sinful union, because he would not have a share in their
dreadful division; they were united in sin, and they must be divided in
punishment.

3. Out of piety toward God; God forbids it, Ephesians. 5.7. be not partakers with
them, and God forbid that we should do it! Nay, God abhorres it and condemns
it, Psalm. 50.18, 21. When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst with him and
have been partakers with the adulterers, etc. These things have thou done, but
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. This sin is a breach of
all the Law at once, being against the Rule of Charity. He that has his own
sins alone, does only commit them; but he that takes other men's sins, does
highly approve them; and this greatly dishonours God; it is worse partaking of
sin, than committing of sin, Romans 1.32. They do not only do the same, says
the Apostle, but have pleasure in them that do them, that is worse. Wherefore
Zelophehads daughters pleaded in Mitigation of their Fathers offense, that he
died in his own sin, he was not partner with Korah, but died in his own sin:
It is worse to be a partner, than to be an actor, Numb. 27.3.

3. Application.
1. Information; Is there such a thing, as partaking of other men's sins after
this manner.

1. Hence you may be informed of the Equity and Justice of Gods proceeding in
punishment; you oft-times see God punishing one man's sin upon another, or at
least hear of it, and you think it strange: why this Oedipus will read you the
riddle. This Clue will conduct you through the labyrinth, they have been some
way or other partakers of those sins, either by contrivance, or by compliance,
or by connivance, etc. one way or other, else God would never punish them, if
they have not been actors, they have been abettors; Shall not the Judge of all
the world do r ght? God punishes Children for the sins of their Parents, Exodus
34.7. aye but those children have been (...), partakers certainly, by
aprobation it may be by imitation: God punishes servants for the sins of their
Masters, Genesis 12.17. but sure the servants were (...) partakers by consulting,
it may be by executing: God punishes Wives for the sins of their Husbands,
Genesis 20.18. but those Wives were (...), partakers still by admitting, by
enduring. God punishes Ministers for the sins of the People, Ezekiel. 33.8. but
then those Ministers are (...), partakers sure enough, by not instructing, by
not reproving, still the Justice of God is vindicated.

2. Hence be informed what piety, and strictness, and watchfulness, is more
especially required of those that have the care of others, e.g. Kings and
Parents, and Masters, and Magistrates, and Ministers; they should be exemplary
in godliness; They have curam animarum, and therefore they should have curam
anima; they have care of other men's souls, and therefore they should look well
to their own. The want of this was her crime and complaint, Cant. 1.6. They
made me the keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept. Oh
those that are keepers of Vineyards had need to have special care of their own
Vineyard.

3. Hence take an account why the wicked of the world do so hate the godly, and
reproach and revile them; it is this, They will not be partakers of their
sins, they will not commit them, neither will they connive at them; and this is
the reason why the world hates them; Ahab hates Michaiah, and himself gives the
reason, because he reproved him, 1 King. 22.8. I hate him, he never speaks
well of me. Herod hates John Baptist, because he reproves him. No wonder that
Ministers of all kind of men in the world are most hated; the case is plain,
because they are reprovers. Godly Ministers, are wicked men's reprovers, and
wicked men are godly Ministers reproachers, 1 Pet. 4.4. They think it strange
you run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you.

4. Here is matter of reproof and humiliation this day for our want of
watchfulness in this kind. Oh which of us can say that we are free from the
guilt of other men's sins. Every man may cast this bur of reproof and
lamentation at his own conscience, and there let it stick. Parents every one,
ah my childrens sins; Masters, ah my servants sins; Ministers, ah my peoples
sins; Rulers, ah my subjects sins. Oh let us deeply mourn for want of relative
holiness, and more frequently and fervently pray that prayer. Lord forgive me
my other man's sins.

2. The second Use is of Exhortation and Caution together. Is it so, That it
ought to be every man's care, not to partake of any men's sin.

Oh Christians! let me entreat you then to be very mindful of this duty; be
persuaded, beloved, and the Lord persuade you to be tenderly careful and
watchful, that you do not partake of other men's sins. These are infectious
times and places that we live in, and multitudes there are that catch diseases
and distempers from others; but let me tell you Christians, that bodily
diseases are not half so catching as sin is; sin is an infectious, contagious,
pestilential plague, that spreads mightily in the world. Oh take heed, take
heed that the guilt of other men's sins do not one day lie upon your conscience,
and be put upon your account.

Let me enforce this counsel in the words of our Apostle here, and and they
are very weighty and Emphatical.

Verse. 21. I cha ge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect
Angels, that thou observe these things without preferring one before another,
and amongst the rest this is one, That thou be not partaker of other men's
sins. Give me leave to prosecute this in these three particulars.

1. By laying down some Arguments to press this Caution and Exhortation.

2. By pointing at what sins especially you must not partake of.

3. By showing you how you may so manage the business, and order the matter,
as not to be partakers of other men's sins. What are the Antidotes against this
Infection?

1. To lay down the Arguments.

1. Consider, you have sins enough of your own, you have no reason to partake
of other men's; it is cruel to add affliction to your bonds. Jesus Christ had no
sins of his own, and therefore he could and did bear ours; he did take all
men's sins, though he did not partake of any man's sins, all were his by
imputation, Isa. 53.6. He has laid upon him the inquities of us all, but none
were his by perpetration and participation. It is not so with us, alas! we
have sins enough of our own; Man, Woman, thine own pride will damn thee, if
thou do not repent; and thine own hypocrisy, and formality, and worldliness,
and hardness of heart; thou have no need to take the sins of others, said the
Daughter of Zelophehad, our Father died in his own sin, Numb. 27, 3. aye, that
is enough to kill a man, and damn a man, his own sin.

2. Consider, It is a most monstrous sin, it is a most dreadful sin to partake
of other men's sins. The Apostle speaks of committing iniquity with greediness,
Ephesians. 4.19. Sirs, there is no such greedy sinning as this, for a man to lick
up, and swallow down, and devour other men's sins. Naturalists tells us, that
Serpens Serpentem devorans sit Draco, If a Serpent swallow down another Serpent
it becomes a Dragon. Oh Christians! this sin of devouring other men's sins, it
is a Dragon-sin, a Monstrous-sin, a Dreadful-sin, a Devilish-sin, and therefore
take heed of it.

3. Consider, If you partake of other men's sins, you shall certainly partake of
other men's plagues, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, says God, namely,
from Babylon, that you be not partakers of her sins, that so ye receive not of
her plagues. See Prove. 13.20. A companion of fools shall be destroyed not only
fools shall be destroyed, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed: if you
sin with them, you shall suffer with them, and you shall suffer more because of
them. Read that, Luke 16.27, 28. And the rich man said, I pray thee Father
Abraham, that thou would send Lazarus to my Fathers house, for I have five
Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place
of torment. Why would not he have his Brethren to come to Hell to him? Divines
determine, not out of any love to their souls, there is not that charity to be
supposed in Hell. Oh but because the sight of them, and company of them would
increase his torment. This will be the schreeking and howling in Hell among
damned souls one to another; oh woe worth the day that ever I saw thy face, or
that ever I saw thy face, thou have brought me hither, and thou have brought
me hither; and so they will torment one another to all eternity.

Loquitur Apostolus de peccatis gravioribus iisque maxim quae publicum
offendiculum pariunt Estius in loc.
2. What sins we must especially take heed of partaking of?

Ans. Of all sin whatsoever, 1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil;
but especially of three sorts of sins, which may be called Epidemical plagues.

1. Church-sins. 2. National-sins. 3. Family-sins. But I shall speak nothing of
the first, but little of the second, and most to the third.

Among National sins, especially take heed of Profaneness; this is obvious,
this is an universal spreading plague, that is like to infect the whole
Kingdom, if God does not in mercy prevent it. There is a deluge of
profaneness breaking in on every side, Swearing, Drinking, Whoring,
Sabbath-breaking, Scoffing, and Mocking at Religion, all the Countries ring
again. Men are now grown bold, and audacious, and incorrigible in their
wickedness, that like a Titan-brood they even threaten Heaven it self with an
over-daring impudence, as if they would storm the Palace of Jehovah, and pluck
him out of his Throne. Oh take heed of partaking here!

2. Family-sins, we must have a care of partaking here, and so much the more
watchful must we be, in that Family-sins of all sins are most catching and
infectious; As it is with bodily diseases, if one be sick in an house, they of
the blood, and kin, and family, are likest to catch the distemper, because of
their frequent and intimate converse especially: So it is here, if there be
any predominant lust lurking in a family, all are apt to be infected with it,
if they are not marvelous circumspect and watchful.

And therefore Parents, and Masters, and Governors of Families had need to be
reformers both of themselves, and all under their charge; for besides, that
this is the most compendious and safest way to State-Reformation, and
Church-Reformation. Every Family being a kind of a little Kingdom of it self,
and a little Church of it self, wherein the Master is both King, Priest, and
Prophet; besides this, there is the sound of this Argument, and reason to
allarum them (viz.) as they desire to have their souls and consciences free
from the guilt of other men's sins.

Plato seeing a child do mischief in the streets, went forthwith and corrected
his Father for it; that Father that does not correct his child when he does
amiss, is justly corrected for his faults, and it is the pattern of Gods
judicial proceedings, as he visits the iniquities of the Fathers upon the
Children, who imitate them: So he visits the iniquities of the Children upon
the Fathers, who countenance and indulge them. As Jacob was countable to Laban
for the whole flock, not a Sheep or a Lamb lost or torn, but it was required at
his hands, Genesis 31.39. Thus must Family Governors be accountable to God for
every Lamb in the fold, for every child in the family, for every servant in
the house, Luke 16.2. Says God to him, Give an account of thy Stewardship,
thou may be no longer Steward: So will God one day cry aloud in thine ears,
Quintili vare read legiones, Husband, Father, Master, Wife, give an account of
thy Husbandship, and give an account of thy Fathership, give an account of thy
Mastership, give an account of thy Wifeship, etc. This made Joshua undertake
for his house, as Well as for himself, Josh. 24.15. And this made David careful
of his house, as well as his heart, Psalm. 101.2. I will walk within mine house
with a perfect heart; not only with a perfect heart, but in his house with a
perfect heart, Philem. 2. Col. 4.15. 1 Cor. 6.19.
so as to reform his family, that that may be the Church of God, Col. 4.15. as
well as to reform himself, that he may be the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.17.

Ah how many Families are there whose houses are not the Church of God, but the
Synagogue of Satan rather; God is not in all their thoughts, nor God is not in
all their mouths, except it be in swearing and cursing, and blaspheming. Their
bellies are their God, and their lusts are their Lord. It is said of Noah's Ark,
that it was pitched within and without, Genesis 6.14. Such (says one) is the
condition of many a man's house, it is a Noah's Ark, it is pitch within and
without, nothing but the pollutions and defilements of sin in every room, and
passage, and corner. Idleness stands at the door; Unconscionableness walks in
the shop; Covetousness lurks in the counting house; Luxury sits at the Table;
Pride looks out at the window; Wantonness lodges in the bed; all pitchy and
filthy both within and without.

And therefore Christians for the Lords sake, out with all this rubbish, if it
should be found in your families; How do you in London here delight to have
your houses clean, and hereupon sweep them, and wash them, and rub them; oh
that you would be as careful to cleanse your Families from sin, as you are to
cleanse your houses from dirt; how soon would this great City become an
Habitation of Righteousness, and a Mountain of Holiness; how would this
Family-Reformation prevent the guilt of Family-sins, and keep out
Family-distractions, and secure from Family-desolation. Therefore Sirs, set up
family watchfulness, and family-correction; let every house be an house of
correction of it self; and set about family-reading, and family-conference, and
family-repetition, and especially family prayer. That all ydur houses may be
like Gods house; you know his is called an house of Prayer, Isa. 56.7. Mine
house shall be called an house of prayer for all people: So should yours, they
should be houses of prayer all of them; if they be not, let me tell you, they
are no better than Dens of Thieves. Says Christ, Matthew. 21.13. My house shall
be called an house of prayer but you have made it a den of thieves. There is
no Medium betwixt these two; if your houses be not houses of prayer, they are
certainly dens of Thieves; if you do not pray to God for your mercies, before
you receive them, and praise God for your mercies when you enjoy them, you do
but rob God of his mercies; they are not given, but thrown, and snatched indeed,
rather than received.

3. Now, and in the last place, we come to the Antidotes, How we must so
carry it, and order the business, as not to partake of other men's sins.

Antidote 1. Exercise an holy jealousy over others (I am jealous over you,
said Paul especially thy Relations; and this is the way, to deliver thy soul
from their sins. Job sacrifizing for his children, said, It may be they have
sinned. JOb 1.5.

Antid. 2. Watch against the sins of others, have your eyes about you; Take
heed of contriving, complying, winking at them, if it be in your power, take
heed of suffering them. See David's paroxism of zeal in this case, Psalm. 101.2,
etc.

This is the direction in the Text, which must, not be omitted; Keep thy self
pure, take heed of infectious places, and infectious practices, and infectious
company.

Antid. 3. Pray against them, pray against profaneness, pray Augustines
prayer, Lord deliver me from other men's sins.

Antid. 4. Mourn for them; mourn for the sins of the Nation, and mourn for the
sins of thy Relations; for the sins of thy Brethren in their obstinacy, that
they will not be reformed: Christ came to sinful Jerusalem with weeping eyes,
and with a mourning heart? oh Jerusalem! David mourned for the wickedness of
the times that he saw, Psalm. 119.136. Many walk, says Paul, of whom I tell
you weeping. Thus did Gods people of old free themselves from National sins,
and particular men's sins. When they could not be reformers they turned
mourners, Jer. 13.17. And see how prevalent this is with God, these mourners
are the only people to deliver a Nation, or at least to deliver themselves
from the sin and plagues of a Nation, when God makes an overflowing scourge to
pass through, Ezekiel. 9.4. On the other side, not mourning for the sins of
others, makes us adopt, and espouse the sins of others. Dan. 5.22.

Antid. 5. Reprove them, Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. If we would not partake of the
sins of others, we must reprove the sins of others, Lev. 19. Ezekiel. 33.7, 8, 9.
So the Apostle says expressly, Ephesians. 5.11. intimating that you do certainly
approve them, if you do not reprove them. Reprove Heresy, Blasphemy,
Drunkenness, Oaths, Sabbath-breaking, Uncleanness, and every sin you hear or
see committed. The Ravished Virgin under the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.25. was to cry out;
in this case God takes silence for consent. As there is a holy silence to Gods
Correction, Aaron held his peace; so there is a sinful silence under man's
corruption, Eli held his peace also; Aarons silence was a good silence, but
Ely's silence was a naughty silence; we must be silent under Gods correction,
but we must not be silent under man's corruption, Levit. 5.1. Therefore says
St. Paul, Reprove them; the best way to avoid fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, and to free a man's soul from the guilt of other men's sins,
is to reprove them, that is the Antidote against this infection. Thus the
Ephesians practiced as St. Paul preached. St. Paul does not more advise them to
this duty, than St. John does commend them for this duty. Says the Holy Ghost
there in Apoc. 2.1, 2, 3. compared together -- have born, and yet have not born
-- Gods Correction -- man's corruption. I know thy patience, and how thou can
not -- it is no breach, of patience to be impatient against sin, and sinners.
But now beloved, because this sword of Reproof is a very dangerous weapon, if
it be not rightly handled, an edge-tool that we must be marvelously chary
how we meddle with; There is required therefore a great deal of skill, and
prudence, and wisdom, and watchfulness, to a right and successful managing of
this duty, Eccles. 12.11. He that would fasten this nail of Reproof, in the
conscience of his offending Brother, had need be a very wise man. Yea, as I
remember, I siod. Pelus. (...). Every one can find fault, and reprove another
for the same, but to do it discreetly and seasonably, and successfully requires
a great deal of wisdom; and to this end I shall give you these Rules. Reproof
is double.

1. Ministerial, and by way of Authority, and Fraternal, by way of Charity.

And here we come to the second case, viz. Reproof. 1. He that reproves
another, must be very careful that himself be faultless and blameless, as
much as may be; otherwise he is not acting his Charity, but bewraying his
Hypocrisy. Thou that teach another -- Romans 2.21, 22. This is Hypocrisy,
says Christ, Matthew. 7.3, 4, 5. -- And here there are two things coucht in this;

1. A man must be faultless in reference to sin general, as much as may be,
that will reprove another. The snuffers of the Sanctuary under the Law were of
pure gold, and it behooves that man, that will be a snuffer in Gods house, to
correct others, to amend others, and reprove others; to be very upright and
circumspect in all things, and then he may admonish with the greater Advantage,
Authority, Efficacy. Let the Righteous smite me, says David, etc. Psalm.
141.5. A man of a strict and severe life, and religious and righteous
conversation, carries a kind of a Majesty and Authority along with him, at
which the guilty consciences of guilty sinners cannon but recoil, as Herod did
to John Baptist, Mark 6.20. -- Though John had reproved him, and touched him to
the quick, v. 18. And then

2. A man must be blameless in reference to that sin he reproves especially;
else, in healing his Brother, he does but stab himself; if thou reprovest
Pride in others, and art proud thy self; Covetousness, and art covetous thy
self; Drunkenness, and art a drunkard thy self, thou do but like David in
Nathans Parable, pronounce the sentence of thine own condemnation, Romans 2.1.
But here I must enter one Caution, none is exempted from this duty for
unfitness; no, this thou ought to have done, and not to have left the other
undone.

2. -- As he must take heed that himself be faultless, so he must be sure
that his Brother be faulty; For otherwise it is not to reprove him, but to
reproach him; and so instead of doing a Christian duty, a man commits a
devilish sin; he becomes an accuser of the Brethren instead of a Reprover of
the Brethren, Gal. 2.11. And here are likewise two things considerable; 1. It
must be a truth that thou reprovest him for. 2. It must be a sin that thou
reprovest him for.


1. It must not be a conjecture, or imagination, or jealousy, or rumor, or
hearsay that is ground sufficient for Reproof: for all these may be false, and
the Rule of Charity is, quisquc praesumitur esse bonus nisi constat de malo --
but verily the guise of the world is far otherwise; we deal with our Brethren
as the persecuting Pagans did with the Primitive Christians put them into Lions
skin, and into Bear skins and then bait them, and tear them to pieces. Alas!
the poor Christians were harmless, meek Lambs, but they disguised them, and so
abused them. Thus it is now, Christians are apt and ready to put their poor
Brethren into I know not what kind of monstrous, ugly shapes, of their own
imagining, and devising, or else of other men's traducing and reporting, and
without more ado, they fall soul upon them; This is not to imitate our Savior,
Isa, 11.2, 3, 4. -- Not from rumors -- but with righteousness and equity, as
God said in destroying of Sodom, so should we say in reproving our Brethren,
Genesis 18.21. I will go down and see.

2. It must be a breach of some command Affirmative or Negative, directly or
reductively; either the omission of that which is good, or the commission of
that which is evil; -- we must be Cato's, -- not Momus's. -- As the
Pharisees, so Christ, Mat. 19.3. So here, is it lawful to reprove a man for
every cause? no, the Disciples were quite out in reproving the children for
coming to Christ in this chapter. when it was not their sin, but their duty,
verse. 13, 14. Quakers make a stir about Cuffs, and Bands, and Ribbons, and
Laces, and such like minute trifles of Pharisaical Humility, if they can prove
these sins, let them reprove them in Gods Name; but if they are indifferent
things, it is censoriousness, uncharitableness, and pragmaticalness to rail at
them, and not Christian Reproof.

3. -- He must manage his Reproof to sincere ends; must take heed that his
aims and intentions be upright and honest in reproving. Take heed of mingling
any wilde-fire of pride, and vainglory, and ambitious humor of contradicting
and controuling others, with thy zeal of Reproving; This heat must be holy
heat, a fire of the Sanctuary as free from the smoke of by-ends, and
self-interest, as may be, purely for Gods glory and out of hatred unto sin,
and out of love to the salvation of thy Brothers soul. Diogenes (it is storied)
reproved Plato's pride, by trampling upon his Velvet Chair and Cushion, but
says, the Author, Majori fastu superbum Platonem Diogenes saperbior.

4. He must manage his Reproof in fit season; There is a time to speak, and a
time to be silent; Reproof is a duty grounded upon an Affirmative Precept. Now
it is well observed by Divines, that Affirmative Precepts bind semper, but not
ad semper; we must always reprove, but we must not reprove always; it is a
constant duty, but it must be done in a seasonable opportunity. There are
certain mollia Tempora fandi, words upon the wheels, as Solomon calls them,
that are like Apples of Gold; and let me tell you Christians, one word spoken
in season, is worth a thousand other words. Now it is impossible to define and
determine all the nicks of time wherein a man should strike in with a Reproof;
for this must be left to the wisdom and experience of every Christian, that
makes it his business to be his Brothers keeper; and let him assure himself,
he must expect to lose many an admonition, shoot many an Arrow, of Reproof, as
Jonathan did his, under and over, on this side and the other side, before he hit
the mark.

Rules.
1. He must take a season wherein the offender is capable of Reproof. If a man
be drunk, we must stay till he be sober, as Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. --
So if a man be a^l in a heat of passion, we must stay, and come to him, as God
did no Adam in the cool of the day, when the fit was over.

2. We must take a season wherein we have occasion to commend a man for his
virtues, and then rub him up for his faults, Sir you are thus and thus, oh but
if you would but mend this and that, how excellent it would be! So St. Paul, 1
Cor. 11.2, 17.

3. We must do it as soon as ever we can, and the sooner the better; a green
wound is easier healed than an old sore, Levit. 19.17.

4. If we have long waited for fit seasons, and yet cannot find them, you had
better make a breach upon ones prudence, than ones conscience; discretion then
must give place to necessity, out with it, and leave the success to God.

5. He must manage his Reproof with due conditions and qualification. And
beloved there are seven properties of that Reproof that will in all likelihood
both benefit and better our Brother, and also secure our selves from
participation of his sins.

1. We must reprove seriously and in good earnest, so as to knock the nail up
to the head in the conscience of the sinner, Psalm. 50.21. -- So should we in
our Reproofs, of our Brother, charge him home, these things have thou done,
there is no denying; thou art the man, says Nathan to David; before he was in
his parable, but now he speaks plain English, as we say. -- This Jesus whom
ye have crucified, says Peter to the ^ews, and thus we should set things in
order before him. Sir, is not this and that highly to dishonor God, and to
crack your credit, and to shame your profession, and to impair your body, and
to waste your estate, and to wound your conscience, and to d^mn your precious
and immortal soul: and therefore for the Lords sake think on it, and amend it.
A loose and squibbing kind of Reproof is like an ignis Lambens, as soon off as
on, and does the man more hurt than good. As Elies careless and loose reproving
of his lewd Sons, did rather harden them in their villainy, than any way reform
them. As it is with weak Physic administ^ed to a sick man, if it does only
stir the humors, but not purge them away, it leaves the body in a greater and
worse distemper than it was before. So it is here, -- therefore says the
Apostle, Titus 1.13. (...) -- cuttingly. A finger that is but just pricked, and
no more, it is apt to wranckle and fester, and be worse, but let it bleed, and
there is no danger, it will then soon be healed.

2. We must Reprove impartially, and without respect of Persons. Good men, if
they miscarry, must be reproved as well as bad men. If Peter temporize, Paul
will not spare him, nor Barnabas neither, they shall hear on it, Gal. 2. Again,
great men, be they never so great, they should be admonished as well as
others, so long as they are under the great God, and subject to great failings
and miscarriages; Kings, and Nobles, and Magistrates, as well as meaner and
inferior persons. Nathan reproved David, though a King, and so did Elijah
Ahab; and Nehemiah reproved the Nobles, and Rulers for Usury and
Sabbath-prophanation. Certainly, if any be fit to teach great men, they are as
fit to reprove them, for both must go together, 2 Timothy 4.2. That Is but a
drone-like Preaching that has lost the sting of Reproving. It is the great
unhappiness of Princes and Nobles that they have so many flatterers about them,
and so few Reprovers. Carneades in Plutarch was wont to say, that great men's
Sons learned nothing well, but to ride horses; for men would be sure to flatter
them; If they run, they would lag behind, that they might outrun them; if
they wrestled, they would fall on purpose, that they might seem to cast them,
etc. But a Horse not knowing a Prince from a Peasant, would down with him if
he could not rule him. Just so it is now, let great men do what they will, both
against Scripture and Reason, and Law, and Conscience, they will not want their
Parasites, both to encourage them, and applaud them: If there be not a Law for
Cambyses to marry his Sister, tush, what of that, there is a Law for Cambyses
to do what he pleases; and thus men out of cowardice, and fear of frowns, and
wrath, dare not reprove guilty Greatness. Oh but if a man be a faithful
Monitour, he must be impartial in his reproofs. Agag must be reproved as well
as the poorest Amalekite, and the Mountains must be touched, let them smoke and
fume never so furiously, to allude to that place, Psalm. 144.5. This made that
excellent Emperor Theodosius so much esteem Ambrose, viz. that he durst, and
would out of the sense of his duty, reprove even the highest and proudest.

Ambrosium ob hoc dignum Episcopi nomine solum novi; but here humility must be
used.

3. We must reprove discreetly, making a difference between man and man; For
though it is true, that all are to be reproved, that are offenders, especially
within the Pale of the Church, 1 Cor. 5.12. Except they be scorners which
Christ calls Dogs and Swine, Mat. 7.6. and obstinate Heretics, Titus 3.10. yet
all must not be handled in the same manner; Some will do more with a Rod, than
others will do with a Scorpion. A Glass is not to be handled so roughly as a
Brazen Vessel; this Rule St. Jude gives, verse. 22, 23. -- Some must be dealt
withal with lenitives, others with corrosives; some gently reproved, others
sharply rebuked, according to the tenderness or stubbornness of their
disposition, or according to the nature and quality of their offenses; and here
abundance of Rules might be said down about public, private, great, small,
seldom, or frequent offenses. In one word, a Reprover must be like the
Thrasher, that the Prophet describes, as one says, Isa. 28.17, 28.

4. We must reprove compassionately, with the deepest sense of our own
failings, and miscarriages, and so with the greater pity to their infirmities,
Gal. 6.1. Bernard said of himself, That he never saw another man sin, but he
was distrustful and jealous of his own heart, ille heri, and tu hodie, and ego
cras -- and this would file off a great deal of that rigor and roughness that
renders a Reproof so unpleasing, and so unprofitable; for verily Christian
tenderness and compassion in the Reprover, is the best way to work sense and
passion in the sinner; Si vis me stere dolendum est primum ipse tibi.

This is the way to mollify men's hearts, whereas on a lordly, domineering,
austere, rigid Reproof, instead of rendering thy Brother Gods friend, thou do
but render thy self his enemy, James 1.20.

5. We must reprove charitably, with the greatest love to men's persons, even
then, when we show the greatest zeal against their sins; for it is one thing
to be angry with the sins, and another with his person; therefore we should
consult our Brothers credit, and esteem, and honor, and person, while we stab
his sin: and not (as one said well) in healing a wound in his conscience and
conversation, to leave a skar of reproach upon his person, and a brand of shame
and ignominy upon his Name; that were to do the work of an enemy under the
vizard of a friend; and thus I remember the Jews generally interpret that Law,
Levit. 19.17. -- That is, say the Talmudists and Gemarists, thou shall rebuke
thy Brother so, as to reform him, but thou shall not rebuke thy Brother so, as
to shame him; thou shall rebuke him in love and lenity; he that shames his
Brother by rebuking him, bears his sin; nay, say they, he that shames his
Brother, shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Their meaning is,
unless the fault be notorious, and public, and scandalous, for then they may
shame him. I speak it to your shame, says Paul.

6. We must reprove meekly, not in rage, and passion, and bitterness, but in
meekness, and sweetness of spirit, this Rule the Apostle gives, 2 Timothy 2.25.
Though there may be some warmth in a Reproof, so as to fetch off the hair, yet
it must not be scalding hot, so as to fetch off the skin. Elijah did that with
a kiss, which his man could non do with a staff: Beloved, when a kiss will do
it better -- oh take heed of carrying your Teeth in your Tongues; Take soft
words, and hard Arguments to convince gainsayers, and so gentle reproofs, and
solid reasons to reduce offenders.

7. We must reprove Scripturally: My meaning is, as near as we can to reprove
our Brethren in Scripture-text, and Scripture Language, that so it may not seem
to be we that speak, so much as the Spirit of our Father that speaks in us;
and this is to reprove with authority, Titus 2.15. What greater Authority and
Majesty wherewith to awaken the conscience of a sinner than the Word of God, by
which he should be ruled, and by which he must certainly be judged.

Know Reader, That God took the Author to Glory, before he could finish this
Sermon for the Press.

What Means may be used toward the Conversion of our Carnal Relations?
Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved.


THis Noble Argumentative Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Romans, was
written and dated at Corinth, when he was now even ready to set sail for
Jerusalem, as the Messenger of the Churches, to convey thither the Collections
of Macedonia, and other places in Greece made for the poor Saints of Judea;
Romans 15.25, 26
as appears by the 15th. Chapter of this Epistle [But now I go unto Jerusalem
to minister unto the Saints. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia,
to make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which are at Jerusalem] It
being supposed to be the same journey which is mentioned in the twentieth and
one and twentieth Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 20.3. and 21.3,
etc. Capellus in have. Apostol. p. 76. Calvis Usse^. Paraeus.


The time of the penning this Epistle some place in the 14th. year of Claudius
the Emperor, some in the second, some in the sixth, some in the eighth of Nero.
It Is at present impertinent to decide that Chronological controversy.

It consists principally of two parts; the first Doctrinal, the second
Hortatory.

The Doctrinal part spends its strength upon the great point of Justification
by Faith, and its glorious effects. Unto which our Apostle does annex a notable
discourse of the abstruse Mystery of Predestination, from the beginning of the
ninth, to the end of the eleventh Chapter; and therein takes, occasion to speak
of that doleful bill of Divorce which God had given to the Jewish Nation. He
treats likewise of the Calling and Fullness of the Gentiles, and the
Restoration Israel in the latter days.

In each of these three Chapters he sadly bewails the deplorable state of his
own kindred, and by all the evincing Arguments possible labors for their
conversion to the Faith.

To cut off any further Prologue; In the beginning of this tenth Chapter, he
pours out his longings after their Salvation.

In the first verse whetreof, be pleased to observe these four parts.

1. Paul's holy groans and prayers [my hearts desire and prayer to God] (...);
The good will, the hearty wishes, desires and pantings of my soul. Chysost. in
loc.
He lays open the greatest earnestness of his Spirit. [(...), etc.] By this
his desire we are to understand a mavelous strong intention of spirit,
H^sych.
and an earnest study and endeavor after accomplishment. Hesychius expounds
the term by (...); to will, desire, wish, love and delight in the work. He
wills it, not only as a possible achievement, but as amiable, he endeavors
to compass it by all good means, because he proposes so desirable an end. The
sincerity of our desires in obtaining of possible designs, is manifested by our
diligent endeavors in the use of proper ways to effect them. Aristot. Rhet.
l. 2. c. 19.
[(...)] For the most part (says the Philosopher) no man delights in, or
hankers after impossibilities. No rational man certainly. And therefore we are
to conceive, that our Apostle does here under his importunate desires, couch
and imply all holy means to accomplish his end. Upon which account he
presently subjoyns [(...)] his prayer to God for that purpose: of which
afterward. Only at present observe from the connection of his prayers to his
hearty desires; That lively are those prayers which flow from the heart. Note.
Most harmonious in the ears of God are those groans, that mount up to Heaven
upon the wings of ardent emanations, out of the depth of our hearts. Suspiria e
sulco pectoris ducta. When the words of our petitions ascend warm and reeking
out of our bowels, when every expression is dipped in our heart blood.

2. The persons that were the subject of his prayers and desires: For Israel.
And here it is considerable in what relation Israel stood to the blessed
Apostle. Romans 9.3. Romans 11.1. Phil. 3.5. Act. 23.6.
They were his Brethren, his Kinsmen according to the Flesh. For I also (says
Paul) am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of Benjamin. In
another place he acquaints us that he was circumcised the eighth day, of the
stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamin an Hebrew of the Hebrews (i. e. both
by Father and Mother) as touching the Law a Pharisee. It appears thence, 2 Cor.
^1.22.
that the Israelites were his kindred, his own dear and near relations,
remaining for the most part in a state of ignorance, as to the Messiah, and of
alienation and estrangement from the Covenant of Grace, and the mystery of the
Promise through Faith in the blood of a Mediator. For these it is, that our
Apostle groans; for these he is so ardent in prayer; for these he pours out
such earnest petitions to the Father.

3. The great scope and design of the Apostle for his kindred and relations
according to the flesh in all his desires, endeavors, prayers was [(...)] That
they might be saved. The earnest solicitude of his Spirit, the fervent
petitions poured out into the Divine bosom, did all combine in this, that his
natural might become spiritual relations: that his kindred of the Tribe of
Benjamin, might through union to Christ, be allied to him in the Tribe of
Judah. What is natural to animals and plants [(...)] to thirst after an
impression of their own likeness upon another; Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 1.
Is much more longed for by Saints, that others might be holy and happy, as
well as themselves, but especially such as are nearest to them by the bonds of
nature. Holy Paul does not press after outward enjoyments, as health, strength,
riches, power, or dominion in the world; that Israel might have prosperity and
plenty in their Streets and Palaces, or that the Kingdom should be restored
to them from the Romans: Not the great things of the Earth, but the greater of
Heaven: This his soul travels with, that Christ might be formed in them, and
dwell in their hearts by Faith, that so Israel might be saved.

4. In these words we may observe likewise the kind compellation, wherewith
our Apostle does salute the saints at Rome, to whom he wrote this Epistle, by
the name of Brethren. Now, though he wrote to the Gentiles, yet he lets them
know that his bowels did yern over his poor kindred, that they also might be
saved. The Reason why in this letter to the Romans he does so pathetically
mention these his desires, with such strong and vehement asseverations, is,
because there were great numbers of the Jews at Rome, and principally of he two
Tribes that returned out of the Babylonian captivity; who after the wars of
Pompey, and other Roman Generals and Captain in Judea, were very many of them
transplanted into Italy: Which is not only attested by Civil and
Ecclesiastical Historians: but also by Scripture it self, declaring that there
was a solemn Convocation of the Jews assembled by Paul at his arrival. Act.
2^.17, etc.
To whom the Apostle did first preach the Gospel, and related the story of his
coming to that Imperial City, by reason of his appeal to Caesar.

From all these parts laid down together, there result this Doctrinal
Conclusion.

Observe. That to endeavor the conversion and salvation of our near relations
is a most important duty.

The president and example of our holy Apostle compared with, and confirmed by
other Scriptures, will notably evince the truth of this assertion. 1 Cor. 12.7.
The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. One
great end, why God bestows the graces of his Spirit upon us, is, that we
should spend the savor thereof upon others. Our discourse must he seasoned
with the salt of grace, Col. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.29.
that it may minister edification to others. Our speech should never overflow
in abundance, but like the waters of Nilus, to render the neighboring
Plantations fruitful. Grace is sometimes compared to Light, by reason of its
diffusive nature; that our shining conversations night illustrate others in the
paths of Truth and Holiness. Cant. 1.12. Prove. 27.9. John 12.3.
Sometimes Grace is likened to Spikenard, to perfumed ointment, which must not
be shut up in a box, though of purest Alabaster, but opened, that the whole
house may be filled with the fragrant odor thereof. Psalm. 133.2.
To Oil, to the costly sacred Oil that ran down not only upon the beard of
Aaron, but to the skirts of his garments. To Talents, which must be
industriously traded with, and not laid up in napkins. To Dews, Showers,
Waters, because of their fructifying virtue. 1 These. 5.11. Romans 14.19. Heb.
3.13. Col. 3.16. (...) Ezekiel. 18.30. Heb. 10.24.
To a generative Principle, because of it is begetting power and influence. We
are therefore commanded, exhorted, directed to edify one another, to exhort
one another, to admonish one another, to turn one another, as that phrase in
Ezekiel seems to import [and converti facite] and make others, to be converted
as well as our selves; to provoke one another to love and to good works. When
converted, we are enjoined to strengthen our Brethren, that we may save their
souls from death, James 5.20.
and hide a multitude of sins.

Now the principal Objects of this excellent duty are such with whom we
converse; such to whom we are obliged and connexed by the bonds and links of
nature, office, or vicinity of habitation.

Hence was it that our blessed Lord, while he walked in the valley of his
Incarnation, exercised his Ministry most part among his kindred, relations, and
neighbors; at Nazareth, Capernaum, Bethsaida, near the Sea of Tiberias, at
Cana, and other Regions of Galilee, in which parts he had receive his
Education Andrew when he understood the call of Christ the great Savior of the
world; John 1.41.
he presently seeks out his Brother Simon to bring him to the Messiah. Philip
after the like, manifestation, looks out for Nathaniel, and in a great ecstasy
of spirit; John 1.45.
cries out [(...)] We have found him of whom Moses and the Prophets did write.
There are many instances of this nature both in the Old and New Testament.
Abraham and Joshua were famous in their Generation; for this work: they counted
it their principal business, they made it their great care to instruct their
families in the fear and service of the great God. Psalm. 101.2.
David also ingages to walk in his house with a perfect heart, that by his
exemplary pattern he might gain over his family to the Lord. Luke 5.29.
Matthew the Publican (we read) did invite all the Tribute-gatherers that were
of his own Fraternity and Profession, to a great Feast, that they might sit
down with Christ, and feed upon his heavenly Doctrine. John 4.53.
The great man in the City of Capernaum brings in his whole family to the
belief of the Truth. Act. 10.24.
Cornelius the Roman Centurion, who was quartered at Caesarea, calls his
Relations together, to hear the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance. The woman in
the Gospel having found the lost groat, after great pains and diligence, calls
in her friends and neighbors to rejoice with her. Luke 15.9.
Crispus and the Jailer, and Lydia, and Stephanas, are eminent Examples of this
duty; by whose conscientious care and procurement, it may be supposed, that
their whole households came under the roof of Christ; because presently after
that we have heard of their own personal Baptism, we find their families
also washed in that sacred Layer.

I shall not insist upon Arguments; to prove the incumbent necessity of this
duty, or Motives to allure you to the practice of it: I might deduce it as an
inference consequent from the Law of Nature, to use our greatest endeavors
that our Relations might obtain an union to the best and highest good. I might
draw it from the. Divine Injunction. I might excite your diligence from the
consideration of the dreadful danger following its neglect; Psalm. 78.5.
from the comfort that will flow into thy bosom upon the exercise of it, since
it is a notable evidence of the sincerity of Grace in thine own heart. None but
such as have seen and tasted, can cry out to others with an holy affectionate
vehemence. O come taste and see that the Lord is good! P1sal. 34.8.
The Wine of the Kingdom having once warmed the hearts of Saints, sends up
vivacious spirits, and fills their mouths with a holy loquacity. I might
further provoke thee to this excellent work, by the rich benefit in gaining
such to love thee, whose affections will exceed all natural love whatever, and
by the great reward that shall ensue in the life to come. For they that turn
many to righteousness, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

O Brethren, if families were holy, then Cities, then Nations would quickly
prove Mountains of Holiness, and Seats for the Throne of God. We are apt to
cry out of bad times; Alas, those unclean Nests of ungodly Families have been
the causes of all the wickedness in all Ages and Generations to this day.
Therefore whoever thou art, on whom the Grace of God has shined, study that
holy art of Divine Reflection, and Re-percussion of that light on others
hearts, which bring's me to an useful and practical question.

Quest. You I say, What course shall we take, what means shall we use, what
method will you prescribe, that we may be able to manage this important and
weighty duty; that we may be helpful toward the conversion and salvation of
our near Relations that are in the state of nature?

I confess this Question is of grand importance, and being properly solved, may
prove of great influence in all places where we are cast by Divine Providence.
There is scarce a family, scarce a person living, who may not be comprehended
within the verge and limits of this discourse.

Ans. In answer therefore to it, I shall spend the principal part of my time,
and that I may handle it the more distinctly; I shall rank such as may desire
satisfaction and direction in this weighty and excellent case under three forms
or orders: Such as are either Superiors, Equals, or Inferiors. But before I
enter into the main body of the Answer, I shall crave leave to premise three
things.

1. That this Question is not to be understood of persons in public capacity
and concernment, as Magistrates or Ministers: but of Family-Relations, Kindred,
Co-habitants, Neighbors, Friends, and Acquaintance, of such as have frequent
converse together in Civil Societies and often commerce in dealings; but
principally of Oeconomical Relatives, or such as are nigh to each other by
blood or affinity.

2. That Saving-Conversion is in the power of God alone to effect, as being the
primary and principal efficient cause of all those gracious works that
accompany salvation. There is none able to kindle Grace in the heart, but he
who has his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. Yet not withstanding
all of us in our several stations, as subordinate instruments, may and must use
all wholesome means that are of Divine Appointment, conducing to such a blessed
end.

3. That there are different states, conditions, capacities and qualifications
among such Relations, whose conversion we should endeavor. Some being perhaps
enormously and outragiously wicked; others morally civil, and yet further,
others possibly may be conformable to the institutions of the external worship
of God. Of these I may speak Sparsim, opere inter^exto as the particulars will
hear, together with such other appendant cases that may hold some consanguinity
with the General Question.

To begin then with the first branch.

Quest. 1. What means Superiors (principally in Family-Relations) should use to
draw on their Inferiors to relish and savor the things of God? True it is
what Jerome says [ fiunt, Hieronym. ad Laetam. Tom. 1. p. 55. edit. Lugd. 1530.
non nascuntur Christian] No man is born a Christian, but an heir of wrath and
divine justice. For the obtaining of the New Birth thin, in such as are
committed to our charge, I shall draw up directions under twelve heads. Some
whereof, though usual and obvious, in such as tre^t upon Oeconomical duties,
yet being further improved, may by no means be here past by in silence, since
they are exceeding useful, and no less practical than others. Most men under
the Gospel perish for want of practicing known duties. Wherefore let me beg of
thee, O Christian, that every prescription may be duly weighed, and
conscientiously improved, so shall thou not doubt of admirable success through
Divine Assistance.

1. In the first place. Preserve and uphold the honor and pre-eminence of that
station wherein God has set you by all prudent means. The Prophet bewails
those times wherein the Child shall behave himself proudly against the
ancient, and the base against the honorable. Isa. 3.5.
Distance of years calls for distance of deportment. A Father may challenge
honor and reverence; a Master his due fear and subjection from his servant.
What is duty in the Inferior to yield, is prudence, in the Superior to
maintain. It is therefore wisely advised by the Philosopher, that no persons
should marry over-early [(...)] For if Parents and Children prove too near in
age, A^ist. Pol. l. 7. c. 16.
there may follow great inconveniences; In that, too much propinquity of years
dimini^heth reverence in children, and oftentimes produces contentio^s in the
management of family-affairs. Hieronym. ad. Gaudent. Tom. 1. p. 101.
Let such a distance he preserved, as may obtain the effectual issue of that
counsel which Jerome gives to Gaudentium about the education of Pacatula [Matris
no (...) pro verbis ac monitis and pro imperio habeat. Amet us Parentem,
subjiciatur ut Dominae, timeat ut Magistram] Let the Child esteem the nod of
her Mother in lieu of words, admonitions, and commands; let the Mother be
loved as a Parent, subjected to as a Lady, feared as a Mistress] condescension
to mean, sordid, and contemptible actions draws scorn and disdain upon
Superiors. As reverence and obedience is enjoined to Inferiors: so Rulers
should manage and order their actions with such gravity and sobriety before
them, as may gain some awe and respect from their hearts. No wonder, if that
Ruler be contemned and slighted, who disgraceth himself. Some are apt to
count it a piece of gracious humility and lowliness of spirit; but they are
greatly mistaken: It argues rather a base, low, degenerate temper. Be as
humble before God, as reverential to Rulers, as affable to Equals as thou
can; but ever remember to maintain the eminency of thy place above Inferiors.
It is not heavenly, no nor moral wisdom to entertain discourse of trivial and
frivolous matters, with those that are under your inspection and government.
Let converse with Inferiors be spent, Epictet. c. 54.
not upon superflucus, but necessary subjects. It is a good precept of the
Stoic, to abstain from moving of laughter by Jests among familiars, Maxima
debetur pueris reverentia. (...) Pytyhag. aur. ca^m.
for it will have that influence [(...)] to lessen their reverence toward
thee. There is a great deal of reverence to be manifested by Superiors toward
Youth; if they would cherish and preserve that due reverence which ought to be
in the hearts of young ones toward? themselves. And yet notwithstanding, you
must not carry your selves with any proud, supercilious, or fastuous
deportment, your countenance though grave, yet must not be stern. As you need
not indent your cheeks with continual smiles; so neither to plow your foreheads
with rough and sour wrinkles. A sober, affability, an unaffected and amiable
gravity will suffiently chastize contempt, and nourish a reverent love. Rigid
austerity in words and actions will produce a slavish dis-spirited temper in
children and servants; that when they come to years they, prove either more
difficult to please than their Fathers before them, or else so pusill animous,
that they are rendered unfit to manage the work of their Generation among whom
they converse. Plato de lag. l. 7 Tom. 2. p. 791. Ed. H. Steph.
It is a maxim of Plato [(...)] that overmuch rustic slavery, renders them
dejected, illiberal, and haters of mankind. Carry your selves therefore in
that manner, that they may neither fear or hate your morosity, nor grow wanton
opon the commonness and supinity of your carriage. If Inferiors repute their
Rulers not wise enough to govern them; all their instructions will fall to the
ground [Regimen esse non potest, nisi fuerit jugiter in rectore judicium]
Judgment and Prudence in a Ruler, Salvian. de Gu. Dei l. 1. p. 20. Ed. Oxon.
is the foundation of the consistency of Government.

2. Be frequent, pithy and clear in Family-instruction. Nature without moral
Discipline is blind, could a Heathen say. Plut. (...). Ed. H. Steph. p. 2.
Without heavenly instruction it is sealed up to eternal darkness. We are all
like barren heaths, and stony-deserts by nature: Instruction is the culture and
improvement of the soul. It Is observed by Naturalists, that Bees do [(...)]
carry small gravel in their feet, to poize their little bodies through the
stormy winds. A^ian. de animal. l. 1. c. 11.
Such are instructions to the floating and wavering minds of youth. The keel of
their weak judgments would soon over-set without the ballast of Discipline;
their conversations would soon prove unfruitful, or overspread with the
rampant briars of vice and sin, unless well manured and labored upon, Deuteronomy.
32.2
and moistened with the sweet showers of parental teachings. Wherefore all
Inferiors are by God referred to their Rulers, that they may drink in the
soul-refreshing dews of prudent Precepts. Even women are commanded to learn in
silence, 1 Timothy 2.11. Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 8. p. 86. 1 Cor. 14.35. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Isa. 38.19.
with all subjection, (...); Silence is a woman's ornament, as a great Master of
wisdom has observed, Their ears should be more exercised than their tongues.
If they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home; who are
commanded to dwell with them according to knowledge. As for servants and
children, the case is more evident and clear: But in all your instructions have
a care of tedious prolixity; make up the shortness of your discourse by
frequency. Thou art enjoined to talk of Gods precepts, when thou sit in
thine house, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and 11.18.
when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest
up. A little now, and a little then. When thou would accustom a child to
any useful quality, begin betimes ('It Is the counsel even of a Heathen) but yet
(...), Arist. Pol. 7. c 17. A^ton^n. de scipso. l. 4. p. 69. Ed. Lon. 1643.
inure him by degrees. As the Precepts and Axioms by which a wise man should
guide his life according to the royal Moralist should be [(...)] brief and
compendious: So much more for youth. Long Orations burden their small memories
too much, and (through such imprudence) may occasion the loathing of spiritual
Manna, considering their being yet in the state of nature. As Physicians in
their diaeretical precepts prescribe to children, little and often: so must we
deal with beginners in the things of God. A young plant may quickly be
over-glutted with manure, and rotted with too much watering. Weak eyes newly
opened from sleep, cannot bear the glaring windows, Isa. 28.20.
scarce a Candle at the first. Line upon line, and precept upon precept; here a
little and there a little. You must drive the little ones, as Jacob did, Genesis
33.13.
very gently toward Canaan.

Entertain their tender attentions with discourses of Gods infinite greatness,
and amiable goodness; of the glories of Heaven, of the torments of Hell. Things
that affect the senses must be spiritualized to them, catch their affections by
a holy craft. Deal as much in similitudes as thou can. If you be together in
a garden, draw some sweet and heavenly discourse out of the beautiful flowers:
If by a river side, treat of the water of life, and the rivers of pleasure that
are at Gods right hand: If in a field of Corn, speak of the nourish^ng quality
of the bread of life: If you see birds flying in the air, or hear them singing
in the woods, teach them the all-wise providence of God, that gives them their
meat in due season: If thou look up to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, tell them,
they are but the shining spangles of the outhouses of Heaven; oh then what
glory is there within! If thou see a Rainbow to diaper some waterish cloud,
talk of the Covenant of God. These and many more may be like so many golden
links drawing divine things into their memories. Hos. 12.10.
I have used sim^litudes by my servants the Prophets, says God. Moreover, let
young ones read and learn by heart some portions of the Historical books of
holy Scripture. But above all, the best way of institution, especially as to
the younger sort, may be performed by Catechisms, Plat-forms of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13.
by Question and Answer in a short compendious method; whose terms being clear
and distinct, might be phrased out of holy Scripture, and fitted to their
capacities by a plain, though solid style, and to their memories by brief
expressions.

Obj. But some may object, that children not well understanding what they
repeat, do but profane the Name of God.

Answ. To this I answer; That our reasonings ought not to countermand, or
contradict Divine Injunctions. We are commanded by God in the Book of
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Prove. 22.
to whet the Law upon our Children. Train up a child in the way he should go,
and when he is old he will not depart from it. By the bending of young trees,
and putting young fruit into glasses, you may form them into what shape you
please. The Apostle commends the president of Timothy to the whole Christian
world, 2 Timothy 3.15. Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.41, 44.
that [(...)] from a little sucking child, as the word imports, he had known
the holy Scriptures. Some children have been sanctified from the birth, as is
evident in Jeremy, and John Baptist. Now we being ignorant, who are under the
election of God, must use the means to all, especially such as are under the
faederal stipulation between God and us; such as are the children of believing
Parents. They are commanded to remember their Creator in the days of their
youth: Eccles. 12.1.
And who should make such impressions of God upon their hearts, but those that
are over them by Divine Appointment, who ought to bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. 6.4.
As Seals are to be imprinted upon the wax, while it is tender: [(...)] so,
teaching and instruction will best fix upon their minds while yet they are
children, Plut. (...). p. 5.
So soon as ever reason begins to sprout forth, yea as soon as they are drawn
from the breasts, Isa. 28.9.
begin to season younglings with the sense of Gods Majesty and Mercy. Gardiners
begin to graft, so soon as ever the sap begins to arise in the spring, and the
bud of the stock to swell and enlarge. Colts must be backed before their mettle
grows too high; and Heifers must be used to the yoke, before they attain to
their full strength, or else they will prove unserviceable. God commanded in
the old Law more Lambs, Kids, and Bullocks, young Turtles, and Pigeons, to be
offered upon his Altar, than those of elder growth: Levit. 2.14.
first fruits and green-corn must be presented to the Lord. To intimate the
dedication of our children (those reasonable Sacrifices) unto the Temple and
service of God, while they are young and tender. Romans 11.1.
The sooner you sow, the sooner you may reap. Sow thy seed in the morning,
Eccles. 11.9.
says Solomon. The benefit of timely instruction is scarce imaginable. But I
come to the third.

3. Add to thine Instructions preceptive Injunctions, lay it as a charge upon
their souls in the Name of God, that they hearken to, and obey thine
Institutions. Every house is under a kind of Kingly Government [(...), Arist.
Pol. l. 1. c. 1.
etc. (...)] and a Ruler gives Laws to wife and children. An instance we have
in the case of Solomon, Prove. 4.30 4.
who acquaints us that he was his Fathers Son, tender and only beloved in the
sight of his Mother. He taught me also, and said unto me; Let thine heart
retain my words, keep my Commandments and live. When David was ready to dye,
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.5. and 29.1. 1 Chronicles. 28.9, etc. 1 King. 2.1.
the text says was [Yet young and tender] and notwithstanding that, his Father
instructs him in many grave and excellent lessons, and in the Book of Kings
it is remarkable, that when David's decease drew nigh; he charged Solomon his
Son, saying, etc. Now when Solomon came to the Crown, he was but eighteen
years old, or nineteen at the most, Usser. annal. pt. 1. p. 56.
as the learned seem to evince from several passages of David's Reign. Rawleigh.
hist. pt. l 2. c. 18. ss 4.
How young then was he when his Father David, and his Mother Bathshebah began
to instruct him, and lay their preceptive charge upon him. This charging of
obedience upon young ones, is like the tying and claying on of the graft upon
the stock. Sen^c. Epist. 38.
[Non multis opus est, sed efficacibus] efficacious words rather than many are
to be sought, studied, and used.

Nay, women have both president and precept also for this work, as who do move
frequently converse with their children in their tender age? We have an
excellent example in Bathshebah teaching her Son, P ov. 1.8. and 6.10. and
31.1. Prove. 31.15.26. Tit^s 2.3, 4.
and pressing Divine Precept upon his heart; she gave also a portion of
instruction, as well as of food to her servants and Maidens. Ancient Matrons
are commanded also by the Apostle to teach younger women the works of sobriety
and obedience. For this matter Abraham was commended by God himself, Genesis 18.19.
as a pattern to all posterity. I know him (says God) that he will command
his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the
Lord to do justice and judgment, etc. And therefore God was pleased to reveal
secrets to him. To conclude, It is good to edge your Precepts and Instructions
with some notable remembrances of the great day; as that holy and learned Mr.
Bolton did to his children upon his deathbed; for speaking of the instructions
that he had given them in the time of his sickness, Mr. Boltons Life. p. 33.
printed with his works. 4 to. Anno 1639.
and before; he said, he hoped they would remember it, and verily believed
that none of them durst think to meet him at that great tribunal in an
unregenerate state.

4. Set a narrow guard upon the first sproutings of sin in their conversations.
Crush Vipers in the egg. Exercise your hazle-rods upon the Serpents heads,
when they first creep out of their holes, being chill and feeble in the
beginning of the Spring. Psalm. 101.8.
I will early destroy all the wicked of the Land, says David. You must set
about this work betimes; check every evil and unsavory word at the first
hearing; Watch the beginnings, that first bubblings of corruption in them. A
man may pull off a tender bud with ease, but if he let it grow to a branch, it
will cost him some pains. It is observed by experienced Naturalists, that a
Common bringing forth nothing but fern, may be made very good ground: if when
the weed comes up tender and green, it be often cut down, you will (in three or
four times) discourage the root, and make it dye away. It may prove so through
Divine Blessing, as to the shootings up of original corruption, if thou be
diligent and constant at first. Cant. 2.15.
Take us the Foxes nay the little Foxes that spoil the Vines; this is the way
to destroy their race, as well as to preserve your tender Grapes. David smote
Goliath in the forehead; he smites the Devil and sin in the forehead [qui
initio tentationis vincit] that falls upon, and overcomes tentation at first.
Stella in Loc.
It is a saying of Salvian [Cum primum homo peccare incipit, aternum
sibi-accendit ignem] When one fir st begins to sin, S^lv. de G^b. Dei. l. 4. p.
116.
then he kindles the eternal fire] Oh that you would then begin to cast water
upon the first kindlings of sin in your little ones! Cut off the occasions of
sin by prudent interposition. It is strange to see, what excuses and
palliations for sin what collusions in speech little children will use. Before
thou can teach them to speak plain English, the Devil, and a corrupt heart
will teach them to speak plain lies. While their tongues do yet falter much in
pronunciation; they will falter more in double speaking. What great need is there
then to put a curb and bridle upon thy child's tongue as well as thine own.
Undermine their fallacies by discreet examinations, Psalm. 39.1.
and sagacious questions. If this work be not set to betimes, possibly in
process of years they may prove too cunning to be catch, unless thou season
them quickly with the awe of Gods judgments, and the danger of sin: Teach
their conscience to blush, as well as their cheeks; that they may from an
inwrought principle eschew the evil, and do the good. Aelian. de animal. l. 6.
c. 47.
Else they may too soon prove like the Hares in Aelian, that by leaping this
way and that way, when they come nigh their muse, do [(...)] confound their
footsteps to prevent discovery, If thou suffer child, or a young servant to go
on in sin unregarded, untaught, unchid, and think it is too little to mind at
first; that sinful folly will be thy scourge in the end. God many times whips
an aged Parent by that child, which was unwhipt at first. 1 King. 1.6.
Adonis^h had well nigh broken the design of David about Solomon's being set in
the Throne; whom his Father had never displeased by saying, why have thou done
so? that is, never checked him for his faults. The means to take away the root,
and foundation of evil customs and habits, Hieron. ad Gaud. p. 101.
is to fall a weeding, in the spring of thy childs Life [Aegre reprehendas
quod sinis consuescere.] Reproofs will go down untowardly, when children come
once to their teens, when their years come up to double numbers.

5. Preserve them from evil society. David not only hated sin in general,
Psalm. 101.7.
but especially he detested to have it become an inmate in his house. He that
works deceit shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies shall not
tarry my sight. That so the evil example, and pitch-like society of wicked
persons might not cleave to, and corrupt his near Relations. Children are like
the Polypus in Aelian, Ael. Var. hist.
that turns into color of that rock or weed in the Sea that lies nearest.
Imitation is natural to children: Associates and companions are the patterns of
their imitation Wherefore Plutarch in his tract about the education of
children, advising some Grecian Boys to be brought up with them, gives this
precep^, Plut. (...). p. 6.
that these (...) should be (...), of virtuous manners and behaviors, lest
children should contract some vice from ill society. For according to the
Proverb; He that lives with a lame man, will learn to limp. Nay one greater
than Plutarch tells us, that with a furious man we should not go, lest we
learn his ways. Prove. 22.24, 25.
Children especially may be dangerously infected by lewd and corrup^ company.
Many children of godly Parents have had their manners fouled and viti^ted
extremely by frequent and familiar converse with the naughty children of wicked
neighbors.

6. In the next place, let seasonable and prudent rebukes be administered,
according to the nature and quality of their offenses. Begin gently, use all
persuasive motives to draw and allure them, if possible to the ways of God;
tell them of the rewards of glory, of the sweet society in Heaven: Endeavor to
satisfy their hearts, that God is able to fill their souls with such joys as
are not to be found in the creatures. Jude 22.
Of some having compassion making a difference. Butt if this will not do, then
begin to mix some more severe expressions of thy holy anger against sin. As
there is a concatenation in virtues, so in passions. Love and anger are not
altogether [(...)] incompatible affections. Nay love may be the principle, and
foundation of that anger, which shoots its rebuking arrows against the But of
Sin. It is well observed by the Philosopher [(...)] There may be accusations
and reprehensions connext with that love which designs the profit and benefit
of the persons beloved, Arist. Ethic. l. 10. c. 13.
and that ((...), as he says) according to the Rule even of right reason.
Thou may tell thy child, and that with some grains of vehemence, that if
he continue in sinful courses that God will be angry, and thou will be angry,
and then let him know what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the
Living God. Heb. 10.31. Ephesians. 4.26.
This is the way to be angry, and not to sin, as the Apostle commands. Let not
your passions, like unruly torrents overflow the banks that are limited by
Scripture and reason. There is a grave and sober anger, that will procure
Reverence, and advance Reformation. That which is mixed with horrid noise, and
clamours, flows from the breast of fools. In vain shall thou attempt to
reclaim others, who art so exorbitant thy self. He that lets loose the reigns
upon the necks of the unruly horses of his passions, will endanger the tumbling
his reason out of the Chariot. How shall that person in his rebukes speak
reason to another, that has lost his own? He that is a slave to his irascible
appetite, can never manage ingenious Reproofs. A child can never persuade
himself that such anger proceeds from love, when he is made the sink to
receive the daily disgorgements of a choleric stomach; when the unhappy
necessity of his relation ties him to be always in the way, where an angry
disposition must vent and empty it self. If thou that rulest be thus unruly,
How can thou expect thy Inferiors to be regular, when thy uncomely demeanor
does almost convince them, that love can hardly be the genuine root of thine
anger, but that they are made the sad objects of thy native temper, or that thy
reprehension is spiced with hatred? Observe therefore a prudent administration
of thy rebukes. Gild those bitter pills with the hopes of recovering thy favor
upon amendment, Plut. ibid. p. 22. Gassend. in Epicur. Tom. 3. p. 1511.
mix these unpleasant potions [(...)] with some sweet emollient juices; that
such inter-woven lenity may procure access for your admonitions, and effect
your desired issue. The quality of the offense, and the various aggravations of
it, must state the quantity, measure, and duration of thine anger. Great
faults, if repeated, deserve a greater ardency of spirit. Consider likewise the
station and place of thy several relations. A wife ought not to be rebuked
before children and servants, lest her subordinate authority be diminished.
Contempt cast upon the wife, will reflect upon the husband at last. Yea for
smaller offenses in children and servants, if they be not committed openly,
rebuke them apart, and in private. But above all, Take heed thou be not found
more severe in reproving faults against thy self, than sins against the great
God. They that honor me (said God to Eli in the case of his Sons) I will
honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. It is a point of
excellent wisdom to manage thy family aright in these cases. A Pilot may show
as much skill and dexterity in steering of a little catch or pinnace of
pleasure, as of the vast Gallions of Spain. If thou have cause to be angry, yet
let not thy storms run all upon the rocks, but endeavor [(...)] speedily to
cool the inflammation, to abate the fever, Plut. ib. p. 23.
and slake the fire of anger. It is better for a Father to be often and nimble,
than to be heavy and durable in his wrath. Wink at infirmities; if not such as
are immediately sinful, chide them with frowns, and not with bitter assaults;
reserve thy public and sharp reprehensions for open and scandalous offenses,
for reiterated and repeated transgressions which bear a show of great neglect,
if not of some contempt and disdain.

7. Keep up a constant and vigorous practice of holy duties in thy family.
Josh. 24.15. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
As for me, says Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord. Moses commanded
the Israelites to go over the Laws and Precepts which he had given them from
God, in their own Families in private among their children. The Instructions
and Exhortations of Gods Ministers in public, should be repeated at home, and
whetted to and again upon the little ones. Samuel had a feast upon the
Sacrifize in his own house. 1 Samuel 9.12, 22.
Job and others had Sacrifices in their own Families. The Passeover-Lamb was to
be eaten in every particular house. Exodus 12.3, 4.
God says, he will pour out his fury upon the families that call not upon his
name. Zech. 12.12, 13.
There are times that every family must be apart, as well as every wife and
person apart. All the Males of Abraham's family were appointed to pass under the
Ordinance of Circumcision. The keeping up of family duties makes every little
house become a Sanctuary, a Bethel, a house of God. And here I would advise
that Christians be not over-tedious in their duties of private worship. I have
heard from a near relation of that holy man Mr. Dod, that he gave this
counsel, that the constant family-prayers should not ordinarily exceed above a
quarter of an hour, if so much. The morning and evening Sacrifices at the
Temple, and the Passover offerings (which were for every family) consisted but
of one Lamb. Take heed of making the ways of God irksome, and unpleasant. If
God draw forth thy heart sometimes, do not reject and repress divine
breathings; but usually labor for succinctness and brevity; such as may stand
with holy reverence to God, so as not to huddle over excellent and weighty
duties, and yet such as may render Religious Worship desirable in the eyes of
those whom thou would have to look toward Canaan. The Spirit is willing
many times, when the flesh is weak; and a person may better for a little time
keep his thoughts from wandering and discomposure, when as the large expense of
expressions gives occasion for too much diversion. Eccles. 5.2.
God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few. When
our Lord gave his Disciples a form of prayer, which was for quotidian and daily
use, as appears by that petition; Give us this day our daily bread; you know
how short and compendious it is. Plut. (...).
The Spirits are like strings of harps and bows, which if never remitted and
slackened, will crack, and make those instruments unserviceable. It is of good
use likewise to vary the duties of Religion; Sometimes sing, and sometimes
read; sometimes repeat, sometimes catechize, sometimes exhort. [Orationi
lectio, lectioni succedat oration, breve videbitur tempus, Hieron. Tom. 1. p. 57.
quod tantis operum varietatibus occupatur] It was the direction of that holy
Hermit of Bethlehem. Let reading succeed prayer, and prayer reading: that time
will seem short, which is exercised with such variety of works. Arist. Ethic.
l. 7. c. 14.
Aristotle observes out of a Poet [(...)] That, Change is a most sweet thing by
reason of our pravity. Indeed, says the Philosopher unto simple natures, the
same action is most pleasant, and therefore God delights in one and the same
simple pleasure. However, let us use the best art we can to draw on our own
hearts, as well as of Inferiors, to delight more constantly in holy duties. But
in two things be principally frequent: the offering up the sacrifice of
prayers, and the keeping of children to read daily some portion of holy
Scriptures, Hieron. p. 57.
as Jerome counseled Laeta [Reddat tibi pensum quotidie de Scripturarum
floribus carptum] Let thy child give thee a daily account of some choice
flowers cropped out of the Bible.

8. Endeavor by all good means to draw them to public Ordinances. For there
God is in a more especial manner present. Psa. 133.3. Rev. 2.1. Cant. 1.12.
There he has commanded a blessing, and life for evermore. There he walks
among his Golden Candlesticks, when the King sits at his Table, the
Spikenard sends forth the smell thereof. He makes the place of his feet to
be glorious. Though it were Gods appointment that the males only should at the
solemn feasts repair to Shiloh: yet Elkanah carries up all his house to the
yearly sacrifice. He would have his wife, 1 Samuel 1.21.
and children, and servants, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire
in his Temple, and you know what a great blessing succeeded upon Hannah. Act.
10.24.
Cornelius also when Peter came to preach at Caesarea upon Gods immediate
command, he calls together all his kindred and acquaintance to hear the
Sermon. 1 Samuel 16.5.
Jesse and his Sons came together to the Sacrifice, which Samuel offered to the
Lord at Bethlehem. It is an ungodly wicked custom, to leave many children and
servants at home needlessly upon the Lords Day. Indeed in great and numerous
families, where there are many small children, that might disturb the
Congregation, and where much provision is necessary for such as attend upon God
in the duties of Worship; there the case is somewhat altered. For such works of
mercy are dispenst with by God himself. But labor to contract the number of
absents to the smallest quantity possible, and let servants take their turns,
that none may be always at home; leave none behind thee without necessary and
urgent cause. As for such as can be present at Ordinances, remember to examine
them of what they heard; as our blessed Lord the grand pattern of our Imitation
dealt by his beloved Disciples, when he had preached that famous Sermon by the
Sea side. Mat. 13.51.
Jesus asks them, Have ye understood all these things; and when they were
alone, and apart from the multitude, Mar. 4.34.9.
then he expounded and explained all things that he taught, more fully to
them.

9. In the next place; if all these things forementioned will not prevail, but
inferiors will still run on in a course of sin, then ought thou to repair to
paternal correction. Now chastisements must be suited to their age, the
temperament of their natures, and several dispositions, the various qualities
and kinds of their offenses. Indulge a pardon sooner to lesser faults upon
repentance and sorrow. You must consider, whether their faults proceed from
imprudence and weakness, upon what ground and occasion, upon what provocation
or seduction. Call to mind their former lives, whether they have fallen
seldom and rarely; or often and frequently into the same sin. Observe whether
they appear to be deeply sorrowful, and truly humbled, and readily beg
forgiveness of God, and you [cum animo non revertendi] with a promise of a new
life. In these and the like cases, you must adhibit great diligence and
prudence. Due punishment is a part of oeconomical justice; and there must be
care had, lest by frequent impunity they and their fellows be hardened in the
ways of sin, and grow contumacious against the Commandments of God. Prove.
13.24. and 23.14.
He that spares his Rod, hates his Son; but he that loves him, chasteneth
him betimes. Thou shall beat him with the Rod, and deliver his soul from Hell.
This is an Ordinance and Appointment of God. Heb. 12.9.
Our Fathers corrected us, and we gave them reverence. But let Superiors
remember, that they must not do this without good, and without great cause, and
when all other means will not prevail. If it be possible to rule without the
Rod, it is best. Happy are those Parents, to whom God has given such towardly
children, that a nod, that a frown, that a wink, will reform them. Certainly
the wisdom of Parents might do much this way at first. If their children be of
any tolerable frames, that the holding up of a finger may excuse the holding
up the Rod. It preserves, and indears the affections of children exceedingly.
That of the Tragaedian is a good Maxim in oeconomicks; Qui vult regnare diu,
languida regnet manu. Durable power is fixed upon gentle management. Take heed
of exasperating, Ephesians. 6.4.
and provoking your children to wrath, by rigid and severe courses, where less
may effect your purpose, and that more kindly. There be some cruel Parents and
Masters that carry themselves more like raging brutes, than men, that take
pleasure in tyrannical corrections. They can let their children swear, and lie,
and filch, and commit any other sin, and yet correct them not; but if they do
not what they would have them, then they fall upon them, and tear them like
wild Beasts: Know, that God will require such vile acts at your hands in the
great day. O rather let them see that thou art angry for Gods sake; and not for
thine own. There must be a great deal of gracious pity to their souls, and
holy love mixed with thine anger against sin. O how few be there that beg in
secret, that God would soften the hearts of their relations by their due and
moderate castigations! Oh pray, that God would lay his holy hand upon their
hearts, when thou layest thy Rod upon their backs. After they have paid their
debt to justice, look more serenely upon them, and thereby encourage them to
amendment. Arist. Ethic. l. 8. c. 6.
Morosity and acerbity ((...)) if continuing still, will check their hopes of
ever returning to thy grace and favor. Let ancient rulers have a care of too
much sowreness of carriage; for many times through the common incidencies of
age, the Philosopher has observed that they are too proclive to jealousies,
suspicious [(...)] to interpret all things in the worst sense, Id. in Rhet. l.
2. c. 12.
and so possibly to be too quick and ready upon easy suggestions, to think of,
and deal hardly with their Inferiors; Be careful to use both your ears, and
hearken to both parties in matters of complaint. But if upon deliberate and
mature conviction, nothing less will prevail: Follow Gods command herein, Prove.
29.17.
and thy Son shall give rest unto thy soul. In all these cases there lies a
great point of prudence, to let them know, that thou have yet greater
corrections for them, if they mend not. That the fear and terror of what thou
have yet reserved, may work them to a compliance. They that show the utmost of
their rigor and power in such acts at once, despoil themselves of that
authority and awe which otherwise they might ingenerate in their hearts. But
take heed of all violent and passionate corrections. A Heathen could say to his
servant [Caederem te nisi irascerer] I would beat thee, were I not angry. He
that smites when his passion boils, Seneca de ird. l. 1. c. 15.
is too too subject to transcend the limits of moderation; vehement anger makes
the hands to tremble, that such are not able to strike aright. Take heed lest
thou make thy child or thy servant to become vile in thine own eyes, by too
many stripes. Deuteronomy. 25.3.
Such persons plant quicksets in the hearts of their children, that may grow up
too fast to prick their own hands, yea their hearts another day.

10. If the forementioned means through divine blessing prove effectual, then
praise and encourage them, when they come on, though yet but a little.
Ingenuous, yea rugged tempers are sometimes wrought upon by moderate and
prudent Euge's. It Is spoken of God himself, Psa. 103.9. Romans 13.3. Mat. 25.21.
that he will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever. As Magistrates,
so Parents must be sometimes praisers of them that do well: Our Lord comes in
sometimes with, Well done good and faithful servant: So must you, when they are
towardly and dutiful [(...)] call up their spirits by commendation. [ Laudibus
excitandum est ingenium. Hier. ad Lat. p. 55.
] There is a notable virtue in praise, especially as to generous spirits, to
excite and prick them forward to duty, and that principally when diverse
together according as deserts vary, are unequally praised; it stirs up a
virtuous emulation. Only take heed of exceeding too much; for little vessels
can bear no great sails; pride and arrogance are many times nursed up by too
exuberant and lavish expressions; and sometimes an unmannerly familiarity
appears.

11. Do they flourish and thrive in duty and obedience, and begin to take in
precepts freely and kindly, then win them on further by rewards, according to
their several capacities, and the quality of thine own estate. God is pleased
most graciously to draw and allure us on in the ways of holiness, by the
proposal of reward. He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb.
11.6. Hieron. Tom. p. 100.
I remember that Jerome, as to the green years of Pacatula, wishes her Father to
use these means [proponantur ei crustula, mulsa praemia, and quicquid gustu
suave est, quod vernat in floribus, quod rutilat in gemmis, quod blanditur in
puppis, acceptura festinet, etc. Psalmos mercede decantet] give her
sweetmeats, flowers, jewels, babies, to entice her to learn the Psalms. As to
years of further growth, such rewards as become them may be more proper. In
some cases these have proved great spurs and incitations, at least to the
outward work of Religion in younger ones. 1 Samuel 2.19.
Hannah that good woman brought up a little Coat every year to her Son Samuel,
when he was in the service of the Lord at the Tabernacle in Shiloh under Eli.
And you know the Father of the Prodigal in the Parable, when his Son returned
home to lead a new life, he killed a fatted Calf for him, put the best Robe
upon his back, a Ring upon his hand, and Shoes upon his feet.

12. In the last place be exceeding conscientious and cautelous in disposing
them abroad, Luke 15.22.
when either their education or profession requires it. As to the Schools, when
young and tender, choose out such Guides and Masters, as may edify them, and
imprint something more of God upon their hearts. It is a great fault in many
that take up any neighbour-school where there are profane and wicked children,
such as have learnt of their Parents to swear, and take Gods Name in vain; Many
times little youths gather a great deal of filth, and soil, and pollution in
such places, that sticks by them many years after. It is a good work [(...)] to
prohibit and keep them off from all illiberal and sordid speeches and
spectacles. Arist. Pol. l. 7. c. 17.
There was it seems a great crew of naughty children at Bethel, in the days of
Elijah, that mocked the Prophet; a place that was a Seminary and Nursery for
young ones in knowledge. 2 King. 2.23. 2 King. 2.3.
Oh how sad is it for children that have been diligently taught at home in the
fear of God, to unlearn all in wicked schools! Have a great eye to this, and
especially if they be such as are designed for Academical learning, that they
be placed under godly Tutors at the University; or if for Trades, or other
Mechanical Mysteries, that you choose out the blessed shadow of a godly Master
and Mistress, that may rivet and clench the nail that thou have knocked in.
Great will be thy comfort in this, if thou soughtest more a pious family, than
a great and rich Trade. A family wherein ships go to Heaven, and a Trade is
driven to Canaan. But especially in the grand concernment of Marriage, that
they may match into a godly family, in whose veins the blood of the Covenant
does run. An Heiresse of the Divine Promises is a greater match than an Empress
of the whole world. He that has but one foot of Land in Mount Zion, is richer
than he that holds a Scepter over the round Globe.

I come now to the second branch of this Question, and that is,

Quest. 2. By what means we may attain our desires in reference to a good work
in the hearts of those that are our equals, whether of consanguinity, affinity,
or neighborhood?

Ans. As to this I shall only propose two particular Rules, which I cannot now
handle largely.

1. Be diligent in private conference and admonition, as the providence of God
shall administer seasonable occasions. 1 Timothy 4.13. Heb. 10.25.
Give attendance to Exhortation. Exhorting one another. Lay before them the
weighty and momentous matters of eternity, and another world. Such things will
make deep wounds to be cured in time by the hand of Heaven. Be short and
nervous, and lead them off from carnal discourse by some sweet and heavenly
diversions.

2. Manage your Reproofs with great prudence and discretion, Thou shall not
hate thy ^rother in thy heart; Rev. 19.17.
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. I
might here divert unto a case almost co-incident, and that is,

Quest. When is it our duty to reprove such as we see and hear committing of
sin as we pass by in the streets?

Answ. This being the business of another subject, I shall only say thus much,
that if thou perceivest them by their haughty and scornful carriage to be such
as will kick at rebuke; Prove. 9.8.
thou have a Rule from Solomon. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee. When
by the wisest conjecture that thou can make, he is like to show the
properties of a brutish, Mat. 7.6.
swinish nature. Cast not thy Pearls before Swine, lest they trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rent you. But if he be a person likely to
receive impressions, and particularly if it be a trespass against thy self, go
tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, Mat.
18.17.
thou have gained thy Brother. Debate thy cause with thy neighbor himself,
Prove. 25.9. I have known admirable success in this case. But in all such cases
observe these three directions.

Prove. 25.11. Diog. Laert. in Arcesilao.
1. Time your Reproofs seasonably; words spoken in season are like Apples of
gold in pictures of silver. [(...)] This very point (says an ancient) is
proper to a Philosopher to understand the season of all things. I may say, it is
much more the excellency of a Christian to feel the pulse of the soul, and hit
the disease in the very joint; as it is reported of Galen, that when Antoninus
labored under a distemper, others not being able to declare where it lay; this
Physician by his expertness in the evidence of symptoms pronounced that his
stomach was vexed with crudities and indigestion; Castellan. de vit. medic. p.
117.
the Emperor cried out three times [(...)] That Is it, that very thing is it,
which thou have spoken. As to our purposes, it is advisable, sometimes not
presently and immediately to fall bluntly upon the work, lest thou thy self
should be in a passion. Yet stay not too long, lest thy holy zeal be cooled;
and both thou and he forget or dissemble the Circumstances, whereby Reproof
might be the better fixed. A seasonable time to intermeddle in these cases may
be when a friend is under the holy hand of God in any affliction, particularly
in a sickbed. That time which is fit for bodily, may be much more fit for
soul-physick. When thoughts of mortality, and the leaving of all outward
enjoyments do prepare and meliorate the way for spiritual impressions.

2. Mix thy Reproofs with meek and gentle expressions. Every Reproof should be
like the Syrupus Acetosus of Physicians, the Syrup of Vinegar, that carries
with it a grateful sharpness. Take heed thou go not to this work vested in
thine own anger; for though there may be in thee some holy zeal, yet take heed
of mingling too much of kitchen-fire. Meek Reproofs are like Tents dipped in the
balm of Gilead, that both search and cure the wound together. Let the Righteous
smite me, Psalm. 141.5.
(says David) and it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. Such are the Disciples of
the good Samaritan, who poured in Wine as an abstersive, Luke 10.34.
and Oil as a suppling incarnative into the wound Such are the children of that
prudent Matron, who opened her mouth in wisdom, Prove. 31.26.
and in whose tongue was the Law of kindness. And yet, friends, if we be
over-gentle, the core of the wound will remain. The Chyrurgian, who has taught
his fingers too much tenderness, and not willing to put his patient to pain,
may, through cruel kindness occasion distorted limbs and lameness all a man's
life. Corrosives are as necessary as glutinous plasters, to eat down the proud
flesh of our sinful sores. Ely's sinful mildness procured the sharp sword of
the Philistines to cut off his Sons, and occasioned such dismal events, that
broke his own heart, and his neck too. In many Chemical operations; Salt is a
most necessary ingredient, and causes things to ferment; without the salt of
Reproof in its due proportion, bare words of advice will seldom work. The
temper of the person must be wisely considered. In some, too mild expressions
lull them asleep in sin. No great matter (may they think) which extorts but
such gentle reflections. In others, that are quick and apprehensive: Soft words
do pacify wrath. Prove 15.1.
Such as are of choleric tempers, whose gall does much overflow their
intestines, Physicians are more careful (of their Cholagoga) of such
ingredients in their purges that may exonerate, and not augment their choler.
In all thy spiritual Physic, labor to clear it up, that thou give no potion
but what may tend to the health of his soul.

3. Be sure thou be unblameable as to that which thou reprovest in another. If
thou do the same things, Romans 2.1.
for which thou rebukest thy Brother, thou art inexcusable, for wherein thou
judge another, thou condemnest thy self. He may well retort the Proverb upon
thee, Physician heal thy self. Cast out first the beam in thine own eye, Luke
6.42.
and then shall thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy Brothers
eye. This is the first and principal work [(...)] to persuade thy self. Arrian.
in Epictet. l. 4. c. 6.
Do thou attempt to persuade others to that, whereunto thou art not arrived
thy self? O vain man! who will believe that thou art in good earnest, that thou
do indeed abhor Idols, Romans 2.
when as thou committest Sacrilege.

Obj. But some may object, Shall we never reprove others in any case, till we
are clear our selves, then who can perform this duty?

Answ. I answer, as to scandalous sins, and such as grossly foul the
conversation; James 1.27.
a man through grace may keep himself unspotted from the world. But in matters
of infirmity, who can say that his heart or his life is free and clean. In the
former, when thou have washed thy hands in innocence, then may thou deal
with thy Brother. In the latter, James 3.2.
since in many things we offend all, involve thy self in the same Reproof, and
it may be digested the more kindly.

I come now to the third and last branch of the Question, and that is,

Quest. 3. How we shall deal with Superiors, in case such are in the state of
nature? by what means we may most effectually promote their conversion?

1. Here I might enlarge by way of preface, to show that it is lawful in some
cases for Inferiors to deal with Superiors, though it be the most difficult
task.

2. That it is not only lawful, but sometimes necessary. For it may so fall
out, that in a whole family there may be but one child, or one servant that
truly fears God, as it was with Joseph in the house of Potiphar. What shall he
do, that would fain win a Father, a Master, or any other Superior unto God? As
to this I shall give in but two directions at present.

A. 1. Exhibit thy counsel, advice, or reproof, under the vails of similitudes,
Diog. Lae^t. in Zenone. p. 445. Edit. Genev. 1615.
examples, or histories. Diogenes Laert. in the life of Zeno acquaints us.
[(...).] that if he did reprehend any, he did it succinctly, not profusely,
but at some distance. It is a good Rule as to Superiors. It is an elegant and a
profitable way for managing this necessary duty, though usually ineffectual and
successeless, for want of vigilant circumspection and prudence. If thy Father
be ungodly and unholy, recite some history out of the Bible, or out of
Church-Writers, that may have a sweet reflection upon thy Fathers way.
Sometimes Parables, and Proverbial speeches that are modest and sober, may hit
the joint. He may vouchsafe to behold his face in this glass, who would storm
at direct Reproof. Parents many times when they are hit thus meekly and
modestly, if they be wise, will seem to take no notice, but may ponder upon it
a great while after. As our Lord when he told his Parents that he was about
his Fathers business, Luke 2.51.
the Text says, that Mary kept all those sayings in her heart. This is drawing
the bow, as it may seem to the Superior, many times at an adventure; yet may
thine arrow hap to pierce even within the joints of the harness. Parables are
feigned examples, and are [(...)] near a kin to inductions. Arist. Rhet. l. 2.
c. 10. Judge. 9.7, etc. 2 Samuel 12.1, etc.
Such was the great wisdom of Aesop and Stesichorus in their days, as the
Philosopher notes. Such was the Parable of Jotham to the men of Shecheus. Thus
Nathan dealt with David, and our blessed Lord himself after this manner many
times handled the High Priests and Rulers of the people; he reproved them
sometimes in dark sentences, and chosen Parables. But if Superiors be
over-morose, and exceeding sagacious, and highly magisterial, then a
disapproving silence, 2 These. 3.14.
a dis-relishing look, as speedy a departure out of their presence as may stand
with the necessary detentions of thy duty [(...)] a holy blush for them that
are shameless in sin, Epictet. c. 55.
may do greater things than thou art aware of.

2. Manage all your discourses with reverent expressions and compellations.
Diog. Laert. in Platon. p. 245.
If it be a great part of common humanity [(...)] to salute courteously those
that we meet: what dexterous affability; and most sweet lowly demeanor should
we exert and put forth to those above us? Paul in his conference with Porcius
Festus salutes him with great respect. Most Noble Festus, Act. 26.25.
I speak the words of truth and soberness. Grace expells not the due distance
of nature. Rebuke not an Elder, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.1.
but entreat him as a Father, that he may see thou desire and longest, that
he may be begotten to God. Mark how Naamans servants treated their Master,
with what submissive reverence did they bespeak him in that matter of his
washing in Jordan. My Father, 2 King. 5.13.
If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done
it, etc? Abraham hearkened you know to the voice of his wife, at the command of
God, in the case of Hagar, Genesis 21.12.
and the Spirit of God takes notice of the temper of Sarah, and commends her
for it, 1 Pet. 3.6.
that she called her husband Lord. And that I may give an instance in all
three relations, if we consult the circumstances of the Text, we shall find
it probable, Genesis 11.31. and 12.1.
that Terah the Father, hearkened to Abraham his Son, as to his departure out
of an Idolatrous Country. For the voice of God came to Abraham alone, bidding
him to go out of Ur of the Chaldees, Josh. 24.2.
to a Land that he would show him. Nebuchadnezzar that great and mighty
Monarch did not reject that pious and savoury counsel which was given him by
Daniel his captive-servant within his Palace. Dan. 4.27.
Job likewise a man of great possessions in the East, Job 31.13.
did not despise the cause of his Manservant or his Maid servant, when they
contended with him. Humble, modest, and reverent behavior may have notable
influence into Superiors. It is controverted by Seneca whether or no a child
may not heap greater benefits upon a Father, Senec. de Benefic. l. 3. c. 35.
than he had received from him. It may be clearly stated in the Affirmative; if
he should be a means of turning him unto God. The Father begets his Son to a
miserable and mortal life: the Son begets his Father to that life which is
glorious and eternal.

There remain yet four general Directions respecting all Relations.

1. Insinuate thy self into their affections. Let them know, that thou have no
design upon them, but to make them happy. Endeavor to persuade them that thou
have no private end, only their everlasting good. Wind into their hearts,
screw thy self into their affections, and thou have done half thy work. Max.
Tyr. dissert. 10. Ed. Heins. 1607.
[(...)] Nothing so inimical to love as fear and necessity. When all jealousies
of any sinister ends are blown away, then exhortations and counsels go down
comfortably. When persons are convinced and satisfied that in all our
Applications we study their benefit and profit, this opens an effectual door to
all the means that we shall use. Romans 1.11.
Thus the Apostle accoasts the Romans, I long to see you, that I may impart
unto you some spiritual gift. Thus he facilitates his way to the Philippians.
Phil. 1.8.
God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus
Christ [(...)] we do even naturally respect and reverence such as bring that
which appears profitable to us; Simplicius in Epictet. c. 38. p. 217. Ed Salm.
especially when Superiors carry themselves with courteousness and kindness.
For most men delight to be honored and esteemed by them that are above them
[(...)] for the hope that they conceive of some special profit to be received
from them. Arist. Ethic. l. 8. c. 8.
The case varies not in spiritual matters. Labor then to gain their love,
their good esteem, and the work will thrive beyond expectation.

2. Study to convince them by rational Arguments [(...)] persuasion is the
daughter of love and reason. Man. Tyr. dess. ^0.
Our affections indeed most times are first wrought upon, we are so sensual by
nature. When thou art once gotten into their hearts, then press them with
weighty Arguments drawn out of Scripture; argue with them about the folly of
sin. See how Job handles the matter with his wife about murmuring and
impatience against God. I^b 2.10.
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not evil? Let them know
that all the ways of God are pleasant ways, and all his paths are peace.
Prove. 3.17.
That the path to Heaven is a most sweet path to walk in. Show them the beauty
of Christ, the glory of Christ, draw aside the curtain, and unvail the
mysteries of free grace before their eyes. Let them behold the Image of that
blessed Savior pourtrayed in Scripture. As the Spouse did to the Daughters of
Jerusalem, run over all the excellencies of Christ, and then conclude, He is
al^ogether lovely. This is my Beloved, Cant. 5.16.
and this is my Friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Tell them what experience you
had of the blindness, nakedness, miserableness of your own condition formerly,
when you were as they are now; that you then thought of Religion, as they do;
that it was but a peevish, foolish, unnecessary strictness. Tell them how the
case is mended with you, how admirably through mercy it is altered.

3. Let your conversation be very exemplary; so that, what you persuade, may be
strongly confirmed by your own Example. Both vice and virtue are learned by
Presidents. Alexander in his manners and gate did imitate his Master Leonides,
as long as he lived. Hieron. ad Laet. p. 56, 57.
[Nihil in te and in patre suo videat, quod si fecerit peccet] Let thy child
behold nothing in thy walking, which if followed may prove sinful. Be an
example to others of holiness, Id. P. 101.
that they may not offend by the authority of thy Name. Though thy precepts be
short and concise, let thine actions, exemplifying those precepts, be constant
and perpetual. Max. Tyr. dess. 15.
Deny your selves sometimes in the enjoyment of lawful things, which may not be
expedient before Carnal Relations, when you are upon this work. Let Wives,
says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.
win their husbands by their holy conversation. Walk so meekly, so obediently,
so winningly by an amiable deportment, that a wicked drunken husband may see
the picture of grace in the life of a wife, and may be forced to confess, that
grace of a truth dwells in her. 1 Cor 7.16.
Many times the unbeleeving husband may be saved, even in this sense by the
believing wife, and vice versa. David professed that he would walk in his house
with a perfect heart. Psalm. 101.2.
As the water follows the finger in the Clay: so may thy example lead them on
to the things of God. There is a secret reverence and awe upon the hearts of
others; when any in the family do walk worthy of the Gospel unto all well
pleasing.

Fourthly and lastly, After thou have used all these forementioned directions
(which lie couched in the bowels of these words in the Text [my hearts desire
is, that Israel may he saved] For if he did heartily desire their good, as he
professed, then he would use all good means proper and proportionable to that
end. But then he adds, his prayer to God for the same purpose, and so must
thou) follow the example of our holy Apostle; Alas all thy instructions without
prayer will do no good. Go to God to sanctify all, and to persuade their souls
that you have a most single and sincere aim at their everlasting salvation.
Pray apart for them, and if the condition of thy Relations will admit, pray
with them, and therein couch some sweet reflections upon their souls. Elijah
when he was in prayer with company, cries out, 1 King. 18.37.
O Lord hear me, that this people may know that thou art the Lord God. Joh.
17.20. and 18.1.
Our blessed Lord also in that heavenly prayer to the Father makes most sweet
and ardent mention of his Disciples who were present with him. Job 1.5.
Job, he sacrificed for his children, he sent for them, and sanctified them,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all; To teach us to
pray for children distinctly one by one. Abraham he begs of God, Genesis 17.18.
Prove. 31.2.
Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight, and Bathshebah she calls Solomon the
Son of her vows. Austin was the child of Monica's prayers and tears. Ask
counsel of God, as Manoah did, Judge. 13.8.
that he would be pleased to teach you what you must do with your children. Beg
of God wisdom and direction, that he would order providential seasons for
their good; let that be your great request in secret; Oh that such a child,
such a servant might be pulled as a firebrand out of the fire, Jude 23.
and brought home to God. Should ye have the wisdom of Angels, if God do not
come in to your help, all your labor will be in vain. Cry out with the poor
man in the Gospel. Lord have mercy on my Son, Mat. 17.15.
for he is sore vexed; for oft-times he falls into the fire, and often into the
water, sometimes into one sin, sometimes into another, whereby his soul incurs
fearful and terrible dangers. Commend thy child to God, whom thou have
begotten to death and damnation, unless wonderful mercy interpose it self.
Sprinkle him with the holy water of melting tears; beg of God that he may be
delivered from the wrath to come by his Almighty Arm. Petition earnestly for
the pardon of those sins, for the rooting out that spiritual wickedness, which
thou have been the means to propagate. Pray it out, fast it out, weep it out
before God. Such Devils go not out without fasting and prayer.

Now I shall make some brief Application of the whole, and so conclude.

Use 1. In the first place, hence we learn the diffusive nature of holiness; 2
King. 4.3.
it is like the widows Oil, that filled all the vessels of her neighbors. He
that is holy, is (...), like unto God himself for communicat^veness, as well as
for purity in his small degree and measure; The language of a Saint is, Come,
let us sing praise, Psalm. 95.1, 2.
let us come before his presence with thanksgiving. Come ye, Isa. 2.3.
and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, etc.

Use 2. To reprove such as do not perform their utmost, that do not improve
their skill and endeavor to the height in this excellent work. Every child is
born an heir of Hell, and will thou use no means to deliver his soul from
death, and to pull him out of the jaws of the Devil? Oh thou ungodly Father,
that like Gallio, take no care in this matter, God will require the blood of
thy child, and the blood of thy servant at thy hands one day. Do thou love
thy child? a Heathen will teach thee thy duty, To love, says he, Arist.
Ethic. l. 2. c. 4.
is [(...)] to desire good things for such, and according to the utmost ability
to endeavor to accomplish them. There i^ but one good thing that is absolutely
necessary for thy child, and that is, a happy union to God. What have thou yet
done to the effecting of that? Many are eagerly bent upon those designs, how
their children, Sueton. in Calig. c. 42.
like Caligula in the Historian, may tumble in a room full of gold, but take
little pains for the gold of Ophir, Prove. 3.14 15.
and that wisdom which is far above Rubies. Know, that all the sins of
Relations under your charge that are not reproved and corrected for, will
become yours. Every drunken fit of thy servant will be counted thine to answer
for. Every turn of pleasure that thy children and servants take in the fields
upon Gods holy day, with thy approving connivance, Isa. 58.13. 2 Ep. Ioh. 11.
will turn to thy account at the great Tribunal. If thou would find favor
with God, labor to divert them from the ways that lead to the chambers of
death. He that neglects his duty herein, does what in him lies to damn his
child and himself too. As if he were in league with death, in covenant with
Satan, Isa. 28.15.
and with Hell were at an agreement; as if it were a laughing matter for
himself, and all his Relations to fall into the bottomless pit of fire and
brimstone. Oh how many families are the filthy cages of unclean birds, like so
many hog-styes and sinks of all manner of abominations! We can scarce walk the
streets, but we shall hear swearing and cursing, and polluting Gods holy Name,
and many obscene and filthy speeches, and see great wickedness committed even
by young striplings; and this is because they are not instructed and taught the
fear of the Lord at home by their Parents and Rulers. There be many ruffling
Gallants in our times, that look upon holiness as a crime, and count it their
bravery to go toward Hell with open mouth, with a full swinge, that swim down
the Rivers of Riot and Luxury into the dead Sea. 1 Pet. 2.13.
That are so far from reproving others for sin, that they commend and encourage
them rather, that have much ado to bear with servants that perform excellent
service, 1 Pet. 4.4. Sueton. in Nerone. c. 5.
if they will not drink healths, and be debaucht as well as themselves, more
like Nero than Christians. If their children serve Satan never so much, they
matter it not; so they do not ruin their Patrimony. No wonder that their
children be profligate and vile, that have such sad examples. The Spirit of God
takes notice, that Ahaziah was a wicked man, 2 Chronicles. 22.3.
and gives this for the reason. His Mother was his counselor to do wickedly.
Such as will be angry rather, if their Relations do not walk in the ways of
sin, Aelian. de animal. l. 5. c. 16. Romans 3.13.
like the Wasps in the Naturalist, that dip their stings in the poison of
Vipers. Their angry tongues are tinctured in the venom of sin. Oh how much
good might a Theophilus do! when greatness and holiness run in a blood, how
would the generations to come rise up and bless them? how much honor might
they bring to God? how would Religion flourish? how would our fields bring
forth peace, and our streets run down with rivers of Righteousness?

3. Hence we learn the horrible sin of such that cause others to do wickedly,
that egg on others to the commission of sin, that encourage children to
profane the Sabbath, to lie, and swear, and seem to approve of, delight and
rejoice in it. Who knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such
things are worthy of death) not only do the same, Romans 1.32.
but have pleasure in them that do them.

4. Hence we may infer, what great wisdom is requisite in managing those means
that are proper and useful in order to the salvation of our Relations, what
integrity of heart, what sincerity, what holy contempt of the scorns of this
wicked world. Do thou take upon thee the study of wisdom, Epictet. c. 29.
says the Stoic, prepare thy self speedily [(...), to be laughed to scorn] and
expect that many should mock at thee? how much greater is the depravation of
men's hearts since the fall in opposition to true holiness. Many a bitter taunt
and scoff must thou go under, but in wisdom pass it by, regard it not, you
work for souls. One soul begotten to God is better than the gaining of whole
Kingdoms and Empires.

5. To such as live under holy Rulers and Governors of families, that you
would highly esteem them for their labor of love; that you would count it a
singular mercy that God has given any of you a holy Father, or a holy Mother,
such as have spent many an hour in secret for thy good, that have sought it
earnestly at the Throne of Grace, that thy life might be hid with God in
Christ. Look upon their instructions as so many Pearls, Prove. 1.9.
their Reproofs as so many Rubies to wear about thy neck. Not to be reproved in
the way of sin is a great judgment. Hos. 2.6.
To have these Thorns and Briars cast in the way to our sinful lovers, is a
great mercy. Oh how many blessings do children enjoy by means of
praying-parents? count it a great and an admirable favor from God.

6. To such as are employed and exercised in this excellent duty and study, to
perform it conscientiously. Who seriously endeavor, that their yoak-fellows
may be the Spouses of Christ, their posterity the children of our heavenly
Father, their servants the freemen of Christ, their kindred of the Blood Royal
of Heaven. Let me say as our blessed Lord to Zacheus, This day is Salvation
come to this house. This day have thou fellowship with the Father and with the
Son. The God of Heaven goes along with thee. Though thou do not see the
desired fruit of thy labor at present, do not despond, the work is Gods. It is
like to some of those seeds, which sown in the earth will not come up, till the
second Spring. James 5.7.
The husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. It is often seen
that there is a mighty Power of God going along with such constant endeavors;
at length the diligent hand may make thee rich. The Grace that dwelt in the
Grandmother Lois, in the Mother Eunice, dwelt afterward in their little Son
Timothy. Though God is not tied by any bond of nature, 2 Timothy 1.5.
yet fervent prayer is of a high esteem in the sight of God. The use of means
directed by God, is a hopeful sign of mercy intended; where God chooses to the
end, he ordains to the means. He has chosen us to be holy, that we might be
glorious. Ephesians. 1.4 11.
However God deal with you in that particular request, yet be sure your care
and pains will not lose a signal reward; your prayers shall return into your
own bosom, and I tell thee, God watches over such a family in a way of mercy
and peace. His eye of grace is toward thee; his holy hand will uphold thee; his
heart will bless thee. Unto his good pleasure, commit thy self, and wait the
success; go on and prosper thou blessed of the Lord.

What are the Characters of a Souls sincere Love to Christ? and how may that
love to him be kindled and inflamed?
EPHESIANS 6.24. Grace be with all Them, that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity.


THese words may well be treated on without much Preface, Romans 16.24. 1. Cor.
16.23, 24. 2 Ep. 13.14. Gal. 6.18.
there being nothing in them, which speaks any dependence upon, or connection
with any thing that went before. Some form of Benediction we find used by this
Great Apostle, at the conclusion of every Epistle; and accordingly having
driven his excellent design in this to the Church of Ephesus, to a full period
or issue; he first makes an affectionate address to God, and to the Mediator
in their behalf, v. 23. Grace be to the Brethren, and love with Faith from God
the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and then leaves his Apostolical
Benediction upon them, v. 24. Grace be with all them, that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity: Or, The blessing of the Eternal God be upon all the
sincere-hearted Christians amongst you, for so I look upon the latter words of
the verse, as a Periphrasis of all real Christians; Love to Christ being as
essential to the Christian, as the Rational Soul is to the man. The only
difficulty in the words, that will require our stay, is to inquire, what is
meant by [(...)] in Sincerity, some refer it to the [(...)] Grace mentioned at
the beginning of the verse, as if it had been read [(...)] unto Incorruption,
or to bring them to eternal life, or until they come to a state of Immortality.
So many of the Ancients, and of the Modern Interpreters, Beza, Tremell^us, and
others.

Others read it, in Conjunction with the love of the Lord Jesus Christ, making
it a qualification, or a discriminating note of that love, which is sound,
real, and sincere from that which is but pretended, counterfeit, and easy to
be corrupted, by every difficulty and temptation; And accordingly they
translate, some [in incorruptione] others [absque] a third sort [amare non
vitiato nec culpato.] All to the same sense with our English Translation, In
Sincerity.

There are others who consider this phrase apart by it self; some explaining it
by purity of heart, and conversation; others as denoting thereby the duration
of love [tam prosperis quam adversis, or] both in good and bad times. Piscator
makes it a distinct branch of the Apostles Prayer, as if he had said, Grace
be with all them, etc. and life eternal; Taking no notice of the Preposition
that is added, and varies the Construction. It Is the conjecture of a Learned
Divine, That the Apostle in adding this clause, has some reflection on the
Gnostics, who had mingled themselves with the Christians of Ephesus; And were,
whatever they pretended, neither pure in their love to Christ, having mixed his
Doctrine with abominable corruptions, nor yet sincere and lasting therein,
being ready upon every blast of persecution that did arise, to deny him, and
Apostatize from him; I shall for the present with Musculus, leave the matter
indifferent, not only which of the two first, but of all the other
forementioned Opinions is fixed upon, finding no cause so far as concerns my
present purpose to be peremptory in either. The Apostle doubtless meaning none
else by lovers of Christ, but such whose hearts were sincerely and entirely
affected, to him, whether he intended to characterize them any further by
[(...), or no] which, I presume, 1 Cor. 16.22. Joh. 14.15, 23. and 21.15, 17. 1
Pet. 1.8.
might easily be manifested from other parallel places (where this grace is
mentioned and understood properly, having no additional qualification made
thereto;) and from the design of the words themselves, for certainly he would
not so solemnly have entitled the rotten-hearted Hypocrites, that did only
pretend love to Christ, unto the Benediction of the great and blessed God. And
if that stand good, we have enough for our purpose, and more need not be
contended for.

Let this suffice then for their meaning. The subject matter of them, whether
you look to the first clause, or the last, is very Noble, and might well
deserve a large consideration; but I am confined to this single use of them,
which is, to make them the Foundation of these two cases of Conscience.

What are the genuine Characters of a Souls sincere love to Christ? And how may
that love to him be kindled and inflamed?

And there are but two or three things, that I desire to suggest, and then we
shall immediately begin to treat upon them in their order.

1. Let it be considered, that there is a vast difference between these cases,
and such others as do refer only to lower duties. When we inquire after the
sincerity of our love to Christ. It Is all one as if we were upon the search,
whether we are Christians, yea or not; And whether consequently our portion
does lie in the Divine Promises or Threatenings; And what is our immediate duty,
that all other set aside, we must attend unto? And again, when we seek for
directions to help us unto the love of Christ, our inquiry is not, how we may
order this or that inferior action, but how we may attain to saving Religion,
and Christianity; How we may escape the great damning sin of the world, and
entitle our selves to the love of God and Christ, and to all the rare
privileges, which belong to the Communion of Saints. In a word, to the Grace
of God here, and to Eternal Life hereafter. See 1 Cor. 2.9. James 1.12. and
2.5. John 14.21.23.

2. Let it be considered, that it is not the distinct resolution of these cases
that will be of final advantage to any person, unless there be added to the
former an impartial soul-searching examination of themselves; and to the
latter, (as the case shall require) a conscientious practice; The resolutions
given to cases of conscience about the right performance of duties, being
nothing else, but the bare providing the food or physic; And again, the
discoveries of men's states thereby, being but the presenting looking-glasses to
them; neither of which are effectual, or do any good, but to such as faithfully
use them.

3. Let me humbly mind you, that the more uncertainty you are at, touching
your estates, when you have examined them by the Characters, the more diligence
you are concerned to use in the practice of the Directions. And let me add
this, That where you cannot undeniably, and demonstratively conclude, the
sincerity of your love (which I think few in compatison, on this side of Heaven
can) there you must never lay by the advice about the last case; no not
although your probabilities should be great, it being at the worst but an easy
and sweet trouble to be still doing this great work over again, whereas it is
irrecoverably dangerous and desperate upon presumption, that we have done it
already, to leave it wholly neglected: And I beseech you, remember this useful
Rule, That in all Trials, which Christians make about Grace, It is safer to
want credulity, than to be over hasty therein.

The cases are two, and very fit to follow each other in the order, that is
given to them. I begin with the first.

What are the genuine Characters of a souls sincere love to Christ?

And in order to the Resolution thereof, I must premise these several
Propositions.

1. Proposition.
That there is a great deal of difference between Love as it is seated in the
Will, or rational Appetite, and the same Act or Principle of Love, as seated in
the sensitive. In the former, it is a settled, Voluntas nihil aliud est, quam
Intellectus extensus ad habendum and faciendum id, quod cognoscit. Scaliger.
exercit. 107.
rational, uniform, and deliberate Motion, co-incident with the very natural
Act of the Will it self, To Love (as the great School-man notes) being nothing
else but [Intensive velle] to will intensely either person or thing. The motion
of the Will toward the Object, as good and desirable; and the earnest
embracing thereof; this is Rational Love. And according to the various Aspect
which it has thereto, either as present or absent, perfect or imperfect; it is
called love of desire, or fruition, dependence, or complacency: And if the
Object be such, as can or does reciprocate affection, then its friendship [or
Amor Am^citiae.] But now take Love, as it is an Affection properly so called,
and sea^e^ in the lower faculties of the soul, and so there is a great variety,
and inequality in its motions, much easier to be felt, th^n expressed;
sometimes the soul is in a kind of ecstasy, wrapped above it self; and then by
and by it is flat, and dull again. I note this first, for this reason, that you
may understand what kind of love it is, that our inquiry does proceed upon,
viz. Rational Love, Baxters D^rections for peace and comfort. Direct. 21.
it being (as a Judicious Divine has often observed) not so safe for
Christians to try their states by the passionate motions of Grace in the lower
parts of the soul, or the affections, as by the more equal and uniform actings
thereof in the Will it self; the [(...)] commandress of the soul.

2. Proposition.
The Acts of the Will (in specie morali) derive their goodness or vitiousness
partly from the nature of the Object, upon which they are fixed. I do not
assert this to be the only ground, whence they are concluded good or evil,
for the Principle, and the End, and sometimes the degree of the Act are all
necessary thereto, but only that this is one thing necessary. Thus the willing
of God, or any of those things, which are in a direct order to his glory, is
that, we call the Grace of Love: As on the other side, when the Will moves
toward any thing, which stands in opposition thereto; This is that we call
sinful Concupiscence.

3. Proposition.
It is not barely the Object in it self considered, but as clothed with its
proper excellencies that agree to it, and all its necessary Relations, which
the Will in its motions must have respect unto, before any of those motions can
truly be said to be Gracious: For the nature of Grace lies not in the Act or
motion of the Will simply and nakedly considered, but as it is suited and
proportioned to the excellencies of the Object, and those Relations which do
inseparably belong thereto. For instance, To delight in God; It is not every
act of delight, which the Soul may have upon the apprehension of him; such as a
bare Philosophical conception of God, may sometimes raise the heart unto: But
when the believing Soul having taken a view of the excellencies of God, and its
own sweet Relation to him, as a Gracious Father, is carried forth in a holy
rapture and exultancy of Spirit. This is the Grace of Delight.

4. Proposition.
Though the Love of God, and the Love of Christ are never found one without the
other, yet is there a distinction necessary to be put between them; and that,
even as great in proportion, as is between God and the Mediator, or between
the last end, and the principal means conducing thereto. The love of the Soul
to God is [ Amor finis ultimi, Or] of such a Being as it will be an eternal
happiness to be united unto. The love of the soul to Christ, as Mediator, is [
Amor medii principalis, or] of one, by whom, we may have access to God, and
find our happiness in him. The formal reason of the former, is the Divine
All Sufficiency and Blessedness, but of the latter the personal excellencies
that are in Christ, together with his ability and willingness to free us from
our undoing streights, and exigencies, as we are in a state of Apostasy and
elongation from God. And (if I mistake not) the not observing this necessary
distinction between the Acts of the Soul, as respecting God, and the same Acts
[ in specie, or] in kind, as respecting the Mediator, has occasioned much
confusion in those Answers, which are given to this, and many such like
inquiries, such Arguments as are only proper to the one, being made use of to
discover the sincerity of our hearts in the other.

5. Proposition.
Love, as it is an Act or habit of the will, and has Christ for its object, is
not properly the Evangelical grace of love to Christ, unless it have respect to
him, according to the various Excellencies of his person, and the several
distinct Relations, which are by God invested in him: Or thus, The gospel grace
of love, is not the Intensive willing a Naked Christ, but Christ as represented
with his peculiar personal Excellencies, and with his various offices and
relations unto us in the Gospel. This proposition undeniably follows from the
third before laid down: But yet, because it gives some special light to help
us to discover the true nature of this grace; and is Intended, as the
foundation of some of those Characters, that will afterward come to be
insisted on, I must crave your patience, while I offer something farther, for
the confirmation thereof. That certainly is no true Moral Act, which is not
suited to the nature of the object; Thus, for a man to love his friend, no
otherwise, than he loves his beast, would not be a true Moral act of love?
And again, as plain a truth it is, that where the act of love does not bear
some gradual proportion, to the various excellencies of the object, that it is
conversant about; neither can that Act have any Moral truth or goodness in it:
For Instance, to love God, or Christ, with no higher love, than we love
inferior persons, whether Friends, Relations, or Superiors in the world; This
were not Sincerely to love either of them. See 1 John 2.15, and Matthew. 10.37.
and Luke 14.26. -- I add in the last place (which is no less evident, than
either of the former) that where there are relations, or offices Necessarily
Invested in, and Inseparable from the person beloved, then if our love does not
respect the object, as under those relations, and offices, it will be far from
being love in Sincerity. Some Instances will clear this also beyond
Contradiction; Suppose a Woman, that has a Husband, and she loves him no
otherwise, than one friend loves another; And the Case is the same between a
Scholar and his Master, a Servant and his Lord, a Subject and his Prince, If
the affections be without reverence, obedience, and loyalty, will either of
these be reputed true love? Why, no more are such to be accounted the sincere
lovers of Christ, who do not bear an affection to him, in all his offices and
relations: And this I take to be so demonstrative a truth, and of such
Necessary consideration in our present inquiry, that nothing could be spoken
in Judgment thereto, until we had first made our way unto it, and laid it
down; I am sure it will be found fundamental to the right understanding, the
Nature of sincere love to Christ, and the greatest part of the Characters,
which are laid down in the scripture of this grace. It might now be here
expected, and it is almost necessary to give some account of Christ's personal
excellencies, and also of his offices, what they were, and briefly to intimate
what new qualifications, each of them would put upon a Christians Intensive
willing of Christ, which is but the [ Substratum or] matter of this grace; But
I am not now to discourse the nature of this grace at large, and so much
thereof as is necessary, will come in, when we lay down some of the Characters
of it, and I have but two things more, and then we come to them.

6. Proposition.
The love of the soul to Christ in sincerity is not any one Indivisible act or
habit, but a Holy frame of spirit, made up of many gracious Inclinations
carrying the whole soul along with it unto Christ, for Union and Communion with
him. I told you in the beginning, that it is used here by the Apostle as the
periphrasis of a Christian, a Brother, a real Saint; And therefore it is not a
sudden and transient flash of the soul, or any one act, but Comprehensive of
much of that, wherein the nature of Christianity does essentially lie. This
follows necessarily from the last proposition; And Indeed to make faith or love
to Christ, such single Physical acts, as many do, as it renders the Doctrine of
Christianity perplexed, so does it exceedingly tend to the amusing of the
Consciences of weak Christians, and I am afraid, Engender also to
licentiousness: It being too usual with such persons, who presumptuously
conceive themselves to be Christians, because they discern, as they think,
those supposed particular acts, to take up with them, and to grow remiss, and
careless in other duties, as essential to Christianity, and necessary to
Salvation, as those graces themselves. To conclude this Proposition, you may
note, that as love to God, is the soul of natural Piety, and is Incorporated
into every branch of it, so is love to Christ the very Spirit, that diffuseth
it self through, and animates all those duties, which are required by the New
Covenant, and respect Jesus Christ as Mediator.

7. Proposition.
When we inquire after this Love, by it is Genuine characte^s, you are not to
understand thereby only such special properties, as argue the essence of this
grace a posteriori; But you are to know that we understand it, in such a
latitude, as leaving Room for all those Arguments by which the conscience of a
Christian may be resolved; whether this grace was ever truly wrought in his
soul or not. And these things premised, the Characters which evidently
discover, whether we love Christ in sincerity, are these that follow.

1. Character.
We may know it by our former Convictions, and the rule is this; When e love to
Christ is sincere, Esa. 55.1. and 61.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 11.28.
there has been a Conviction of the souls undone condition without him, and of
the sufficiency, and willingness of Christ, to recover the soul out of that
condition; And wherever this Conviction has been fully wrought, and the wound
made thereby Regularly healed, there dwells Sincere love to him. I put this
first, as containing the original birth of Evangelical love. I dare affirm No
conviction, no love; No contrition of heart for sin, no affection in the soul
for Christ? 1 Pet. 2.8.
Every degree of true Spiritual love (says a Divine, that had well studied
this point) proceeds from a proportionable Act of saving Faith. And to the same
purpose (says Dr. Preston) and he presses it earnestly, two things must
concur to beget love. 1. The sight of Christ's willingness, and readiness to
rel^ive. 2. His ability, and sufficiency to help. These two, willingness, and
ability, Cant. 3.11.
are the Crown upon the Head of Christ, when undone souls do first take delight
in him, they are the sweet ointments of our Lord, Cant. 1.3.
which by their Savor do attract Virgin souls to betroth themselves unto him.
What ever men may vainly talk, it is brokenness of heart, Act. 2.36, 37. and
9.5, 6. Matthew. 9.12.
and a sense of approaching Ruin, that gives the soul the first occasion of
acquainting it self in good earnest with Christ, and when faith has thereupon
found the suitableness of Christ to it self, in its present State of misery,
then the fire of love begins to burn. So that it is not a blind, casual
passion, but a matter of right Reason, mature judgment, and choice. It is not
a frame of spirit, that persons were delivered into, they know not how, but
such, whereof they that have it, can give undeniable reasons, so that if the
question were put to any love sick soul, as to the Spouse in the Canticles
chapt 5.9, 10. What is thy beloved more than another beloved? she could give
an Account; if not so Glossy and Rhetorical, Cant 1.3.12. Chap. 2.3.
yet as Logical and Rational as that, which is there given. She has seen that
in Christ, so much Excellency in his person, and so much readiness and
sufficiency, as resulting from his several offices, which has even ravished
her, and made him comely to her for delights, yea, the very chiefest of ten
thousands: and therefore she both can, and 5.10.
and does claspe fast about him, and takes him for her Physician, Husband,
King, riest, and Prophet; Since he is willing and fit to be my Savior, (oh!
says the soul) I will be his Disciple, Servant, Subject or any thing; and
2.5.5 4.
Thus she can hold no longer but falls downright sick of love. And this is the
first Character. Take it now, and ask thy soul; did thou ever yet find thy
self lost and undone? not able to bear up against the Terrors of an accusing
and condemning conscience even dying away for fear, least Go^ should spend all
his arrows upon thee, ^^t. 32.23. Job 6.4. Psa. 38.2.
and leave thee a Horror (...) thy self, and an amazement to all about thee?
And was it in this da^k Valley, that thou came first seriously acquainted
with Christ; and did thou see his bowels yearning to thee, Jer. 31.20. Act.
9.5.
and that he was fully able to set thee in the light of the Countenance of
that God, whose Terror was upon thee? And under this conviction was it, that
thou did first close with him; why this is love not in pretense, and
complement, but in Sincerity: Whereas on the other side, if thy pretended
affection wants this foundation; if it has been always alike, neither more,
nor less; if that senseless conceit runs through thy soul, that thou have loved
Christ ever since thou wast born, See Reynolds on Psalm. 110. p. 59. 60. etc.
and never did feel the least stirrings of Enmity against him; If Education,
Custom, outward Communion, be all that thou have to say to prove thy love; in
faithfulness to thy soul, Job 19.28.
I warn thee to take heed of self-deceit, for surely the Root of the matter is
not in thee; and if thou will still presume, notwithstanding this confident
denial, I have but one word more, and that is to commend to thy serious perusal
that Judicious tract of Mr. Pinke, Trial of a Christians Sincere love to Christ.
on this very Case, and Text; where these counterfeit grounds of love are fully
convicted of Insufficiency, and therefore I would not do it here again.

2. Character.
Where love to Christ dwells in Sincerity, there has been some sensible
Impression, Taste, and Feeling of the Fathers love to the soul in him: Romans
9.13. Romans 8.30.
I do not mean, the Fathers love, as it lies in the womb of Election, but as it
has broken forth in a powerful actual Vocation. The pedigree of a Christians
love to his Savior, is to be fetched from the Fathers love to souls in Christ.
John 14 6.
1 John 4.19. We love him because he loved us first. Christ himself as
mediator, is but a means whereby Souls may come to God their final end, and
blessedness; And therefore as the soul that loves him, John. 14.9. and 15, 23.
loves the blessed God much more, so before we can fix upon him with full
satisfaction; some beams thereof must light upon us, it being too great a
difficulty for the soul to prevail with it self, to trust all its concernments
in the hands of a Crucified Christ, and to be fond of him, until i^ has
gained some sweet assurance of the Fathers love to it self in him. And hence it
is that our Savior tells us; John 6.44. No man can come to him, except the
Father that has sent him, draw him. By coming to Christ, I take it for
granted, may be understood, either Faith or Love; And these cannot be without
the Fathers drawing, what is that! morally, it lies in the clear discoveries of
his willingness to be reconciled to us in Christ; 2 Cor. 5.20.
when in Conformity to his being in Christ reconciling the World to himself,
he is pleased to vouchsafe us his own beseechings of us to be reconciled,
then he draws us. The promise therefore of reconciliation must first be made
known, and by the sweet influence thereof, the soul is allured with
Cheerfulness to throw it self into the Arms of it is Savior: And this is love.
Try by this also; Did thou ever find those Cords of a man, those bonds of
Divine, and Ravishing love, thrown upon thee? Did thou ever see God to be
thy happiness, and offering himself to thee, as such, and so alluring thee?
Then thou art Married to Christ, for this speaks thee, United to God in love,
and the end must include the means, and the greater the lesser.

3. Character.
We then love Christ in Sincerity, when that affection in us is qualified
according to the various Excellencies, that belong to the person of our Lord;
when it respects him, according to the Manifestation made of him in the Gospel;
viz. not simply as a person, who is Historically made known to us by such a
Name; but according to the true Character of him, as God and man in one person;
[(...)] as one filled with the spirit of God, above measure, by an ineffable
Unction, John 3.35. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
as one admirably Condescending, and laying aside his divine splendour, and
Majesty, that he might appear in the form of a Servant, and be obedient to
the death of the Cross, for the Salvation of Sinners; and lastly, as one raised
from the dead by God, made able, Act. 5.30.
and declaring his high satisfaction in the access of sinners unto God by him;
And so there are these four graces, which are always attendant upon, and are,
(as it were,) Incorporated into the nature of this evangelical affection. 1.
Humble and Reverent admiration; It Is an admiring Love, Objects that are
incomparably Excellent, do always first affect with admiration, and though
that affection dissolve into love, yet does it not usually wholly cease,
especially if the object be not thoroughly Comprehended: Cant. 5.16. Ephe. 3.17.
It Is thus with thy soul (Christian) that art a sincere lover of thy redeemer,
and have not set up some Image, of an ordinary person, in the place of him,
thou admirest him, whom thou love, as never being able to comprehend his
Glory: The Lord whom thou love being God as well as Man, and Man as well as
God, John 1.1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16.
and all this, in one person: An object in whom Heaven and Earth are so
admirably blended together, that the acutest reason loses it self, and stands
amazed at the union, Chrysostom.
whence we find one of the Ancients thus speaking of it, I know that the word
was made flesh, but how or in what manner this was done, I know not; Do thou
wonder, that I profess my Ignorance; why, the whole Creation is Ignorant of it
as well as I: And another of them gives this advice; if Reason go about to
cavil? Justin Martyr.
[(...) ((...)) (...).] Do not dispute, but apply thy self to the common Refuge
against cavils in matters of Faith, even Faith it self: God has said it, and
therefore I must and will believe it; Th^se things considered, I dare boldly
tell thee, that thou can not love in sincerity, but together therewith thou will be under a holy rapture of Admiration, and together with thy love, thy
Admiration will be alwa^es increasing.

Cant. 2.3.
2. Sweet and refreshing delighting. It Is a delighting, rejoicing love: love
(says Aquinas) [est complacentia amantis in amato] is the rest and
satisfaction of the soul in the Object loved; the nature of love lies much in
delight. Thou can not (Christian) love thy Lord, but thou will find thy
heart even ravished with delight in him; as being one in whom the fullness of
the God head dwells [(...), (...).
or] personally [ non per efficaci^m solum ^upassistentiam, sed per Unionem
Hypostaticum, or] not vertually, or only in a way of external help and
assistance; and being also one that had such an Unction of the Spirit upon him,
Cap. (...)
that has fully fitted him for the delight of thy soul: And hence it is, that
we find the Spouse in the Book of Canticles so often letting forth her heart
in holy delight to her Beloved, as is manifest by her many loving
compellations, and several other expressions ( He shall lie all night betwixt
my breasts, Cant. 1.13.) too large and many to be mentioned here, and therefore
I refer you to the Book it self.

3. Ingenious gratitude and thankfulness. It Is a grateful and thankful love; as
that which is begotten in the soul by the sense of Christ's unspeakable
goodness, and condescension; and which is also ever after fed; and maintained
thereby. Now the condescension of Christ lies in three things.

1. In his voluntary undertaking the work of Reconciliation, and Mediation with
God for persons so unworthy, Romans 5.8.
Heb. 2.16. He took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham;
it was the cause of sinners, which this great Lord undertook to plead.

2 In his unwearied diligence; and invincible patience in fulfilling the severe
Law of Redemption, which he had submitted to: Though the injury that was done
him by man was so great and manifest; and the terror of the Lord against him
also so severe and unspeakable, yet he opened not his mouth, but was dumb,
even as a Lamb at the slaughter, and as a Sheep under the hands of the
Shearers. Isa. 53.7.

Mat. 11.30. Romans 10.8, 9, 10. Isa. 1.16.17, 18
3. In being willing to communicate the benefits purchased thereby to sinful and
rebellious men, upon such easy Terms; bidding us do nothing else but turn to
God by Repentance, and Self-denial, and believe in himself, and then what ever
our sins had been, all the advantages merited by his death should be made over
to us. Now when all these are considered (as by every soul that sincerely loves
him, more or less they are) do they not sweetly affect with thankfulness, as
well as love? Christian, can thou look upon such a Redeemer without some
sense of an obligation laid upon thy soul thereby? will thou think one single
and separate affection enough for him? or rather, will not thy heart empty it
self into the bosom of the Lord with love and thankfulness both at once, and
each of them contending which shall outdo the other?

4. Supporting hope and confidence; It Is a hoping and confiding love; It Is not
a languishing affection, but that which brings life into the soul from the
fullness of that Christ it feeds upon. 1 Ioh. 4 17.
Perfect love (says the Apostle) casts out fear. There will not be so much
as the shadow of fear upon the soul, when this affection is ripened into
perfect fruition: And in the mean time, as the degrees of it do increase, so is
the soul heightened in its hopes, and tramples upon its former jealousies,
fears, and discouragements. And to this sense some interpret those words, Romans
8.38, 39. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? etc. As if they were
the exultation of Faith upon the view of Loves Conquest, and victorious Triumph
over all its enemies: Love gives confidence of access to Christ, and unto God
by him; and this confidence lies in the soul, as a cordial against all its
faintings and despo^dencies; not that there may not be a sinking of spirits,
and a swooning away for a time, but love will restore the soul again, and
knowing Christ to be good, Cant. 6.1^, 13.
as well as all-sufficient for its condition it will recover life and spirits
again, and nor suffer it utterly to faint under its own sad apprehensions. And
this is the third Character. Take now all these four qualifications of sincere
love, and try your selves by them.

4. Character.
If our love be sincere, it is an affection, which respects not a naked
Christ, but Christ as Mediator: Or, it is a hearty desire of, and complacency
in Christ in all his offices, as King, and Priest, and Prophet: And of such
moment is the right knowledge of this Character, that (Christian) I must desire
thee principally to study it, and pass a judgment upon thy self thereby: For
whatever fondness, and sudden flashings of love thou may find within thee,
they will not so clearly tell thee what thou art, as the knowledge of thy self
by this m^rk. Take it for a clear Truth. That if thou love not Christ as thy
Sov^raign Lord; if thy heart be not knit to him, as thy High Priest with God;
if ^h^^ (...) ^ot affectionately entertained him as thy Master and Teacher: In
a word, if thou art not consecrated unto God by Christ, if thou art not a loyal
subject, and a willing Disciple, love in sincerity does not dwell in thee: Thou
art still an enemy, and wilt so be judged; It Is not fondness of expression, nor
any outward complement that men put upon Christ, which reaches the New
Testament notion of love to Christ, but when as loyal subjects, Ioh. 14.15.21.
and 15.8. and 10.21.23, 24. 1 John 5.3. Luke 19.27. Heb. 10.28. Ioh. 14.23, 24.
and willing disciples, we are always doing the Things that are grateful, and
are obedient to him: This is love; And hence it is, that in so many places, our
Lord puts us upon trying our love by our obedience, by keeping his words and
Commandments. And speaks of Libertines, Infidels, the carnally wise, Rebels and
Apostates as enemies, and haters of him, whatever their pretenses are to the
contrary. And verily, so essential is this to sincere love, that unless you
understand it, you will be able to give but a lame account of most of the
Scripture-Characters thereof (as if I had time, I could easily demonstrate)
because they do all presuppose it. If thou would know therefore whether this
Grace be in thee in truth, take thy heart (Christian) to Christ in every
office, and try it by such Interrogatories, as may result from the
consideration of them; and this will tell thee thy case distinctly. Begin first
with Christ as High Priest (for this did lay the foundation of the other two
offices; and if thou have any love to Christ in sincerity, it was the sight of
him in this, that first kindled it) And thus bespeak thy self: Did thou ever
(oh my soul) seriously consider, what Christ has undertaken in thy behalf with
the jealous God, whose face thou could not see, and live? wast thou ever
convinced, that all thy prayers, duties, outward privileges, and devotions
were little worth, and could not have ought availed thee, Heb. 10.10.12. 1 Cor.
2.2.
unless by his own blood he had first entered within the vail, and made
atonement for thee? And then with the same blood went afterward to the right
hand of God, and put him in mind of his Covenant, to procure actual Grace, and
Peace, and Adoption for thee? And is it a pleasure to thee, as well as thy
admiration, to be always musing, and searching what such an Abyss of grace
and goodness should mean? And in the midst of thy musings was it, that thy
affections first took this holy fire, and were even surprised into love? Romans
8.34. Phil. 3.7, 8.
Is it by his Mediation that thou find thy expectations from God, and thy
delight in him supported? And do thou rejoice in him, as one whose goodness
thou adorest, and whose favor with God, purchased by his own merit, thou
admirest? And therefore art most willing to trust all thy concernments in his
hands? and in all thy addresses to God come leaning upon the Arms of him,
Cant. 8.5.
as thy Beloved Mediator and Intercessor? why thus to renounce our own
Righteousness, and ^^^^el our hearts warmed into a further estimation of his;
to attribut^^^l our acceptance with God to him: Briefly, to be intensively
willing of Christ, and to look upon him with full satisfaction of spirit in all
his priestly Administrations, This is sincerely to love Christ as our
High Priest. And on the contrary, to undervalue his blood, either, as needless
by presumption, or as worthless by desperation; to be ascribing to our selves,
when we receive any kindness or favor from God; to doat upon our own worth,
and righteousness, as that which is sufficient without either Christ's
Righteousness, Satisfaction or Intercession: Heb. 10.28.
This is interpretatively to reject him from being our High Priest, and to hate
the person of our Lord. Thus try your selves whether ye love Christ in his
Priestly Office; and when you have done with that, take thy soul to his
Prophetical Office, and make a further trial, by bespeaking thy self after the
same manner. Thus, Did thou ever (oh my soul) seriously consider that thou
wast made for an eternal life, and that none could ever chalk thee out the way
thereto, it being only to be learnt in the School of this great Prophet? And
thereupon have thou wholly ceased from listening unto any other, and as a
loving Disciple have thou found pleasure in seeking the Law, (even the word of
thy Salvation) at his mouth? Does thy heart thoroughly savor his Doctrine? and
do thou like the Discipline of his School? Do thou make it thy study to
know, and lay it as a charge upon thy self, to keep the words of this great
Master and Prophet? Ioh. 14.23, 24.
And even now, that he is gone to Heaven, and has left his word in the
Scripture behind him, and has sent his Spirit, and set up under Officers in
his School, and precious Ordinances for thy guidance and direction; do thou
value the Scriptures above all other writings in the world? and witness thy
esteem of them by thy daily perusal, and study of them? do thou bear a
Reverence in thy breast to all Christ's Officers and Institutions? Cant. 5.16.
Psalm. 1.2. Heb. 2.1.
Do thou account the mouth of Christ most sweet? and even delight to hear his
voice in the Scripture; and in every Ordinance? and when thou have heard, do
thou lay up what thou have been taught as the faithful counsel of thy dearest
Teacher, and rejoice therein? More particularly, what is thy carriage toward
his Spirit? do thou hear, when he calls? and art thou tractable to all his
Motions? do thou grieve him, or art thou willing to be instructed and guided
by him? why, thus to cease from leaning to our own understandings; to give up
our selves to Christ, and his Spirit in the Scriptures, and in all the
Ordinances of the Gospel, to be the serious and willing Disciples of Christ;
This is to love Christ as our Prophet in sincerity. That is the second office.
Once more to make th^^ ^al by this mark Complete, and that will respect his
Kingly office. (...) this is as easy, as either of the former; for our loyalty
and voluntary Subjection to Christ, as commanding, and governing, this is love;
And the hearts rebellion against Christ, rejecting his dominion, murmuring
against his Laws, finding fault with his administrations, disturbing his
subjects; and disquieting the peace of his Kingdom, envying him the multitude
of his subjects, and yielding no obedience to his commands; all these are
several branches of enmity against Christ as King, and Sovereign. Put the case
therefore home to thy own soul, if thou would not be mistaken, and say, Does
Christ rule within thee (oh my soul) or does self, and Satan? Art thou glad
with his Sovereignty, or is it the yoke thou can not bear? do the Laws of his
Kingdom bear sway within thee, Romans 6.
or is it the Law of thy Members, and carnal self? when both come in
competition, whose command do thou in the course of thy life most commonly
fulfill? whose Kingdom art thou most delighted in the advancement of? Is it a
pleasure to thee, that thy Lord does reign, and that his Throne is more
universally exalted? or else does thy heart rise against the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom? In whom do thou find thy greatest delight? is it rather in
the company of Rebels, that would pull the Crown from the head of Christ, then
in the humble and obedient subjects of thy Lord? do thou take Christ to be
thy Prince, and Sovereign? and do thou love the peace and glory of his
Kingdom, as becomes an obedient subject of so great a Lord? why this is
intensively to will Christum Regem, or to love him as King. And this is the
third Office, and the fourth Character. If you would make sure work, this is a
Rule which will not deceive you.

5. Character.
If we have a fellowship with Christ in his honor and dishonours, or in his
joys and sorrows, then is our love not feigned unto Christ, but in sincerity.
True-love (if I may be allowed so to speak) mixeth concernments; my meaning is,
that it makes another joys and sorrows to be mine, as well as his; they may
write hatred upon themselves, who are regardless whether it go well or ill,
with Christ's interests in the world. No communion with Christ, no love. Even
the personal reproaches and abuses, which Christ endured here below, though so
many hundred years since, do yet affect them, and they that love him, have a
sympathy with him in them. Luke 24.52. Act. 2.26.
Neither is it his joy alone that he was personally advanced by being raised
again from the dead, and taken up to glory, to sit therein at the right hand of
God, but theirs also: Tell a loyal wife, that her husband is honored, and her
heart will leap at the tidings, that are brought to her. It Is good news to
lovesick souls to hear that Christ is now in Glory, they savor the
advancements of their Lord, according to those words of Christ himself to his
Apostles. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go to the Father, for
my Father is greater than I, Joh. 14.28. They are glad by Faith to see the Sun
of Righteousness after a dark and cloudy morning in his Meridian Altitude. They
dye, Ioh. 20.20.
and are crucified with Christ in his death, Romans 6.3. Gal. 2.19. And they feel
a reviving of themselves in the Resurrection of their Lord; and hence it is
said of them, that they are quickened together with him, Ephesians. 2.5. Ioh.
20.11. compared with Mat. 28.8.
and that they sit together in heavenly places with him, Ephesians. 1.20. We read
of Mary, that she went weeping to the grave of her Lord, but hearing that he
was arose, she came away rejoicing: And no otherwise was it with his
Disciples. Christ does not triumph alone in his Ascension, but all such as love
him, share therein together with him. And as they share with Christ in his
personal joys and troubles; so do they no less, when any of his concernments
in the world, do either prosper, or else are trampled upon and clouded. Psa.
42.10. and 69.9.
It Is as the arrows of death to see either his Laws, Ordinances, Officers or
Subjects trampled upon. The reproaches of the rebellious world reproaching
their Lord fall upon them, and are as so many darts struck into their own
souls. This is that, which successively feeds their joys and sorrows, that it
goes well with the Militant Church here below, or that a cloud of displeasure
and persecution is spread over it.

6. Character.
Where love to Christ is sincere, there Christ is accounted by the soul to be
its Treasure; and there is a longing desire in every such soul of the nearest
communion with him: I put both these together, though there be a very clear
distinction between them, for brevity; it is a truly conjugal love, which can
neither bear with distance, nor brook any Rival. And this is the meaning of the
Spouse in that double expression, calling him the chiefest of ten thousands,
and professing him to be altogether lovely. The soul that loves Christ, may
love other things, Cant. 5.10.16.
and esteem them lovely; but she will say of none, that they are altogether
lovely, but only of her Lord. When one asked Alexander to show him his
Treasure, the report is, that he pointed to his friend Ephestion; the Treasure
of a soul that sincerely loves Christ, is Christ himself [Deus meus est omnia,
or] my God is my all, says the soul, that loves God as his Ultimate end. Hence
is that of David, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and who is there
on Earth, that I desire besides thee? [Christus meus est omnia, or] my Christ
is my all, says the soul, that is upon inquiry how to find acceptance with
God. Whence is that of Paul, Doubtless I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. It Is the proper Motto of a
lovesick soul, None but Christ: The sincerity of a Christians love lies in
giving a pre-eminence to the Redeemer, whom it loves above every thing else.
The soul that loves Christ, values nothing in comparison of him, no not his own
benefits. Meretricius amor est, plus annulum, quam sponsum amare, or] It is a
no^e of a Harlot, to prefer the portion before the person. And that is a no
less true than noble speech of the devout A. Kempis [Nobilis amator non
quiescit in dono, sed in Christo super omne donum; or] The Woe thy and Noble
Lover values not Christ so much by what he brings, as by what he is himself.
The soul that loves Christ, loves Ordinances, because they are the
banqueting house of her Lord, Cant. 2.4.
wherein she is often refreshed by him; she loves the Privileges of the
Gospel, because they are the Purchase of her Lords blood; Cant. 4.1, etc.
She loves her own Graces, because they are the rare Ornaments which Christ
has put upon her to render her beautiful, and fit her for his own embraces;
and yet after all, her language to Christ is, Not Thine, but Thee: She will
not so value them, as to forget him, that gives them; Christ is her Center, and
therefore she rests not, but will lay by, and through all to come to him; she
can scarce forbear a fit of Impatience sometimes to think of that distance that
is still between them. See Cant. 8.14. Make haste my Beloved (says the Spouse
to Christ there) and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
Mountains of Spices; And such another Ejaculation is that, Revel. 22.17, 20.
where the whole Church is brought in crying to Christ, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly: While our hearts dwell below upon the thick Clay, and have no daily
desires to send forth (as Doves from the Ark) for communion with Christ, There
is little sign of sincere love to him.

7. Character,
We may know our Sincerity in love, by the value we put upon our selves, as
well as upon Christ; if our interest in Christ be the rule by which we value
our selves, that will argue true love; when this makes it day in our souls,
that Christ smiles upon us, and on the other side, when this spreads the
darkness of the night over us, that he hides his face from us; then we love
him. David loved God heartily, and therefore when God smiled, he rejoiced,
Psalm. 4.6. Psalm. 30.7.
and when God hid his face, he was as much troubled then, as before delighted;
It Is thus in every relation, where there is sincerity of affection, as the bond
thereof, and a dependence between them, of the one upon the other; It Is thus
between a Prince, and a loyal favorite; between a Husband, and a loving wise;
it is thus between the lovesick soul, and Christ; when she injoyes him, then
none so lightsome in Countenance as she? According to the nature of love, her
affections are hardly concealed; they are even too big for her heart to cover,
and therefore she can scarce with hold her self from a Holy exultation before
every one that meets her. Whereas on the other side if Christ but withdraws, if
she calls, and he gives no answer; if he seems to avoid her Company, and to
despise her familiarity; what then? Oh then her Joy is turned into Gall, and
her Pleasantness into Wormwood; then her Countenance grows dark and sable, and
her thoughts within her are full of horror, dejection, and confusion; she
goes up and down like a person almost distracted, and every place is made to
Echo to her griefs, and mournings; she goes from Ordinance to Ordinance, and
from one Watchman to another, and proclaims to them all the sickness of her
soul, If peradventure she may recover again the sight of her Beloved. All this
and much more with incomparable elegance you may read described in the Song of
Solomon. Thus as the Marigold opens to the Sun in the firmament, so does the
heart of a Sincere Christian to the Sun of Righteousness, Christ in Glory.

8. Character.
Where Love is Sincere, the soul will be often on the wing of Meditation, and
busied in the contemplation of Christ. It Is an old Rule and a true one [ Anima
est ubi amat, non ubi animat, or] The soul dwells as much where it has fixed
it is love, nay more there, than where it has it is most natural operation:
Christ and the believer that loves him, live as if they had but one soul
betwixt them. It Is not the distance between Earth and Heaven that can separate
them; True love will find out Christ where ever he is; when he was upon the
Earth, they that loved him, kept his Company, and now that he is gone to
Heaven, and out of sight, those that love him are frequently sending up their
hearts unto him. And indeed they never think themselves Intelligent in any
thing that is worth the knowing, until they have made their souls much
acquainted, and familiar with their Crucified Savior. 1 Cor. 2.2.

9. Character.
2 Samuel 13.2. 1 King. 21.4. Hest. 5.13.
There will be a Willingness to part with all for him: How many goodly things
do persons of all sorts contemn for some one thing, which they love? Amnon,
Ahab, and Haman, are three great examples of this: Take but one instance, and
it shall be of a Covetous man; why, he disregards all the learned
accomplishments in the World, for a little gain; He thinks himself better,
when he has got that which comes out of the Bowels of the Earth he treads
on, than that which comes from the Mansion house of God, in the Heaven above
him: and therefore, how familiarly, and easily will he part with the one to
choose the other? Act. 20.24.
no bonds of nature or religion, are enough to restrain him; It Is the
resolution of a soul that loves Christ, that nothing shall part them, they are
habitually Martyrs already, and if he put them to it, it is not life it self
that they will account too precious to lay down for the sake of him. All the
waters, and floods of persecution, temptation, Matthew. 10.37. Rev. 12.11.
and affliction, shall not quench their flames of love. Cant. 8.7. Witness
those words of Ignatius [(...) etc. or] let fire, cross, etc. and all the
torments, which by men or beasts can be Inflicted on my body, yea, and add to
them, what all the Devils in hell can do upon it, if it were by solemn sentence
of Excommunication delivered to them, yet would I go through them all, to come
to the bosom of my Lord.

10. Character.
There will be a willingness to stoop to the meanest offices, for the service
of Christ; love (we use to say) stands not with Majesty; it did not do so in
the person of our Savior, when he washed and wiped his disciples feet; John
13.5.6.14.
and those that love him will not think it much to conform to his example; they
will not think they can ever stoop too low for the sake of him. John 21.15.

11. Character.
If it sticks not barely in the person of Christ, but reaches to all, that
have an union with him; if it be to Christ mystical, as well as personal;
Cant. 1.7.
if you love their persons, their graces, their fellowship, etc. Tell me
(says the Spouse) where thou causest thy flocks to rest at Noon, She delights
to be led forth with them into the green Pastures of his ordinances, and to
feed together with them; If she has any thing, it is all theirs, Act. 2.44.45.
who have an equal interest in Christ with her self, she will make use of her
graces, substance, and all, that fellow members may be refreshed. It makes them
of Catholic spirits. The Apostle is peremptory, and brandeth them all as
liars, that pretend to the one of these without the other. See 1 John 4.19. and
5.1. and John 13.34.35.

12. Character.
We may know it by its Concomitants. Sincere love goes not but in the company
of every other grace; It either presupposes, or strongly implies and
infers the whole duty of a Christian. [ Diligere Christum (says Aquinas)
est Christo in omnibus se subjicere, Joh. 14.15.
and regulam Praeceptorum ejus in omnibus sequi, or] to love Christ, is to
fulfill the whole Law of Christ; it is a most comprehensive grace; it is the
abstract of the New Creature, the whole Image of God in one word; it is the
substance of the Divine Workmanship upon the soul. They are but Ciphers, and
signify nothing in Christianity, who are without it. Briefly, to love Christ,
it is in some measure to partake of every grace, and to be a Christian
altogether.

These are the Characters, some I have omitted, and in others I have been
brief, because I would reserve a little room for the second Case: Give me
leave but briefly to suggest a few things for satisfaction of one doubt, and I
shall presently come to that. Will some say, If this be love in sincerity, who
then loves him aright? It is no less dangerous to draw out the description of a
grace, so as none can find it, than to leave it so, as none may suspect the
want or absence thereof in themselves; and upon that Rock, they will tell me I
have splitted in the decision of this Case, there being hardly any one that can
go from Character to Character, and say after a thorough search, Now I know
that I am a lover of Christ in sincerity: For answer to which scruple, I shall
barely suggest a few Considerations.

1. It is most certain, and notorious, that there is much counterfeit love
abroad; and it was not the least part of my design to unmask it. Characters
serve as well to convince the presumptuous, as to establish the sincere and
upright. There is much in the world, that looks like love, that is not; such
are those Vagous affections, that are to a Christ in general, and not to him,
as King, Priest, and Prophet; And those counterfeit affections, which are to
Christ upon the sole Arguments of Education, Custom, which are as truly in a
Turk to his Mahomet, and serve as well to justify the Jew in his blasphemy
against Christ, as the Christian in his pretended love of him; for love to
Christ, say Divines, is not so much to be measured by the degree, and fervor,
as by the grounds and motives; And also that barren love, which works up the
soul to no measure of obedience unto him; And lastly, that which allows Christ
but the worlds leavings in our hearts, every thing being constantly, preferred
before him: And what a vast number of persons go no further than these?

2. Many persons are truly gracious, who yet know not, whether they have any
grace or not: It requires more skill to search out the nature of a grace, and
to find it in our selves, than barely to exercise it; The former are works of
much judgment, and require a deep acquaintance with our own hearts; whereas to
the latter, it is enough, if a person be but of an ordinary understanding, and
an honest heart. Besides Graces have their degrees, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5
like the waters of the Sanctuary, and where grace is very shallow and little,
it is exceeding difficult to know that there is any at all: And such persons
should do well, who are so weak, rather to spend t^me in the exercise of grace,
than in trying whether they have grace or no, for commonly it is but labor in
vain.

3. There are no souls in whom this grace is really planted, but they have all
these Characters drawn upon their hearts to know it by, more or less; I do not
say, they can find them in themselves, and know they have them, but only that
they have them. And of this I need give no further evidence, than what you will
easily find your selves, if you will but study the nature of love to Christ,
by the Rule of it laid down in the fifth Proposition premised, and by the third
and fourth Characters; for I am well assured that Christ cannot be loved, as
therein described, unless all these particulars mentioned, be either antecedent
thereto, or connexed with it.

2. Case.
And so I come to the second Case, viz. How we may get our love to him kindled
and inflamed? And I shall proceed in the Resolution of this by these four steps.

1. I will discover the danger of being without this grace.

2. I will add some moving Considerations to provoke all that love their souls,
to look after it.

3. I will give Directions to them that have it not, how to get it.

4. I will add a few more Directions for them that have it, how it may be
increased and inflamed?

I begin with the first, which I will dispatch by these two steps. 1. By
discovering the Hainousness of Sin. 2. The Terror of the Punishment due
thereto.

Now that you may understand the first, besides what has been said in the
forementioned Tract, proving it to be a sin against the Fathers love and
wisdom; the whole work of the Son, and the special economy of the Holy Ghost;
I add first it is a sin utterly subverting the whole design of the Gospel,
casting a scorn upon the grace of all the three persons, and not so much as
acknowledging what was done by them, as worthy the least acceptance; it writes
vanity upon all the promises, and is a frustration to the design of Christ in
that Noble Dispensation, there being nothing that he did more aim at, than to
testify his own, John 3.17. 1 John 1.3.
and his Fathers love to us, and to recover from us our love to them again.

2. It is interpretatively a confederacy with Satan against God and Christ; The
proper and grand wickedness of the Devil, Mat. 6.24. Act. 13.10.
being his opposition to the design of God in glorifying himself by the
salvation of mankind through Christ, which yet so far, as we are haters of
Christ, Heb. 10.28.
we are in our measure guilty of, as well as he.

3. It is a complicated sin; many sins in one. Such as are foul ingratitude;
Rebellion, it being the casting of the Sovereignty of a Rightful Lord: Cruelty
to Christ and as it were, a kicking him upon the bowels, a Christicidium; and
to our selves, Prove. 8.36. the tearing out our own bowels, with our own hands,
spiritual uncleanness and adultery, James 4.4.
it being a treacherous revolting from Christ after profession of Marriage to
him.

4. It is a sin which opens the door to all wickedness, Resistance of the
Spirit, contempt of the Gospel, and them that bring it, Joh. 15.18, 19.
sleighting of Ordinances, Treason against Christ as King, and implacable
bitterness and enmity against his subjects, and children.

5. It is an Irration^l sin, Cant. 1.13, 14.5.9. ad 16.
or such for which there cannot be the least Apology; because Christ was lovely
in himself, did much to engage our hearts to him, earnestly entreated us to
place our affections upon him, sending his messengers to woo us, bestowing
gifts upon us, like a King, 1 Pet. 1.4.
to oblige us, and making almost incredible offers of much more that he would
do for us, yea, finally, threatening us even with Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor.
16.22. If we withold our hearts from him; And can such a sin after all this
be extenuated?

6. It is a sin brought forth, and nursed by the foulest abominations, 1 Cor.
2.8. Ioh. 5.43.44, 47.
such as spiritual darkness, and ignorance, Notorious Infidelity, as to the
doctrine of the Gospel, Horrible Pride, Self-righteousnesse, Idolatrous and
carnal Self-love.

7. It is a sin against all our Covenants and Engagements, specially our
Baptismal bond, wherein we did solemnly promise Christ our hearts, 2 Cor. 11.2.
and that in opposition to all others; the bond of Christian Ingenuity,
Self-love, and proper Interest, Profession and Relation, as we bear his Name
in the world.

8. And lastly, It is a sin utterly inconsistent with the presence of any one
grace in the soul; it being impossible, that any thing should prosper, where
this weed has once settled and rooted it self; yo^ may as well expect to find
branches without a Root, as the graces of the Spirit without love: Thus very
briefly you have an account of the danger of being without love to Christ, from
the nature of the sin.

2. I argue it from the Terror of the Punishment: And certainly the Just God
has proportioned the evil of this, to the quality of that. Study well these
few places of Scripture, Joh. 3.19. Mat. 21.41. Heb. 2.3. and 10.28, 29. and
12.25. Rev. 2. and 3. throughout. Oh the terrors of the Lord, that will one
day be heaped upon the haters of his Son! See Rev. 6.16. But we need not look
any further for this matter, than into the awakened conscience of a Rebel
against Christ in a fit of desperation: what Scorpion-lashes does such a man's
conscience give him? Oh the heat of this burning Caldron! with what rage and
fury does it break forth on every side, until the soul is even become a Hell to
it self! And would thou not love Christ (will enraged conscience then say)
so lovely in himself, and so full of love to thee? Could thou see him
sighing, bleeding, sweating, dying for thy sake, and yet not love him? Could
thou spurn at such bowels, and contemn such prodigious mercy? and that when
this love would have opened to thee, the door of glory? how great? how infinite
glory? and when the rejecting of it would infallibly plunge thy soul into
misery? how dreadful, how intolerable? was ever madness like thine, oh my
soul, will conscience say? certainly Hell is too easy a punishment for such a
Serpent, such an Incarnate Devil as thou art; well may God rejoice to be
avenged on such a wretch as thee, and make thee to drink up the very dreggs of
his Indignation; while others that dwell in God, shall dwell in love, oh how
will God be nothing else, but fury, and wrath, and vengeance to thee? Thou
shall one day (and that day such as never shall have an end) hear Justice call
upon Omnipotency still to add more flame to thy torment? Thus conscience will
look backward, and forward, and even wreak it self with the most dismal flaming
language, that it can find out, upon the haters of Christ; And is not that a
dreadful sin, which shall thus set a man against himself? and put a sword into
the hand of cruel conscience to cleave the soul in pieces? And is not that a
dreadful punishment, when a man shall become his own Accuser, Judge, and
Executioner? When conscience shall burn so hot within a man, that he shall be
a terror to himself, and an eternal amazement? And yet alas what is all this
to the immediate impressions of the wrath of God upon the soul? when he that
has said Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, Heb. 20.30.
shall grasp the soul in his dreadful hand: which might be farther Improved,
and be demonstrated to be Incomparably the sorest part of the punishment; but I
come to the second particular, which was to lay down some moving
Considerations, to provoke such as love themselves, to love Christ; and besides
the particulars last mentioned,

Consider 1. Who it is that I plead for this day: Sirs I do not call you to
dote upon thick clay, filth, and vanity: I do not plead to gain your hearts to
one that is not worthy, or has not deserved that you should place your
affections upon him; if you can make either of these manifest, hate him and
spare not; but I plead for one who is 1. glorious, and excellent, if you doubt
it read his Character, Cant. 5.9. What say thou now, is he not Altogether
lovely? is there any blemish to be found in him? and if thou mistrustest the
Judgment of the Church, sure thou can not doubt of Gods; Hear his sentence,
Matthew. 3.17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. He knew of
whom he spoke, for he was his Son; and he does not say, he was pleased with
him only, but well-pleased, i. e. delighted, ( See Prove. 8.30.) and satisfied.
And was he worthy of Gods love, and do thou doubt, whether he have deserved
thine? 2. Consider, he is one that died for thee; first to purchase thy love,
and since is gone to Heaven, where yet he does not Cease to call upon thee,
and Invite thee to bestow thy heart upon him; were he excellent, but proud, it
would be little to thy advantage; But he stoops, and wooes, and entreats
thee. Isa. 55.1. Luke 15.20. Act. 9.4. John 5.21.26.
It Is a day of the Gladness of his heart when he prevails but with one soul
to close with him: And all the rage of his persecutors did not grieve him more,
than you will if you stand it out against him. 3. Consider, he is one that
has the power of thy life and death in his own hands; and this is one part of
his Covenant, upon which thy life or death depends; as offered in the promise,
so he waits, but as love is the Condition of it, so if thou hearkenest not,
thou loosest thy share therein, and what thou choosest be it life, or death,
thou shall Certainly have.

2. Consider, what it is I plead for; why, all that I ask is love, and will
you deny Christ that? I call thee to think well of Christ, to desire him, to
take Complacency in him, to breath after union and eternal communion with him;
And which of these? do thou think too much for such an object? or where can
thou place them, more fitly than upon him? what is he worthy of, if not of
this? did ever death content it self with such a recompense? was ever any debt
easier paid? any service so easily performed, as this, only to love? has God
made Christ a King, Priest and Prophet, and is that all which thou must do, to
partake of his love in him, to love him in those relations, and will thou stick
at this? Have thou any other way to the bosom of God but by him? and yet
rather than thou will come thither by love, will thou damn thy soul by hating
Christ? is not the enjoyment of God, worth the labor of love? 1 These. 1.3.
shall all go, rather than be saved by love to thy Redeemer?

3. Consider what he will do for thee, if thou art a sincere lover of him; He
comes not to Court thee, and flatter thee to thy loss, but his reward is great,
Rev. 22.12.
and he brings it with him. Give me leave to tell thee some particulars
thereof; If thou will love him, he will betroth thee to himself in dearest
love; He will be thy Bridegroom, and thou shall be his Bride; Hos. 2.19, 20.
Ephesians. 5.32. Zech 3 4. Genesis 20.16. Rev. ^1.9. Isa. 62.5.
It Is not all thy filthy garments, Rags, or Poverty that shall hinder, but
he will be to thee the Covering of thine eyes: And a gladness of heart shall
thoa be unto him. Zeph. 3.17. Thou shall be the Joy of Christ himself, for as
the Bridegroom rejoy^eth over the Bride, so shall the Lord thy God rejoice over
thee. 2ly. He will dwell with thee. John 14.23, 24. Husband and Wife dwell
together, and so does the betrothed soul and Christ. John 17.23.
I in them, and they in me, says Christ; Now this is a privilege, which
carries many in the womb of it, Rev. 3.20.
such are these: 1. Intimacy and daily familiarity, Christ and Christians, Ephesians.
5.23.
take their meals together; there is no Communion so near, as that which is
between them. One spirit 1 Cor. 6.17. 2. Maintenance, and provision. 1 Timothy 5.8.
He is worse than an Infidel, that provides not for his own house. Heb. 13.5.
All that live under the same roof with Christ, have their daily bread provided
for them at his charges; and he has said, that he will never leave them. 3.
Protection, every man's house is his Castle, they are under safe Covert that
dwell with Christ. 4. Counsel, guidance, and direction: This great Husband
dwells with all his family according to knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7.
for he teaches them all his Secrets, and shows them his Covenant. Psalm.
25.14.
3ly. He will Interest thee in all his own Riches, purchases, possessions and
dignities; together with his person, he offers Heaven and Earth for a Dowry.
Romans 8.17.
All things are his by purchase, and thou shall be a Copartner or Coheir with
him, when thou art espoused to him. 4ly. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
He will manifest the highest Indulgence, and Tenderness toward thee. Not all
thy cross walkings (if through temptations it shall so fall out) shall put him
upon any more then a moment any departure from thee; Isa. 54.7, 8.
for he has resolved that his faithfulness toward thee shall never fail,
Isa. 89.33.
and therefore when thou seem almost lost, and ready to despond, he will
return to thee again, and the more time he has lost by absence, the more full
will his heart be of ravishing love and affections to thee. 5ly. He will Turn
all to thy good; neither thy sins, Cant. 6.3.
though many and great, nor thy miseries, though overwhelming and discouraging,
no nor lastly shall death it self, Romans 8.28, 38.
be ever able to make a divorce between thee and him; but serve as a passage
to thee when thy work is done into the Bridechamber of thy Lord; and now tell
me, Phil. 1.21.
have not thou Reason to love him?

4. Consider but thy case while this Virgin affection to thy Savior is wanting.

1. Thou multipliest thy whoredoms, and thy abominations continually, for what
are thy Intensive willings of other things, but so many acts of spiritual
adultery, and base prostitutions of thy soul to thy dishonor, and
disadvantage, while other things usurp the room of Christ?

2. Thou art a treacherous Hypocrite and deceiver, forasmuch as thou pretendest
to the eye of the world to be Christ's, and yet art nothing less than his.

3. You lay a bar in against your selves, and the acceptance of all your
duties; when faith works by love, then is obedience illustrious, and meet for a
gracious acceptaotin; that obedience which owes no part of it self to love, is
worth little, and brings in no more, Gal. 5.6.
then it is worth.

4. You make bonds for your selves in death, Job 27.6
and lay up terrible repr^oches in the Consciences against the day of Judgment.

5. You make your damnation necessary; there being no Congruity to any of the
Divine Attributes, much less to the offices of Christ, that that man should
ever be saved, who never had any sincere affection to him. These are some of
the Considerations, which may be of use to them, that have no spark of love
yet kindled in their hearts: There are a few of the other kind, which may
provoke to get this love Inflamed? where it is, such are these,

Consider 1. The love of Christ to thee was a growing, Increasing love; I do
not mean, in respect of the habit, but in the outward demonstration thereof.
The nearer he was to his death, the more exuberant in love, and when he rose
again his heart did overflow with tender indulgence, as appears by the meltings
of his bowels toward Mary, and over Peter; and much more may we believe him
now to be full of them, now that he is at the Right hand of God.

2. There is more lovelyness in Christ, than ever thou can find out or
fathom; when we have let out our affections to the utmost, there will still
be more than we can find affection for; our love to eternity will have
something of admiration mixed with it.

3. It Is all you can return to him; it is all he looks for at our hands; that
which lies in love, and which flows from it, is the whole, that is required to
complete Christianity.

4. The more you love him, the more lovely you are unto him. Then has Christ
the highest complacency in us, when our hearts are under the greatest Raptures
of love to him.

Beatus est, qui intelligit quid sit amare Jesum, and contemnere scipsum
propter Jesum. A Kempis. de imitatione Christi. l. 2. c. 7.
5. It is the honor of a man to love Christ superlatively. It is the sweetest
part of our lives, and that which Christ values us more by, than by any thing
else: It Is Heaven on Earth.

6. According to the measure of your love, so will all the rest of your
services and graces be, i. e. either more or less, better or worse. Love is
like the Master wheel in an Engine, making the whole soul to move faster or
slower. These are the considerations of the last kind; will some say? oh, but
what shall we do to get this blessed affection into our souls? which was the
third thing proposed: And in order thereto, I offer these Directions.

1. Direction.
Be well acquainted with the nature of this great duty. The great mistake of
the world lies in this; That is thought to be love, which is not, and thence
men and women grow bold and confident, and value themselves more than they
ought. I have given in my best assistance, so far as the nature of the first
case would permit to prevent mistakes in this matter before; and therefore I
will not do it over again. Only remember, if you would not miscarry, that it is
not a Naked Christ, but a Christ advanced by incomparable Personal
Excellencies, and clothed with his offices of King, and Priest, and Prophet,
that is the Christ to be loved, and you cannot well miscarry. This is that
damning mistake of the world, they love Christ, but not as dignified by God
with any of his offices.

2. Direction.
Be much in the study of your selves, what you were originally, and what you
are since become through your own miscarriage, wilfulness and folly: Take your
souls to the glass of the Law, and go from one precept to another, and when you
have done there, go to the Gospel; And be sure you do not deal slightly, but
understand thoroughly how much you have offended; And when you have well studied
the number and quality of your sins, then consider the justice and holiness of
the Eternal God, which you shall understand by the same Law and Gospel, where
they speak the Divine Terror against offending-sinners; but more specially
shall ye know is by going to the Cross of Christ, and wisely and seriously
considering the horror of that punishment, which Christ there endured; for we
never know as we ought the evil of sin, and our misery thereby, until we know
what he endured to make an Expiation for it. Do this, and do it faithfully:
They that never knew themselves, they are most certainly without love to
Christ: And it is enough to prove it, because unless this foundation be first
laid, they can see no sufficient reason for it.

3. Direction.
Get a true Conviction concerning thy own ultimate end and happiness, Where it
lies? viz. not in the objects of sense, but in the Beatifical vision of God;
possess thy soul by Scripture light, Mat. 16.26.
of the grand importance of securing thy Interest therein; while you think your
happiness lies any where else than in God, it will be irrational to love
Christ, because his purpose and design is to take our hearts from the pursuit
of all but God: And until you know God to be your happiness, you will never
understand the best reasons (that I may not say, the only) that you have to
love him. That man loves Christ best, that most fully knows God to be his
eternal rest and blessedness, and loves him as such.

4. Direction.
Get a Gospel-knowledge of Christ; both what he was originally, and what he
has stooped and humbled himself to be for thy sake; why he came into the
world, how he lived and dyed, and what was the Covenant between the Father and
him? how he is exalted and honored by God? and what great things are promised
both by Father and Son to all that in Christ sincerely draw nigh to God. Oh the
sweet gales of affection, which by spiritual Meditation upon Christ will begin
to blow within us: We cannot muse upon Christ's dyi^g, and rising again, and
inviting us to love him, but the fire will burn: A considering Faith in Christ
will naturally bud and blossom into love.

5. Direction.
Believe the reality of his love to the^; I mean, that he did all that ever
he did for thee out of a hearty and real affection to thee; and that he still
desires to have the match made up betwixt thy soul and himself: This fond
prejudice, whereby souls put discouragements upon themselves, is that which
spoils many a match: Do not weaken thy soul by making difficulties where there
are none; if thou hear Christ inviting, stir up thy self (oh thou convinced
soul) as if thou heardest him even calling to thee by Name; Believe it, that
Christ is never better pleased, than when he is loved, and that he came no
less to procure thy love, than to testify his own. The way to love Christ in
good earnest, is to believe that he is so in his offers of grace to us.

6. Direction.
Understand the world thoroughly, and be jealous of thy own heart therein:
Remember that of the Apostle (who knew what it was to love Christ, as well as
any man ever did) 1 John 2.15. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him. We may well enough add, Nor the love of the Son: We may
offer to our Lord [ cor fractum or] a broken heart, but we must not presume to
desire him to accept our [ cor divisum, or] divided heart: Remember that Christ
and the World are two, contrary each to other, and the single stream of love
cannot run two contrary ways at once. If our hearts be not crucified to the
world, the love of Christ will never live with in us.

7. Direction.
Be much in attendance on those means or Ordinances, wherein Christ is
evidently set forth, and by his Spitit wooing souls to love him. If Faith comes
by hearing, so no less certainly does love. Christ most commonly honors his
own Ordinances, and Officers, in making up the match between himself and souls;
so he did Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2.

8. Direction.
Go to God and Christ for love: When you have gotten your hearts well warmed
with the use of all the forementioned means, then go to God and Christ, and
turn thy Meditations into Petitions. Plead hard, and heartily all those moving
Considerations which were set down to usher in these Directions. God delights
to honor prayer in this great work of his, in drawing souls to Christ: No
Prayer, no Faith: And it is as true; No Prayer, no Love, no Marriage to Christ.

I have done with the Directions of the first kind; and have therein almost
prevented my self from going any further; it being a Rule in the spiritual, as
well as the natural growth, that we are nourished by the very same, that gave
us our first beings. If we know by what means we came by our love at first,
and have but appetites whetted on to a further growth, we need little more.
And therefore having first persuaded you carefully to continue to practice over
the forementioned Directions. I only add

1. Direction. Consider much your own Experiences, and the great advantages you
have made by this grace: I need not tell you what they are, because ye know
them well enough already; and the sense of past advantage will best quicken to
future diligence; which is the second.

2. Direction. Be constant in the exercise of that love ye have: The best way
to strengthen any habit, is to be often repeating its Acts. We cannot do any
thing better to increase love, than to be often acting love.

3. Direction. Get Faith more rooted, and that will make your love to be more
inflamed. If you would have fruitful branches, you must keep the Root of the
Tree fat; and if you would have any Grace to thrive, you must be sure to
strengthen Faith.

4. Direction. Take heed you be not willingly guilty of any known wickedness
against Christ; for this will cause Christ to withdraw; it will occasion in thy
heart a jealousy, and that will be an abatement of thy love: Be
conscientiously diligent in all known duties.

5. Direction. Get thy heart daily more thoroughly crucified to the world; and
better acquainted with Heaven, and the love of God. The more you love God, the
more you will, and must love Christ.

6. Direction. Be much in the Communion of Saints, and then especially when
together with them thou may look on, and admire the love of thy crucified
Savior in the Lords Supper. They that are most where Christ is to be enjoyed,
love him best; And these are briefly the heads of Directions in answer to each
of these Inquires; They might have been more largely insisted on, and pressed,
but this defect must be supplied by your selves.

Remember again, and with that I will conclude, that it is not the knowledge of
these Directions, that will advantage you, but the serious and diligent
practice of them; And so Grace be with all them, that in the diligent use of
these means get and inflame their love to the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Wherein lies that exact Righteousness, which is required between man and man.
MATTHEW. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever you would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.


THese words being brought in by way of Inference from something said before,
we must look back a little to find out the relation of them to the former
verses. At the 7th. verse. Christ commands to ask of God those things which we
want, to encourage us to ask, he promises we shall receive, to induce us to
believe this promise, he puts a temporal case; Our earthly Fathers which are
evil, give us good things when we ask them, how much more easily may we
believe this of a good God, of infinite goodness. Now as we desire God should
give us those things we ask, so we should do to others, and not only so, but
universally in all other things, what we would that men should do to us, that
we should do to others. That men should do unto you; though the persons be
expressed, yet we may take it impersonally, by an usual Hebraism, as if it had
been said, whatever you would should be done unto you, leaving the person to
be supplied in the largest sense; thus, what ever you would should be done
unto you by God or men. This is the Law and the Prophets, i. e. This is the sum
of the Old Testament, so far as concerns our duty to our neighbor.

The Observation which arises from the words is this.

The great rule of equity in all our dealings with men, is this, to do as we
would be done unto; This Rule has been otherwise expressed, but not more
emphatically in any other form of words than this here in the Text; Matthew.
22.39. Love thy Neighbor as thy self; this requires that we should bear the
same affection to our Neighbor which we would have him bear to us, but the
Rule in the Text expressly requires that we should do the same offices to
others, which we would have them do to us. Severus the Emperor (as the
Historian tells us, Lampridius.
) did learn this rule of Christians, and did much reverence Christ, and
Christianity for it, but he expressed it negatively, Quod tibi non vis, alteri
ne feceris; Now this forbids us to do injuries to others, but does not so
expressly command us to do kindenesses and courtesies.

In speaking to this Rule, I shall give you.

1. The Explication of it.

2. The Grounds of it.

3. The Instances wherein we ought, principally to practice it.

1. For Explication, the meaning of it is this; Put thy self into the Case and
circumstances of every man, with whom thou have to do, that is, suppose thou
were he and as he is, and he were thy self and as thou art; that then which
thou wo^ldest desire he should do to thee, that do thou to him; and that which
thou would be unwilling he should do to thee, do not thou do to him. Now
this is an exact rule, for we are very curious in determining our own
privileges, and what duty others owe to us; just so much as we take to our
selves, we must allow to others; what we expect from others when we are in
such circumstances, we must do the same to them in the like. And this is a
plain and easy rule, many men cannot tell, what is Law or Justice, or right in
such a Case, many cannot deduce the Laws of nature one from another, but there
is no man, but can tell what it is that he would have another man do to him;
every man can take his own actions, and put them into the other scale, and
suppose, if this that I do now to another, were to be done to me, should I
like it, should I be pleased, and contented with it; And thus by changing the
scales, his own self-love, and self-interest, and other passions, will add
nothing to the weight, for that self-interest which makes a man covetous, and
inclines him to wrong another man for his own advantage, makes him likewise
(when the scales are changed) unwilling that another man should wrong him; that
self-conceit which makes a man proud, and apt to scorn, and despise others,
makes him unwilling that another should contemn him.

I question not but by this time, you understand the meaning of the rule; but
we are not yet past all difficulties about it; Three things are to be done,
before this rule will be of use to us.

1. We must make it appear that it is reasonable.

2. Make it certain, for till it be certain it cannot be a rule.

3. Make it practicable.

1. We must make it appear to be reasonable; The difficulty about the
reasonableness of it is this; according to this rule I shall be obliged to do
that many times, which is sinful, and to omit that which is a necessary duty; I
will give two or three instances; Saul would have had his Armor-bearer, to have
killed him, might he therefore have killed his Armor-bearer if he had been
willing, and had desired it? I may not be an instrument, or furtherer of
another man's sin, though I were so wicked as to desire that another would be
so to me; If I were a Child, I would not have my Father correct me; or a
malefactor, I would not have the Magistrate cut me off; must there therefore
be no correction, or punishment? Now because of these, and the like instances
which may be given, the rule is necessarily to be understood of things that
may be done, or omitted, i. e. which are not unlawful or unreasonable; Saul
might not kill his Armor-bearer, I may not further another man's sin, in the
cases propounded, because these things may not be done, they are Morally
impossible, that is, unlawful; A Parent or a Magistrate, may not wholly omit
Correction or Punishment, because such omission would tend to the ruin of good
manners and of humane Society.

2. We must make the rule Certain; The difficulty about the certainty of it,
is this; everlasting disputes will arise about what is lawful, and reasonable,
and unlawful, and unreasonable; Now we must reduce it, to a certainty thus;
what ever I would that another should do to me, that I should do to him, unless
the thing be plainly, and evidently unlawful or unreasonable; and this cuts
off all disputes, for though there may be perpetual disputes about what is
lawful and reasonable, or the contrary, yet there can be no dispute about the
unlawfulness and unreasonableness of those things which are plainly and
evidently so, for that which is plain and evident, is out of all dispute; To
confirm this let us consider another Text. Phil. 4.8. Where the Apostle exhorts
Christians to follow whatever things are true, and honest, and just, and pure,
and as a discovery of what things are such; he adds what ever things are
lovely, of good report, and praise worthy; that is, what ever things are
amiable well spoken of, and praised by wise and good men (who are the only
competent Judges of these things) if they be not plainly contrary to truth or
honesty, or justice, or purity, follow these thing; and if this be not the
meaning, those words lovely, of good report, praise worthy are superfluous, and
do not at all direct our conversation, which certainly the Apostle intended to
do by them.

3. We must make it practicable; There are two things which make the practice
of it difficult.

1. A seeming contradiction in the rule.

2. Partiality in judging of the circumstances of other men's conditions and our
own.

1. A seeming Contradiction in the rule; which you will see in these instances;
if I desire a thing, I would not have another stand in competition with me for
it, if another desire a thing, I would not have him think much, that I stand in
competition with him; if I be indebted to another, I would not have him arrest
me; if another be indebted to me, I would not have him think much that I
arrest him; when we sell we care not how dear, when we buy we care not how
cheap; now if this were a real contradiction in the rule, it were impossible it
should be put in practice, but it is only a contradiction in our wills, which
must thus be reconciled to the rule.

1. We must consider which of these wills, is most reasonable, and the greater
reason and equity must carry it, and that which is plainly unreasonable, in
comparison of the other, is not to be regarded; If we consider the two first
instances, this is most reasonable that where men have an equal right, they
should be allowed an equal liberty to use that right; another man has as much
right to stand in competition with me for any thing, as I to stand in
competition with him, and to arrest me in case of debt as I to arrest him, and
it is plainly unreasonable that I should use this right and another be
debarred from it.

2. If both these Contradictory wills, be plainly unreasonable as in the third
instance of buying and selling, they must be accommodated by finding out such
a medium as is equally and mutually good for all buyers and sellers, that is,
such a proportion of gain may be taken and must be allowed to be taken, as
will be equally and mutually good for all buyers and sellers.

2. Another difficulty in the practice of this rule, arises from men's
partiality in judgeing of the circumstances of other men's conditions and their
own; we are apt to lessen the circumstances of another man's condition, and to
overvalue our own; another man's concernments seem less to us than they are,
and our own greater than they are. Now this difficulty will most eminently
appear in Cases of passion, and interest, and those subordinate relations,
which are at the greatest distance; another man provokes me, I revenge my self
on him; one asks me, would you be contented to be thus dealt withal; I am
ready to answer, yea, if I should so provoke another; I aggravate the fault of
his provocation, and lessen that of my own revenge, here is passion. I desire a
courtesy of a man which he cannot conveniently do for me, he denies me, I
think much at him, because I judge the courtesy less, and his obligation to do
it greater, than indeed it is; here is interest; I think if I were a Father, I
should not carry my self so severely toward my Children; if I were a Master, I
should give more liberty to servants, and use them with a greater familiarity;
if I were a Minister, I should not gall the consciences of people by so free
and open a reproof of sin; if I were a Magistrate, I should make other laws, or
punish some crimes more or less, severely: Now if men frequently thus
mis-judge, how shall this rule be put in practice?

To remove these difficulties, as much as may be, and to make the practice of
this Rule more easy; observe these rules,

1. Labor to understand truly every man's condition, so far as you have
opportunity; this is easily said, but how shall we come to do it? Thus, when
you are in any condition, observe diligently the motions of your own mind, and
how your affections then work, and what apprehensions, you then have of things,
and what it is that in such a condition you desire, and expect from others; and
labor to remember this when you are out of that condition, and to retain the
fense which you then had of things.

2. In cases wherein you are unexperienced, and which you cannot reasonably be
presumed to understand, partly because of your distance from that condition,
partly because of the opposition of your own interest; and partly because of
the mists, and clouds, of your own passion; trust the concurrent experience of
others, that are in that condition; and think that you ought not to do that to
another, which the generality of mankind count grievous, and that fit to be
done, which the most, and wisest in such a condition and relation, do usually
expect. If men when they are under, and lie at the mercy of others, generally
desire that clemency, and moderation should be used toward them, how just
soever thou may think thy severity is, and that thou would be contented,
that another should deal so with thee, yet do not trust thy present
apprehensions of things, but believe that thou will have the same sense of
things, when they lie heavy upon thee, with the rest of mankind, and when thou
art in their circumstances, thou will desire quarter as they do; In like
manner, that respect and obedience which Parents, and Masters, and Magistrates,
do generally expect (even the best and wisest of them) that do thou pay to
them; and though it may have some appearance of rigor, and injustice, yet
believe that when thou come to be in the same relation, thou will expect the
same things as they do; and that thou do now judge otherwise, proceeds from
thy inexperience, and distance from that condition, or from passion and
opposition of interest.

3. Conclude, that in cases betwixt Superiors and Inferiors, the partiality
is usually on the Inferiors side; and it is reasonable thus to conclude, both
because Inferiors have seldom had experience of the other condition, as
superiors usually have had; a child has not been a Parent, or a servant
ordinarily a Master, or a subject a Magistrate; but all Parents have been
children, and most Masters have been servants, and many Magistrates subjects,
and so they have had experience of both conditions; And likewise because
Inferiors cannot so well see the condition and circumstances of those that are
above them, as those that are above can of those that are below them, they have
the advantage of ground, and better opportunities of knowledge.

4. In judging of your present condition and circumstances, always abate some
thing for the presence of them, and for self-love, and self-interest, and other
passions. He that does not consider how apt every man is unequally to favor
himself, does not know the littleness and narrowness of humane nature. We are
near to our selves, and our own interest is near to us, and we see it in its
full proportions, and with all possible advantages, other men and their
interests are at a distance from us, and seem less to us than they are. Now we
must make abatements for this, according to that experience which we have had
of our own mistakes, which, if we will observe, as we pass from one condition
into another, we may easily be convinced how great many times they are.

2. For the grounds of this. The equity of this Rule stands upon these
foundations.

1. All men are equal in many things, and those the greatest things. Now I
should deal equally with him, whom I acknowledge to be mine equal. Have we
not all one Father, has not one God created us? Mal. 2.10.
Are we not all made of the same materials? Heb. 9.27.
Is it not appointed for all men once to dye, and after death to stand before
the impartial judgment of God? We have all the same notions of right and
wrong, we are all obnoxious to one another, and may be all beneficial one to
another; we all love our selves, and study the advancement of our interest and
happiness. Thus far equal.

2. In most of those things wherein we are unequal, the inequality is not
considerable, so as to be a ground of any unequal dealing with one another. As
to strength of body, whatever the difference be, the inequality is not
considerable, because as to the greatest effects of strength there is an
equality; every man that will venture his own life, may take away another man's,
Dominus est alterius vitae quicunque contemnit suam.
either by open force, or by surprise. As to abilities of mind (which we
usually call parts) there is originally a great equality, especially if that
received Opinion be true, that souls are equal; And as the French Philosopher
Des Carts has ingeniously observed, Dissertat. de Methodo.
there is this notable sign of the equality of men's understandings; Nulla res
(says he) aequabilius inter homines distributa est quam bona men's, etc.
Nothing is more equally divided among men than a good understanding; Men will
acknowledge others to be richer and stronger than themselves, few will
acknowledge others to be wiser, or to have better parts than themselves; every
man thinks himself to have so good a proportion of parts and wisdom, that even
those who are most covetous, and have the most insatiable desires as to other
things, and whom nature could never satisfy in any thing else, Qui velit
ing^nio cedere ra^us erit.
yet would not desire to have more wit than they have, or exchange their parts
with any man. Now there is no better sign of an equal distribution of things
than that every man is contented with his share. Now because all men generally
think thus, it is to be presumed that all are not deceived, but that there is
some real equality, which is the ground of this conceit. A difference indeed
must be granted, but which arises usually from one of these two causes,
either an unequal exercise of our parts, or an unequal temper of body. Now
those who are so happy, as to exercise their understandings more than others,
are very often rather conceited that they are wiser than others, than really
so; for the greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men; those who are
unhappy in the temper of their bodies, are thereby inclined how weak soever
they be, to conceit themselves as wise as others. So that whatever real
inequality there be, conceit levels all again. So that whether men be really
wise, or only think themselves so, it makes no difference as to men's dealing
with one another, for they that think themselves equal, Politic. c. 3.
will not deal but upon equal terms; So that Aristo^les pretty notion, that
wise men are born to govern, and fools to obey, signifies very little in this
case, for there are but few such fools in the world, but would govern if they
can: So that by virtue of wisdom or parts, no man can challenge a privilege,
or prerogative to himself above others, which another will not pretend to, as
well as he.

3. In all those things wherein men are unequal, the inequality is not fixed and
constant, but mutable and by turns. All things that belong to us are either the
endowments of the mind, the accidents of the body, or the circumstances of our
outward estate; Now those that are most unequal in any of these, may be equal,
or the inequality may turn and be as much on the other side. A disease may
ruin the most happy and excellent memory, and make a man forget his own name;
a little knock on any side of the head, may level the highest understanding
with the meanest; beauty, health and strength may be blasted by a disease, or
a thousand other accidents; Riches, and Honor, and Reputation are the most
slippery and brittle things that belong to us, and when these are gone, friends
will fall off, like leaves in Autumn. Now why should I despise another man,
when I may be as silly as he; or bear down another by my strength, when I may
be as weak as he; or insult over another poor and low condition, when a day
may level me with his meanness, and raise him to be as great and rich as I am?

4. Another ground is, the mutual and universal equity and advantage of this.
Rule. Upon those terms I and all men shall be equally dealt with, it will be
well with me, and well with all men. The observation of this Rule would secure
peace to the world, and if it were generally practiced, those few that should
offend against it, would be looked upon as the pests and troublers of humane
society. As by the violation of this Rule, every man becomes a Wolf, and beast
of prey to another, so by the mutual observation of it, every man would be a
God to another; men would be full mutual goodness, and pity, and compassion,
they would be mutual benefactors one to another; All men would be as happy as
it is possible for them to be in this world, and no man could be miserable if
it were in the power of his neighbor to help him.

5. The last ground I shall mention is, the absurdity and inconvenience of the
Contrary.

And this is the most proper way of proving this; for as Aristotle tells us,
First Principles which are evident by their own light, cannot be proved by way
of demonstration, but of conviction; As thus; contradictions cannot be true at
once; This cannot be demonstrated a priori, because there is nothing true
before it to prove it by; therefore whoever shall deny it, must be convinced
of the truth of it, by showing the absurdities of the contrary. In like manner
this being one of the first Principles of humane society, that we should use
no more liberty toward other men, than we would allow them to use toward us;
the best way to convince any man of the reasonableness and equity of it, will
be to show him the inconveniences of the contrary. Wherever this Principle
is violated, men will think themselves injured; where men are injured, they
will be apt to vindicate themselves; hence comes contention and wars, which
loose the bands of humane society; or if a man can pardon an injury, that has
received one, yet he that has done it cannot believe so, but he will fear
revenge, and fear of being oppressed, makes a man seek to anticipate and prevent
another, so that every injury endangers the peace and security of mankind, and
lays the foundation of perpetual mischief; for by the same reason that I
injure any man, I am obliged to ruin him.

He that breaks this Rule, does what he can to break humane society; that is,
to spoil himself of all common protection, and to leave himself to stand upon
his guard against all the world; in which state no man can hope to continue,
that is not wiser and stronger than all the world. (...). Politic. c. 2.
Aristotle tells us, He that desires to be alone, must either be a God, or a
wild beast; that is, he must either be self-sufficient, and stand in need of
nothing, or else be wild and savage, and delight in cruelty, and mischief.

3. The Instances wherein we ought chiefly to practice this Rule, are these.

1. In matters of civil respect and conversation. I must treat every man with
that fair respect which I would have another to show to me. We must
accommodate our selves to men's particular tempers, and nor be froward or
intractable, or tenacious of our own humor, especially when it lies in another
man's way, but we must be apt to recede and give way, that there may be room
for other men's tempers and humors, as well as ours; our humor must not take
up all the world. Those who want this compleasance, are in society (as one
ingeniously compares them) like irregular stones in a building, which are full
of roughness and corners; they take up more room than they fill, till they be
polisht and made even, others cannot lie near them: so men of sharp and
perverse humors are unsociable, till the ruggedness and asperities of their
nature be taken off. We must not carry our selves insolently, or
superciliously, or contemptuously toward others; we must not be contumelious,
not by deed or word, countenance or gesture, declare hatred, or contempt or
others. We must not upbraid one another with any imperfection, or weakness, or
deformity, we must not peremptorily contradict others, we must not use to
talk things displeasing to others, wherein their credit, or relations, or
(especially their Religion) is concerned; Josephus says, this was one of Moses
his Laws (it was a good one whose ever it was) (...). Antiquit. Judaic. lib. 4.
Let no man blaspheme that which other Nations count a God, or make their
Religion. Not but that every man may confute a false Religion, and endeavor by
all fair ways to convince a Jew, or Turk, or Heathen, but we may not reproach
another man's Religion, or provoke any man in ordinary conversation, by
unseasonable and uncivil reflections upon it; for we are with meekness to
convince gainsayers, to reprove men for their sins, but not to upbraid them
with them: We must give no offense to the Jew, or to the Gentile, remembering
always that the wrath of man does not work the Righteousness of God; and that
Michael the Archangel, when he conrended with the Devil, did not bring a
railing accusation against him; he did not revile him, no not in heat of
dispute. And there is great reason why we should thus carry our selves toward
others, because we our selves would not be contemned or despised, we would
not have any man jeer us, or insult over us, or upbraid us, or peevishly
contradict us, or affront us by speaking unhandsomely of us, or of our
Relations, or of our Religion. Now if we would have others to consider us, we
must not neglect them; if we would be taken notice of for some body, we must
not overlook others with contempt; every thing thinks it self considerable,
and there is nothing comes sooner to us, or continues longer with us, than a
sense of our own worth; and we judge ill of humane nature, if we think
another man is not as impatient of rude and uncivil usage as we are; nothing
would be despised, a worm would not be trod upon; nay, men do usually
overvalue themselves, and are apt to think that they are owners of that
singular worth, which may command respect from all men, and that every one that
passes by ought to fall down, and do obeisance to them; they have Joseph's
dream waking, they think all men's sheaves bow to their sheaves; they think
every man takes notice of them, and observes their carriage and actions, when
probably not one of a thousand ever took them into consideration; or ask who
they were; Now we must consider, that it is a hundred to one but there is a
little of this vanity in us also, and that we do usually look for more respect
than is due, therefore it will not be amiss in our respects toward others,
largiri aliquid, to give men something above we think they deserve, and the
rather because civil respect is cheap, and costs us nothing, and we expect
from others full as much as comes to our share; for it is a mistake to think
that we do but righteously esteem our selves, and that we have no more than a
just value of our own worth.

2. In matters of kindness and courtesies, we must be useful to one another, I
would have no man churlish to me, but ready to gratify me, and do me a
kindness. Do I think much to be denied a reasonable favor, and does not
another so too? we would have all men love us, that is, bear such an affection
to us, that when it falls in their way, they should be ready to do us a
courtesy. We would not have courtesies done in a discourteous manner, extorted
by importunity, or upbraided to us afterward. Let us likewise dispense favors
with a liberal hand, and a cheerful countenance, that men may see that they
come from a kind heart, and a real good will.

3. In matters of charity and compassion, if any man be in misery, pity him,
and help him to your power; if any be in necessity and want, contribute to his
relief, without too scrupulous inquiries about him; for we would be thus dealt
with our selves, we would not have others to harden their hearts, or shut up
their bowels of compassion against us. Is any man cast down? do not insult over
him, and trample upon him, do not look upon him with scorn, and rejoice over
him in the day of distress. Res est sacra miser, persons in misery are sacred,
and not to be violated; When you see any man in calamity, think ye hear him say
to you with Job, I also could speak as you do, if your soul were in my soul
stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you, but I
would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should assuage
your grief, Job 16.4, 5.

4. In matter of forbearance; and forgiveness; We stand in need of forbearance
and pardon from others, from God and men; we should be loath God should take
advantage against us upon every provocation, and let fly at us with a
thunderbolt every time we offend him. We would not have men storm and fall into
passion with us upon every slight occasion; I would have great allowances
given to me, I would have my ignorance, and inadvertency, and mistakes, and
present temper, and all occasions and provocations, and every thing considered.
And when I have done amiss, upon acknowledgement of my fault, I would be
forgiven and received to favor. Now if we would be thus dealt with, we must
bear with others; the best men need some grains of allowance; Nullum unquam
ingenium placuit sine venia; no man was ever so perfect, so accomplished, so
unexceptionable, but there was some thing or other in his carriage that needed
pardon; every man has a particular humor, we must give some allowance for
that; every man is subject to mistake, we must allow for that too; and if a man
have committed a fault, we must accept of an ingenuous acknowledgement, and be
ready to grant him peace: There is a shame and disdain in humane nature of too
vile a submission; therefore we must not bring a man too low when we have him
at advantage.

5. In matter of report and representation of other men, and their actions. We
must not take up a rash prejudice or entertain a sinister apprehension of any
upon slight grounds; do not represent any man, his words or actions at a
disadvantage; make the best of every thing; A man's good Name is like a
Looking-glass, nothing is sooner cracked, and every breath can sully it. Handle
every man's reputation with the same tenderness thou would have every man use
toward thine. Do not slander or defame any man, or rejoice to hear other men's
miscarriages ripped open, do not account it an entertainment to censure and
backbite all the World.

6. In matters of trust and fidelity. Where I place a confidence, and repose a
trust, I would not be deceived, I must not deceive another, nor let any man
fall that leans upon me. If a man trust me with the management of his
business, or lodge a secret with me, or put his life into my power, or commit
the care of his estate or children to me after his death. These are all
ingenuous trusts, and must be discharged with the same faithfulness we expect
from others.

7. In matter of duty and obedience; We must give that honor to our Parents,
which we would expect from our Children; and pay that reverence to Masters,
which we would exact from our Servants; We must rise up before the gray head,
and give respect to old Age? For let not us think, but that the change of
Relation, and of Age will have the same effect upon us, which it has upon the
rest of the World: It is a folly to talk, that when we are Old, we shall be
pleased with the insolences of Youth; when we are Masters, we shall not be
at all offended with the contemptuous carriage of our Servants; that it will
not touch our hearts, to have our Children undutiful, and void of respect, to
see the fruit of our body, unnatural and unk^nde to us.

8. In matters of freedom and liberty; Which are not determined by any natural
or positive Law, we must permit as much to others, as we assume to our
selves; and this is a sign of an equal, and temperate person and one that
justly values his own understanding and power. But there is nothing wherein men
usually deal more unequally with one another, than in indifferent opinions and
practices of Religion; I account that an indifferent opinion which good men
differ about, not that such an opinion is indifferent as to truth or error,
but as to salvation or damnation, it is not of necessary belief; By an
indifferent practice in Religion, I mean that which is in its own nature,
neither a duty, nor a sin to do or omit. Where I am left free, I would not have
any m^n to rob me of my liberty, or entrench upon my freedom, and because he
is satisfied, such a thing is lawful, and fit to be done, expect I should do
it, who think it otherwise, or because he is confident such an opinion is
true, be angry with me, because I cannot believe as fast as he. Now if
another do ill, in doing thus to me, I cannot do well in doing so to another.
And do not say that thou art sure thou art in the right, and he that differs
from thee in the wrong, and therefore thou may impose upon him, though he
may not upon thee; has not every man this confidence of his own opinion and
practice, and usually the weakest cause bears up with the greatest confidence;
now if thou would not have another that is confident he is in the right, to
impose upon thee, do not thou impose upon another for all thy confidence. We
should rather be modest, and say every one to our selves; How came I to be so
much wiser then other men, which way came the spirit of the Lord, from so many
Wise and Pious men, to speak unto me? Is it a peculiar privilege granted to
me, that I cannot be mistaken, or are not they most of all mistaken, who
think they cannot mistake? If then I be but like other men, why should I take
so much upon me, as if my understanding were to be a rule, and my
apprehensions a standard to the whole World? As if when another man differs
from me, I did not differ as much from him; why may not another man understand
the thing better than I do, or what crime is it if he understand it not so
well? Were all men's understandings cast in the same Mould? Is it presumption
for any man to know more then I do, or a sin to know less. Job does well
reprove this self-conceit, Job 12.2, 3. His friends would needs bear him down,
and were very angry with him that he was not of their mind, and would not
acknowledge all to be true of himself which they said against him; he takes
them up sharply; No doubt ye are the people, and wisdom shall dye with you,
but I have understanding as well as you, and I am not inferior to you, who
knows not such things as these? Let not any man think that he has engrossed
all the knowledge of the world to himself, but others know the same things
which he does, and many things better than he.

9. In matters of Commerce and Contracts, which arise from thence; Now a
contract is a mutual transferring of right; when I buy any thing of another,
he makes over the right of such a Commodity to me for so much money, or other
valuable thing, the right whereof I make over to him. Now in this kind of
intercourse, we are to be governed by this great Rule. In making of Contracts
we must agere bona fide, deal honestly and truly; in performing of contracts
we must liberare fidem, satisfy the engagement we have made, for thus we
our selves would be dealt withal.

Now if any shall desire to be more particularly satisfied, What that exact
righteousness is, which in matter of Contracts, ought to be observed betwixt
Man and Man? I must confess this is a difficult question, and to be handled
very modestly, by such as acknowledge themselves unacquainted with the affairs
of the World, and the necessities of things, and the particular, and hidden
reasons of some kind of dealings; For he that is ignorant of these, may
easily give rules, which will not comply with the affairs of the world; he
may complain of that which cannot be otherwise, and blame some kind of
dealings which are justifiable, from particular reasons, not obvious to any
man, who is unseen in the way of Trade. Besides there are many Cases fall under
this question which are very nice, but of great consequence, and the greater
caution and tenderness ought to be used in the resolution of them, because
they are matters of constant practice, and the greatest part of mankind are
concerned in them; now it is a dangerous thing; to mistake in those things, in
which many persons are interested, especially if they be things of such a vast
difference, as Good, and Evil, Right, and Wrong are; For if that be determined
to be lawful, which is unlawful, men are led into sin; if that be determined
to be unlawful, which is lawful, men are led into a snare, for if this
determination be to the prejudice of men in their callings, it is an hundred
to one, but common example and private interest, will make many continue in
that practice; and then the mischief is this, though men do that which is
lawful and right, yet they are staggered by the authority and confidence of
him, who has determined it unlawful; and so have some reluctance in their
consciences, in the doing of it; and this by accident becomes a great sin to
them; and when upon a sick bed, or any other occasion, they come to be touched
with the sense of sin, this will be matter of greater horror and affrightment
to them, than a real sin which they committed ignorantly, and were afterward
convinced of. Upon all these considerations, I ought to proceed with great
wariness, in the answering of this question, therefore I shall content my self
with speaking those things which are clear, and evident, though they be but
general, rather then venture out of my depth by descending into particulars,
and such things as are out of my notice.

I shall therefore,

1. Lay down the general Rule.

2. Some propositions which may tend to the explication of it.

3. Some special Rules, for the directing of our Commerce and intercourse.

1. The general Rule is this; That which it is not unreasonable for me to
desire to gain by another, when I am to sell, that I should allow another to
gain by me, when I am to buy; and that which it is not unreasonable, another
should gain by me, when I am to buy, that, and no more I may gain by another,
when I am to sell.

2. The propositions, which I shall lay down, for the further explication of
this Rule, are these,

1. In buying and selling, such a proportion of gain may be taken, and ought
to be allowed, as is mutually and universally best. And this every man is
presumed to desire, because this will be certainly good for every one, whereas
if it be not universally good, it may be bad for any one, if it be not
mutually so, it will be bad for me by turns.

2. That proportion of gain which allows a reasonable compensation for our
time, and pains, and hazard, is universally and mutually best. If the
compensation be unreasonably great, it will be bad for the buyer, if
unreasonably little, it will be bad for the seller, if equal, and reasonable,
it will be good for all.

3. That proportion of gain, which in common intercourse and use of bargaining
among those who understand what they buy and sell, is generally allowed; ought
to be esteemed a reasonable compensation. This is evident, because the common
reason of mankind does best determine what is reasonable. Therefore those who
speak of commutative justice, and place it in the equality of things contracted
for, need explaining, for value is not a thing absolute and certain, but
relative, and mutable; Now to fix the value of things as much as may be, this
Rule is commonly given, Tanti unumquodque valet, quanti vendi potest. Every
thing is worth so much as it may be sold for, which must not be understood too
particularly, as if the present and particular appetite of the Contractor were
to be the Rule, for every thing is not worth so much as any body will give for
it, but so much as in common intercourse among knowing persons it will give.
For this I take for a truth, that in the ordinary plenty of commodities, there
is an ordinary and usual price of them known to the understanding persons of
every Profession; If I be out in this, the matter of gain will be more
uncertain than I thought on.

4. A reasonable compensation does not consist in an indivisible point, but
has a certain latitude which likewise is to be determined by the common
intercourse and practice of mankind. Suppose ten in the hundred be the usual
gain made of such a commodity, eleven the highest, nine the lowest, the
latitude is betwixt nine and eleven.

5. Every man engaged in a way of commerce, is presumed to understand, unless
the contrary be evident. So that keeping within the latitude of a lawful gain,
I may use my skill against another man in driving a bargain. But if his want of
skill be evident (that is) sufficiently known to me, I must use him as I would
do a child, or other unskilful person, that is, fairly.

6. Where the price of things alters (as it often does almost in all things) no
other Rule can be given but the common and market-price. There are some things
which are fixedly certain, as coin; there I have no latitude at all; I may not
put off a piece of money for more than its value, though a person out of
ignorance would take it for more; There are some commodities which in ordinary
plenty being of an ordinary goodness, have an usual price; here I have but
little latitude, viz. that of the market; In the rising and falling of
commodities, I have a greater latitude, but usually in these cases the Market
sets some kind of price; unless I be the sole Master of a commodity, and here
the latitude is the greatest, and my own reason and moderation must limit me:
And if any ask why I make the Market the Rule, seeing this seems to be as if I
should say, let every man get as much as he can, for so men in the Market do;
I answer, The Market is usually more reasonable than the particular appetites
of men; and though every man be apt to get as much as he can, yet men
generally have an appetite to sell, as well as to sell dear, and that checks
this, and men are brought to moderation, because they are unwilling to lose
custom; so that he that governs himself by the Market-prizes, not catching at
particular advantages, seems to me to follow the safest Rule.

7. There are some things allowed in common intercourse, which are so rigorous,
that they are hardly just, which are rather tolerable than commendable. I will
give one instance instead of many; A man has a small piece of ground lying
within another man's estate, he is willing to sell, but requires (possibly)
forty or sixty years purchase, or more, according to the particular appetite of
the purchaser; This seems not to be so agreeable to this great Rule of equity;
I deny not but some advantage may be made in this case, and I will not set any
peremptory limits; I shall only say this in general, we should set a moderate
value upon another man's appetite and convenience.

8. It is to be feared, that something very like unrighteousness is woven into
the mystery of most Trades. And like Phideas his image in Minerva's shield,
cannon be defaced without the ruin of it. I think this is not a groundless
jealousy, but the confession and complaint of the most knowing and
understanding persons in humane affair. I shall instance only in the
sleightness of work, the imbasing of commodities, and setting them off by
indirect advantages. I can only bewail this, for unless the world could
generally be convinced of this, it is not like to be amended. Perfection is not
to be looked for in this imperfect state, we must be content if things are
passable.

9. Nevertheless we ought to aspire after as great a degree of Righteousness
and Equity, as the condition of humane affairs will admit. We should bend all
our endeavors to the bettering of the world, and not only avoid all
unrighteousness, but draw back as much as in us lies from the indirect
practices of the world, and from all appearance of unrighteousness.

3. The more Particular Rules are these.

1. Impose upon no man's ignorance or unskilfulness. Thou may set a just
value upon thine own commodity, but not a price upon another man's head; I mean,
thou may not tate a man's want of understanding, or set a tax upon his
ignorance; therefore take no advantage of children, or any other incompetent
persons, and do not only use them with justice, but with ingenuity, as those
that repose a trust in you, and cast themselves upon your equity. And here are
some questions to be resolved.

Quest. 1. If a man be otherwise skilful in his calling, may not I take
advantage of his ignorance of a particular circumstance wherein the contract is
concerned?

Ans. I will tell you how Tully resolves this in a particular case; De
Officiis. l. 3.
A man (says he) brings a Ship of Corn from Alexandria to Rhodes, in a time
of great famine, he may have what price he will, he knows of a great many
more ships that will be there next day, may he conceal this from the
Rhodians? He determines peremptorily he may not. If we will be worse than
Heathens -- I say no more.

Quest. 2. But may we not take advantage of the ignorance of the seller,
though not of the buyer? the difference is, he that offers to sell any thing
at such a price, is willing so to part with it; Now there is no wrong done to
him that is willing.

I answer, A man is so far willing, as he is knowing; Aristotle tells us, That
Ignorance is a sort of unwillingness, If a man out of forgetfulness, or want of
consideration, or sufficient understanding of his own calling mistake himself,
I may not make a prize of this man's weakness; for he is only willing to sell
it so upon supposition, he remembers right, and understands himself aright,
but the thing being really worth more, he is absolutely unwilling, and I am
injurious to him in taking advantage.

Quest. 3. May I not sell secret faults and vices in a commodity?

Ans. If the faults be such as men take for granted do often happen, and
notwithstanding them, they do not account any man to have deceived them, then
they are faults pardoned by common consent; but if they be such as I am
agrieved at, and think my self not fairly dealt withal when they happen, then
some think it is enough to allow for them in the price, Offic lib 3.
but I think Tully has determined it better, Ne quid omnino quod venditur
novit emptor ignoret, that the buyer should not be left ignorant of any thing
that the seller knows; And this seems reasonable, for I know not but another
man may value those faults higher than I do; however it is not so fair for me
to make another man's bargain.

2. Impose upon no man's necessity. If a man must needs buy now, or of thee,
because none else is near, make no advantage of this.

3. When Gods providence has put into thy hands some great opportunity and
advantage (as by the intervention of some unexpected Law, by a sudden war or
peace betwixt Nations, or by some other casualty) do not stretch it to the
utmost. Fortunam reverenter habe, use this providential advantage modestly,
considering that he whose blessing gave thee this opportunity, can blast thee
a thousand ways.

4. Use plainness in all your dealings; this the Roman Laws called bona fide
agere; Do not disparage another man's commodity, or raise your own besides
truth, this is sinful; do not insinuate a commendation or disparagement
indirectly thereby to lead a man into an error that you may draw on a bargain
the more easily; do not (as your phrase is) ask or bid much out of the way; for
if this be not simply unlawful, yet it does not become an honest man; We
commend the Quakers, because they are at a word in all their dealings; we
would be loath not to be counted as good Christians as they are; let us then do
as good things as they do, especially when we account those things
praiseworthy; and I am sure this is no ways contrary to Justice, and Honesty,
and Truth; I know nothing that gives so real a reputation to that Sect, as this
practice; and would it not adorn those who account themselves the more sober
Christians: if we praise this in others, let us practice it in our selves. We
are apt to value our selves much by our Orthodox Judgments, but let us take
heed that Sectaries do not confute us by their Orthodox lives. For the sake of
Religion, Next to your consciences, in all your dealings, tender your
reputation, for, quod conscientia est apud Deum, id fama est apud homines, that
which conscience is in reference to God, that our reputation is in respect of
men.

5. In matters of verity and fancy, and things which have no certain
estimation, use moderation; and so much the rather, because in these thou art
left to be thy own judge.

6. Do not go to the utmost of things lawful. He that will always walk upon
the brink, is in great danger of falling down; he that will do the utmost of
what he may, will sometime or other be tempted to what he should not; for it
is a short and easy passage from the utmost limits of lawful, to what is evil
and unlawful; Therefore in that latitude which you have of gain, use favor
toward the poor and necessitous, ingenuity toward the ignorant and unskilful,
moderation toward all men.

7. Where you have any doubt about the equity of your dealings, choose the
safest part, and that which will certainly bring you peace? For not only a good
conscience, but a quiet conscience is to be valued above gain. Therefore in
matters of duty do the most, in matters of privilege and divisions of right,
and proportions of gain (where there is any doubt) choose the least, for this is
always safe.

Thus I have laid down the Rule and explained it, and have given as particular
directions, as I could safely adventure to do; I must now leave it to every man
to apply it more particularly to himself, and to deal faithfully with his own
conscience, in the use of it. Circumstances which vary Cases are infinite,
therefore when all is done, much must be left to the Equity and Chancery of
our own breasts. I have not told you how much in the Pound you may gain and no
more, nor can I; A man may make a greater gain at one time, than another, of
the same thing; he may take those advantages which the change of things, and
the providence of God gives him, using them moderately: A man may take more of
some persons than of others; provided a man use all men righteously, he may
use some favorably. But I have on purpose forborne to descend to too many
particularities, among other reasons, for the sake of Sir Thomas Mores
observation concerning the Casuists of his time, who (he says) by their too
particular resolutions of Cases, did not teach men non peccare, not to sin, but
did show them quam prope ad peccatum liceat accedere sine peccato, how near men
might come to sin, and yet not sin.

The Uses I shall make of all this, are these two.

1. Use. Let us not revenge our selves; The rule is not, we should do to
others as they do to us, but as we would have them to do to us; as if it were
on purpose to prevent revenge. Saint Luke forbids revenge from this rule; Luke
6.31, 32. For if you love them that love you etc. But love your enemies.
Revenge is the greatest offense against this rule, for he that revengeth an
injury, has received one, he that has received one, knows best what that is,
which he would not have another to do to him; the nature of evil and injury is
better known to the patient, than to the agent, men know better what they
suffer, than what they do, he that is injured feels it and knows how grievous
it is, and will he do that to another?

2. Use, Let me press this rule upon you; Live by it, in all your carriage and
dealings with men, let it be present to you. Ask your selves upon every
occasion, would I that another should deal thus with me, and carry himself
thus toward me? But I shall press this chiefly, as to justice and
righteousness in our Commerce. It is said that Severus the Emperor caused this
Rule to be written upon his palace, Lampridius.
and in all public places; let it be writ upon our houses, and shops, and
exchanges. This exhortation is not altogether improper for this Auditory; you
that frequent these exercises seem to have a good sense of that part of
Religion, which is contained in the first Table; do not by your violations of
the second, mar your obedience to the first; do not prove your selves
Hypocrites in the first Table, by being wicked in the second; give not the
World just cause to say, that you are ungodly because they find you to be
unrighteous; but manifest your love to God, whom you have not seen, by your
love to your Brother whom you have seen; and if any man wrong his Brother, he
cannot love him. Do not reject or despise this exhortaton, under the
contemptuous Name of Morality. Our Savior tells us, this is a chief part of
that which has ever been accounted Religion in the World, It is the Law and
the Prophets; and he by injoyning it has adopted it into Christianity, and
made it Gospel. We should have an especial love to this precept, not only as
it is the dictate of nature, and the Law of Moses, not only as it is a Jewish,
and Gentile principle, but as it is of the household of Faith. When the young
man told Christ, that he had kept the Commandments from his youth, it is said
Jesus loved him; Mark 10.20, 21
wherever we have learned to despise morality, Jesus loved it; when I read
the Heathen writers, especially Tully and Seneca, and take notice what precepts
of morality, and Laws of kindness are every where in their writings, I am
ready to fall in love with them. How should it make our blood to rise in many
of our faces who are Christians, to hear with what strictness Tully determines
Cases of conscience, Offic. Lib. 3.
and how generously he speaks of equity and justice toward all men.
Societatis arctissimum vinculum est magis arbitrari esse contra naturam,
hominem homini detrahere sui commodi causa, quam omnia incommoda subire; This
is the strongest bond of society, to account it to be more against nature, for
any man to wrong another for his own advantage, than to undergo the greatest
inconveniences. And again; Non en^m mihi est vita mei utilior, quam animi talis
effectu neminem, ut violem commodi mei gratia. Nor is my life more dear and
profitable to me, than such a temper and disposition of mind as that I would
not wrong any man, for my own advantage. Again, Tollendum est in rebus
contrahendis omne mendacium. No kind of lying must be used in bargaining. And
to mention no more; Nec ut emat melius, nec ut vendat quicquam simulabit; aut
dissimulabit vir bonus; A good man will not counterfeit, or conceal any thing,
that he may buy the cheaper, or sell the dearer. And yet further to check our
proneness to despise moral Righteousness, I cannot but mention an excellent
passage to this purpose, which I have met with, in a learned man of our own
Nation. Two things (says he) make up a Christian, a true faith, and an honest
conversation, Mr. ^ales.
and though the former usually gives us the Title, the latter is the surer; for
true profession without an honest conversation, not only saves not, but
increases our weight of punishment; but a good life without true profession
though it brings us not to Heaven, yet it lessens the measure of our Judgment,
so that a moral man so called is a Christian by the surer side. And afterward,
I confess (says he) I have not yet made that proficiency in the schools of
our age, as that I could see why the second Table, and the Acts of it are not
as properly the parts of Religion and Christianity, as the Acts and
observations of the first; if I mistake, then it is St. James that has abused
me, for he describing Religion by it is proper Acts tells us, that pure
Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father is this, to visit the
Fatherless and the Widow in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted
from the World; so that that thing which in an especial refined dialect of the
new Christian Language, signifies nothing but morality and civility, that in
the language of the Holy Ghost imports true Religion. Mark. 12.33, 34. when the
Scribe told Christ that to love God with all the heart, etc. And our neighbors
as our selves, was more than whole burnt offerings and sacrifices; it is said,
when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him thou art not far
from the Kingdom of God. They that would have a Religion without moral
righteousness, talk indiscreetly, and are further from the Kingdom of God than
a mere moral man. If we neglect this part of Religion we disparage the
Gospel, and abuse our profession, we are but pretenders to Christianity.
Plutarch speaks somewhere to this purpose, he had rather posterity should say,
there was never such a man as Plutarch, than that he was a vicious, or cruel,
or unjust man.

I had rather a man should not call himself a Christian, that he should
renounce his Title, than that by his life and actions, he should represent
Christians to the world, as oppressors, as unjust, and treacherous dealers. If
men will only use Religion for to cover their unrighteousness, I had rather
they would put off their Cloaks, and be Knaves in querpo, that every body may
know them, than that they should go like High-way-men in vizards, and
disguises, only that they may rob honest men the more securely.

And to move you to the practice of this Rule, I shall only offer to you one
Consideration, but which has so much weight in it, that it may be instead of
many; As you deal with others, so ye shall be dealt with. With what measure
you mere to others, it shall be measured to you, is a proverbial speech often
used by our Savior, and which one time or other you will find to be very
significant. God does many times by his providence order things so, that in
this life men's unrighteousness returns upon their own heads and their violent
dealing upon their own pates; There is a divine Nemesi^, which brings our
iniquities upon our selves. No man has any vice or humor alone, but it may be
matched in the world, either in its own kind, or in another; if a man be cruel
and insolent, A Bajazet shall meet with a Tamerlane; if a man delight to jeer
and abuse others, no man has so good a wit, but another has as good a memory;
he will remember it to revenge it; He that makes a trade of deceiving and
couzening others, he does but teach others to cousen him; and there are but
few Masters in any kind but are outdone by some of their Scholars. But
however we may escape the hands of men, how shall we escape our own
consciences, either trouble of conscience in this life, or the worm of
conscience in the next? how shall we escape the hands of the Living God? how
shall we escape the damnation of Hell? 1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond, or
defraud his Brother in any matter, for God is the avenger of all such. He will
take their cause into his own hands, and render to us according to our
fraudulent and cruel dealing with others, Mat. 18.35. So likewise shall my
Heavenly Father do also unto you, etc. What our Savior says, Mat. 19.29. That
there is no man that denies himself in Houses or Lands, etc. for Christ's sake
and the Gospels, but shall receive in this life a hundredfold, and in the
world to come everlasting life, is true also here. There is no man that is
injurious to his Brother in houses, or lands, or good name, or any other thing,
but shall probably receive in this world a^ hundredfold; however (without
repentance) in the world to come, everlasting misery. In the next world men
will find, that they have but impoverished themselves by their ill-gotten
wealth, and heaped up for themselves treasures of wrath; Read those words and
tremble at them, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3 4, 5. Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl,
for your misery shall come upon you etc.

Let us then be persuaded, as we love God whom we have not seen, as we love the
Gospel which we read and hear every day, and would preserve the reputation of
it; as we would better the world, and the condition of mankind, as we love
our selves and our own peace and happiness, to deal justly and equally with all
men. Till we come to live by this Rule of Equity, we can never hope to see
the world a quiet habitation. But if this were practiced among us, Psalm. 85.9,
10 11, 12, 13.
then Glory would dwell in our Land, Mercy and Truth would meet together,
Righteousness and Peace would kiss each other, Truth would spring out of the
Earth, and Righteousness would look down from Heaven, yea the Lord would give
that which is good, and our Land would yield her increase, Righteousness would
go before him, and set us in the way of his steps.

After what manner must we give Alms, that they may be acceptable and pleasing
unto God?
1 TIMOTHY 6.17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate*

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.


THe sum of these words is a Direction for Rich men how to make the best use of
their Riches.] The ground or occasion of this Direction, is to meet with an
Objection, which might be made against the discommodities and dangers of
Riches, noted before in verse. 9, 10. But they that will be rich fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition. V. 10. For the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and
peirced themselves through with many sorrows. From hence some might infer, as
the Disciples did from the inseparable, and inviolable bond of Marriage, noted
by our Savior, Matthew. 19. If say they, the case of the man be so with his
wife, it is not good to marry. So might some say, if they that will be rich
fall into temptation, and a snare, etc. then it is not good to be rich; yea
such as are rich may say, Let us give away, or cast away all that we have,
rather than retain such Vipers, as Riches seem to be.

To prevent such inconsequent inferences, the Apostle gives this Direction,
whereby he shows that Riches may be well used, and being well used, be a
means of helping on our Eternal Salvation. Learn hence not to condemn things
good in themselves, because of the abuse of them. The Lord in regard of the
ordinary abuse of Riches, styles them mammon of unrighteousness, and yet
advises not thereupon to cast them away, but to make to our selves friends
thereof; that is, Luke 16.9.
so to use them, as the good works done by them may as friends before the Judge
give evidence of the truth of our Faith, and Love, and show that we are of the
sheep of Christ, for whom Eternal Life is purchased.

Having thus showed the occasion and dependence of these words upon the former,
come we now to the Logical Resolution of them; where we may observe two parts.

1. A Prohibition. 2. An Injunction.

A Prohibition of hurtful Vices.

An Injunction of needful Virtues.

The vices are two 1. High-mindedness. 2. Vain confidence.


Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor
trust in uncertain Riches. The Virtues are likewise two.

1. Confidence or Faith in God, but trust in God, which is urged by an Argument
taken from Gods bounty, in these words, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy.

2. Charity toward Men, expressed in several phrases, viz. by doing good, and
by being rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; which
duties are enforced by an Argument taken from the benefit of performing them,
which is in brief, assurance of Eternal Life, implied in these words, Laying up
in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on Eternal Life.

I shall briefly speak something to the several branches of the Text, as they
lie in order, and then come to the Question or Case of Conscience given unto
me to handle.

Charge them that are rich in this world; The expression of our Apostle is here
observable; in that he says not (...), speak to them, nor (...), declare to
them, but (...), (...).
charge, command them. Well did the Apostle know how forward on the one side
rich men are to be high-minded, and to trust in their Riches; and on the other
side, how backward they are to trust in God, and to show charity to the poor;
and thereupon sure it is requisite that a Minister should take courage to
himself, and not think it enough, closely to intimate to rich men what Vices
they are addicted to, or what Virtues they are bound unto, but remembering the
place wherein they stand, which is God, in the Name of his most excellent
Majesty, to require, charge and command them to forbear the one, and endeavor
after the other.

In the next place follows the parties to whom this charge is to be given,
namely, To the rich in this world, Charge them, says the Apostle, who are rich
in this world, that is, in this present world; noting our riches to be only for
this world; for true is that Proverb of the Wiseman, Prove. 27.24.
Riches are not for ever, they cannot be carried out of this world. Job 1.21.
As naked we came into this world, so naked shall we go out of it. And
therefore it must needs be a point of great wisdom by that which is but for
this present world, to store up a sure foundation for the time to come.

In the next place follows the Vices here forbidden, the first is,
High-mindedness, whereunto rich men are very prone, in that their wealth is as
wind; and though wind be but a vapor yet it puffs up exceedingly, as we see
in a bladder blown up with wind. In like manner, Eccles. 1.2.
Riches, though they be but mere vanity, as the Wiseman expresses it, yet are
they apt to puff up men extremely, even to think of themselves above what is
meet. Whereas if rich men would but well weigh, that they came from, and must
return to the same mould that others do; Genesis 3.19.
for dust they are, and to dust they must return; Yea if they would consider
that they came from the same cursed stock that others do, and are by nature no
better than the meanest; especially if they would consider, that outward riches
cannot add the least dram of real worth to the owners of them; but though they
may be the more honorable parts or members in the civil body of the state, yet
in the mystical body of Christ they may be less honorable than the poor; I
say, if rich men did but seriously consider these things, they would not be so
high-minded as they are.

The other Vice here forbidden unto rich men, is, Vain-confidence, or trusting
in their riches; and this is very fitly joined to the former; for where our
pride is, there will be our confidence. That rich men are apt to put too much
trust and confidence in their riches, does appear by the titles which they
commonly give unto them, calling them their goods, as if they were the only
good things; and their substance, as if all things else were shadows; and by
the increase of them they say they are made for ever, and by the loss of them,
they say they are utterly undone. What do these expressions imply, but a trust
and confidence in their Riches; Whereupon says the Wiseman, Prove. 18.11.
The rich man's wealth is his strong City, and as an high wall in his own
conceit. It makes him think himself so safe and secure, that like the Judge
mentioned by our Savior, he fears not God, nor regards man. Luke 18.2.


In the next place follows the Virtues enjoined.

The first is Confidence, or Faith in God, which is directly opposed to trust
in Riches, so as rich men may have wherein to trust, though they trust not in
riches. God is the God of the Rich, as well as of the Poor, and the one as well
as the other, are to put their whole trust in him.

And if we consider the property here given to God, viz. Living, but trust in
the Living God; we shall see good reason to trust in God, rather than in
Riches. For our wealth may vanish away, but he ever lives, our wealth may
prove our bane, but he is both the giver and preserver of life. Our trusting in
God is here pressed by an Argument taken from Gods bounty to us in these words,
who gives us richly all things to enjoy: So that the Lord is not only a
Living, but also a Giving God, of whose gift you have not only your life; but
also your riches; yea all that you have is the gift of God, who gives you not
only all needful things, but also richly, and as St. James says, liberally.
James 1.6.
For God in his gifts shows himself to be a God, and that two ways. 1. In
the freeness. 2. In the greatness of them. Psalm. 68.19.
He loadeth us with benefits, says the Psalmist. This rich bounty of God is a
further Motive to draw you to trust in him.

Yea the Apostle adds, that the Lord gives us all things richly to enjoy;
that is, not only for the present to spend, as being absolutely necessary; but
also to lay up and reserve, so as it is not unlawful to lay up for aftertimes.
The Apostle presses it on Parents as a bounden duty, 2 Cor. 12.14.
to lay up for their children.

Only let this lawful liberty be limited with these and such like bounds.

1. That we lay up nothing but what is justly gotten. To lay up riches of
unrighteousness, is to kindle a fire that may destroy both our temporal and our
spiritual estate.

2. That we be not so covetous of hoarding up, as to deny our selves what is
needful for our use and comfort, or to deny the poor what is needful and
necessary for them; but that we willingly give out as what is meet for our
selves, so what is needful to the poor.

3. That in our treasuring up we aim not merely, wholly, and only at our
selves, but withal have an eye as to the charge which in particular God has
committed to us, so also to the Church, Commonwealth, and Poor for the time to
come.

4. That we exceed not measure in our treasure, no though we aim at the
forementioned good ends.

So much for the clearing the first duty the Apostle would have pressed upon
rich men especially, which is to Trust in God.

The second is Charity toward men, expressed in several phrases, as first by
doing good.

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they do good. So that true
Charity consists not only in compassionate affections, and kind speeches,
(...)
but in good deeds, as the word in the Original implies.

You rich men ought to be rich in good works, as the Apostle adds. For God
expects fruit answerable to the seed which he sows. He gives you plenty
of seed, therefore you must be plentiful in this kind of fruit.

The next branches, Ready to distribute, willing to Communicate, set forth the
manner of our charity.

The former implying a wise distribution of our Alms; for to distribute is not
hand over head without consideration to give, but according to the need of them
to whom we give. The latter implying a willingness therein. As, by
distributing, good is done to others, so by willingness therein, much comfort
is brought to our own souls, and grace to the work; 2 Cor. 9.7.
And God does best accept such, for he loves a cheerful, willing giver.

In the next place follows the Reasons, to enforce the forenamed duties, taken
from the benefit of performing them, which is in brief, assurance of eternal
life, implied in these words, Laying up in store for themselves, a good
foundation, against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
The Apostle here, for their better encouragement to lay out a portion of their
estate on good works tells them that they are so far from loosing what they
so lay out, as in truth they lay up thereby in store for themselves.

Yea, they lay up a good foundation, that is such a treasure as is like a
foundation in the ground, that cannot be shaken nor over-thrown. This treasure
the Apostle thus expresses, in opposition to the forementioned uncertainty of
riches. So as by a cheerful distribution of this worlds wealth, they do indeed
but exchange uncertainties, for certainties, and so no fear of loosing by such
bargains. Yea, they thereby obtain eternal life.

Quest. Are then good works the cause of eternal life.

Answ. Surely No, only they are the means and way of attaining thereto, and in
this sense, is this phrase here used; That they may lay hold on eternal life:
Having thus showed you the occasion of the words; the logical resolution of
them; their sense and meaning.

I should now according to my accustomed method, come to such points of
Doctrine, which the words do naturally afford unto us; But I must wave them,
and fall upon that Question, or case of conscience, which was given me to
handle; viz.

Quest. How, or after what manner, must we give Alms, that they may be
acceptable, and pleasing unto God? In the resolving whereof, I shall endeavor
to answer most of the cases of conscience about almsgiving.

Answ. 1. It must be with justice, giving only of our own, whereunto we have
a just right and title, so much our Savior implies in that precept of his,
where he says, Give Alms of such things as you have, Luke 11.41.
whereby is not meant, such things as a man has by him (for one may have
another man's things by him) but such things as are his own, whereunto he has
a just title, an undoubted right, whereof he is the lawful proprietor, has
the power of disposing those things, and those only he may lawfully and justly
give away,

This Caveat is very necessary for many Reasons,

1. Because otherwise we shall sever mercy from justice, which should always
go hand in hand; God has put them together; Prove. 21.21. Dan. 4.27. and we
must not put them asunder; indeed they are two links of one and the same chain,
of which other virtues and graces are also other links; So many virtues, so
many links; Now if one link of a chain fall off, the whole chain is broken, and
down falls that which is drawn or held up by it; so we that are held out of
the pit of destruction by the Chains of graces, are in danger to fall into it,
if one grace be violated, and severed from the rest.

2. By giving that which is not our own, 1 Samuel 4.21.
the excellency and glory of Charity is lost, of such charity it may be said
Ichabod, where is the glory? The glory of Charity consists in this, that we
are willing to part with our own, and therein to damnifie our selves, for the
relief and succor of others.

3. By giving that which is not our own, we do wrong, and thereby make our
selves liable to restitution. So as Charity in such a case, is a plain injury.
It is a case wherein recompense of revenge may more be feared, than recompense
of reward expected.

Quest. Who may be said to give that, which is not their own?

Answ. They who filch, steal, or rob for this very end, As Parents for
Children, or Children for Parents, or one friend for another. It is a sin for
one to steal to satisfy his own hunger, Prove. 6.31.
Much more it is sin, to steal for another, certainly it is a great wickedness
to do injustice that we may do acts of Charity.

2. Such as having raised up an estate, or got something by indirect and unjust
means, as by lying, swearing, false weigh's, deceitful measures, and the like;
think to make up all by giving part to the Poor? For as the Civilians say well,
Bonus usus non justificat, injuste quaesita.
the good use does not justify, the unjust getting of their goods. And can any
imagine that God will be pleased with those men's charity, who give relief out
of that which they have wrongfully gotten? restitution should rather be made
to such as have been wronged. And if neither the parties wronged; nor their
heirs can be found, then what has been wrongfully got, ought to be given to
the Poor, as their heirs. An example whereof we have in Zacheus, Luke 19.8.
who having wronged many by oppression, after his conversion, offers fourfold
restitution unto all whom he had wronged, and because many could not be found,
to whom he should make it, he offers to bestow half of his goods to the
relief of the Poor.

3. Such as being under authority, and have no propriety in the things which
they give, do notwithstanding give, directly against, or simply without the
consent of those who have the true propriety, do not give of their own, as
Servants, Children and others. Indeed Servants, and Children, may lawfully give
out of that which is their own, but not out of that which is their Masters, or
Parents, without their allowance.

4. Such as being joined in partnership with another, and give Alms out of the
Common stock without the consent of their Partners, do not give that which is
their own.

5. Such as are in extreme debt, and owe more than they are worth; We showed
that mercy and justice must go together, yea, justice must go before mercy, and
be satisfied before mercy be showed. They who owe more than they are worth,
have nothing at all to give for Alms, such join Arrogance to Injustice, to
make show of a great estate, and yet have none.

I shall close this with a word of advice to such as have a merciful and
charitable disposition, above their outward condition and ability; That they
use the best diligence they can, by all lawful and warrantable means, to get
something to bestow upon charitable uses. Let poor laboring men take so much
the more pains, that they may have somewhat to give; let servants spare out of
their wages; Ephesians. 4.20.
let such as have no propriety in any thing, but are wholly maintained by them
under whom they live, as Children, apprentices, and others, do what they can to
obtain something of their Parents, or other governors, even for this very end,
that they may have something to give. Let such as are in debt, first pay their
debts, and then give Alms. Let such as have any way defrauded others, first
make restitution, and then releeve them that are in need. Finally, let such as
live at the extent of their estate, and much more, such as live beyond their
means, well weigh wherein they may cut off some of their expenses to bestow on
the Poor.

II Almsgiving must be with freedom, and cheerfulness, and not grudgingly;
The phrase of giving Alms, frequently mentioned in Scripture implies as much,
for to give, is freely to bestow. In the Law this propriety of giving, is
plainly expressed, and by the contrary thus explained, Thou shall freely give
him, Deuteronomy. 15.10.
and thine heart shall not be greived when thou give unto him. Deuteronomy. 15.11.
It is also employed under this phrase, thou shall open thy hand wide, Alms
must not be wrested and wrung out of a man's hand, but he must of himself open
his hand, that is, freely give. The word wide adds emphasis. And in the
Gospel, we find it commanded by the Apostle, 2 Cor 9.7.
Every man according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.

Many motives may be produced to induce us hereunto: as,

1. The pattern of God our Heavenly Father, and of his Son Jesus Christ, our
Redeemer.

All the good that the Father does, he does most freely; who has first given
unto him? Romans 5.15, 16. (...) Id quod gratificando aliquis donat. Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
The word which is used to set out that which God gives, signifies a free
gift; and he is said to love us freely, Hosea 14.4. To justify us freely,
Romans 3.24. and freely to give us all things, Romans 8.32.

This Reason of Gods love, the Lord set his love upon you, because he loved
you, does clearly demonstrate the freeness of it.

The good also which the Son of God, Jesus Christ our Savior does for us, he
does most freely upon his own love, without any desert of ours: in this respect
it is said that he has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2, 25.
and has given himself for us. The conjunction of these two, love, and giving,
plainly prove the freeness of the gift. But further he expressly says
concerning the freeness of his gift, Rev. 21.^.
I will give unto him that is athirst, of the fountain of the water of life
freely. And again, Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.
Rev. 22.17.


2. A second Motive may be taken from the nature of Charity, which unless it
be free, is not true and sound. Thus much the Apostle implies under this
phrase, 1 Cor. 13.3.
Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and have not charity, it
profits me nothing. By Charity he means a free giving of that which is
given, merely out of love and pity to him, unto whom he gives.

3. Free giving makes that which is given to man acceptable to God; for God
loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9.7.
Yea God has more respect to this matter of giving, than to the greatness of
the gift. For if there be first a willing mind, 2 Cor. 8.12.
it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he
has not.

4. A free manner of giving, makes the gift the more acceptable to him that is
made partaker thereof. As the gift supplieth his want, so the manner of giving
reviveth his spirit. The Apostle rejoices in the Lord greatly upon that ca^e
which the Philippians showed to him in his necessity. Phil. 4.10.


5. A free and cheerful giving much redoundeth to the glory of God, in that
others are stirred up to praise God for such gifts. David praised Gods glorious
Name, 1 Chronicles. 28.13, 14.
when he saw his people offer willingly unto the Lord. And in this respect the
Apostle says of such benevolence, that it is abundant by many thanksgivings
unto God. 2 Cor. 9.2. and 12.


III. With simplicity and sincerity; according to that of the Apostle, He that
gives, Romans 12.8.
let him do it with simplicity; that is, with an honest, plain, and sincere
heart, not aiming therein at his own praise, or applause, but at the glory of
God, doing it in obedience to his command. This simplicity in giving, our
Savior hinteth unto us, where he faith, When thou do Alms, Matthew. 6.3.
let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does; that is, let not the
nearest that may be unto thee know what thou give. The right hand is that
hand wherewith we ordinarily give, yet the left hand is often assistant to it.
Now though there should be any so near unto thee, as to be helpful and
assistant, or at hand, yet let them not know it; make known thy charity to none.

Quest. May we not give Alms if others be by?

Ans. Yea, if need so require, as at public Collections, or when in public
we see one stand in need. But we may not do it with a mind to have it known,
our mind must be free from all such conceit, and we must so do it, as if we
were alone. That Alms is not unacceptable which is given and seen of men, but
that which is given to be seen of men. Non est ingrata cleemosyna quae fit and
videtur, sed quae fit ut videatur.
So that the scope of our Savior in the forementioned place is to take us off
from all vainglory, in giving of our Alms, that as much as in us lies we
should endeavor to hide and conceal our good works from the eye of the world.

IV. Our Alms must be given with a compassionate heart, (...) ab (...)
misericordia.
with bowels of affection. The Greek word so: Alms is derived from a word that
signifies Mercy, which intimates the disposition of the giver, how he should
be a merciful man, whose bowels are moved at the misery of another, and
thereupon contributes to his need with bowels of compassion.

In giving we must not only open our hands, but our hearts also in pity and
compassion; Psa. 58.10.
we must draw out our souls (as the Prophet speaks) as well as our purses,
to the hungry and afflicted; which is implied under several expressions of
Charity, used in Scripture by the Holy Ghost, as He that has mercy on the
poor, happy is he. And again, Prove. 14.21. Prove. 19.17.
He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord. And says the
Apostle Paul, Put on, as the Elect of God, bowels of mercy. Col. 3.12.
And says the beloved Disciple John, Who so has this worlds goods, and sees
his Brother has need, and shut^eth up his bowels of compassion from him, 1 John 3.17.
how dwells the love of God in him? It is not sufficient to have an open,
liberal hand, unless we have also an open and compassionate heart; for if the
Sacrifice of our Alms-deeds be not mingled with the oil and incense of mercy,
Beneficentia ex benevolentia manare debet. Affectus tuus nomen imponit o^eri
tuo. Am^. Offic. 30.
and compassion, it will not be acceptable unto God, who will have Mercy, as
well as Sacrifice. In contributing therefore to the relief of the poor; let our
inward affection, go along with our outward-action.

As helps hereunto,

1. Be well informed in the benefit that compassion brings and that not
only to thy distressed Brother, who is succored; but also to thy self, to
whom in this case a promise of mercy is made; Mat. 5.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; Mercy from other men,
and mercy from God himself.

2. Well we^gh the common condition of all, Eccles. 9.2.
how All things come a^ike to all; as the Wiseman speaks, so as thou also
art subject to the same distress, whereunto others are brought; and therefore
as Aquinas says, we should have compassion on other men's misery, Propter
possibilitatem similia patiendi Thom. 2. 2. quaestion. 3. art. 2. Heb. 13.3.
for the possibility of suffering the like; Which Argument the Apostle uses to
the Hebrews, saying, Remember them which suffer adversity, as being your selves
also in the body; that is, say some, as being members of the same body, but
rather, as Beza and others interpret the place, as being your selves in the
body of flesh and frailty, Ut qui sitis and ipsi iisdem calamitatibus obnoxii.
Beza in locum. Theodor. Epist. 29.
subject to the like miseries; for so long as we dwell here in these houses of
Clay, and carry about us this earthly Tabernacle, we are all subject to the
like changes and chances; which made old learned Theodoret, to reach his
helping-hand to those outcast Africans, For when I saw (quoth he) their
pitiful estate, I began to lay to heart the doubtful turnings and inversions
of humane things, and to fear lest I my self might fall into the like evils.

V. Our Alms must be given seasonably; for as the Wiseman speaks, To every
thing there is a season, Eccles. 3.1.11.
and every thing is beautiful only in its time and season; And therefore it
will be our wisdom so to observe the needs and necessities of other men, that
we do not let slip any season, or opportunity of doing good. According to that
exhortation of the Apostle, Gal. 6.10. (...).
As we have opportunity, let us do good. The word in the Original translated
opportunity, properly signifies a seasonable time.

Quest. Which are the most seasonable times of doing works of mercy?

Ans. 1. When accidentally thou meetest with any fit objects of mercy, Luke
10.31, 32, 33, 34.
thou must not then pass them by with the Priest and Levite, but with the good
Samaritan, presently pour the Oil and Wine of thy charity into the wounds of
thy Brother, forthwith contributing somewhat to his relief; For misery being
the proper object of mercy, thou should then extend thy mercy unto such as
are in want and misery.

2. When God by his providence has any way blessed and increased thy stock and
store, by prospering thy adventure at Sea, or thy trading at home, or by some
great Legacy bequeathed thee by some of thy friends, that is a seasonable time
for thee to give out freely and liberally to the relief of the poor, in
testimony of thy thankfulness unto God for his bounty toward thee. I know it
is usual with most men upon the increase of their stock and store, to sacrifize
to their own nets, to ascribe their wealth to their own wit and policy, and to
say in their hearts, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
Their power, and the might of their hand has gotten them this wealth. But
mark what Moses says in the next verse, 18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy
God, it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. Seeing therefore what thou
have, thou have received from God, whatsoever the means and instruments were of
conveying it unto thee, is it not most just and equal, that in way of
thankfulness, thou should set apart some portion thereof for the poor and
needy?

3. The Lords Day is another seasonable time of doing works of mercy, according
to the Apostles Rule and Direction; Now concerning the collection for the
Saints, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2.
as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the
first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has
prospered him. Where by the first day of the week is meant, the Lords Day, on
which the Apostle enjoyneth the Corinth^ans to lay up something in store;
implying thereby, that that is a very fit season, not only to do such works of
mercy, which are then offered unto us, but also to prepare for other times.

4. Days of Thanksgiving for some eminent mercy, are another seasonable time
of doing works of mercy. The remembering of the poor at such times is expressly
commanded in Scripture; Deuteronomy. 16.14.
Thou shall rejoice in thy heart, thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter, and thy
Manservant, and thy Maidservant, and the Levites, the Stranger, and the
Fatherless, and the Widow: Here the Stranger, the Fatherless, the Widow are
commanded to rejoice on their days of Feasting, which presupposes the rich
men's sending portions of their good cheer unto them; which was the practice of
the people of God, as appears by that command of Nehemiah to the Jews on a
day of Thanksgiving; Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, Neh. 8.10.
and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared. And their day of
Thanksgiving from Hamans conspiracy, is called a day of feasting, Ester 9.22.
and of sending portions one to another and gifts to the poor. And what more
seasonable time can there be for showing mercy to the poor, than when we are
blessing God for his manifold mercies vouchsafed unto us?

5. Days of fasting and prayer, are another seasonable time of doing works of
mercy. For how can we expect that God should show mercy unto us in removing
those Judgments which we feel, or in preventing those which we fear; if we
will not show mercy to our poor Brethren, who stand in need of our relief? In
the day of our fasting therefore, let us at least give away to the poor so much
as we save by our fast. For as Austin in one of his Sermons says, Then are
our fasts acceptable to God, Tum grata sunt Deo nostra jejunia, si illi qui
necessitate jejunant reficiantur a nobis. Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 64.
if they which fast out of necessity, because they want meat, be relieved by
us. Let this therefore be always observed by us, that the poor have the gain
of our fasting, and not our own purses.

VI. Our Alms must be given readily and speedily, without any needless delay;
according to the counsel of the Wiseman, Prove. 3.27.
Withold not good from them, to whom it is due; that is, withold not any
act of Charity from those who stand in need of thy help, Say not unto thy
Neighbor, go and come again, and to morrow I will give thee, when thou have it
by thee, Qui sic moratur, neganti proximus est. Seneca de benefic. l. 2. cap.
5. Beneficia non sunt procrastinanda, sed tempestive danda, ut magis prodesse
possint. Bis dat, qui cito d'at.
he that so delaieth his helping hand, is next door to him that denies. And
therefore as any occasion offers it self unto us, let us speedily embrace the
same, as knowing that a speedy giver, is a double benefactor, and the swifter
that a benefit comes, the sweeter it casts. And contrariwise a benefit loses
its grace, that sticks to his fingers who is about to bestow it. What then
shall we think of their charity, who put off all to their deathbeds, never
giving any thing considerable to the Poor, till they can keep it no longer?
these though by their last will and testament they give somewhat to the Poor,
yet, questionless it is against their wills, for could they have kept it
longer, they would not have parted with it. Ingratum est beneficium quod diu
inter manus dantis haesit. Senec. de Benef.


I shall desire such seriously to consider, these six things;

1. That if all rich men should do thus, the poor would soon be starved for
want of bread.

2. That this practice of theirs, is against the express command of God, who
requires us to do good, and to communicate out of our store while we have
time and opportunity. Gal. 6.10. Matthew. 5.16.


3 That they have no assurance of the continuance of their wealth. For as the
wiseman speaks, Prove. 23.5. Alas Aquilinas.
Riches many times make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven; they have Eagles wings to fly from us. And how many are there, who have
outlived a fair estate? If God in his displeasure, blasts a man's substance; it
vanishes away in a moment.

4. Though their riches should continue with them, even to their deaths, yet
they have no assurance that God will give them grace to be liberal at their
deaths, who had never the goodness to be charitable in their lifetime.

5. That they have no assurance that God will accept of their deathbed charity:
what St. Austin speaks of deathbed repentance, that it is seldom true and
hearty; The same may I say of deathbed charity, it is seldom true and hearty,
but for the most part rotten and Hypocritical, proceeding from ill grounds, as
vainglory, conceit of merit, and the like.

6. That they have no assurance of the true performance of their will, that the
poor shall be the better for what is thereby given them. For how many
Exeoutours have proved most unfaithful to their trusts, whereby many charitable
gifts have been clean perverted. And if friends be so unfaithful, to us in our
life time; how can we but question their fidelity after our deaths? Oh
therefore that all, whom the Lord has blessed with an estate, would in their
life time become their own administrators, making (as one says) their own
hands their Executors, and their own eyes their Overseers. For questionless
that charity which is exercised in a man's life time is the best, and most
acceptable unto God.

VII. Our Alms must be bountiful, and liberal, giving out proportionably to
what the Lord has given unto us. This is implied in that command of God to his
people, Deuteronomy. 15.11.
Thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy poor, and to thy
needy in the Land; that is, thou shall give unto him bountifully and liberally.
And our Apostle here in the Text, would have rich men charged to be rich in
good work, 1 Timothy 6.18. Luke 12.48.
even as God has given them all things richly to enjoy; For unto whomsoever
much is given, of him much shall be required. And therefore the same Apostle
advises the Corinthians to give; 1 Cor. 16.2.
as God had prospered them: To whom God has given little of this worlds goods,
of them he requires but little, but to whom he has given much, of them he
requires much. Rich men therefore must not only give a portion of their wealth
to the releife of others, but also in some fit proportion to their estate.

Quest. If any shall ask what is that portion, or proportion of estate, which
rich men ought to set apart for Charitable uses?

Answ. It is an hard matter to determine the quantity and proportion of men's
charity, the scripture being silent herein, leaving this to the discretion and
ingenuity of the prudent Christian. 2 Cor. 9.7.
As the Apostle speaks, every man according as he purposes in his heart, so
let him g^ve, etc. A certain quantity is not set him, that's left to the free
purpose of his own heart.

But yet though the Scripture gives us no direct precept in this particular;
it holds forth many presidents for our imitation; as that of Jacob, who in
testimony of his thankfulness unto God for what he should bestow upon him,
Vowed the tenth part thereof unto God for Pious and Charitable uses. And Jacob
vowed a vow unto God saying, Genesis 28.20, 22
of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. Act.
10.20. 2 Cor. 8.3.
Of Cornelius it is recorded, that he gave much Alms. And the Macedonians are
highly commended, for their great bounty, and large contributions. Romans 15.4. 1
Cor. 10.11.
These examples are left upon record for our imitation. For as the Apostle
speaks, whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning; and for our admonition. So that hough the quantity of our Alms, how
much we should give, is not expressly set down; yet this we find both
commanded and commended, by precepts and presidents, in the scripture, that we
give liberally and bountifully in some fit proportion to our estates; that if
we be rich in this worlds goods, we should then be rich in good works;
sowing liberally, 2 Cor. 9.6.
that so we may reap liberally.

Now that our Alms may be liberal, it must be fitted to two things, viz. 1. The
Necessity of the Receiver. 2. The Ability of the Giver.


That in our giving we should have respect to the need and necessity of our
Brother; The Law is clear, which says, If there be among you a poor man of
one of thy Brethren, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and shall give him sufficient for his
need, in that which he wants. That we should likewise have respect to our
own Ability, the Apostle Peter is as clear, 1 Pet. 4.11.
where he says, If any man minister, let him do it as of the Ability which
God gives; that is, let every one give with respect to his own estate and
ability. Notwithstanding in cases of urgent necessity, and great extremity we
are to strain our selves even above our ability.

Here it may not be impertinent to answer another question (for I resolve to
contrive all I have to deliver upon this subject into this plain and easy
method) and that is this.

Quest. How many ways may rich men exercise their Charity?

Ans. 1. By laying out a portion of their estate in such a way as directly
tends to the worship of God, the advancement of Religion, the salvation of men's
souls; which I may not unfitly term, A Spiritual Charity.

And this may also be done several ways. As

1. By contributing toward the planting and propagating the Gospel where it
has not been. A work set on foot by diverse in New England, but chiefly carried
on by the charity of well-disposed people here in Old England.

2. By setting up, and maintaining of Lectures; the preaching of the Word, Romans
1.16.
being the ordinary means appointed by God for the bringing of sinners to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, whom to know is life eternal.

3. By adding to the maintenance of such settled Preachers, whose pains are
great, and means small, through the covetousness of Impropriators, who ingross
to themselves what does more properly belong to the Minister.

4. By maintaining of poor Scholars at the University in reference to the work
of the Ministry, that so there may be a continual supply of learned, godly,
and Orthodox Ministers, for the edifying of the body of Christ.

5. By bestowing of Bibles on poor Children, whereby through the care of their
Parents, 2 Timothy 3.15.
they may be acquainted with the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make them wise unto salvation. Memorable is the pious gift of Sir John
Fenner, who by his last will gave six pounds per annum to several out-Parishes
in London for the buying of Bibles to be distributed amongst poor children.
From my own experience I can say, that this gift has occasioned many poor
people to teach their children to read, that so they might be capable of those
Bibles, which are to be given only to such as can in some measure read.

6. By erecting of Country-Schools, and endowing them with some competent
maintenance, for teaching of poor men's children, who have not wherewithal to
pay for their schooling; which will be a special means not only to further
their civil, but likewise their spiritual education. For thereby they will be
made more capable of Divine Instruction. Experience teaches us how ineffectual
the most powerful Ministry is upon an ignorant and unlearned Congregation.
Docere simpliciter est melius quam pascere. Aquin. 2. 2. Quaest. 32.
Questionless therefore the erecting of Country-schools is a work of charity,
more noble in it self, more acceptable to God, and more beneficial to the
Kingdom, than the building of Almshouses, who are too often filled with
swarms of idle drones. But though this Spiritual Charity is questionless the
more excellent, as tending to a more excellent object, namely, the souls of our
neighbors, yet the bodies of our neighbors must be cared for, as well as
their souls: Our Charity therefore must also extend to them, and in this kind
it may be practiced and expressed.

II. By a free and liberal giving to the relief of those who are in want, of
which I have already largely spoken.

III. By a ready lending to such, as being in a Calling, want stock, or other
means to help themselves in their Trades. This duty of lending we find
expressly commanded both in the Law, and in the Gospel; in the Law, as in the
place before quoted; Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
Thou shall open thine hand wide to thy poor Brother, and shall surely lend him
sufficient for his need in that which he wants, etc. In the Gospel, Luke
6.35.
Lend (says our Savior Looking for nothing again; that is, lend not only to
such from whom you may hope by reason of their ability to receive your own
again; but also to such, as by reason of their poverty may perhaps never be
able to repay you. Psalm. 37.26.
The Psalmist makes this a note of a righteous and a good man, that he is
ever merciful and lends; Psalm. 112.5.
that he shows favor and lends. Where we see it is set down, as the
property of such a man, that he is ready to lend to the poor, to such as stand
in need of his help, and that freely without hope of gain.

This duty belongs especially to rich men, because the occasions of him that
would borrow, usually require more than meaner persons can well spare, they can
better give a penny, than lend a pound; though in many cases the lending our
Brother a considerable sum together; would be more beneficial to him, than it
may be to give him half as much; there is therefore a noble and very generous
act of charity, to be exercised this way, and it is peculiar to rich men, who
have it by them wherewithal to do it.

IV. Rich men may and ought to express their charity, by forgiving a debt, in
case the borrower be not able to repay it

There be many who by the help of that which is lent them, God blessing their
pains in the employment thereof, are able to repay what is lent. If there were
not hope thereof, men would rather give than lend to such.

But there are others, who, notwithstanding their care and pains in their
Calling, thrive not; or by some accident suffer such loss and damage, as they
are not able to repay what they have borrowed. In such cases Creditors are
bound to forgive (at least to forbear) their debtors. Luke 6.35.
This is the intendment of that charge, Lend hoping for nothing again. To take
this phrase simply, is to alter the nature of lending, and to turn it into
giving. Herein lies the difference betwixt lending and giving. Lending is on
condition to have again that which is lent, or at least the worth of it some
other way: Giving is free, without any such condition. That advice of Christ,
to lend hoping for nothing again, has respect to the mind of the lender, that
he should not have his mind wholly and only upon the repaying of what he
lends; but on the need of his Brother. He is not simply to lend, because he
is persuaded he shall lose nothing, but have his own again. He is to lend,
because he does therein great kindness to his Brother, who stands in much need
thereof.

(...) sperare; (...) desperare
The Greek word properly signifies to despair, and so it may here be taken; as
if he had said, when your Brother has need to borrow, lend, though his case
be such that you even despair of receiving it again, though you run some hazard
of losing the Principal.

If therefore it so fall out, that the debtor be not able to repay what he
borrowed, forgive it him. He lends hoping for nothing again, who is willing to
forgive, in case the necessity of the borrower requite it. This was it which
Nehemiah enjoined the rich Jews. Neh. 5.11.
Excellently does our Lord press this duty in the Parable of the two Creditors;
where we have a commendable pattern of a certain King, that in such a case
forgave a great debt; and of the sore revenge he executed on one of his
servants, Mat. 18.23.
because he did not in like manner forgive his fellow servants.

In the Old Testament it is commended to us under the phrase of restoring the
pledge. Ezekiel. 18.7. and 33.1, 5. Genesis 38.17, 18.
A pledge was a pawn left by a debtor with his creditor, for assurance to repay
the debt. Restoring the pledge when the debt was not paid, was an evidence of
remitting the debt.

V. By Hospitality, (...) compounded of (...). Hospitalitas est species
liberalitatis qua peregrinos and hospites ac presertim propter verae Doctrinae
professionem exulantes, vera benevolentia, and aliquibus officiis
hospitalitatis prosequimur. Ursin. Cat. (...). Clemens. Alexand.
which consists not so much in a loving entertainment of kindred, friends,
and neighbors, as of strangers; as the word in the Greek imports.

This is that hospitality, which is both commanded and commended to us in the
holy Scriptures. It is commanded in those known Precepts of the Apostle Paul,
Romans 12.13. Be given to hospitality, and be not forgetful to entertain
strangers, Heb. 13.2. Which is as much as to say, Forget not Hospitality which
is an entertaining of strangers. And the Apostle Peter commands the faithful to
whom he writes, 1 Pet. 4.9.
to use hospitality without grudging or repining.

It is commended to us in the practice of Gods people; as of Abraham, of whom
it is recorded, Genesis 18.1, 3.
that he sat at his Tent door looking and waiting as it were for strangers to
entertain them; and so soon as he saw three men, whom he took for such, he
ran to invite them. And of Lot, that as he sat in the gate of Sodom, he saw
two whom he conceived to be strangers, Genesis 19.3.
them he exceedingly pressed to turn into his house, where he made them a
feast. And of the Shunamite woman, and her Husband, who showed themselves
hospitable to the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 4.8.
as often as he passed by their house. We have Jobs testimony of himself, The
stranger, said he, did not lodge in the streets, but I opened my door to the
traveller; which words set out Jobs great hospitality, who kept open house for
all passengers. In those days there was no common Inn for the entertainment of
strangers, and therefore they must have lain out of doors, if some good men had
not entertained them.

Having such and so many presidents of hospitality, let us strive to follow
them, laboring to write after their copy, knowing assuredly that our labor
of love and cost therein shall not be in vain. For I may truly say it is a
fruitful, and gainful course of liberality, never did any lose by it. Some
hereby have entertained Angels, as the Apostle speaks; Heb. 13.2.
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained
Angels unawars. In setting down this recompense the Apostle has an especial
respect unto two instances, Genesis 18.2.
one of Abraham, the other of Lot. Genesis 19.1.


Angels came to both these, in the appearance of men, whom they knew not, which
shows Gods high account of this duty, in that once and again he sent Angels,
to such as were ready to entertain strangers.

Yea, we may entertain Christ himself, and indeed in every entertainment of a
poor godly stranger, Christ himself is entertained. And therefore in the great
day of Judgment, we read that Christ puts in this good work by name; Matthew.
25.35.
I was a stranger and ye took me in; Jesus Christ is a stranger in his
members.

In sacred Scriptures we find several others rewarded for their Hospitality;
as,

Genesis 24.22, 49.
Rebeckah for her courtesy to Abraham's servant, a mere stranger to her, was
rewarded with precious gifts, and a good Husband. The Shunamites hospitality to
the Prophet, 2 Kings 4.
was recompensed with giving her a Son, and restoring him to life. The widow
of Sareptahs hospitality to the Prophet Elijah, in receiving him into her house
in a great famine, was rewarded with preserving and increasing her meal and
oil, 1 King. 17.16.
for it is expressly said, that her barrel of meal wasted not, neither did her
cruse of oil fail, until the Lord sent plenty of food.

Gaius his hospitality toward Paul in receiving him into his house, was
recompensed with an honorable testimony, which both Paul and John gave of him.
Romans 16.23. 3 John. 5, 6.


Obj. Some may object and say, Instead of a godly man I may happily entertain
some dissembling Hypocrite, and so lose both my gift and reward?

1 Cor. 13.7.
Answ. 1. Our charity ought to hope the best of every one, of whom we have no
evident proof, or presumption to the Contrary.

2. If we receive a distressed Minister, in the name of a Minister of Christ,
or a private distressed Christian, in the name of a righteous man, supposing
him to belong to Christ; let him be what he will, we shall neither lose
gift, nor reward, Christ has undertaken the Payment thereof.

V. Rich men may and ought in some cases to express their charity, even by
selling what they have, for the releif of others, according to that of our
Savior, Sell that ye have, and give Alms. Luke 12.33.


Quest. In what cases must rich men sell their estates, or any part of them,
for the releif of others?

Answ. 1. When they are extraordinarily called thereunto, as he that asked
Christ, what he should do to inherit eternal life; Christ said unto him, Sell
whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor. Mark 10.17, 21 Matthew. 19.27.
That which the Apostles did in leaving their callings to follow Christ, was
equivalent to selling their possessions.

2. When they have defrauded and oppressed others, and are rebuked for that
sin, or otherwise brought to repentance for the same, they ought to testify
the truth of their repentance, by a full restitution, though it be by parting
with their possession. Neh. 5.11, 12.
Thus did the Jews after their captivity restore to their poor Brethren, whom
they had oppressed with Usury, their lands and their houses, etc. Luke 19.8.
The instance of Zacheus tends also to this purpose, who promised to give the
half of his goods to the poor.

3. When there are such a multitude of indigent persons in the Church, as the
superfluity of such as are rich, is not sufficient to relieve them. In this
case, Christians in the primitive Church, Act. 4.34, 35.
that were possessors of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the prices of
the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, and
distribution was made unto every man according as he had need.

These particular cases, being all of them somewhat extraordinary, do not
patronize the Platonical and familistical conceit of Community of goods.

Which fond mistake of theirs, these arguments amongst others, may sufficiently
confute, and evince propriety in lands and possessions to be lawful now in the
times of the Gospel.

1. In those very times wherein Christians for use, had all things common, Peter
expressly says to Ananias concerning the Lands which he sold, whilst it
remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, Act. 5.4.
was it not in thine own power? Hereby it is manifest, that men then had a
propriety in goods and lands.

2. The duties prescribed to rich men in the words of my Text, to do good, to
be ready to distribute, and willing to communicate; prove as much.

3. The many admonitions to pay Debts, to give tribute, and perform other like
duties of Justice, do imply a propriety of goods.

4. Exhortation also to Lend, and to Sell, prove as much. Luk^ (...) Luk^ (...)
For men may not lend, nor sell that wherein they have not a propriety.

Ephesians. 4.28. 1 These. 4.6.
5. Inhibitions against stealing, and against all kind of injustice presuppose
a propriety.

Thus have I done with the seventh property, requisite to the right manner of
giving Alms; which is bounty and liberality, whereon I have somewhat the longer
insisted, because it is the principal thing intended in my Text, That they
which are rich in this worlds goods, be rich in good works. I shall add but one
more.

VIII. Our Alms must be giving prudently, with discretion, according to every
ones need, Psalm. 112.5.
it is said of the merciful man; A good man shows favor and lends, he
will guide his affairs with discretion. And truly there is a great deal of
discretion to be used, Turpissimum genus perdendi est inconsulba donatio.
in the ordering of our Charity; by putting a difference between poor and poor;
for as one says, unadvised givi^g, is the worst kind of losing.

Prudence in Alms giving, is commended to us by our Savior, in this word, (...)
distribute, distribute to the Poor; Luke 18.22. For to distribute, is with
discretion to give to sundry persons, several portions according to their need.
When mention is made of a prudent, discreet, Act. 4.35.
releeving the poor, it is thus expressed; Distribution was made unto every man
according us he had need.

For the better performing this due discretion in our Charity, let these rules
following be observed?

1. First they are before others to be releeved, over whom we have an especial
charge, as they who are of our household, of our own house and family, as Wife,
Children, and Servants? For as the Apostle speaks, If any provide not for his
own, and especially for those of his own house, 1 Timothy 5.8.
he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

2. In our Charity we ought to have a special respect unto our poor kindred,
for of those is the forementioned place (1 Timothy 5.8.) to be understood, (...).
where the word in the Greek translated House, is rendered kindred in the Margin
of your Bibles. For the scope of the Apostle is to free the Church from
unnecessary charges, 1 Timothy 5.16.
and to that end does impose the care of providing for poor kindred, upon such
of their relations as were able.

3. They are to be releeved who are of the Congregation, or Parish, whereof
we are members, Deuteronomy. 1.5.7, 8.
especially they who dwell near unto us, in regard that we may best know their
wants.

4. They whom we have just cause to believe, that they are of the household of
Faith. Gal. 6.10.
For we may judge them to be true in their words; and believe that their wants
are such as they declare them to be. Now amongst the godly, such are especially
to be relieved, and to be preferred in our charity, who are imprisoned, or
otherwise suffer for Christ, and the Gospels sake; For Christ in a special
manner is relieved in the persons of such, as himself will acknowledge at the
day of judgment, when he will pronounce that blessed sentence of absolution
to such merciful men; Come ye blessed of my Father, Mat. 25.34.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye took me
in; I was in prison, and ye came unto me, etc.

5. They whom we discern to stand in need of present succor, though they be
mere strangers, whom we never saw or knew before. Hereof we have a worthy
pattern set before us in the good Samaritan. Luke 10.33, etc


6. They who are in prison, or sick, or any otherways restrained from making
their wants known unto others. Matthew. 25.36.


7. They of whose piety, poverty, and necessity, credible testimony is brought
unto us, though we see them not our selves. Thus many of the Christian
Gentiles, Act. 24.17. Romans 15.25, 26
sent relief to the Churches at Jerusalem upon the Apostles making known their
wants.

In these and other like cases we ought to extend our charity according to the
necessity of those whom we relieve, and our own ability. And not think it
enough to give a few scraps of bread and meat, or some half-pennies or pence to
common beggars at our doors, or in the streets. This kind of Alms savoureth
more of vain outward oftentation, than of true inward compassion: And it more
beseems proud Pharisees, than humble Christians. A charitable Christian
ordinarily gives more to one whose distressed case he knows, or is credibly
made known unto him, than these Pharisees do to many beggars at many times.

Quest. But you will say, do ye then utterly condemn all giving to common
beggars, as unlawful?

Ans. For answer to this Question, we must distinguish of common beggars; some
are strong and lusty, able to work, and yet are so lazy, that they will not
work, but would live by the sweat of other men's brows. Others again are weak
and impotent, unable to work through age, sickness, lameness, blindness, or the
like.

These latter are fit objects of charity, and therefore ought to be relieved.
But the former sort of Beggars, namely, the strong and lusty, who are able to
work, but will not through laziness, are no fit objects of charity, and
therefore it is no work of charity to relieve such; For

1. Their trade of life is no warrantable calling. It is a disorderly walking,
which is expressly taxed by the Apostle, for says he, When we were with you,
this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. 2
These. 3.10, 11.
For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not
at all. It cannot be said of those, As the Lord has called every one, so let
him walk; or, let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. 1
Cor. 7.17, 20.
God has called none to such a trade.

2. They are as drones in an hive of Bees; they live of the labors of others,
but bring in nothing to the stock, as all the other Bees do. They are as barren
Trees, which receive sap from the earth, but yield no fruit; Tellu^is inutile
pondus.
unprofitable burdens of the earth, whose sad doom ye may read, Luke 13.7.

3. Many of them are of no particular Church, nor of any civil society, but out
of all Government in Church and State. In this and the former respect they may
justly be styled Children of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13.13.
without yoke.

4. They withold, and in a manner rob the state wherein they dwell, of their
labor and pains. The State or Kingdom is as a body, all that dwell therein
are as so many members; now nature teaches every member to do somewhat for the
benefit of the whole. These doing nothing thereto, sin against the light of
nature.

Qui la^giuntur indignis ea quae dignis conferri debebant, tria committunt
absurda.

1. Nam and ipsi jacturam faciunt.

2. Et in bonos contumeliosi sunt.

3. Et malos roborant mat ria vitiorum s^p^^ditata.


5. They who are truly poor, shall by this means be neglected and scanted,
whilst these lazy drones devour that which of right belongs unto them.

6. They are a great scandal and shame to the Government of the Nation wherein
they are. For their course of life implies, that no good provision is made for
the poor; nor order taken to set such as are able to work, and to relieve such
as are impotent. Now it is a great sin to be a shame to ones own Country.

7. Their kind of life is sensual and brutish; for as brutes they spend all
their days in seeking food for their bodies.

From hence it follows, that they who relieve such, make themselves accessory
to the forementioned sins.

There are some allega ions made for relieving such; but they are undue
allegations, and may easily be answered; The chiefest of them is this.

Luke 6.30.
1. Christ commands to give to every man that asks thee.

Ans. To this I answer, that that Precept is to be taken in reference to a
false Position of the Pharisees, which was this, that their Countrymen and
friends only were their neighbors, whom by the Law they were bound to love.
That this was their opinion, is evident by this their gloss on the Law; Thou
shall love thy neighbor, Mat. 5.43.
and hate thine enemy. And by the Parable which Christ produces to demonstrate
to the Lawyer, who was his neighbor. In opposition to that false doctrine,
Christ commands to give, not to friends only, but to every man. Luke 10.29, 30,
etc.
So as the scope of that precept is, to take away respect of persons in
Almsgiving: that we should not restrain this duty of Charity to Country men,
kindred, and friends; but extend it also to strangers, enemies, and to every
one, that being in need, crave it of us.

2. A second Allegation is, That many beggars may perish if they be not
relieved.

Ans. In case of necessity they may and must be relieved, either at doors, in
streets, or other like places, where their necessity is manifested. Necessity
(as we speak) has no Law. It dispences with ordinary Rules. Instance that
which Christ produced concerning David. He entered into the house of God, and
did eat the shewbread, Matthew. 12.4.
which was not lawful.

I have done with the Question allotted to me, give me leave to add a few
words for the more profitable pressing this most necessary, but much neglected
duty of Charity; I shall dispatch my intendment herein,

1. By showing you by what means you may obtain this Grace.

2. Giving you some Motives to quicken you up to a conscionable performance of
the works of it.

The means are these.

1. Meditation, seriously meditate

1. Of the Necessity of it, which arises from the Lords express charge and
command, unto which we are bound to yield obedience. It is often commanded
both in the Old and New Testament. That I may not be tedious, I shall give you
but two or three proofs, Deu. 15.11. A place I often mentioned for the
excellency, and exceeding pertinency of it to this purpose. Says the Lord to
his people there; The poor shall never cease out of the Land; Therefore I
command thee, saying, thou shall open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy
poor, and to thy needy in the Land; that is, thou shall give unto him freely
and bountifully. And says our Savior in the New Testament; Give to him that
asks thee, Luke 5.42.
and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. And says the
Apostle, To do good, and to communicate forget not, Heb. 13.16.
for with such Sacrifices God is well-pleased; in which words he presses the
duty with a forcible Motive; for who would not do that which is well-pleasing
unto God, who is bountiful in rewarding the least good we do upon his command.

This duty of Almsgiving being so expressly commanded in Scripture, it is not
in our power to omit or neglect the same; neither can any creature give us a
dispensation against the Creators command. A Prophet styles omission of that
which God enjoyneth to be done (yea though that omission were but in part, and
that upon a fair pretense) Rebellion, 1 Samuel 15.23.
which is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness, which is as iniquity, and
idolatry. Against him who failed in performing the charge enjoined him (though
he were a King) this doom is denounced, because thou have rejected the Word of
the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being King. 1 Samuel 15.26.
In like manner may God reject such as neglect this duty of Charity, when he
calls them to it, from being Kings, and reigning in Heaven. We have a manifest
instance thereof, Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43.

Now the giving of Alms being a duty so expressly commanded in the holy
Scriptures, it cannot therefore be accounted a matter merely arbitrary, left to
a man's own will, to give or not to give. But it is a bounden duty, which they
that in any competent measure can do, must not omit, which consideration cannot
but be a strong incitation unto us, to make conscience of this duty of
Almsgiving, as occasion is offered, and not to over-slip opportunities, that
by the divine providence are offered unto us. Should we neglect that which our
Lord has expressly commanded? that whereunto by virtue of that command we are
bound? that whereof we are to give an account? Let us upon the Lords commands
do what in this kind we can: And when we have done what we can say, Luke
17.10.
We are unprofitable servants, we have done what was our duty to do.

2. Of the Equity of this duty of Almsgiving. It is a most equal thing, that
he who has wherewithal, should give to him that has not. The equity arises
both from the divine providence, and also from the instability of man's state
and condition.

1. God for this end gives more to some than to others, that they who have more
abundance, should give out of their abundance to them who are in want. This was
typically signified by the gathering of Manna, which though it were rained down
from Heaven, yet the Lord would not allow, that they who had gathered much,
even more than was needful for themselves, and their household, should hoard up
their superfluity, but enjoined them to communicate of their abundance, to such
as had not enough. 2 Cor. 8.14.
The which the Apostle applies to the giving of Alms out of our abundance to
those who want, which he styles equality.

2. Man's state is so variable, as he who now has, may quickly want; and in
want desire to be succored by such as have. It is thereupon most equal, that
they who would be succored in their need, should be willing to succor the
need of others. This equity does Christ himself press; Matthew. 7.12.
all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them. And as a ground to enforce this the further, he adds, for this is the
Law and the Prophets. Hereby implying, that this doctrine is contained in the
Law and the Prophets; but that is not all, these words, this is the Law and the
Prophets, intend that the sum of the law and the prophets consists therein;
and the main scope of them tends thereunto; namely so far as they contain the
duties of man to man. So evident is the equity hereof even by the light of
nature, as the very heathen who wanted the light of Gods word, discerned it.
Well therefore might the Apostle enforce this duty of charity upon this ground
thus, Remember them that are in bonds, Heb. 13.3.
rebound with them, that is, be helpful to others which cannot help
themselves, as you would have others afford succor unto you, if you were
succourless.

3. Meditate of the manifold singular benefits which do follow and accompany a
conscionable performance of this duty; For thereby we discharge our duty to
God, who requires it at our hands, and as a consequent thereof we shall
glorify God, for it tends much to his praise and glory, when in such works as
himself has commanded, his children testify their obedience and thankfulness;
and therefore says our Savior, Herein is my Father glorified, if ye bring
forth much fruit. John 15.8.


And by our Charity, as we shall grace and adorn our holy profession, so we
shall stop the mouths of wicked men from speaking any evil of us or of our
profession; for how are men apt to speak of us, and of our profession,
according to the fruits we bring forth, and the good works which we do.

And as we shall thereby comfort, and make glad the hearts of the poor and
distressed; so we shall refresh our own souls, in that our works of Charity
will evidence our fruits to be sound and saving, lively and effectual; for as
Rachel said to Jacob, give me Children or else I dye; in like manner says
Faith to the soul of a Christian, Give me Children, let me bring forth good
works, else I dye, Jam. 2.26.
and have no life in me, according to that of the Apostle James, Faith without
works is dead, its not a living but a dead faith, that manifests not its life
by working.

II. As Meditation, so Prayer is a special means on our part to be performed,
for attaining unto this grace of Charity. I say, earnest and fervent prayer
unto God for the same; for as he is the fountain and author of every good
gift, so he has sanctified Prayer, as the means of obtaining every good gift
from him.

Be earnest therefore with God in Prayer, that he would be pleased to give
thee as a compassionate heart toward the needs and necessities of the poor
members of Jesus Christ; so an open hand, that thou may freely and liberally
contribute unto them, according to their necessity, and thy ability: Beg of God
that as he has blessed thee with some competent estate, so he would add this
mercy, to give thee an heart to give out proportionably to what he has given
thee; and that in testimony of thy love, and thankfulness unto him. But alas
how few are there who in their prayers unto God are mindful of this grace of
Charity? how few are there who ever begged of God, that he would be pleased
to implant this noble grace of Charity in their hearts? If upon examination
thou find thy self to have been faulty therein: Go take up a new resolution
to be earnest with God in prayer for this grace especially, and never to give
over, till thou find it in some measure wrought in thy soul, till thou find
thy self upon all good occasions ready to distribute, and willing to
communicate to the needs and necessities of thy poor Brethren.

III. Diligence in our Callings, is another means on our part to be performed,
for the practicing of charity. He that would be charitable to the poor in
their needs and necessities; must be diligent and industrious in his calling,
so that he may have wherewithal to express his charity; Prove. 10.4. Prove.
13.4. (...). Ephesians. 4.28.
for men's diligence in their callings is usually crowned with a blessing,
according to that of the wise man, the hand of the dil^gent makes rich: And
again, The soul of the diligent shall be made fat, that is, shall be enriched
with outward blessings; and the Greeks say, that plentifulness follows
painfulness, and that all things are made Servants to care and industry? And
therefore the Apostle Paul prescribes diligence and industry in a lawful
calling as a means of charity; Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather
let him labor, working with his own hands the thing which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs. This is one end we should propound to our
selves, in the works of our callings, namely that through Gods blessing on our
pains and endeavors, we may have, not only sufficient for our own livelihood,
and of them that belong unto us, but also somewhat for the releif of others;
Solomon describing the virtuous woman, says in the first place, that she
seeks wool and flax, Prove. 31.13.
and works willingly with her hands; And then, that she stretches out her
hands to the Poor, yea, she reaches forth her hands to the needy.

IV. Be careful to prevent all superfluities in your expenses. As diligence in
your callings, so frugality in your spending, is a special means for the
practice of charity; Frugality, says Justin, Genetrix virtutum frugalitas.
Just. lib. 90.
is the mother of virtue; I am sure it is the foundation and supporter of
Charity; For let a man's estate be never so great, yet if there be not
frugality used in the management thereof, there will be but little found for
works of charity. And on the other side, though a man's estate be but mean and
low in the world, yet if there be frugality used in the management of it, there
will be ever somewhat for charitable uses. As therefore thou desire to be
charitable, be careful to prevent all unnecessary expenses; I mean, let not
thy apparel be too costly, for how can it be expected, that they should be
charitable, ready to distribute to the necessities of others, who lay out the
greatest part of their estates upon their backs. Neither let thy feastings be
too frequent, nor too chargable; which is noted for one of the sins of the old
world, who were given to eating, (...) Matthew. 24.38.
as the word in the Original properly signifies. Neither let thy recreations
be too expensive, in playing more for money than for refreshment: Oh that such
of you who spend so much time and money on your recreations; as if God had sent
you into the world, and given you the good things of the world, for no other
end than to follow your pleasures; would consider what a fearful reckoning you
are to make at the day of judgment, not only of your precious time lavishly
mis-pent, but also of your estate wickedly lost, or wasted? when in thy account
there shall be found so much wasted in gaming and pleasures, and so little
given to the Poor.

V. Set apart something out of thine incomes and receipts, as a sacred stock
for charitable uses. For,

1. Ad opes honoresque expetendos, ad cumulandas divitias, furiosa est nostra
libido, infinita cupiditas. Calvine Instit. l 31. cap. 7.
Hereby thou will be fitted and prepared with matter for such uses, having
always somewhat by thee, to give upon any good occasion.

2. By this means thou will more readily and willingly, more freely and
liberally contribute to the needs and necessities of others, having a stock by
thee for that very end and purpose. All men naturally are hard-hearted, and
close-handed, and thereupon are very hardly persuaded to part with any thing
considerable for charitable uses. But this consecrating before hand a part of
thine estate for the use of the poor, will cause thy charity to flow out more
freely and bountifully.

Now a sacred stock for the Poor may be raised two ways?

1. By setting apart something every Lords day, out of thy comings in the week
before, according as God has prospered thee; which practice we find
prescribed unto us, by the direction of the Holy Ghost, and warranted unto us
by Apostolical authority, for says the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
16.1, 2.
Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week (which is
the Lords day) let every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered
him; that is, according to the ability wherewith God has blessed him, let him
set apart something for the relief of the poor, especially the poor saints.

2. By consecrating unto God a certain portion of thy yearly incomes and
revenues for Charitable uses; what this portion should be I dare not
determine, the scripture being silent therein, only in the general we are
commanded to give out proportionably to what God has given unto us, that they
who are rich in this worlds goods, be rich in good works; But this I can say,
that the most that I have heard or read of, who have taken this course to
consecrate unto God a certain portion of their estate to charitable uses, have
followed the example of Jacob, Genesis 28.22.
in giving a tenth part unto God. And as God did exceedingly bless Jocob after
his vow; so likewise has he blessed diverse others after their vow unto God.

An Mr. Tho. Gataker, in his funeral Sermon at the Burial of Mr. John Parker
Merchant and Citizen of London.
eminent Divine of this City, now with God, in his funeral sermon, at the
Burial of a Merchant, speaking of his Charity, says, that at his first
effectual call, among other things he then resolved upon, this was one, to set
apart every year a tenth of his gain for the releif of the poor; and that God
from that time forward abundantly advanced his estate. And withal he adds a
passage very remarkable, and therefore I shall give it you in his own words,
True it is, that for some space of time, some three or four years after that
his resolution of setting a tenth apart for such purposes, he thrived not, he
found no increase, nor came forward in the world, as formerly he had done, yet
was he not thereby discouraged, nor did he forbear to be bountiful, as
opportunity was offered, and the necessity of poor people required it: But he
gave still with cheerfulness, and comfort out of love to God, conceiving that
God in wisdom and goodness prospered him not, thereby to try his sincerity to
him, and his Charity to others; yea and that he himself might thereby have
experience of his love unto God, his Faith, Patience, and Constancy. But then
he adds from that time forward God abundantly advanced his estate, so that he
found experimentally all those gracious promises of God true, Psa. 113.9.
of his blessing of him that disperseth and dispenses to the poor; Prove. 19.17.
and of the repayment of that with interest that is so lent to the Lord.

And from mine own experience, I can tell you of another yet living, who has
often acknowledged, that though he had great trading, yet found he no
increase in his stock, but instead of going forward, he went backward in the
world. Whereupon he promised unto God to be more careful in sanctifying the
Lords Day, and dedicated unto him a Tenth of his increase for charitable uses,
and then he so thrived in his estate, that he gave over his Calling, and ever
since lives upon his Rents. Many other instances could I give you of Gods
extraordinary blessing on those who have consecrated a tenth of their estate
unto God for charitable uses, but these may suffice.

Having thus done with the means on our part to be performed for attaining unto
this Grace of Charity.

Come we now to the Motives, to quicken us up to a conscionable performance of
the works of it. I shall touch only upon these four,

1. The Excellency of the duty.

2. The Piety which it contains in it.

3. The Profit which arises from it.

4. The Damage which follows upon the neglect thereof.

1. The first Motive or Inducement to Charity may be taken from the Excellency
thereof. I suppose that all will grant that the greatest excellency that a
creature can attain unto, is to be like his Creator. That excellency wherein
man was at first created, is thus set out, Genesis 1.26, 27.
God created man in his own Image; that is, in his own likeness. And that
excellency wherewith we shall be glorified in Heaven is set out by our
likeness to Christ; for it is said, Phil. 1.21.
Our bodies shall then be fashioned like unto his glorious body, yea in the
whole man, when he shall appear, 1 John 3.2.
then we shall be like him.

Now while we live on earth, there is nothing wherein we can show our selves
more like unto God, than in showing mercy, and in succouring such as stand in
need. When God sets himself to proclaim his Name, he most insisteth upon his
mercifulness and goodness. Exodus 34.6.
Christ himself does press this Motive to enforce this duty, thus, Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful, as your Father is merciful.] The excellency of Charity does
herein further appear, that Christ has set the poor in his own room; insomuch
as they who relieve the poor, do therein relieve Christ himself. So much does
Christ acknowledge, where he says to such as succored the poor, Mat. 25.40.
Inasmuch as you have done it unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye
have done it unto me: Is it not an excellent thing to relieve Christ? They
then that relieve the poor, do an excellent work. As it is a great aggravation
of persecuting the true Professors of the Faith, because therein they persecute
Christ himself, as is implied under this divine voice that affrighted Saul,
while he was breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples of
the Lord, Act. 9.1, 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? So it is a great commendation of true
Charity, that Christ himself is relieved thereby.

II. Another Motive is the Piety, which in and by performing this duty of
Almsgiving is manifested. Piety, I say to God. For pure Religion and undefiled
before God, James 1.27.
is this, to visit the Fatherles^, and Widows in their affliction. Here he
puts two particulars, for all kinds of Charity: And by this phrase, Pure
Religion before God is this, he intends four things.

1. That it is but a mere show of Religion that is without charity.

2. That true Religion w ll make men charitable.

3. That Charity will prove men to be truly Religious.

4. That works of Charity are as acceptable to God, as duties of Religion.
Phil. 4.18.
For God accounts Charity an odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable,
and well-pleasing unto him. The poor and needy are to God as the Altars of
burnt-offerings, and incense were under the Law. Those things which were laid
on them, and offered up, were given to the Lord, and as a gift accepted by him.
Even so are Alms given to the poor, the poor are the Altar, Alms the Sacrifice.
Now who would not dispose so of that which he has, as God may account it
given to him, and answerably accept it? On this very ground does the Apostle
incite the Hebrews to this duty in this manner, Heb. 13.16
To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased. Thus we see how works of Charity are not only useful and
profitable to man, but also acceptable and well-pleasing to God; which
consideration adds much life to the duty here pressed. Omnes expetimus
utilitatem, ad eamque ropimur nec facere aliter ullo modo possumus. Cicer.
Offic. 3.


III. A third Motive is, the manifold profit wherewith it is rewarded. Profit
and advantage is the Motives, which, for the most part, spurs men on to labor
and take pains, to rise early, and sit up late, to venture goods, life, and all
they have. Witness the pains, travels, watchings, and adventures of laborers,
workmen, tradesmen, Farmers, Merchants, Mariners, etc. yet that profit which
they aim at, is but earthly, and temporary; and their hope of attaining it
uncertain. Surely works of Charity give an assured hope of far greater, and
better profit than earth can afford.

In general it is promised, That if we cast our bread upon the waters, we
shall find it after many days; that is, Faecundus est ager pauperum, cito
reddit donantibus fructum. Aug. Sermon. de Divite. Mat. 10.42.
If we give Alms to the poor, where all we do may seem to be cast away, as if
it were thrown into the Sea; yet in due time will it return to us with
advantage. And lest any should be discouraged from doing works of Charity, our
Savior assures us, That whosoever gives but a cup of cold water (which is
one of the least acts of Charity we can perform) shall in no wise lose kis
reward.

If in special it be demanded, what profit is there of Charity? I answer, (as
the Apostle did of Circumcision) much every way. Yea, Romans 3.12.
I may say of Charity, as the Apostle does of Piety, 1 Timothy 4.8.
It is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come.

In this life is promised

1. Sufficiency, He that gives to the poor shall not lack; that is, P^ov.
28.27.
he shall be secured from want and penury; God will not suffer him to be
brought to penury, who has been charitable to the poor.

2. Not only sufficiency, but likewise abundance; For says the Wiseman,
Honor the Lord with thy substance, P^ov. 3.9, 10.
by giving freely and cheerfully to charitable and pious uses, So shall thy
barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new Wine,
which is an hyperbolical expression, implying plenty and abundance.

3. Good success in what he enterprizeth. According to that of Moses, Deuteronomy.
15.10.
Thou shall surely give him, because that for this thing, the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand unto.

4. Deliverance out of trouble. For says the Psalmist, Psalm. 41.1.
Blessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble.

5. Protection against enemies; as it follows in the next verse, Verse. 2.
Thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.

6. Succor in sickness; as the Prophet goes on, Verse. 3,
The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; that is, the Lord
will comfort and support him in his sickness, and at length restore his
strength again. Thou will make all his bed in his sickness; that is, thou will
give him ease and rest, as they do to sick men that make their beds.

7. To pass by other particulars, Blessedness, which comprizeth under it all
manner of Commodities, is promised to the charitable person, Prove. 22.9. And in
Psalm. 41.2. It is said, He shall be blessed upon the earth; yea and at the
resurrection of the just, Luke 14.14.

8. This promise is extended to his postetity, for his seed shall be blessed.
Psalm. 37.26.


These and other like promises of temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings,
being made by the Lord God of Truth, may with much confidence be rested upon.
For Gods words are deeds, his promises performances.

Mat. 25.34.
In the life to come merciful men shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for them,
from the foundation of the world.

There are among others two Metaphors often used by the Holy Ghost, in setting
our Almsgiving, which do much amplify the commodity thence arising.

One is taken from lending; The other from sowing.

1. Almsgiving is set forth in Scripture by lending; yea to such a lending
whereby we have not only the principal restored, but with great increase. And
whereas such as put forth their money unto men, can expect but six in the
hundred; If we in obedience to the command of God, shall freely part with our
money to the use of the poor, for their relief, we shall receive an hundred for
six, yea an hundred for one, Mark 10.30.
and eternal life to boot. And we need not to doubt of the payment; for though
the poor be never so unable, yet we have an all-sufficient Surety, even God
himself, who has undertaken to pay whatsoever is thus put forth, Prove. 19.17.
according to that of the Wiseman, He that has pity upon the poor, lends
unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again. Where you
have Gods counterbond to save you harmless, in which he both acknowledges the
debt, and promises payment. And what better security can any man desire than a
bond under Gods own hand? The consideration whereof should mee-thinks make us
willing to embrace any opportunity of putting out our money to this great
advantage.

2. As for the other Metaphor of sowing, it is in Scripture applied to
Almsgiving, Psalm. 112.9.
under this phrase, He has dispersed. As the Husbandman disperseth his seed
which he sows in the earth; so does the Alms-giver, his Alms, therefore this
is added by way of exposition, He has given to the poor. The Apostle also
applies unto Almsgiving this proverbial speech, He which sows sparingly,
shall reap sparingly; 2 Cor. 9.6.
and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Now what is it that
ordinarily brings forth a greater increase than sowing seed in fertile
ground? It is said of Isaac, that he sowed in the Land, Genesis 26.12.
and received in the same year an hundredfold. And Christ says, that good
ground bears fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixty-fold, Mat. 13.8.
some thirty-fold. Now Almsgiving is one of those things that shall receive an
hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

If therefore profit and advantage may be a Motive to stir us up unto any
thing, surely it should be a Motive to incite us unto liberality in
Almsgiving, to be bountiful in contributing to the relief of the poor.

For it is a most certain truth, that giving to the poor is the su^est and
safest way of getting. For though Husbandmen may sometimes lose the benefit of
their seed sown, through mill-dews, or unseasonable weather, and such as put
their money to use may come short of their principal, yet he who with an
honest, and sincere heart gives to the poor, shall in no wise lose his reward.
For as the Wiseman speaks, There is that scatters, and yet increases;
Prove. 11.24. intimating unto us, that this scattering is the best way of
increasing. And indeed so it is, for has not our Savior promised, Luke 6.35.
That if we give, it shall be given unto us good measure pressed down, and
shaken together? Here God gives us as it were a bill of his hand, and enters
into bond, and becomes Surety with the poor, that what we give shall be
repayed with advantage. This is a Paradox to worldly men, that giving should
be the surest and safest way of getting and increasing, yet nothing more
clearly laid down in the Scripture, and found to be true by the experience of
all Gods people.

4. The fourth Motive and Inducement is the damage which may ensue upon the
neglect of Almsgiving. Though it argue a kind of servile disposition to be
moved with fear of loss or pain to a duty; yet of that disposition are many;
and in that respect this may be added as an Inducement to the duty.

The damage that may arise upon the neglect of Charity, when it ought to be
showed, is in the kind thereof as large, as the forementioned benefits of
performing the duty in the kind of it.

For neglect of the duty does not only cause a forfeiture of all the
forementioned benefits arising from the performance thereof, but also pulls
upon the neglectors head many evils. Where the Wiseman says, The merciful man
does good to his own soul; he adds, Prove. 11.17.
but he that is cruel, troubles his own flesh. Soul and Flesh are the two
essential parts of a man; both the one and the other are Synecdochically put
for the whole man; even for the person, By a cruel man, is meant an unmerciful,
or a hard-hearted-man; for he is opposed to a merciful man. The meaning then
of the proverb is this; As a merciful man does good not only to his poor
Brother, to whom he shows mercy, but also to himself: So an hard-hearted-man
does not only grieve his distressed neighbor in affording him no succor, but
also brings much damage to himself. Prove. 11.24.
For he that withholds more than is meet, comes to poverty. Withholding
is there opposed to scattering, which word has reference to casting or sowing
seed on the earth to bring forth a crop; and thereby is meant Almsgiving. On
the contrary, Withholding more than is meet, implies a denial of Alms, when
there is just cause to give. Justice and equity require this duty (as we have
before showed) so as that phrase does much aggravate this kind of
unmercifulness; and as a just punishment thereof, that which covetous men by
refusing to give, seek to prevent, shall fall upon them, even poverty.

And if in any distress they shall be forced to seek help of others, even they
shall be neglected as they neglected others. The Wiseman testifies as much
in these words, Prove. 21.13.
Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself,
and not be heard. Not only other men, Luke 16.24.
but also God himself will refuse to hear his cry. Dives, who refused to
relieve Lazarus, could not obtain any to afford him a drop of water to cool his
tongue, when he was tormented in Hell flames. It is expressly said, Mat. 18.33.
that he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, James
2.13. For God deals with men according to their dealing with others.

Finally, as blessings are promised to merciful men, so curses are denounced
against unmerciful men. Prove. 28.27.
As under blessings, all manner of good things are comprised, so under curses,
all manner of evils. Unmerciful men shall have the curses of men, Prove. 11.26.
and people shall curse them. And at the great day of judgment, they shall be
pronounced cursed by the great Judge. For then shall he say unto them on the
left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: Mat. 25.41, 42, etc.
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave
me no drink, etc.

If we must aim at Assurance, what should they do, that are not able to
discern their own spiritual condition?
1 JOHN 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life.


THe greatness of the mercy, in having of the Scripture is manifested by the
great advantages that the Elect of God receive thereby: viz. John 20.31.
that they might be brought to close with Christ by faith unfeigned, and be
partakers of eternal life through him, that bad men might be made good, and
that good men might be made sure of an eternal blessed state, in the life to
come, whereby the Lord has abundantly provided both for our happiness and our
comfort: for our happiness that we may have eternal life: 1 John 1.4. Romans
15.4.
for our comfort, that we may know we have eternal life. I cannot stay to
view the context. I need not stay to explain the Text. The case of conscience
to be treated of from this Scripture is this.

Since men may know that they have eternal life, what must they do, that cannot
discern their spiritual Condition?

Here are two things to be performed,

First. That we may know in this life, that we shall certainly be partakers
of eternal glory in the life to come. For if assurance be not possible, I can
neither blame you for wanting it, nor stir you up to labor after it.

Secondly. Lay down some Rules for the getting of it, and directions, if by
these rules we cannot for the present obtain it.

For the stating of the first part of the Question, concerning the possibility
of getting this certain knowledge of our future Happiness, I shall lay before
you these six positions.

1. Position. 1. An unregenerate person while John 3.36. 1 Ioh. 5.10, 12.
such can have no assurance, or certain knowledge of the eternal salvation of
his Immortal soul. Because as such he has no actual interest in the promises
of salvation, being without the conditions of faith and repentance, to which
the promises are made, being a child of Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath, Tit. 3.3.
a slave to his lusts, a 2 Timothy 2.26.
captive to the Devil, a Ioh. 5.40.43. Mark 12.10.
rejecter of the Son of God. This man has plague sores, tokens of eternal
death. I cannot say thou shall be infallibly damned, because thou 2 Timothy 2.25.
may repent and believe; and thou can not say thou shall be saved,
because thou have not yet repented for thy sin, nor believed on the Son of God.
A wicked man is not subjectum capax, a subject capable of this assurance, Ephesians.
1.13. In whom also after ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise. It is not the hard stone, but the soft wax that receives the
impression of the seal. If he hope for Salvation while he lives, and dies
in a natural condition, he shall loose his hope Job 11.20. and 8.13, 14. and
18.14.
and soul together: this presumption will prove self-delusion, and end in
desperation. He is worse than a Pharisee, Luke 18.11.
whether he be a private person, or a Preacher, that lives in gross sins,
hating the power of godliness, and discouraging holiness that yet blesses God
for election, justification, sanctification, and assured hope of glory.

2. Position. 2. That many of Gods dear Children Psalm. 77.1. to the 10. ver.
and 88.14, 15, 16. Isa. 50.10.
for a long time might remain very doubtful as to their present and eternal
condition, and know not what to conclude, whether they shall be damned, or
whether they shall be saved. There are believers of several growths in the
Church of God: 1 Ioh. 2.13.14
Fathers, Young men, Children, and 1 Pet. 2.2.
Babes; and as in most families there are more babes and children, than grown
men, so in the Church of God, there are more weak doubting Christians, than
strong ones, grown up to a full assurance. A Babe may be born and yet not know
it, so a man may be born again and not be sure of it. Sometimes they think
they have grounds of hope, that they shall be saved, sometimes they think they
have grounds of fears, that they shall be condemned: not knowing which might
be most weighty, like a pair of balances, they are in equal poyse. Zach.
14.6. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear
nor dark. It is spoken primarily of Gods providential dispensations, toward
his Church in Gospel times; For a while she should live in Crepusculo in
twilight: in a mixed condition of light and darkness, comfort and affliction;
like a man in a misty morning, that neither w lketh in the dark, nor yet has
the light clear to see far before him; like Paul and the Mariners that saw
neither Sun nor Stars for many days, Acts 27.20.
so might it be with a particular person, in reference to his spiritual
condition.

By this you see,

First. We make a difference betwixt saving faith as such, and a full
persuasion of the heart.

Secondly. That some of those that shall be certainly saved, might not be
certain that they shall be saved; for the promise is made to the grace of
faith, and not to the evidence of it. To Faith as true, and not as strong; they
may be sure of heaven, and yet in their own sense, not assured of heaven. As
an Infant may be born to a great estate, and have a certain title to it, but
yet he might not know it, or make it out to himself or others. So that the
Question is not de certitudine objecti, of the certainty of Salvation, but de
certitudine subjecti, of the apprehension, sense and knowledge of the believing
person, concerning his salvation.

3. Position. 3. That a believer may not only in the general, gather from the
word of God Mat. 8.11. and 25.34.
, from the death of Christ Mat. 20.28.
, from the glorious preparation God has made 1 Pet. 1.4.5.
, that many shall be infallibly brought to glory, but also that he in
particular, shall be one of them. This must have its proof after; I therefore
now pass on.

4. Position, 4. That we are not to expect any voice from Heaven, or Gods
sending of an Angel, or extraordinary revelation, to make us to know that we
do believe, or shall be saved, but to make use of those helps, and means
appointed by God, common to all believers, but yet sufficient for the obtaining
of this particular Assurance. This I put in, because the Papists grant it may
be got by extraordinary revelation, but not else; As it is their wicked
practice to keep the people most ignorant of those things, of which they should
have most knowledge, that following them with an implicit faith, and blind
obedience might not scruple at their Humane Traditions, and unwarrantable, and
many Bellarmin. de Baptismo. Tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 25. 26. 27. mentions 22
Ceremonies about baptism, Exorcism, Salt, Spittle, Cross, Unction, waxtaper
lighted, in token that the baptized person is translated from the power of
darkness unto light. etc.
ridiculous Innovations, that have crept in amongst them, so they keep them
most doubtful, where they should be most sure, and so the counsel of Trent Si
quis dixerit, hom nem renatum and justificatum teneri ex fide ad credendum se
certo esse, ex numero praedestinatorum, Anathema sit. Council. Triden. sess. 6.
Can. 15. and again, Si quis dixerit, magnum illud usque in finem perseverantiae
donum se certo habiturum absoluta and infallibili certitudine, nisi hoc ex
speciali revelatione dedicerit. Anathema sit. Council. Trid. sess. 6. Can. 16.
. If any man say that he knows, he shall certainly persevere, or infallibly
be assured of his election, except he have this by special revelation, let
him be Anathema. A wicked counsel that Anathematizeth a man for asserting that
may be obtained, which God commands him to get. 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your
calling, and election sure.

5. Position. 5. That such as have been filled with divine joy, through
wellgrounded apprehensions of their present grace and future glory, might lose
that assurance, and that joy Psalm. 30.7 Cant. 5.6.
, and this may be. 1. From God acting, 1. As Job 9.17.
a Soveraing Lord. 2. As a wise God putting a more eminent difference, betwixt
Earth and Psalm. 13.1. with 1 Cor. 13.12.
Heaven. Or, 2. From the buffetings of Satan. Or, 3. From themselves, 1. For
the trial and exercise of some of their graces Job. 1.1. with Job 13.24. Isa.
8.17.
. Or, 2. For correcting them for sin Isa. 59 2.
. As, 1. For their backwardness to duty Cant. 5.2, 3, 6.
. 2. Slothfulness in duty. 3. Frequent st^ong actings of pride in and after
duty. 4. Letting down their spiritual watch; and so, 5. Falling into some
notorious transgression ^ Sam. 11.4.13, 15. comp Psalm. 51.8.12.
. Or, 6. For not setting a due esteem upon the comforts of the spirit Job.
15.11.
. Or, 7. Insulting too much over weak believers; not exercising tender
compassion to dejected drooping Christians. 8. For their too much Earthly
mindedness. 9. Not rising presently by repentance Isa 57.17.
; for these reasons and the like, their Sun might be eclipsed, a winter of
sorrows, might follow their summer joys. They may Lose their evidence, but not
their adherence; and though there shall not be any intercision of
justification, yet there might be afterward a non-apprehension of it.

6. Position. 6. That in diverse men, there are diverse degrees of this
assurance, and in the fame man different degrees at diverse times, but in no man
at any time, in this life perfection of degrees; For our understanding is
imperfect, both as to the faculty and its acts. And though the mind is curing,
yet it will not be perfectly cured in this life, from that darkness that
beefel it, by man's Apostasy from God. For we have but an imperfect knowledge
of Faith and Love: and while we have but an imperfect knowledge of the
premises, we cannot give a perfect assent to the conclusion. And no man has
such perfection of degrees, of the assurance of his salvation, in an ordinary
way, as that one degree more cannot be added to the former; neither is there
any repugnancy in asserting an infallible assurance, and denying a perfect
assurance, for I infallibly know that there is a God, and that this God is good
and just; and yet I have not a perfect knowledge of a deity; or of his goodness
and justice, for in this life we know but in part. 1 Cor. 13.11, 12.

There are three ways that we come to a certainty.

1. There is a certainty that comes by sense, A threefold certainty.
which cannot err about its proper object, when there is a due distance, a fit
disposition of the Organ, and the medium rightly disposed: thus Thomas was
certain of Christ's resurrection from the dead. John 20.25. The other Disciples
said unto him, we have seen the Lord, but he said unto them, except I shall
see in his hands the Print of the nails, and put my finger into the Print of
the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. verse. 27. He
says to Thomas, reach hither thy finger and behold my hands, reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing. Verse.
28. And Thomas answered and said, my Lord, and my God. Though the other
Disciples told him they had seen the Lord, yet he would not take it for a
certainty from their report, except he had a certainty from his own sense. But
the Papists do not only deny us a certainty of faith, but also a certainty of
sense, for though in the Sacrament we see it is real bread, and taste it to be
real bread, and feel and handle it as real bread, yet contrary to our sense,
would have us believe, and say it is transubstantiated.

2. There is a certainty of science, or knowledge arising from first
principles, received by all, that are proved by their own light, that cannot
be demonstrated a priori, because there is nothing true before them; as a man
cannot show you the Sun but by its own light; So I certainly know that both
parts of a contradiction cannot be true; so I certainly know, that the whole
is greater than any particular part.

3. There is certainty of authority, or testimony, if the testimony be Humane,
it begets but a moral persuasion; for no humane testimony is of necessary
verity, because truth is not necessarily, but contingently and mutably in the
man that gives this testimony, and the testimony has not its cogency or
validity from it self, but from the qualifications of the person that bears the
testimony, whence there is a gradual certainty in humane testimonies; only God
is so necessarily true, that it should imply a contradiction that he should
be God, and yet lie. God cannot lie; Tit. 1.2. So that a Divine testimony
begets a certainty of divine Faith, for what God says, I undoubtedly know to
be true, because truth is Deuteronomy. 32.4.34.6. Heb. 6.18.
essential to him; for if truth be necessary to the testatour, the truth of
the testimony must necessarily be John 17.17.
true, so I know that the impenitent unbeleeving person that dies without
grace, and an interest in Christ, shall certainly Mar 16.16. Romans 2.4, 5. Heb.
12.14.
be damned, because God has said it, as if I saw him in his misery; and I
know that the Penitent, believing, self-denying, and sin-mortifying-Christian,
shall be Matthew. 5.8. Romans 8.13. Act. 10.43.
saved because God has said it, as certainly as if I saw him actually
possessed of it already.

When faith has this divine testimony to lean upon, it arises in some by
degrees to a full assurance. There are especially fo^r words in the scripture,
that set forth faith in its different degrees.

1. As it is said to be (...) Heb. 11.1. The substance, subsistence, existence
of things: Looking upon things future, as certain as if they were present;
among the Hebrews there is usual, a mutation of tenses, turning the future into
the praeter-tense. In lingua sacra, vau cum pathach sequente dagesh futuru^ in
praeteritum convertit, nam praesens proprium, Hebrai nullum habent.
Faith is the believers pathach, making things to come as certain to him, as if
he did already enjoy them; and puts a date upon the joys, of the life to
come, before he is possessed of them. Noah's faith assured him of the flood, as
certainly as if it had then been, when it was first Heb. 11.7.
foretold; it is a demonstration of things not seen; faith sees things that
cannot be seen. That way of argumentation whereby error is confuted, by
Aristotle is called (...) (...). Arist. de reprehensi. l. 1. Cap. 8. And so
used by the Apostle. 2 Timothy 3.16. The scripture iprofitable (...). To convince
the enemies of the truth, it signifies conviction, plain and evident. Joh.
8.9. and 16.8.
the word here used. But here for a certain conviction arising from divine
authority, showing us such things which sense cannot perceive, and reason
cannot comprehend. When faith thus represents these glorious things to come
thus unto the believing soul, then there is (...) a good persuasion of the
heart, or a holy confidence; and from this persuasion there arises (...) an
humble boldness, or liberty, and freedom of speech to God in prayer, which de
jure all believers have; these words you have together, in the Ephesians. 3.12. In
whom we have boldness, and access with confidence, by the faith of him. And
from these resulteth that desirable (...) a full assurance of a future
enjoyment, of those things that faith presents unto us, and we are persuaded
of our title to, and with liberty, freedom, and enlargedness of soul have
prayed unto God for. So the Question is not concerning all men, but believers,
and not whether all believers have it, but may have it; not by revelation, but
by ordinary means; not whether they always keep it; nor about perfect, but
certain infallible assurance in these words: thus,

The question stated. 1 Argr from special grace.
A believer may without extraordinary Revelation, certainly know and be
infallibly assured of eternal life.

And this will be made evident by the proof of these two propositions.

1. That a believer without extraordinary revelation, might certainly know that
he has justify ng faith, and unseigned love to Christ, and that he is upright
and sincere with God.

2. That there is an infallible connection, between these special graces, and
future glory. That a man may certainly know his sincerity, faith, and love, is
evidenced by these Particulars.

1. First proposition which shows that a man might know he has saving Grace.

Positio effectu in esse effectus ponitur causa.


God has laid down in his word certain infallible (...) Characters, Signs,
Discoveries, of sincerity, Justifying faith, and Unfeigned love to God, besides
other topical heads, we may know it from the effects which it does always
produce, that where I see such an effect of faith, I know there is faith: And
Papists must make us cast away all Logic, if we shall not have this granted.
I see the broad clear light shining in mine eyes, therefore I know the Sun is
risen; and when we see any sign, that is concomitant, or consequent,
inseparable and proper to the thing of which it is a sign, we know that that
thing is. A man that is sick and weak, yet feels his heart to leap and pant,
he knows he is a living man, a man that discourses, and rationally infers
one thing from another, knows that he has a reasonable soul, and that he
is a man. There are as certain Characters in the word of God of sincerity,
faith and love, as there are plain injunctions that we should be sincere,
believe and love; Would God command a man to examine himself whether he be in
the faith, if there were not rules suitable and sufficient, to direct us to know
the nature of faith, and wherein it does consist?

2. God has given to a man, a power to understand, consider, deliberate, (...).

Antonin. l 11. ss. 12. Edit. cant. 1652.

(...). Idem. L. 11. ss. 1.


and reflect upon himself, and judge of himself and of his ways, herein a man
is above a brute; a beast likes his pasture, but cannot know his propriety.
Certainly a man that is not a stranger to himself, but a diligent observer of
the actings of his soul, might know what they are, yea, and discern the moral
modifications of those acts. For Conscience is privy to the principle, and
spring of all our actings, to the manner and the end. If I love a man, by
reflecting upon my self, I know I love him, and shall this noble power of the
soul be only useless, in the greatest concernments of my soul? Can I know what
I approve, esteem most, and delight in most, and breath, and pant after most,
in other things and not in this? it is true, conscience is naturally blind, in
spiritual things, but yet directed by the word, and enlightened by the spirit,
might pass a judgment upon a man: For as the Moon borrows light from the
Sun, and so communicates light unto the world, which else it could not do: so
conscience receiving light from the word, and spirit, discovers what else it
could not do. So it is called the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27. The spirit
of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
belly: Not only taking notice of the outward acts in the life; but the inward
motions of the heart, not only of some, but it has a power to take cognizance
of them all: Conscience is like the urine which discovers whether a person
be sound in health, or shows what his distemper is. By the Echo, caused by
the reflection of the sound, a man hears his word, after he has spoken it:
so by the reflecting power of conscience, a man views his actions after they
are done, and hears his words after they be spoken. A man fees his spots or
beauty in the glass, by the reflection of the species, that do represent them to
his view. As Joseph's brethrens consciences told them that they were true men,
and not Genesis 42.31.
spies; so conscience may truly tell a man, that he is sincere, and not an
hypocrite. Thus conscience is said to be a witness; Romans 9.1. I say the truth
in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also be^ring me witness in the Holy Ghost;
to accuse, and to excuse. Rom 2.15. So it is a judge, condemning or acquitting,
according as a man's state is found to be. So much Heathens have spoken of
conscience. (...). Hierocl. Comment in Pytha. Carm. Unfeigned willingness to
part with, and mortify every sin, a sure sign of saving grace.


Now that the Scripture contains Characters of sincerity, and that a man
comparing himself by those Characters, might certainly know that he is
sincere; will be evidenced by these Scriptures. Psalm. 19.13. Keep back thy
servant from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me: then mark
[then] shall I be upright. When there is no one known sin, but a man is really
willing should be mortified and parted with, his most beloved sin that is
nearest to him, which by way of propriety he may call his own, in an especial
manner, which is the last sin a man parts with, and if there be any sin
which a man is unwilling to part with, and will keep a man off from Christ, it
is his bosom sin, his darling; and the truth is, that if any man keep, love
any one sin, which he will not let go, to close fully with Christ, let his
profession be never so great, he is an hypocrite. Some men part with Christ
for one lust, for one sin, Luke 18.22. When Jesus heard these things, how far
he had gone, how much he had done, he said unto him, yet lackest thou one
thing. Love to his riches, and prizing them more than Christ was his ruin; one
stab at the heart with a Penknife, will as certainly kill a man, as a thousand
wounds with a sword; one disease that is mortal, will as certainly bring a man
to his grave, as twenty; and one leak in a ship, will sink it, as more. Herod
did many things, but yet he would not let go his Herodias. Mark 6.17, 18, 19,
20. It is a sure rule, that which a man loves most, he will endeavor to keep
longest, Skin for skin, all that a man has will he give for his life. A man
prizeth his right hand much, but his head more, and therefore to save his head,
he will hold up his hand, and venture the loss of the one, to save the other.
There may be many sins a man might love, but one especially, and he may be
willing the other should be pared off to preserve that, but when he is
willing to leave all, to indulge himself in none, no not his darling sin; it is
a sign of sincerity. Consult these Scriptures; Psalm. 17.1, 3, 4. Psalm. 119.1,
2, 3, 6. Job 1, 8. and 2.3. and 31. cap. throughout.

Now a man may by diligent inquiry find out his beloved sin, A man may know
whether he be thus willing to part with sin.
and he may know, and his conscience may bear him witness of his willingness
to part with this, to have it subdued, and that by the grace of God he does
keep himself from it, that it bears not rule, nor dominion in his soul. Psalm.
18.23. I was also upright before him. How does David manifest this, by the
observation of his heart, and ways in this particular, for it follows, and I
kept my self from mine iniquity; There is as much power of God required, and
strength of grace to make a man part with his beloved sin, as all the rest.
Thus Hezekiah knew his sincerity; Isa. 38.3. He had the testimony of his
conscience, and was sure of it, else how could he have made his appeal to God?
Remember now, oh Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.

Likewise a man might certainly know, True faith might be discovered in us.
that he has justifying faith is proved from, 2 Cor. 13.5. Exami^e your
selves, whether ye be in the faith, prove your ownselves: know ye not your
own selves, how that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates. Does God so
strictly charge us to know that, which cannot be known? that faith here spoken
of that we must enquire after, is a justifying faith appears from the Text.

1. By this Christ dwells in us, and so not by any other faith.

2. Because without this faith we are (...) Reprobates, no^ as opposed to the
elect, but denoting persons unsound and hypocritical. It is also not a
conjecture, but a certain knowledge that we are pressed to obtain, (...)
by the word that the holy Ghost uses, search, make trial, as God tried
Abraham; Genesis 22.1. That his love to God, and fear of God appeared. Prove as
the Goldsmiths does his metals in the fire, or by the touchstone; because he
bids us prove it not so much by argument, as experience, for so the word is
used; Luke 14.19. He went to prove his Oxen, and forasmuch as we must prove
our selves to be in Christ, we must not leave it uncertain, for what is
uncertain after trial, is not proved.

A note of true Faith. (...) for (...). Fiscat. in Loc.
Besides that we do believe, we might know by the Judgments valuing, the
wills choosing, and the affections loving Christ above all. 1 Pet. 2.7. To you
that believe he is precious; Christ is an honor to the believer, and Christ
is most prized and valued by the believer: And cannot a man know what he
prizeth most? what he valueth, and esteems most? what his understanding does
dictate to him, to be chosen above all? and whether his will does choose
according to the dictates of the understanding? and the affections, love, and
desire, are upon the wing to enjoy what the will does make choice of? and grief
fills the heart when he cannot obtain it? could not Ahab know that he
prized Naboths Vineyard, when he greived because he could not get it? and all
that he had was lessened, by the want of what he prized so much? so does the
soul cry out, riches is nothing without Christ; and honor and friends, cannot
remove the grief of his heart, till Christ comes in to his heart, and manifests
himself there; cannot he know it, by his care to get, by his fear to lose, by
his determining what to do, in case he must lose that which he prizeth most,
or all other things besides? he will part with all though very desirable, as a
mariner will cast away his richest goods in a tempest, to save his life; As
Aristippus ^ast his gold into the Sea, saying, satius est, ut, haec per
Aristippum, quam propter haec pereat A^istippus, it is better these things
perish by Aristippus, than Aristippus by these things.
which think you does he prize most? a woman if her house be on fire, suffers
all her pewter to be consumed in the flames, so that she may but save her
child, is it not apparent which she valueth most? all shall go that thou
may keep Christ, if thou prize him most. This is known by the delight of the
heart in the enjoyment of that which a man valueth most in the want of other
things; thou can delight in Christ, in poverty, affliction, in the midst of
troubles in the world.

So likewise for love; is it not possible for a man to know that he loves
Christ above all? how else could Peter when asked three times by Christ,
whether he loved him, answer three times, that he did love him, and did
appeal to Christ that knew his heart, that he spoke truly, because he knew
he loved him sincerely, and this is observable that this was after Peter's
fall, by which he had learned to have a holy jealousy over his own heart, and
Christ does not intimate any deceitfulness in his heart in thi^ as he did
before when he said Mat. 26.35.35. Sign of true love to God.
twice that he would not deny him.

By the effects of love, we may certainly know that we love him.

1. By thy unfeigned desires to be like unto him, we love to imitate those
whom we dearly love; love produces assimilation, if he be holy so would
thou be, if he hate sin so do thou.

2. By thy hearty desire to be united to him, to have him with thee Nih^l
magis gregale quam antor omnilim rerum patichtissimus, nisi solit^dinis,
societute gaudet and extorquet consortem. Nieremb. De art. Vo p. 333.
his presence thou do desire, his absence thou can not bear without
mourning and complains, and wishing, oh that I could see him: oh that I could
meet with him: and therefore thou go from duty to duty, from ordinance to
ordinance, from thy prayers in thy closer to the congregation, if thou might
find him there, from the word to the sacrament, if thou might find him
there, if he come unto thee thou rejoycest, if he withdraw himself thy soul
is troubled.

3. By thy great care to please him, fear to offend him, and Se a se ausert
amans, and amato tradit.
resigning thy self to him. When it grieveth thy heart, to grieve thy Lord, and
it breaks thy heart when thou breakest his commands. Joh. 14.15. If ye love
me keep my commandments. Verse. 21. He that has my commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me. -- 1 John 2. cap. 3. And hereby we
know that we know (including this affection of love unto) him. verse. 4. He
that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. verse. 5. But whose keeps his word, in him verily is the
love of God perfected: hereby we [know] that we are in him. 1 John 5, 3. For
this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments
are not grievous, because of the love we have to him that does command.

4. By the love that we bear unto his Image, in whomsoever we do see it, and
love them that are like to Christ, so much that we could deny our selves of
honors, Amor echo. The soul that loves God does echo to God Commands. Psalm.
27.8. when thou saidest -- my he^^t said. --
and profits were it necessary, and God should call us to it, to do them good;
as we love Christ above all, so we love his likeness in others, and the
believer for Christ's sake above outward things; that if he be in necessity
we do not only wish him well, but part with something, and if God and the Law
of nature did not require us to lay it out; first for necessary provision for
our families, could part with all to help them in their great Act. 4.32, 34.35,
37, 1 John 3.16.17
necessity. Now this sincere love to the people of God, is an evidence of the
goodness of our spiritual condition. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed
from death to life. How, not by extraordinary revelation, but by this rational
argumentation, because we love the brethren? and verse. 18. My little Children,
let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. And verse.
19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth; and shall assure our hearts
before him.

But here the Papist does not only cavil, but the drooping distressed Christian
also questioneth all this, because of the deceitfulness of the heart. Alas the
Scripture tells us that the heart of man is desperately wicked, and deceitful
above all things From Jer. 1.9 The Papists cavils the drooping Christian doubts.
, who can know it? and if the heart of man cannot be known, how can we say
we believe, or love God? For this consider these four things,

1. Another man cannot know it; I cannot certainly and infallibly know whether
another man be sincere, or what his heart is, for it is the prerogative and
excellency of God to be (...) one that knows the hearts of all men. Act. 1.24.

2. A wicked man's heart is so wicked, and there is such a depth of wickedness
in his heart, that he cannot come to the bottom of it.

3. If a man cannot know all the secret turnings, and windings of his heart,
yet he may know the general scope, and frame of his heart.

4. If he could not do this of himself yet assisted by the spirit of God;
which all believers have received, he might know the frame, bent, scope,
inclination of his own heart.

Thus far the first proposition, that a man may know that he has sincere
faith in Christ, and love to God. Now we proceed to the second.

2 Proposition which shows the connection, between grace and glory.
Second Proposition is this; that there is an infallible connection between
justifying faith, unfeigned love, and eternal glory.

The Apostle tells us of some things that may be called (...) Heb. 6.9. things
that accompany salvation. Having, or containing Salvation, that are contiguous
to salvation, that the one touches the other; this must be proved, for else
though I know I do believe and love God sincerely to day, I can have no
infallible assurance of salvation, because this may be lost before to morrow,
or before I dye. Now this I shall endeavor to prove by these three following
particulars. 1 From the verity of Gods promises.


1. The undoubted verity of Gods promises, proves an inseparable connection
between sincere grace, and eternal glory. Faith is the eye of the soul, and
with it, through a promise, as through a perspective-glass, can the soul have a
view of Heaven and glory. What greater certainty or security can a man have,
than the infallible promise of that God who is truth it self; who will not deny
his Word, but the same Love and free Grace that moved him to infuse Grace into
thy heart, and to make the Promise, will move him also to give the thing
promised, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life. Joh. 5.24. He that believes has everlasting life: He has it in the
Promise, he has it in the first fruits, Romans 8.23. -- But we our selves also
which have the first fruits of the Spirit. -- The Jews by offering their first
fruits, did testify their thankfulness to God for what they had received, and
hopes of the full crop in due time. He has everlasting life, then it must not
end, Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: He that
believes not shall be damned. As certainly as the unbeleever shall be cast
into outer darkness, so certainly shall the believer be partaker of the
glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light. The Promise is as true as the
Threatening, Act. 16.30, 31. There you see a poor convinced, wounded sinner,
under the load of guilt, that had a sight of his lost, undone, deplorable
condition coming to the Apostles, and speaking after this manner, Ye men of
God, ye servants of the Lord, if there be any way for me, who have been so
great a sinner, that have done enough ten thousand times over, to damn my own
soul; if there be any certain way to avoid damnation, I beseech you tell me,
if there be any means by which I might certainly be saved, as you pity my
sinful soul, my bleeding heart, my wounded conscience, tell me what it is,
declare it to me. What is the Apostles answer? Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. The Apostles speak not doubtingly, perhaps
thou shall be saved, perhaps thou may be damned. If thou get Faith, it may
be thou may get Heaven. Alas! what relief, peace, satisfaction would this
have been to his wounded conscience? But they speak peremptorily, believe and
thou shall be saved. So that prove thou, that thou have Faith, and these
Scriptures prove thou shall have salvation.

The Connection therefore will not be questioned, if I believe I shall be saved;
this God has promised, but shall not a believer lose his Faith in Christ, and
lose his Love to God; for the Remonstrants grant that a believer qua talis, as
a believer cannot fall away, not come short of glory; but qui talis est; He
that is a believer may fall away totally and finally, and so cannot have
assurance of salvation, because he has no assurance that he shall persevere
in his believing, and state of grace. To this I oppose these places of
Scripture, 1 These. 5.23, 24. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly;
and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body, be preserved blameless
(therefore preserved from Apostasy, which is exceedingly blameworthy) till
when; till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; is this a prayer and not a
promise? yea, it is a prayer indicted by the Spirit of God, and has a promise
following it, if you will read on. Faithful is he that calls you, who also
will do it. Here the Apostle that had the Spirit, prays for perseverance; and
the Apostle that had the Spirit, promises perseverance. Certainty then of
perseverance does not make men careless in the use of means, not prayers
needless; by praying a man obtains the thing promised, and the certainty that
he has by the promise of obtaining, puts life into his prayers, Phil. 1.6.
Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, (...) denotes more safety than (...).
will perform it ((...), will finish it, will perfect it) until the day of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.5. Kept (garrisoned) by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, Joh. 10.28, 30. 1 Cor. 10.13. -- But will with the Temptation
make a way to escape; therefore they shall persevere, for to enable the
believer to persevere in all tentations, is to make a way to escape the
destruction and hurt the tentation tends to. God does promise this
absolutely, Jer. 32.38, 40. And they shall be my people, and I will be their
God, and will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. They shall not forsake God, because God will not
leave them, Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my Spirit into you, and [cause] you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. As absolute
as was the Covenant with Noah, that he would not drown the world, Isa. 54.9,
10. Besides, as God does make conditional Promises of Pardon and Salvation to
those that believe, and repent, so he does promise to give the condition,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. And herein is one special difference betwixt the Covenant
of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; for God promised happiness to man under
the Covenant of Works, if he persevered in yielding perfect Obedience, but did
not promse to keep him from departing from him. So that a conditional promise
is sufficient security, where the condition is certain, and does not infer the
uncertainty of the Promise, but where the condition is doubtful. These places
also prove the constancy of Grace, that it shall not be lost, 1 John 3.9.
(...), differt ab (...). Simpliciter accepto.
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; does not make a trade of sin,
cannot sin so, as by sin totally and finally to fall, for his seed remains in
him. Whilst the Papist and Arminians have endeavored to bite asunder the
Golden Chain, whereby Grace and Glory are linked together. This place of
Scripture has broke their teeth. Bellar. Tom. 4. de Justif. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Bellarmine acknowledges, that this is the hardest place of Scripture for him
to answer, in all the Book of God. Joh. 4.14. it is set forth by a well of
water springing up to everlasting life. A believer is born of incorruptible
seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. An Hypocrite, like a stake, has no root, and therefore may
be plucked up, but a real believer has grace rooted in him, and therefore like
a tree rooted in the earth stands fast.

If it be objected, no man can certainly be assured of Salvation, because God
has no where made a particular promise to any person, by name, and nothing is
to be believed with a Divine Faith, but what is expressly contained in the Word
of God. He has not said, Thou Cornelius shall be saved.

To this is answered, That all particulars are contained under the Universals.
If all men be rational creatures, and Cornelius be a man, we must conclude
that Cornelius is a rational creature. How will they prove that there is an
infallible certainty, that every particular person shall come to judgment. For
God has not said, and thou Cornelius shall come to judgment. In the commands
that are given to all men, that they shall not commit Adultery. How will they
prove that this reaches every particular man; for where has God said, Thou
Cornelius shall not commit Adultery? Thus this is proved from the infallibility
of Gods Promises.

Secondly, 2. From the prevalency of Christ's prayers
The prevalency of Christ's intercession for those that do believe and love God,
does demonstrate the inseparable connection between Grace and Glory. For we
know, that what Christ prays for shall be granted, Joh. 11.42. And I know
that thou hear me always. Certo certius concludere nobilicet, Christi
preces nunquam rejectum iri. Armin. o^at. de sacer. Christi. p. 17.
Arminius lays it down as a certain truth, that Christ's prayers are never
rejected. Now Christ's prayers for believers are not conditional, Father if
their Faith fail not, let them be saved, but Christ prays, that their Faith
might not fa^l, and that they may be saved, Christ's Intercession does not
exclude the conditions of Faith and Perseverance, but is, that we may believe,
persevere, and so infallibly be saved, Luke 22.32. I have prayed that thy
Faith fail not. And Arminians grant this prayer of Christ to be absolute,
praying not for Peter's salvation, if he should persevere, but praying that he
may persevere. Neither is this prayer peculiar for Peter, excluding the rest;
for though he mentions Peter; yet he speaks to all, and of them all.
Simon, Simon Satan has desired you, (...).
that he may sift you as wheat; and when he should be recovered from his fall,
he should strengthen his Brethren; whereby it is manifest, that Christ had
respect unto the perseverance of the rest, as well as to Peter's: And the like
Intercession Christ makes for all that should believe, as appears from the
17th. of Joh. which was not a prayer only suitable to the condition, and cases,
and exigencies of the Apostles at that time, but a pattern of his interceding
now in Heaven. So much Continet illud caput 17. Joh. perpetuum canonem precum
and intercessionis, quas Christus patri offert in caelis, quanquam enim
Christus adhuc in terra existens illam precationem recitaverit, tamen ad statum
illius sublimem in caelis pertinet proprie, and describi voluit, ut perpetuo
nobis esset in terris solatio. Armin. orat. de Sacerd. Christi. page 17.
Arminius grants, Joh. 17.15. I pray that thou would keep them from evil;
therefore from Apostasy the greatest evil. Not that they should be free from
persecution, but from being overcome by persecution, that it may not separate
them from him: (...); the Article shows the evil to be specially sin and Satan,
Verse. 20. Neither pray I for these alone: but for them also which shall believe
on me through their word; And he prays for their glorification, verse. 24.
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me, where I
am. (Christ then as to his Divine Nature was in Heaven, a proof that he was
God) That they may behold my glory which thou have given me.

3. From the inab^lity of all things to separate betwixt Christ and a believer.
Thirdly, The inability of all things that may set themselves to make a breach
and separation between God and the gracious soul, does demonstrate an
inseparable connection between grace and glory. Famous is that place to this
purpose, in Romans 8.35, 37, 38. Where the Question is propounded by the Apostle,
whether any thing shall separate betwixt God and his People, and hinder their
Salvation? and the Apostle says, No, Where observe these particulars.

First, The Interrogation; Who shall separate? that is, none shall. For thus an
Interrogation is a strong Negation Mat. 23.33. Heb. 2.3.
. Interrogatio negantis.


Secondly, Here is a particular application of this, to individual persons; not
only Believers, or Elect in general. Who shall separate [us?]

Thirdly, A particular enumeration of those evils that might threaten this
separation, tribulation, persecution, etc. And whereas some assert their own
wills may be the cause of their Apostasy, and that not mentioned in the Text.
It is not said, their own wills shall not separate them. I answer, it is
included, when it is said, no other creature, except they will exempt men's will
from the Creation.

Fourthly, His glorying and triumphing over all these, (...), more than
Conquerours. Over-overcome.

Fifthly, In whose strength it is that we are enabled to keep our
stedfastness, that makes it the more certain, in the strength of Christ, and
not our own.

Sixthly, His confidence, and he had the Spirit of God, (...), I am persuaded,
though sometimes it signifies no more than a moral persuasion, or probable
conjecture; yet it does not exclude a certainty of knowledge, Romans 14 14. I
know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus Christ, that there is nothing unclean
of it self; That is, I certainly know; it must therefore be judged by the
circumstances of the text.

Seventhly, It is not said only, they shall not separate, but that they cannot
separate us from the Love of God; whether love be taken actively or passively,
for the love wherewith we love God, or the love wherewith we are beloved by
God, is not now material; it is true of both. The sum of this might be gathered
up in this Syllogism. Those that may certainly know, that they do sincerely
believe, and love God, may certainly know that they shall be saved; But a real
believer may certainly know that he does sincerely believe and love God;
therefore he may certainly know that he shall be saved.

Thus far of the first Argument from our graces, and the infallible connection
between them and glory, because I may be judged to be too long in this, I will
be shorter in the rest, that I may come to the second part of the Question.

2. A believer may know that he shall be saved, 2. Argument. from the
inhabitation of the Spirit.
because he may know he has the Spirit of God dwelling in him. The
in-dwelling of the Spirit is proper and peculiar to believers; for the world
cannot receive him, Joh. 14.17. That they have the Spirit, they may know by the
special effects which he produces in that heart where he dwells; by his
convincing, humbling, sanctifying work, 1 Cor. 6.11. by inabling them to make
progress in their sanctification, 2 Cor. 3.18. by his special assistance
vouchsafed to them in holy prayer, with sighs and groans which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8.26, 27. By inabling them to mortify their sins more and more
Romans 8.13.

Now by all these effects, the in-dwelling of the Spirit of God in the heart of
a believer, being manifested, it does assure him of three things.

First, By the inhabitation of the Spirit, he may know his eternal Election, 2
These. 2.13. because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,
through sanctification of the Spirit.

Secondly, By this we may be sure of our Adoption, Gal. 4.6. And because ye
are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying
Abba Father.

Thirdly, By the Spirit dwelling in us, we may be sure of eternal Salvation,
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of
Truth, the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our
Inheritance, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, unto the praise
of his glory. In which Text there are two words that are to be considered; the
Spirit is a seal, it is an earnest; a seal among men, (...).
is, 1. For Secrecy. 2. For Distinction. 3. For Authority. 4. For Certainty. A
writing sealed is authentic, and for ensuring. It is an earnest; so also
called, 2 Cor. 1.22. a Metaphor taken from buyers and sellers. An earnest among
men, is part of payment, and though it be but small, yet it is sufficient to
secure you of that which is of very great value. Though there be no commutative
Justice betwixt God and the Creature, yet here it has its weight. There is
this difference betwixt an earnest and a pawn; A pawn might be fetched from his
hands to whom it was committed to keep, but an earnest binds a man to stand to
his agreement, or at least he must lose his earnest: But God will give the
whole Inheritance, and will not lose his earnest. For our greater comfort,
(...) Peculiariter dicitur pars aliqua persoluta pretii in venditione
intervenientis, ut fides fiat reliquae persolvendae summae. Beza.
we may take notice of these particulars in this Text, and the 2 Cor. 1.21,
22. compared together. 1. The person sealing, the Father. 2. In whom, in
Christ. 3. With what seal, the Spirit of Promise, where are all the persons in
the Trinity making us sure of our Inheritance. 4. When, after ye believed. 5.
The end, subordinate, the certainty of our salvation, a seal, an earnest:
ultimate, the praise of his glory. 6. How long this seal and earnest shall thus
assure us, and that is, till we have the complete possession of what it is an
earnest.

3 Argument from Instances ab esse ad posse valet consequentia.
3. Many have without extraordinary revelation obtained a certain knowledge,
that they should be saved; Therefore it is possible: That which has been done,
is not impossible, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, Henceforth there is a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge will give me at that day: and not to me only, but to all
them also that love his appearing. This certainty the Apostle gathers from his
sincerity and constancy in his Obedience and Faith, and declares the same
certainty that all those have, that know they love his appearing, Heb. 10.34.
Knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance. Par parium est ratio, and par affirmatio.

4. God commands us to make our calling and election sure, 4 Argument. Nemo
tenetur ad impossible.
therefore it is possible; Gods commands are not evidences of our ability, but
yet are of the possibility of the duty that he commands; they do not tell us
what we by our own strength can do, but yet they declare what by our diligence
and Gods assistance may be done, 2 Pet. 1.10. and if we can make our election
sure (not in it self, for so it is, 2 Timothy 2.19. but to our selves) we may be
sure of salvation. Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called,
and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he
also glorified.

5. The Papists grant a certainty of hope, 5 Argument. (...). Heb. 6.11.
supposes, (...). Heb. 10.12. Second part of the Case.
therefore we may have a certainty of faith; for by faith we must first
apprehend the object, before we can hope for it, and according to the measure,
degrees, and strength of our faith is our hope; he that has but a weak faith
cannot have a strong hope. If Abraham had staggered in his faith he had not
been steadfast in his hope. Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace, in believing that you may abound in hope. So much for the
possibility of this assurance.

Now I come to the second part of the Question; to speak to those that know
not, that they have eternal life, and discern not their spiritual condition,
and those may be of two sorts.

1. Some that for want of diligence in the use of means, are uncertain what
their condition is.

2. Such as have made inquiry, and long earnestly to be resolved in this great
Question, whether they be converted, changed, and shall be saved or no, and
yet cannot find it out. I would speak a few things to the first of these,
because the greatest part know not their condition, through their own
carelessness and negligence, that through the slothfulness of their own hearts,
on the difficulty of the work, or multiplicity of worldly care and business,
are yet in the dark. That examine their shop book oftener, and more diligently
than they do the book of their own hearts; that make oftener enquiry whether
they grow rich, than whether they wax good. If I may judge of other men's hearts
by mine own, in this point, and not be thought to have too hard, and
uncharitable thoughts of them, I would conclude we are all guilty of negligence
in this case, and therefore walk in the dark, and remain in uncertainties about
the salvation of our immortal Souls, which should be the first thing we
should make sure of, because it is of the greatest and everlasting concernment.
Ah Christian! chide thy own slothful, lazy, negligent heart; shame thy self out
of this carelessness; what, can thou eat, and drink, and sleep, and trade as
quietly as if thou were past all danger? And yet thou do not know whether
thou shall be damned, or saved. Awake oh my soul! rouse up thy self, and look
after thine eternal state; it is no matter whether thou art rich or poor,
honorable or contemptible, the great question, that with the greatest
seriousness is to be resolved, is whether thou have grace or no, whether
Christ be thine or no; certainly careless persons should be stirred up to
look after their eternal state, and those that are diligent need some
considerations to make them more diligent, and therefore the Apostle Peter
writes to those that had obtained like precious faith with himself, calling
upon them, urging and exhorting them to make their calling and election sure. 2
Pet. 1.10. For this end let me propound these following Questions to thee that
art negligent in this great concernment, and as thou read: give thy self a
sober serious answer.

8. Questions propounded to slothful christians.
1. Is it nothing to thee, to live in the daily neglect of a commanded duty; is
it not the injunction of thy Lord, whose servant thou do profess thy self to
be, that thou should give all diligence in this matter, and will thou not
give any at all; or not at all proportionable to the waightiness of thy
concernment herein? might not this raise doubts and jealousies in thy soul,
that thy condition is not good because thou art not diligent to know, and to
prove it to be good? especially when thou do consider that thy Lord commands
thy diligence herein; Might not thou question the sincerity of thy obedience
to any of Gods commands, for want of the universality of it, extending it self
to all Gods commands? tell me Christian, why has God given us this charge?
read 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore, the rather brethren give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure; is it not the same God that commands thee to
Pray, that commands thee to make sure of Heaven? did thou never read these
words; or have thou read them and thrown them by, and thought this counsel is
not fit to be followed, nor this command to be obeyed? what can thou say
for thy neglect? look a little into the Text, what is it that you are commanded
to make sure of; house or land? if it had been so, it is like thou would
have obeyed; but it is something better, infinitely better, whether thou are
effectually called, and eternally elected; and is this to be done slothfully,
carelessly; or does not God require thy diligence, thy utmost diligence, nay all
thy diligence, nay thy speedy diligence without delay, thy painful diligence
without indulging thy self in thy sloth; (...)
thy continual diligence without weariness, or till thou had got a certainty
of thy state? and should thou not do this, rather than any temporal
concernment? should not thou make sure of grace, rather than of riches; of
heaven, rather than the earth; of an interest in God, rather than of earthly
possessions?

2. Is it not a shame that wicked men should daily use more care to make sure
of fading vanities, Operose nihil oguit.
than thou do use to make sure of better and more lasting riches? what, is
not the soul better, than the body? or are things temporal better worth, than
things eternal? how do they cark and care, what must we eat, and what must we
drink; and how shall we be sure of something to keep us when we are old? do
thou do thus for thy soul, how shall I get my sins pardoned, my nature
sanctified, and my soul saved? how shall I be sure of an eternal heavenly
house above, when this mouldring cottage of my body is tumbled down? does it
not shame thee to see the diligence of worldly men, that if they buy house, or
land, they look narrowly to the writing, and ask advice and counsel, whether
the title will be good, that he may be sure, and not defrauded? The Old
userer will not let forth his moneys, but he will have good sufficient
security, both for principal and interest, because he says and knows it is
good to be sure; nay yet further, does it not shame thee that many men should
take more pains for hell, than thou do for heaven, and to be sure of
damnation, than thou do to be certain of thy salvation? how do they daily
drudge in the ways of wickedness, committing sin with greediness, with both
hands, heartily, with their whole soul, as though they should not come to hell
sure enough, or soon enough; while thou art dull, flat, listless in thy duties
to God, and not praying heartily as for thy soul: do not wicked men take more
pains in breaking the sabbath, than thou do in keeping of it; and do not they
scorn duties, more than thou do prize and practice them: But further,

3. Do thou not too much forget thine own Mortality; do thou indeed
consider that thou art hasting into an eternal state, and must within these few
years, months, yea weeks, enter into an unchangeable condition? do thou
indeed believe Heaven or Hell is before thee? that eternal death, or eternal
life, are at the end of this fading, short, momentany life? or do thou judge
it to be indifferent, whether be the place of thine everlasting abode? what
is the matter? Good Lord! what sloth, stupidity, negligence, has possessed our
hearts! surely if thou did believe that thou might be in thy grave to
morrow, would thou not make sure of heaven to day? if the lease of thy house
be almost expired; and the Landlord has given thee warning to provide thee
another Habitation, for he will not suffer thee to renew it any more, do
thou not presently enquire of thy friends, and of thy neighbors, Sirs, can you
tell me where I may have a convenient dwelling, I have but a little time in
the house where I am, and I have had warning to go out by such a day? art thou
not careful to have an house ready to go to upon the very same day thou leavest
the former? Alas! man, do thou not know the lease of thy life is almost out?
nay, do thou not know that thou art only a tenant at will, and God may turn
thee out at an hours, at a moments warning? and yet do thou not make sure of
an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens? has not God given thee
warning? did thy head never ache? was thy heart never sick? surely if thou did
not forget thy own mortality, thou would be more careful, painful, diligent
in thy business. I see frequently men upon their sick-beds, when they think
they must dye, begin to inquire after Heaven, and how they may know their sins
are pardoned, and whether their souls shall be saved; because the apprehension
of the neerness of the grave, does rouse them; and for all thou know, thou,
though now in health, may be as soon in thy grave, as he that lies sick.
God can stop thy breath when he pleases. Art thou mortal? look then after thy
soul.

4. Is not this too great a sleighting of the comforts of the Spirit? of God?
of Christ and Happiness? is there not so much excellency in all these, and
sweetness in discerning thy propriety to them, as to provoke thee to diligence,
in making sure of them?

5. Do not thou know that others have looked long after it, and do thou
think thou shall come so easily to it? others have prayed much, and searched
themselves often, and yet have not been able to satisfy all their own doubts,
whether they have gone farther than ever any hypocrite went; and do thou
think it will be so easily discerned, whether thy heart be sincere with God?
many find it a hard thing to distinguish betwixt the highest degrees of common
grace in hypocrites, and the lowest degrees of saving grace in a true believer.

6. Do thou think that conscience will never be awakened to disquiet thee,
when thou can not satisfy it about thy salvation? will it always be in this
spiritual slumber? do thou think that sickness will never come? and that
death will never come? and that trouble will never seize upon thee? when thy
conscience shall be so alarmed, that thou would give all thou art worth to
know what shall become of thy soul? oh then for an infallible evidence of Gods
Love! oh then that thou might know whether God will pardon thy sin, and save
thy soul! oh dreadful case! when thou come to dye, and conscience shall
accuse thee for thy sloth, when thou feel thy spirit begin to fail, and
apprehendest thy self near the grave, and conscience rages, and is not at
peace, because thou do not know whether thou shall go to Heaven or Hell. It
is dreadful, doleful, sad to hear these complaints from a dying man: oh woe is
me, that I must take my farewell of all my friends, and death is impatient of
delay, and yet I cannot say my sins are pardoned! oh woe is me, though I lie a
dying, I cannot say my sins are pardoned! within a little while my body must be
carried from my bed to my grave; but oh it breaks my heart that I cannot tell
whether my soul, my precious (and yet too much neglected) Soul shall be carried
to Heaven by holy Angels? or dragged down to Hell by cursed devils! oh that God
would grant me a month or two, a little longer, that I may work out my
salvation! but thy conscience shall tell thee, thou had time, but thou did
mis-spend it; thou had it, but thou did not improve it in getting this
grand Question resolved, Whether thou had made thy peace with God. Consider
now how dreadful it will be, when conscience is awakened, and thou in this case
unresolved.

7. If thou be a true Christian, yet herein do thou not act too much like the
careless ungodly world? they take no care to make sure of Heaven, and will thou
justify their practice, and harden them in it? There are some carnal ones in
the family; a carnal husband, or a carnal wife, or ungodly children, or
graceless servants, that minds not God, nor care for their souls, that look not
after Heaven; and will thou be guilty of encouraging them in their carelessness,
and hardening them in their forgetfulness of God, by thine own remisseness? but
if thou wast serious in the use of means, pressing, following hard after God,
thy strictness might shame them out of their wickedness; and might reflect upon
themselves, if such a one that lives so circumspectly, and takes such pains in
duties, and yet doubts, and fears, and would fain be resolved; what a
careless wretch am I, never to regard my own soul; they are ignorant of God,
and his excellency; of Christ, and his beauty; of Grace, and its necessity; and
therefore desire them not, nor care to make sure of them; but God has opened
thine eyes, to see all these. Stir up thy self then to get a certainty of thine
interest in them.

8. Art thou not too much guilty of hypocrisy, when thou go to the table of
the Lord, and yet do not give diligence to make thy calling and election
sure; nor to have the certain knowledge of the pardon of thy sin, and of thy
peace with God? is not the Lords supper an ordinance for the helping the right
receivers to assurance of the pardon of their sin, in the blood of Christ? is
it not for that end a seal of the covenant of grace; if thou say thou usest
it for this end, why then do thou look after it no more, when thou returnest
from that Ordinance?

Having premised these things to awaken you, and rouse you out of your sloth,
supposing that now you are resolved to take any course that can be prescribed
from the word of God. That thou art one, who weepest, mournest, complainest
because thou do not discern thy spiritual condition; I shall lay down my
advice to thee in these following directions.

1. Direction.
1. Get some Characteristical distinguishing signs of true saving grace, by thy
serious searching the word of God. Directions to get assurance.
God has told thee in his word who shall be damned, and who shall be saved;
though not by name, yet by the qualifications, by which they are described. In
the Bible there are the statute laws of Heaven, and the standing rule by which
thou must be tried, thou must stand or fall, be eternally blessed, or
everlastingly miserable; as thy condition is consonant to, or various from the
infallible characters of saving grace contained in the Scripture. Thou that
have deserved eternal death might know before the day of the general assize
whether thou shall be acquitted or condemned.

But if thou know not how to gather these thy self, go to some godly faithful
Minister, and desire him to give thee some Characters of a sincere Christian
from the word of God, wherein hypocrisy and sincerity are differenced, and be
sure the signs thou tryest thy self by, be not short of saving grace, or that
will not hold trial, or bear thee out at the day of judgment. I cannot here
insert any, partly because I have not room to crowd them in, partly because by
what I have already laid down under that head, that a man might know that he
is sincere, believes and loves God; something to this purpose might be
picked up.

2. Direction.
2. When thou have thus furnished thy self, thy next work must be, to set thy
conscience on work, and reflect upon thy own heart, and upon the m^tions of thy
will, and compare thy self with the word of God. The former sent you to study
the book of Gods word, this calls upon you to study the book of your own
hearts. The other is a direct act of the understanding, this is a reflect act
to make a judgment of thy state; whether there be a transcript of those
things in thine own heart; for every believer has the Gospel-laws written upon
the table of his soul by the spirit of God. Assurance cannot be had
ordinarily, without the examination of our own hearts, for assurance is the
certain knowledge of the conclusion drawn from the premises, one out of the
scripture, the other by the reflect act of the understanding, or conscience,
thus; He that believes and is justified, shall be saved; that is the word of
God: then by the search of his own heart, he must be able to say; But I
believe and am jus^ified, and from these two, does result this assurance that
he may conclude; Therefore I shall be saved. Luke 15.8. The woman that had
lost a piece of silver, did light a candle, and swept her house and thereby
found what she had lost. Conscience is this candle, the scripture is the fire
at which it must be lighted, and self-examination, is the broom whereby the
heart is swept, and so the state of the soul which before was not discerned,
comes to be discovered.

But here take heed thy heart be not rash in affirming or denying, suspend the
determination till thou have made a narrow, strict inquiry into thy soul, as
thou love thy soul do not presume, as thou valuest thy comfort do not deny
any work of the spirit of God upon thy heart, but with thankfulness acknowledge
any thing that thou can discern to be a fruit of the spirit. Search
thoroughly, and judge impartially. Say therefore to thy soul, Deus est oc^^us
infinitus.
to make thy self more serious in this weighty work; thou art now, oh my Soul!
in the presence of the great heart-searching God, that knows certainly what
thy state and condition is, what thy will, heart, and affections are; thou must
oh my Soul! shortly stand at the bar of God, as now thou stand at the bar of
conscience, and must be searched, judged by the Lord, and have the sentence of
life or death, of absolution or condemnation, according as thy state shall be
found to be. Consider oh my Soul! thou art now about the greatest concernment
in the world, many have been mistaken, many are now tormented in hell, that
once thought their condition was good; it is not therefore for thee to flatter
thy self, and it is easy to be mistaken, and if thou should be mistaken,
it is as much as thy soul is worth; if thy condition be bad, and thou conclude
it to be good, thou will but go more merrily to hell: It is as much as thy
comfort is worth, if thy condition be good, and thou conclude it to be bad;
thou will go more sadly to Heaven, and wilt be unthankful to thy God, and keep
the glory from him, and the comfort from thy self. Thou art indicted, oh my
soul! arraigned and sound guilty, that thou have sinned against the Lord, the
question is, Whether thou have repented and are pardoned? I charge thee
therefore, oh my soul! that thou speak truly, and answer rightly to these
demands.

Art thou so far convinced of sin, of the vileness of its own nature, the evil
in it, the evil after it, that thou art weary of it; thou groanest under it,
thou loathest it, and art unfeignedly willing to be broken from every sin,
without any reserve? and what thou can not extirpate, that thou will bewail?
art thou so far convinced of thine own insufficiency to help thy self, that all
thy tears cannot wash thee, and make thee clean, all thy duties cannot save
thee, that though thou dare not neglect them as means, yet thou dare not
rely upon them as a Savior; so that thou see the necessity of a Christ? the
suitableness of Christ? the sufficiency and willingness of Christ, offering
himself unto thee in the Gospel, calling to thee, crying after thee, saying, ah
thou poor, miserable, forlorn sinner, thou have undone thy self, will thou now
be cured? thou have wounded thy self, will thou let me apply a plaster of my
blood, my healing, pacifying blood, to thy bleeding soul, to thy distressed,
disquieted conscience? all that I expect from thee, is to take me for thy Lord
and Husband, to rule, govern, sanctify and save thee, thou have withstood
thine own mercy, I have often asked thee, and thou have often denied me, but
yet if now thou will receive me, behold I bring pardon along with me, and
peace along with me, and eternal life, and every good thing along with me;
yet mercy is not gone, it is not yet denied to thee. When thou may gather
such things from the Word of Christ, put the question to thy self, what say
thou, o^ my soul, thou hear the gracious words of the Lord Jesus, he
commands thee to come, he inviteth thee to come, he promises thee
acceptance, if thou come, art thou willing, or art thou not? will thou
persevere in thy former denial, and be damned, or will thou yield and be saved?
will thou consent to take him for thy Husband, and subscribe unto his terms?
does thy judgment value him above all? and thy will choose him above all? and
thy affections go out after him above all things in the world? as a woman does
in all those three respects, when she takes a man to be her Husband.

Art thou so far convinced of the excellency of the everlasting Glory of the
Saints, and the perfection of that Happiness that is above, as it is a state or
perfect Holiness, as well as a state of real Happiness, that thou art willing
to part with any thing that might hinder thee from obtaining of it, and do any
duty prescribed by God, though displeasing to thy flesh, and use them as means
for the attaining of ^o excellent an end? would thou have him whatever it
cost thee? can thou not be without him, whatever thou be without? then pass
sentence for thy self, concluding thy condition to be happy.

This is the nearest way to find out thy condition, not stand wrangling with
thy self, for thy former neglects, any further than for thy humiliation; and do
not so much enquire what thou have not formerly done, as what now thou art
really willing to do.

Besides, this solemn, set examination, thou shall find it very profitable to
get and keep a sight of thy spiritual condition, to call thy self to an account
every night before thou sleep, where thou have been that day, what thou have
done, what company thou have been in, what sin thou have committed, what duty
thou have omitted, (...); Pythag. Carm.
and mourn if thou have fallen, and return thy hearty thanks to God, if thou
have walked carefully and circumspectly that day; this counsel a noble Heathen
did give; to call our selves to an account before we sleep.

3. Direction.
3. That thy assurance may be yet more complete and full, and thy comfort
arising from the same more enlarged; Fall down at the Throne of Grace, and beg
earnestly, and pray importunately for the witness of the Spirit of God. For as
it is the Spirit that works grace in us, so it is the Spirit that must
discover the truth of that grace to us, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not
the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know
the things that are freely given to us of God, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the children of God. But beware
thou take not Satanical delusions for the spirits persuasion, or the conceit of
thy own brain, for the witness of the Spirit. The Spirit never witnesses any
thing to any man contrary to what is revealed in the Word, for he is a Spirit
of Truth, and never speaks contradictions; therefore if any man thinks that
he has the witness of the Spirit, testifying that he is a child of God, and
yet is not holy, humble, penitent, he is deceived; but if thou have the Graces
of the Spirit, and the Spirit witnesses so much unto thy conscience; and with
thy conscience. 1. It inflameth thy heart with love to God and Christ. 2. It
raises more hatred in thee to thy sin. 3. Thou find a mighty strength and
power in it engaging thy soul to walk humbly, holily with thy God. 4. A
wonderful cogency in it to be zealous for God in suffering any thing for his
sake, and doing and obeying any thing that he enjoins -- thou have
encouragement to ask this of God, because it is according to his will Joh.
14.13, 14
Joh. 14.21. Lord, is it not according to thy will that I should be careful of
my immortal soul? and make sure its eternal Happiness and Salvation? it is thy
command I should do so, that I should examine my self whether I be in the
Faith, and whether Christ be formed in my heart. Lord, I have examined, but yet
I cannot clearly see it. I see there is some grounds to hope it, but yet I
cannot confidently assert it. Oh thou blessed Spirit of God, clear up mine
understanding, and stir up and excite my graces, that I may feel the actings of
them in my soul, and so better discern them. Though this be arbitrary and not
necessary, yet do to me as thou did unto thy servant David, when he prayed
that thou would lift up upon him the light of thy countenance, thou put
gladness into his heart Psalm. 4.6.7.


4. Direction.
4. Press after the highest degrees of Grace, and be much in the exercise
thereof, if thou would clearly discern thy spiritual condition. The weakness
of thy grace makes thee doubt of the truth of grace. The Christian must be like
the Crocodile, As some affirm.
that grows as long as it lives, and cease to be, when it cease to grow.
The body of a man is continually growing, till he come to his perfect age, and
then cease to grow, for then, though he may wax fat, and broader, yet he
rises not higher, and his bones have no increase: So when we come to our full
stature in Christ, to our perfect age in glory, we shall grow no more, because
then we shall be perfect, but in our minority we must be always growing, and
a growing person is easily discerned to be a living person. A Dwarf cannot see
so far as a taller man, nor be seen so far: So a little grace cannot be so
easily perceived amongst a crowd of sins and corruption.

When grace at first is like Elijahs cloud, 1 King. 18.43, 44. Little, like a
man's hand, it was hardly discerned, but when i^ did increase, and the Heavens
were black with clouds, every eye could then perceive them. Assurance is
usually vouchsafed to Christians of the largest size. Men put not up a great
Mast or Sail in a little Boat, b^t in a larger Vessel, Animi quies, motus
virtutis est, the moving activity of virtue, is the settled rest of the mind
that is able to bear it.

So also by the strong actings and exercise of grace it is discerned. A man in
his sleep, when he acts not reason, cannot judge himself to be a man. A man in
a swoon, when he cannot be perceived to breathe, standers by know not whether
he be dead or alive, nor he himself. Moral Habits are acquired and
strengthened by frequently repeated Acts, and more ea^^ly discerned. The fire
lying raked under the ashes, is not so easily found, as when it being blown up,
breaks forth into a flame. He that has strong love to God, will sooner feel
it; and the more frequent it moves, and is upon the wing after God, the sooner
shall thou know that thou love him. The being of a thing is proved by its
operation Operari, supponit esse.

5. Direction.
5. Be well acquainted and informed in the nature of the Covenant of Grace,
and the conditions thereof. Whatsoever are thy doubts, there is something in
the Covenant of Grace that would be ground of satisfaction to thee; is it thine
own unworthiness? here rich and free Grace is laid open; is it thy long delay
of coming in to God, that now thou think it is too late? the Gospel will
tell thee, that Christ will not cast thee off, if now thou come un^o him; is it
thy ragged, torn, imperfect obedience? the Covenant of Grace accepts of
sincerity, though there be many infirmities, the intention of the heart for the
work of the hand, the purpose for the performance, where the sincere soul
cannot do so much as he does really desire to do.

6. Direction.
6. Prize the society of the people of God, that are acquainted with the
workings of Gods Spirit upon their hea^ts. Be much in communion with the
Saints. When they have been unfolding their doubts, they have been in some good
measure resolved; this has quickened their hearts, when they have been dull,
and blown up the sparks of love in their souls to God, that they have felt
their hearts to burn within them Luke 24.32. Psalm. 66.16. Mal 3.16.
with love toward God.

7. Direction.
7. Keep a Record of all the experiences thou have had of Gods goodness to
thee, and what thou have formerly found Psa. 77.10, 11.
make it a means for the supporting of thy soul for the present, and the
future. Such a time thou can remember thou wast upon thy knees, bemoaning thy
self, loathing thy self, full o^ sorrow and complaints, and God took thee up in
the arms of his love, and spoke like a friend, words of peace and comfort to
thy soul, and bid thee be of good cheer, he was reconciled to thy soul; He
filled thee full of sorrow, and afterward filled thee full of joy; he cast
thee down, and raised thee up; he broke thy heart, and bound it up; he came
to thee, as to Mary, expostulating with thee, sinner, why weepest thou? what
aileth thee? thou weepedst for thy Savior, and he was by thee, and showed
himself unto thee.

So much for the means to obtain this certain knowledge of eternal life, but if
by the use of these and the like directions, the soul cannot get this
assurance, and though he search and pray and grieve, because he has not the
light of Gods countenance shining upon him, follows the means, and longs to
know his estate, and all things he enjoys are lessened in his esteem,
because he cannot see his interest in Christ, whom he does most esteem. To
thee I will give these Directions.

Counsel to those that by these directions cannot yet obtain this assurance.
First, Though thou can not say thy condition is good, yet do not say that thy
condition is bad. Though thou can not affirm thou have the faith of Evidence,
yet do not peremptorily say, thou have not the faith of Adherence; though thou
have not the witness of the spirit for thee, yet do not bear false witness
against thy self; can not thou say thou art sure of Heaven, yet do not say
there is no hope of Heaven; though thou can not own Heaven as thine, do not
disown it; if thou can not prove it, do not disclaim it. It is strange yet
ordinary to see many doubting Christians dispute against themselves, and reason
against their own comfort; tell them of their longing after Christ, their
weeping and mourning for him, they doubt it is not in truth: if you say to
them, if you do not truly love him, then let him alone, and follow no more
after him; why do you grieve for him because you cannot find him, if you do
not truly love him? they will reply, conscience will put a man on to do
something, when yet it may not be done out of love to God; if you ask, can
you take up with any thing short of Christ, though indeed they cannot, yet they
will reply, the heart is deceitful, and they know not what they should do.
Frame not arguments against thy self, when thou can not frame them for thy
self; live by faith, when thou can not live by sense and comfort.

Take heed here, of judging thy condition to be bad by trying thy self by
rules, not so suitable to find out the being and truth of grace, as the growth
and increase of grace. And here,

1. Say not, thou have no grace, because thou have not so much as thou see
others to have; to take notice of the eminent degrees of grace in others, to
provoke our selves to labor, after the same proportion is good, but to argue
for a nullity of grace, because thou have not such a quantity of grace, as thou
discernest in others, is not rational. Is there no water in the brook, because
there is not so much as in the river? is there not light in a candle, because
there is not so much as in the sun? will thou say thou art a beggar, because
thou art not so rich as thy neighbors, that have a full estate? or that thou
know nothing, because thou know not so much as the greatest scholar?
Observe Peter in this case, John 21.17. he did not say when Christ asked him,
love thou me more than these, I love thee more than John, or any of thy
Disciples love thee, but I love thee; thou must love Christ more than thou
love any thing in the wo^ld besides, or else thou do not sincerely love
him; but thou must not conclude that except thou love him as much or more
than others love him, that thou have no love at all unto him: Yet this is
ordinary, I never was humbled so much as others have been; I cannot mourn as
others do, enquire now after the truth, rather than after the degrees, and know
thy humiliation is true. First when thou art broken for and from thy sin: so
much bitterness upon the breast, as weaneth the Ch^lde from it, is sufficient.
Secondly that makes thee see a necessity of Christ, and willing to close
sincerely with him.

2. Say not, thou have no grace, because thou have not grace proportionable to
thy desires, but rather hope thou have it, because thou have such enlarged
desires after it; is not he a froward unthankful Child, that says his Father
has given him nothing, because not so much as he desires?

3. Say not, thou have no grace, because thou see corruption in thee more
than before; they were in thy heart before, though thou did not discern them;
the house is full of filth, but while the shuts are up it is not perceived, but
take them down and you see it plainly, not because there is more filth, but
because there is more light.

4. Nor because of the indisposedness of thy heart to, and dullness of thy
affections, sometimes in the time of holy duties.

Secondly, When thou can not get assurance, make as much improvement of the
grounds, upon which thou may build Psalm. 33.18. and Psalm. 148.11.
hopes of salvation. The probable grounds thou have, thou would not part
with for all the world; if thy heart is not full of joy through sense of Gods
love, yet thine eyes are full of tears, and thy soul of sorrow through the
sense of thy sin, would^st thou change thy condition with any hypocrite
whatsoever; with the richest man that has no grace? I would not have thee rest
satisfied with a probability, but yet bless God for a probability of salvation:
is it nothing that one that has disserved hell most certainly, should have a
probability that he should escape it; would not this be a little ease to the
torments of the damned, if they had but a strong probability, that they may be
saved; but no hope makes it heavy; when thou art sick, thou inquirest of the
Physician, Sir, what do you think of me? shall I live? or shall I dye? if he
reply, it is not certain, but there is good hopes, it is probable you will live
and do well; this is some support unto thee in thy sickness.

Thirdly, Discourse with such Christians wh^m thou dare not judge to be
ungodly, and yet find them to be in the same condition with thy self, having
the same doubts, the same fears, complaining of the same sin, and do not pass a
worse judgment upon thy self than thou dare upon them. This is a very useful
way, either to convince, or support; to consider our case in a third person.
Thus Nathan convinced David, 2 Samuel 12.1. verse. to the 15. verse. So the Prophet
convinced Ahab. 1 King. 20.35. to the end of the chapter. A man condemning
another in the same case, becomes (...), self-condemned. So a man approving of
another in the same state and condition, clothed with the some circumstances,
as himself, is to approve of himself; thou hear another say he knows not
what to think of his present and eternal state; but yet thou see, and he
tells thee, he dares not willingly sin; the desire of his soul, is to walk
holily and humb^y with his God; he dare not neglect a commanded duty; thou
dare not say, this man has no grace, it being as well with thee, say not
worse of thy self.

Fourthly, Forsake not duty, because thou wan^est comfort; Thou had be^ter
want ^oy, than neglect duty; for duty is more necessary than comfort, and in
order to it, therefore must be minded more; to seek comfort may be in love to
thy self, but to be constant in duty in the want of comfort, argues
conscientious obedience to the commands of thy God. Though thou art not taken
up into the arms of Christ, yet lie at his feer; though he does not take thee
into his bosom, yet th^ong among the crowd to touch the hem of his garment.
He might deny thee comfort, and yet own thee for his child; but thou can
not deny him duty, and yet own him for thy God; if he do not tell thee thou
art his Son, yet do no^ thou say thou will not be his Luke 15.19.
Servant. I beseech thee say not, I will hear no more, I will pray no more,
Ordinances are in vain, and all endeavors will be in vain. Casting off hope,
c^ips the wing of serious, constant endeavors. Limit not God to thy time.
Joseph did not presently discover himself unto his Brethren, but carried
himself as a stranger to them. Joseph knew that they were his Brethren, but
they knew not that they were related to him; but they often coming to him, and
making known their perplexed condition in the grief and trouble of their souls,
with sad complaints and moans; he could no longer refrain, his heart was full,
his bowels did yearn, and the fire of love did so slame forth, that made his
tears presently boil over. I am Joseph your Brother, I will show you kindness,
be not troubled, Genesis 45.1. and the following verses. While thou followest God
with thy complaints, and pressest hard after Christ; he will at length show,
and make known himself unto thee. Oh thou weeping sinner, I am Jesus thy
Brother, I am thy Redeemer, I will be thy Savior, though thou have dealt
unkindly with me, yet I will receive thee with the sweet embracements of my
everlasting love. Read Psalm. 85.8. Hosea. 6.1, 2, 3. Isa. 54.7, 8.

Fifthly, Always be more observant of the purpose and disposition of thy
heart, the inclination of thy will, the general scope of thy life, than the
passionate sense of joy and comfort. There is but little constancy in these
joys, like the tide, they ebb and flow. Like a Land-flood, might overflow for
a while but a little after be dried up; joys are the sweetmeats of the soul,
but are not for its constant fare and diet. For a spiritual banquet, not for a
standing-dish. Thus it was with David. And the experience of Christians proves
it.

Sixthly, When thou can not experience the sweetness of the Promise, yet then
firmly believe the verity of the Promise. The Truth of the Promise does not
depend upon our sense and feeling of it, especially when we would; there might
be evidentia cred^bilitatis, when there is not evidentia rei, sufficient reason
to believe, because it is a promise made by God, when thou do not as yet see
the performance of it. Though thou have not tasted honey, yet thou will believe
it to be sweet, if told by one that has eaten thereof.

Seventhly, Carry thy self really toward thy sin; as thou do conceive
through mistake God does toward thee. Thou say, God does not love thee, be
sure thou do not love thy sin; thou say, he has cast thee off, be sure
thou cast off thy sin; smile as little upon thy sin, as in thy greatest
darkness of discomfort, thou say God does upon thee. Lighten the ship by
casting thy sins overboard, and thou shall come safe to shore. This Eclipse
may be by the interposition of some sin betwixt thee; and the light of Gods
countenance.

Eighthly, Diligently observe what grace is of the greatest growth in thy soul,
and make the best improvement of that for thy support. The body natural does
grow in all the parts of it, but not equally, as to all dimensions; the finger
grows not to the magnitude of the wrist or arm; In mixed bodies there are all
the elements, but one is predominant. Amongst the many branches of a tree, one
might out-top all the rest. In a ring of Bells all sound, but the great Bell is
heard above them all. In the New Creature there are all Graces radically and
seminally, but yet one might be more eminent than the rest. In some Faith (
Mat. 15.28.
;) in some love to God ( Luke 7.44, 47.
;) in some sorrow for sin ( 2 Cor. 2.7. 2 Chronicles. 33.12
;) as eevery sin is radically in every wicked man, yet some sin is grown to a
greater height, and like Saul, is taller than the rest; in one, covetousness;
in another, passion; in another, pride.

Moral virtues are connexed communi vinculo, with a common bond, yet they may
be in several degrees: Some have them in gradu continentiae, that though the
disorders and perturbations of the soul are very urgent and pressing, yet a man
is able to resist and to suppress them. Some in gradu temperantiae, when the
passions are more sedate and calm; some in gradu heroico, when they are so
subdued and restrained, that they are subject to the Government and Rule of
Right Reason, the Guide and Leader of the soul. Now that grace that is most
eminent, is easily discerned. Make use of that.

Ninthly, Blear not thine eyes, by always poring upon thy sin, and wants, that
are the reason of thy doubts and fears, but study also the Righteousness and
fullness of Christ, for the support of hope and confidence. Know, that if thou
had never so little sin, Gal. 3.10.
yet thou have need of a Savior, and if thou have never so much, he is willing
and sufficient ( Isa. 1.18.
;) if thou had never so much sorrow, and inherent grace, thou must be
justified by the mirits of Christ alone Job 9.21. 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.8, 9.
and if thou have but so much as is true and sincere, thou art justified, and
shall be Mat. 12.20.
saved. Set thy Faith on work therefore, to lay hold upon Christ, and Faith
will suck strength from Christ, as the child does cleave to the Mother by the
navel, and receive nourishment from her; a twigg that is shaken by every wind,
yet tied to the body of a tree, it stands fast; eye thy sin to cast thee
down, and Christ's Righteousness to raise thee up.

Tenthly, Be more in practice than in disputes, and wherein thou would
inform thy judgment, proceed in a right method. Many weak Christians cannot
see the complexions of their faces, because they are always looking into
troubled waters, searching into needless disputes and questions, notional
knowledge in the Scripture will never cure thy distemper, no more than bare
reading of Galen, or the works of some Physician will recover a man from a fit
of sickness.

And where thou would be informed, proceed in a right method, question not
thy election first, but thy true conversion. God has reprobated me, all will
be in vain: but thou must prove thy election by thy conversion, as the cause
is discovered by the effect. We must begin in this where God does end, and end
where God does begin. As on a Ladder, he that is above, if he would come down
to you, must first use the top rounds, but if you would go up to him, you must
first use the bottom-rounds, and ascend step by step. Election is the uppermost
round, sanctification is at the bottom, and by our sanctification we must
climb up to see our names written in the Book of Life. In building men proceed
methodo synthetica, in pulling down, methodo analytica. If you would take a
Watch to pieces, you must begin where the Watchmaker made an end. The
Carpenter, when he builds, first lays the foundation, and finishes the roof
last; when he pulls down, he takes off the roof, and so to the foundation.
God did first choose, and then convert us; but we first know our conversion,
and thereby our election. Motives to get Assurance.

In the cloze take these Motives drawn from the utility of this Assurance, to
quicken thee further to labor after it. This Assurance will be 1. Comfortable
to thy self. 2. Profitable to others.

It will fill thee with comfort 1. Under all Gods Providence. 2. Under all
Gods Ordinances.

First, That is a desirable frame of spirit, that does fit us to carry our
selves under the various dispensations of divine providence (wherewith the
people of God are exercised) as most becomes the Gospel of Christ, and the
Profession we make. Assurance helps us in this; For

1. Assurance sweetens every mercy, it is the Sugar in our Wine. He knows
every mercy is given in mercy, and not in wrath; he knows it is not his
portion; he has much here, but he is sure he shall have more hereafter; but
the want of this imbitters all outward enjoyments to the doubting Christian;
who says, what are the riches of the world to me, when I doubt whether the
graces of the spirit are infused into me? what is gold without Gods love? and
what is plenty without hope of Heaven?

2. Assurance will lighten every burden; with this he can bear the burden of
adversity (as Sampson did the gates of Gaza upon his back, Judge. 16.3.) without
sinking under it.

1. The assured Believer knows he is rich in the midst of Poverty, Col. 2.2.
Though I cannot say riches are mine, yet I can say Christ is mine, and that is
more. Though I cannot say silver and gold is mine, yet I can say grace and
glory is mine, and that is better. This believer can look up toward Heaven,
and say, yonder is the place, the palace, the Kingdom I have a title to, above
yonder Heavens must I for ever dwell; above yonder Sun is a mansion for me, oh
I long to be there, where I know I shall for ever be. My heart is filled with
joy, while I think on it; oh what joy shall enter into me, when I shall enter
into that joyful, blessed place; though now I walk in rags, I shall shortly be
clothed with white and glorious Robes. Now a Cottage is my house, but a
stately building is prepared for me. 2 Cor. 5.1. Joh. 14.2, 3.

2. The assured believer rejoices in the sharpest sufferings for the Gospels
sake Heb. 10.34. Act. 5.40, 41. and 16.23, 24, 25. compare Gal. 2.20. with Act.
20.23, 24. and 21.13.
. He can despise and scorn all the scornings, threatenings, and reproaches of
the ungodly world; for though he sees he is hated by men, yet he knows
he is beloved by God.

3. Assurance is the best cordial in time of sickness, and a Sovereign remedy
against the fears of death. But it is sad to be a doubting Christian, when thou
art a dying Christian.

Secondly, The assured believer may with comfort approach to God in all his
Ordinances. 1. He can go to the Throne of Grace with humble boldness, crying
Abba Father. 2. When he reads or hears the Word of God, every part is welcome
to his soul. When the Promises are opened, he can say these belong to me;
when threatenings are denounced, he can rejoice, because he is delivered from
the misery threatened; when commands are urged by assurance, they are much
facilitated; this is my Fathers command, I will do it, my Fathers will, I will
obey it. 3. He can approach with joy to the Lords Supper, and sit there with
great delight. He sees the wounds, the sufferings, the sorrows of Christ, and
says, all this was for me.

Secondly, This Assurance will make thee profitable unto others.

1. To the wicked. 2. To the godly.
1. To the wicked. By this the wicked shall be convinced, that Religion is a
reality, that Ordinances are not empty things, when they must acknowledge
surely these men meet with something from God in duty, which we are strangers
to, that makes them thus cheerful in all conditions.

2. By this they shall be convinced that that is false, they have conceived of
seriousness in Religion, that if they close with Christ, they shall never have
a delightful, pleasant life more. Drooping, disconsolate, mourning Christians,
strengthen this error in wicked men too much.

2. It will make thee profitable to the godly. 1. To the weak. 2. To the strong.

First, Thou will be profitable to the weak, by communicating thy experiences
to them for their comfort and support. 2 Cor. 1.4.

Secondly, Thou shall be profitable to the strong, that have the same assurance
with thy self. When two such meet together, oh how sweet is their discourse of
the joys of Heaven, and of the comforts of the Spirit, and the delights of the
life of a Christian.

These advantages amongst many others that I might have named, has the
believer that is assured of his spiritual-safe-condition, that a believer that
yet knows it not, does not so fully enjoy. I shall conclude all with that
exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. Wherefo^e the rather Brethren,
give diligence to make your calling and election sure: -- for so an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

What difference is there between the Conflict in Natural, AND Spiritual
Persons?
Romans 7.23. But I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin which is in my members.


THe Apostle having showed in the former Chapter, that Justified Persons are
not under the Law, prosecutes and amplifies that choice Privilege in this
seventh Chapter, which has four parts.

1. An Allegory, Parts of the Chapter.
which shows there is no matching with Christ till we be divorced from the Law,
verse. 1. -- 6. Moses may be a good friend, but to fallen man he is ever an ill
Husband, a bloody Huband, as he was to Zipporah, Exodus 4.25.

2. A complaint, partly of the Law as an occasion of sins malignity, verse. 8,
9.10. and partly of his own estate. 1. Before Conversion (as either secure or
desperate, verse. 9, 10, 11.) Secondly, after Conversion (as troublesome and
vexatious, verse. 14. -- 24:)

3. An Apology, 1. For the Law as spiritual, holy, just and good, v. 12, 14,
16. Secondly, For himself as under a force, etc. v. 15, 17, 20, 22, 25. The
best Gospel apology against sin, is (under Christ) a fore or after descent, 2
Cor. 7.11. This, grace will allow for a good clearing of our selves.

4. A Gratulation, v. 25. No man, especially no Goldly man, can under the
Gospel want matter of thanks be his condition never so sad, since the former is
not altogether hopeless, and the later has at present a part and Interest in
Christ.

Coherence.
My Text falls under the second head. The Apostles condition was bad before
Conversion, sad after Conversion, truly militant and no release from this
warfare, Eccles. 8.8. Christ endured the contradiction of sinners, Heb. 12.3.
Christians the contradiction both of sin and sinners, and that continually. May
they not well complain? as Psalm. 120.5, 6, 7. and Genesis 25.22.

In the words note 1. An Act of Observation; Godly men are great observers,
Division of the Text.
especially of themselves, verse. 18. I know, v. 21. I find, and in the Text, I
see.

2. The matter observed (a Combat or Conflict) In which note 1. The Combatants
or Champions, the Law of the mind and the Law of the members. The form of a
Being Naturalists call a Law, Bac. de forma Calidi Aphor. 7. because forms like
Laws, and Laws like forms do ordinate and constitute Natural and Politic
Bodies in their Being, distinctions and operations. Vatablus calls it aliam
vim, Laws as forms being principles of action. Grotius distinguishes of a
fourfold Law. 1. Lex Dei recorded in Scripture. 2. Lex Mentis the Judgment
between things honest and dishonest. 3. Lex Membrorum, the carnal or sensual
Appetite. 4. Lex Peccati, the Custom of sinning; to complete which heads, we
must (with the leave of that Learned Author) add two other distinctions,
namely, 1. The Law of Original Sin propagated by Generation, which is
strengthened by custom in evil, and together with our sensual appetite
depraved, makes up the Law of sin. Secondly, The Law of sanctifying Grace
infused in Regeneration, which compleats the Law of the mind.

2. The equality of this fight in a reciprocal opposition, sin indwelling
fighting against Grace indwelling, and contra. Arab. Castrametantem, there
being a pitched Battle between Grace and Corruption; in which some Graces and
Corruptions bear the office of Commanders, others of Common-Souldiers: this is
noted in the Preposition (...), compare Hebr. 12.4.

3. The disparity of the fight managed by way of rebellion on the part of Sin,
by way of Loyalty and Authority on the part of Grace: whence Beza and Piscator
render it rebellantem.

4. The dubiousness of the fight, both parties often fighting as it were aequo
Mart; sometimes one, sometimes the other seeming to get the better, as in the
battle between Israel and Amaleck, Exodus 17.11.

5. The sad event too often on the better side which is led Captive; in which
term yet there is a mixture of comfort; Sin when in Triumph acting as a Tyrant,
not as a Lawful Sovereign: The Law of the mind may be overborn by, but never
indents with the Law of the members; as a person inslaved by force but not by
contract; or as Schoolboyes in a misrule may shut their Master for a while out
of doors; but at last he gets in and they pay dearly for that affront. Withal,
note in the Text a mixture of civil and military terms to illustrate the
spiritual conflict; there being a Lawsuit, as well as a pitched Battle,
between Grace and Corruption.

The Text is limited by the Apostle to the Regenerate; The scope of the Text.
yet may in a good and true sense be extended to the unregenerate also, in whom
there is a Law of the mind; namely, the Law of Reason though not of
Regeneration. Yea, Porphyrius lib. 1. (...) uses the Apostles phrase, calling
it (...). Taking therefore the Law of the mind and the Law of the members in a
large sense, may not every one take up this complaint of the Apostle? Thence
note,

In every man, especially in the Regenerate, Mind, and the Law of the Members.

That it is so appears by a threefold Evidence. The (...).


1. By the testimony of Nature speaking in Heathen. Thus Medea; Video meliora,
proboque deteriora sequor. So Simplicius ad Epictetum. (...). The irrational
appetite displaces reason, etc. and leads it Captive.

2. By testimony of Scripture, and that 1. As to the Godly, Gal. 5.17. The
flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc. 2. As to the unregenerate, Instance in
Herod who was troubled by this conflict between Lust and Conscience; Mark 6.26.
Yea, in the very Heathen, Rom: 2.14, 15. who by not harkening to Conscience
opposing sin in them, felt Conscience accusing them for sin.

3. By every man's experience. Who finds not every day within himself a contest
of contrary motions and inclinations? Are we not all in this point Rebeccah's,
big though not with Twins yet with an Esau and a Jacob, two contrary Nations
struggling each with other? Genesis 25. v. 22, 23. Oh that we had all her wisdom
and success.

The (...), why its so, will appear in the Explication and resolution of the
special Case of Conscience assigned: which therefore here I pass.

Premisals.
Before I propound the Case, let me premise some particulars preparatory, as a
Key of Explication.

1. As the great, so the little World (man) is made up of Contraries: The
outward-man of contrary Elements, humors, health and sickness; the inward-man
of contrary Principles, reason and passion, Grace and Corruption, Conscience,
and Sense.

2. Man is both an Actor in, and a Theater of the greatest action and noblest
conflict in the World, though usually invisible, and therefore not so much
observed. Prove. 16.32. He that conquers himself is a nobler Hero, than
Alexander who conquered a great part of the World.

3. In the state of Innocence there was no conflict, in the state of Glory
there will be no conflict, there being no corruption to combat with Grace. In
a state of Minority (as in Infants and Fools) there is no conflict till reason
begin to dawn, and with it Conscience to actuate common Principles against the
motions of innate corruption. In a state of corruption there is no spiritual
conflict, because there is no renewing Grace to combat with Corruption that
strong man that keeps all in peace till a stronger than he comes. Luke 11.21,
22.

4. The natural conflict is in every godly man, the spiritual conflict is in no
wicked or natural man. This I note, to allay the fears of drooping Saints, who
finding a conflict between Conscience and Corruption, conclude they are in the
state of Nature, and search not for the conflict between Grace and Corruption.
This is, as if a man should conclude he is a Beast, because he has sense like
a Beast, not considering that he has reason superadded, which a Beast is not
capable of.

5. There is a vast difference between the natural and the spiritual conflict.
This will appear in the resolution of the case.

6. The mistake about these two conflicts. 1. Undoes natural men, who feeling a
Combat in themselves, fondly apprehend it to be the fight between the flesh
and the spirit, and thereupon rest secure in a natural estate. 2. It troubles
regenerate persons, and that in reference both to duty and comfort, making them
drive heavily, because they doubt whither they be Israelites or Aegiptians.

7. As the great Wisdom of God lies in Governing the Great-world made up of
contraries; so the great wisdom of a Godly-man lies in Governing the
Little-world made up of like contraries.

8. This Government lies principally in discerning these conflicting
contraries, and improving their contrariety for the Advantage of the Outward
and Inward-man. He is the wisest Physician who can Govern the Body made up of
contraries, and he is the wisest Christian who can rule his Soul in the midst
of contraries, In this Government Christ is Principal, Psalm 110.2. A Saint
Instrumental. Hos. 11.12.

9. This singular wisdom is attainable in the use of ordinary means, and that
by the meanest who have Grace to follow Christ's conduct: yet not by the power
of free will or humane industry, but by the bounty of free and Special Grace. 2 Timothy 3.15. Jam. 1.5. Romans 9.16.

10. It cannot be expected that any Unregenerate person should understand to
purpose the difference between these two conflicts; because he has no
experience of this double State and double Principle. No wonder then if such
say of me as the Jews did of the Prophet, Ezekiel. 20.49. Does he not speak
Parables? How ever, for the sake of the Unregenerate to convince them, and for
the sake of the Regenerate to comfort them, I shall endeavor (plowing with
Christ's Heifer) to find out this great Riddle. And so I come to the Case, and a
case of the highest concernment.

Wherein does the Natural and Spiritual conflict differ? or,

They differ principally in seven particulars,

I. In the ground or cause of the fight, which in the Unregenerate is,

1. Natural Principles, or the relics of Gods Image in the Understanding: The
notion of a Deity, and of loving my Neighbor as my self, etc. are Principles
cannot be rased out of any man's heart be he never so professed an Atheist, nor
can these principles lie always idle, but will more or less be in action
against corrupt inclinations.

2. Acquired Principles from common Illumination, moral and religious education
and custom. This light discovers more of sins obliquity and danger, thereby
laying on a stronger Bridle of restraint through fear, shame, etc. and adding
spurs to the exercise of many parts of piety.

3. The natural Temper of the Body which indisposes to some special sins, as
well as to some special Graces. As all Souls, so Original corruption in them
may be equal, yet not act equally, because of the indisposednesse of bodily
Organs. Thus some naturally are more chaste, sober and meek then others, and
hence their temper advances the combat against the lusts that oppose the
forementioned virtues.

4. The contraiety of one lust to another. Grace is uniforme, and each virtue
linked together in a perfect subordination; but sin is divided, and opposite to
it self as well as to Grace. Thus Ambition says Spend, Covetousness says
Spare: Revenge incites to murder, Self-love restrains for fear of an halter.
Here now is a combat, but only between flesh and flesh, between flesh more
refined and flesh more corrupted. The best of these may be called a
counter-motion (as in dust and clouds agitated by contrary winds) but not
properly a conflict or fight; because they proceed not from a true vital
principle, there being in a natural man no principle of Spiritual Life.

On the other hand; In the Regenerate the combat arises from the Antipathy of
two contrary Natures perfectly hating each other, Gal. 5.17. Of all affections
(as one notes well) Love and hatred are first, and most uncompoundable. A Godly
man hates sin as God hates it, not so much for its danger as for its
Loathsomeness; as some creatures hate filth so that they will rather dye then
defile themselves. One Wolf may snarl at another, but the quarrel is not laid
in their Natures as it is in the Wolf and Lamb, which therefore cannot be
reconciled. God in Paradise first sounded the Trumpet to this All-arme, Genesis
3.15. proclaiming an eternal War between this seed of the Woman and of the
Serpent. As in persons, so much more in principles, there is a mutual
abomination. Compare Psalm 139.22. Prove. 29.29. Psalm. 97.10. and 119.128. and
Romans 8.7. Enemies may, but Enmity can never be reconciled.

II. They differ in the Object or matter of conflict; which in a natural man
is, 1. Grosser evils that startle the Conscience. 2. Infamous evils that are
attended with worldly fear or shame, or 3. Some particular evils that cross
temper, education or custom, etc.

But in spiritual persons, the matter of conflict is, 1. Little sins as well as
great, 2. Secret sins as well as open. 3. The first risings as well as the
gross acts. 4. Sins which promise worldly safety, credit, profit, contentment,
as well as those sins that threaten the contrary. 5. In a word, all moral evil;
hatred and Antipathy being of the whole kind, Psalm 119.128. especially of
those evils which most endanger the New-man, Psalm 18.23. and such as are
beloved sins, Matthew: 18. verse. 8, 9.

III. They differ in the subject of the conflict. In natural men the fight is
in several faculties, reason fighting against sense and passion, or the dictate
of conscience against the corrupt inclination of the will; whence the fight is
more at a distance by missile Arms and velitation. But in the regenerate man
the fight is more close in the same faculty, the wisdom of flesh and spirit
counteracting in the same understanding, the lustings of the flesh and spirit
in the same will: whence the fight is as it were inter Triarios Grace and
Corruption immediately; which at first happily was managed by the Hastati and
Scutati, Reason and Interest. The former is like the fight of the Soldiers of
Fortune, more lazy and by way of Siege; the latter more keen and vigorous by
way of Assault an Onslait; like that of Scanderbeg, who fought with his Enemies
breast to breast in a Box or Grate.

IV. They differ in the Instruments or weapons wherewith they combat. The
natural man's weapons are (like himself) carnal; to wit, natural or moral
reason, worldly fears or hopes, and sometimes spiritual fears or hopes but
carnalized, namely slavish fear and mercenary hopes. But the Regenerate man's
weapons are Spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.4. to wit, gracious Interest, and all the
Spiritual Armor, Ephesians. 6. verse. 11. -- 18. especially the Shield of Faith,
and the Sword of the Spirit.

V. They differ in the manner of the fight. The natural man's combat is more
mercenary; admits of more Parley's, cessations, correspondencies, as 1. Sam.
15.9. Saul's fight with Amaleck. But the Spiritual man (as such) fights it out
to the last, and will give no Quarter. The former is like the strife between
Wind and Tide, which often come about and are both of one side; the latter is
like the Dam and the Tide, that strive till one be born down: or like Stream
and Tide meeting and conflicting till one has overborn the other.

VI. They differ in the extent of the conflict, in relation to its subject and
duration. The extent of the Subject is double. 1. As to the faculties. 2. As to
the Acts. As to the faculties; The seat of War in the Regenerate is every
faculty, flesh and spirit being ever mixed (as light and darkness in every
point of Air in the twilight) 1 These. 5.23. Grace and Corruption Leaven the
whole-man: So that in the Regenerate there is at the same time both a Civil and
a Foreign War, that in the same faculty, this in one faculty against another.

Contrariwise, in the Unregenerate there is usually nothing but a foreign War
between several faculties, there being nothing of spiritual good in their wills
and affections, to set the same faculty against it self. 2. It extends also to
every act of piety, and charity (especially if more spiritual) Romans 7.21. For
which the natural man has no conflict, (but against them) unless it be to
stop the mouth of conscience enlightened etc. Nor indeed does he know
experimentally what spiritual acts of Piety are. But the regenerate find it by
constant experience, Faith and Unbelief, Humility and Pride ever opposing and
counter-working each other: whence he is forced to cut his way through his
Enemies, and to dispute it step by step. Others may seek, but he strives, Luke
13.24. and takes the Kingdom of Heaven by an holy violence, Matthew. 11.12. in
spite of spiritual Enemies that way-lay him within and without.

2. As to the extent of Duration of the War, which being in the Regenerate
irreconcilable must needs be interminable; like the War between the Romans
and Carthaginians that was intayl'd to Posterity: or as fire and water will
fight for ever if together for ever. In the natural man (contrariwise) the
quarrel is soon took up, as between the Romans and other Nations; there being
not that Antipathy between Reason and Corruption, as there is between Grace and
Corruption.

VII. They differ in the concomitants and consequents of the fight. And 1. The
fight in natural men may stand with the constant practice of and living in sin
against the light of Conscience. Godly men sin more with knowledge, but wicked
men more against knowledge. He that is born of God does not commit sin, that
is, make a trade of living and lying in known sin, 1 John 3.9.

2. The fight in the Unregenerate hinders not the perfection and consummation
of sin in the antecedent deliberation and purpose, in the present delight and
complacency, and the following pertinacy and impenitency. Instance in Saul,
Herod, Judas, and others. But the Spirit by its conflict breaks the power of
sin in all these in the Regenerate, that they can neither do good as they
would, nor sin as they otherwise would, Gal. 5.17.

3. The fight in natural men seeks only the repression, not the suppression of
sin, to lop the superfluous branches, not stub up the root; to charm the
Serpent, not to break its head. But the spiritual fight seeks the full
mortification and abolition of sin, Romans 6.6. (hatred seeks the destruction of
its Enemy, 1 Samuel 24.19. and 1 John 3.15.) and the complete perfection of
Grace, though not attainable in this life. Phil. 3. verse. 10. -- 14. This for
the first branch of Wisdom, which teaches to discern between the natural and
the spiritual Conflict.

The second Branch of Heavenly Wisdom, Aplic.
lies in improving these Spiritual Contrarieties, by siding with the spirit
against the flesh.

1. This is done. 1. By watching all the forces, designs and motions of the
Enemy. We have in us Legions of these Devils, the meanest of them too strong
and too subtle for us, Heb. 3.13. true Gibeonites, that can easily cheat us
with their moldy bread, and clouted Garments; Sons of Anak, all of one
confederacy, and sworn Enemies of our Salvation; had we not need have our eyes
in our heads, and set watchfulness upon the forelorn hope? 1 Cor. 16.13.

2. By making head early against the Enemy. Principiis obsta, etc. nip sin in
the bud, crush this Cockatrice in the shell, strangle this hellish-Brat in the
birth; take heed of the first appearances of evil, take it is first All-armes;
slight not the smallest sin or occasion of sinning. How much mischife is done
by a little wound, a little Thief, a small Spark? James 3.5. and 2 Samuel 11.2.

3. Oppose especially thy Master-Lust. Fight (in comparison) neither against
small nor great, but against the King of these Hellish Regiments, 1 Kings
22.31. Be sure to pull out that right eye. This is the Skirt Satan lays hold
of, in wrestling with thee, to thy hazard, and his no small advantage; The
Goliath and Holophernes, who being once slain, the Philistims and Assyrians will
soon be routed. Throw the head of this Shebah over the wall, and the enemy will
retreat shamefully.

4. Never enter the field without thy Second: Fight under the Shield as well as
under the Banner of thy General. In other fights the General flies to the
Battle upon the wings of his Army, but here the Army flies upon the wings of
their General. This is done by Faith and Prayer. Thus David conque^ed Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45. and the Philistims, 2 Samuel 5.19, 23. Fight always upon thy knees;
Let Moses be praying while Josuah is fighting, Exodus 17.11. May not Christ take
it ill if thou carry thy self as if thou meanest to steal a victory before he
know of it?

5. Put on, keep on, stand in, and exercise thy Spiritual Arms, Ephesians. 6. v.
10. -- 18. That only is Armor of Proof: never any girds it on but may boast
before the Victory. Allude to 1 Kings 20.11. never any fought prosperously
without it: It Is our metal as well as our weapon. Neither Earth, nor Hell can
stand against this Artilery of Heaven. Let not Satan find thee disarmed, lest
he leave thee dispoyled. There is no fighting with carnal weapons against a
spiritual Enemy. You may as well beat the Devil with a sword or spear, as
conquer sin by the power of Free Will, or with moral and worldly Arguments.
They are but paper bullets and paper walls, the scorn, not the Terror of Hell,
though useful in some cases. Remember withal, there are no Arms for thy
Back-parts.

6. With some Lusts fight like the Parthians, flying, 1 Cor. 6.18. and 2 Timothy
2.22. This is but an honorable retreat, and warlike stratagem, Jos. 8.15.
Judge. 20.32. Youthful Lusts are like the Basilisk, or like a Burning-glasse in
the Sun, that may not be looked on, 2 Samuel 11.2. with other Lusts fight like
the Romans, charging home.

7. Entertain no Parley with thy Enemy. This cost all mankind dear at first,
Genesis 3. verse. 1. -- 4. It Is d^ssloyal, looks like a confederacy, and is very
dangerous. Come not into Jaels tent, sleep not in Dalilah's lap, talk not with
Joab lest he smite thee under the fifth Rib. Sin and Satan are too cunning
Sophisters for us to dispute withal. He in a manner gives up his Cause, that
will plead it with the Devil. The best Answer to Satan's Suit, is, a round and
churlish denial, Zach. 3.2. Matthew. 4.10. Jude verse. 9. Parleying is a kind of
faint denial, and draws on this impudent Suitor.

8. Take advantage by every thing that befalls thee in this Spiritual Warfare.
Eye thy reserves: The Captain of thy Salvation is both thy Vanguard and thy
Rereward, and will be thy Reward: Thou gainest thy Husband, as David did his
wife, by conquering these Philistims: and, while thou art fighting for him, he
is weaving thy Crown: 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Eye thy Fellow Soldiers, those Worthyes
of the Heavenly David, that are both Militant and Triumphant, Heb. 12.1.
Example is very forcible. Yea, take advantage by thy very Foy^s, to be more
humble, charitable, dependent, watchful and cour^gious. Let not the Enemy gain
the field, after Conquest, by a back-blow of Pride. This Antiochus gains
(often) more by flattery then by force, Dan. 11.21, 22. It Is honorable for
Christ to say, well done, etc. but dangerous for Satan to say, well done; and
safe for thee to say, poorly done, when thou have done thy best. Despise thy
self when others admire thee; and be assured, that selfadmiration is the most
dangereus Devil in the World. Especially, improve Advantages prudently, when
thou have thy Enemy on the hip, yea on the ground: fall with all thy weight
upon him, give him no Quarter, lest thou meet with the doom of Ahab, 1 Kings
20.42. and of the Israelites, Numb. 33.55, 56. Here, as one notes well, Learn
Wisdom of the Serpents-Brood, who never thought they had Christ sure enough,
though they had him in the Grave, Matthew. 27.64. Remember; it is thy highest
Wisdom, first to discern, next to improve the Spiritual Contrarieties that act
in thy own bosom. He is the wisest man that knows himself, and he the
strongest man that conquers himself. This alone is the true Israelite, who by
conquering himself does (in a pious sense) overcome both Heaven, Earth, and
Hell. Genesis 32.28.

What Faith is that, which except we have in Prayer, we must not think to
obtain any thing of God?
James 1.6. But let him ask in Faith. --


FOr the Connection of these words with the former, since they will not give
much light to the Question I am to handle, and the time will hardly permit
things more necessary to be spoken, I shall wholly wave or very briefly speak
to.

The Subject I am to speak to, is to show what is meant here by asking in
Faith, or what Faith that is, which who so has not, must not, or has no
reason to expect to receive any thing from God. God may bestow his mercies
where and on whom he pleases; but is no way engaged by promise to bestow any
mercy on such an one that asks not in Faith. It is not said, that such an one
should not expect any great matters from God, but not any thing at all, the
least mercy is greater, then he has any reason to think he shall receive, not
only he shall not receive Wisdom, spoken of verse. 5. but not any thing. Wisdom
he may get as Achitophel did, and many other things without praying in Faith,
or praying at all, but for Divine Wisdom or for any blessing from God, he may
think what he will, but if the Apostle may be thought worthy to advise him, he
would not have him think to receive any thing, except he ask, and ask in Faith.
Therefore it much concerns us to know what is meant by asking in Faith, since
the want of it makes our Prayers of none effect; if we pray without it, we may
pray but you cannot justly expect any return of your Prayers, except it be as
of an arrow shot up to Heaven upon your own head to your wounding. Of this
Question I shall speak very plainly, as the Lord shall enable me in the
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, Comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual things.

Some may make it to imply more to ask in Faith then to ask with Faith, or that
it is more to be in Faith, then for Faith to be in us. To be in Love is more
then to love, and when it is said, Revel. 1.10. that the Apostle was in the
Spirit, it shows that not only he had the Spirit, and was filled with it, but
there were great overflowings, and a superabundance of the Spirit. This the
Apostle seems to call, James 5.15. the Prayer of Faith, as if their Faith
rather prayed then they, as St. Paul speaks, It is not I, but the Grace of God
in me, when Faith rather may be said to act us then we to act Faith.

But I suppose those high degrees of Faith cannot be meant here, because it is
said, that they who have not this Faith, must not think to receive any thing,
not the least; if so then the highest degrees of Faith should be required for
the obtaining the lowest degrees of Mercy; but Scripture promises are made to
the Truth, and not to the degrees of Grace. To Faith that is but as a grain of
Mustard Seed to remove Mountains, and to Love that is but a spark to be
victorious, Matthew. 12.20. but I shall rather endeavor to show you how Faith is
taken here, then how it is taken in other places, therefore, To ask in Faith,
may he here spoken in reference to the Person that prays, viz. he that prays
must be in the Faith a faithful or Righteous Person. The Scripture is full to
this purpose, as Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in mine heart, though my
tongue do not plead for it, nay though it speaks against it, though I refrain
from it in my Life; for one may love the sin we commit not, and if I do so
regard it in mine heart God will not hear my Prayers: if I give it so much as a
good look, for so the Hebrew, if I see iniquity in my heart, if I take any
pleasure in sin, for David calls it painful iniquity, for so in the Hebrew, No
Saint can live without committing sin, but all Saints live without regarding it
in their hearts. So also James 5.15. The Prayer of a Righteous man avayleth
much, how much is not set down, because it cannot be set down how much it
avayles as much as they please, they may have what they will; but for a wicked
man though his Prayers were effectual they avail not much, since their desires
are for temporals. The other places are full to this point, viz. that the
Prayers of none but Righteous persons are accepted with God, as John 9.31. Chapter
1.15. Prove. 28.9. 1 John 3.15.

I. To this may be objected, that many unregenerate and profligate wretches
have obtained by Prayer, as scoffing Ismael, Genesis 21.17. nay Ahab, a man that
sold himself to work wickedness, prevayled with God, for an adjournment of the
Judgment denounced.

I answer 1. This was done by way of Common providence, or Gods Prerogative,
not by way of promise, so that they could not reasonably expect that their
Prayer should be heard.

2. God did this to honor the Ordinance of Prayer. As when our children come
and tell us of some poor body, though we may not think it sit to relieve him in
respect of his wants, yet we give him, for fear we should hinder our children
from acts of Charity; for they not knowing our reasons of denying him relief,
will expound it to be our neglect of the poor. So many times God may give to
bad men, lest good men should be discouraged from Prayer.

3. God gives to wicked men when they pray, oft-times for the strengthening of
his peoples Faith; for they may be sure if God hears the Croakings of Ravens,
he will hear the Mournings of Doves.

II. You may farther say, are wicked men bound to pray, since their Prays are
anabomination, and they cannot ask in Faith?

I answer. 1. Inability to pay a debt, does not acquit one from it, nor Cancel
the Obligation. If one blows out the Candle, one cannot excuse ones self for
not working, by saying that they could not work in the dark; nor can a boy
excuse himself from saying the Lesson he has torn out of his Book.

2. Because wicked men break others of Gods Commandments, it cannot justify
them in the breaking of this, sin does super-induce a new Obligation, viz. to
punishment, but does not cancel their former, viz. to Duty.

3. Wicked men sin not in praying, but in praying so.

4. Doubtless the wickedest man in the World is bound to desire Grace.

III. But does not this make God a respecter of persons, since he will hear
none but his own Children, and them that love him; if a Judge should favor his
relations in Judicature, be should be unjust.

I Answer No, God is no respecter of persons, by doing thus.

1. Because the Prayers of Saints are better, as well as their persons nearer,
for the Prayers of the wicked are lazy, irreverent, bru^sh, wanton Prayers,
Hos. 7.14. if God's People should pray so, God would not hear them neither.

2. If Unbelievers could pray better than Saints, yet God might acquit the
Saint and condemn the Unbeliever, as a Judge may pass Sentence against one who
has paid ninty and nine pounds of an hundred, and acquit another who has not
paid a farthing, if his surety has paid it.

3. Though in matter of Justice we are not to respect persons, Levit. 19.15.
yet in matters of favor we may, Gal. 6.10. This may be the first meaning of
the words, but not the only, nor as I conceive the chief. Therefore,

II. To ask in Faith, is, to believe, that all we say in Prayer is true, when
we confess our selves to be grievous sinners, we are to think our selves to be
as great sinners as we say we are; when we call God Almighty our Father, we are
to believe him to be so.

Then the poor Soul will say, Alas I cannot pray in Faith, for I cannot say our
Father, since I do not believe that I am his child, how then can I call him
Father?

I Answer 1. Thou may call him Father, for he is thy Father; if thou
should see diverse children playing some untowardnesse in the street, and
should see a man that passed by, go and single out one of them, and correct him
and yet the child should follow him, would you not say he was the father of
that child; for a strange child would fly from him, or fly at him if he
should strike him. Do thou not follow God when he corrects thee? be of good
comfort, God is thy Father, and thou art his child.

When that precious man Mr. Murcot was in great anguish, fearing tht God was
not his Father, these words were impressed on his mind, If I am not thy Father,
why do thou follow after me?

Nay not only God is thy Father, but thou think so also. When Naamans
servants called him father, what did they mean, but to show that they
acknowledged that he carried himself rather as a Father than a Ma^^er. When the
Prodigal returned, though he acknowledged that he was not worthy to be called
his son, yet he called him Father, since he had failed of nothing that might be
expected from a loving tender Father. May thou not call God thy Father upon
this account, has he not dealt with thee in abundance of tender Compassion,
nay more than the tenderest Parent in the World. Give God the glory due to his
goodness, call him Father, for thou may truly say he has dealt so with
thee. The same Mr. Murcot being troubled upon the same account, viz. the fear
that God was not his Father, had these words come into his mind, with power,
viz. If I am not thy Father, am I thy Enemy? God argues thus with the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 32.6.

III. We are to believe, that whatsoever we ask of God in Prayer is according
to his will, 1 John 5.14.

The poor doubting Soul will say then, I dare not pray for the recovery of my
child, since I know not whether it be the will of God it shall recover or no.

I Answer, Thine asking what God has decreed not to give, makes not thy Prayer
sinful, but thine asking what he has forbid thee to desire; for the will of
Gods Decree is not the rule for us to walk by, but the will of his Command,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. If what we pray for be such as is lawful and good for us to
desire, though God should tell us by a Prophet that he would not grant it, yet
we might lawfully pray for it, and be blameless, for so did David, 2 Samuel 12.
nay though God should send us word by a Prophet that we should dye and not
live, yet we might pray, and not only be blameless but successful, for so was
Hezekiah, nay though God should forbid us to pray, yet since he commands us to
pray in his Word, we may pray, and be heard; for though God bid Jacob let him
go, yet he wrestled on and obtained the blessing: and Moses, though God bid him
let him alone, yet Moses did not let him alone and prevailed. So then to ask
things according to the will of God, is to ask nothing that is unlawful to ask,
as for one to pray that God would prosper us in evil ways, this is to ask what
is not according to his will. I say, you are to pray for nothing that is any
way unlawful to be desired. Now it is not enough that the thing it self be
lawful to be desired, but the end for which we desire it must be lawful; for if
we desire lawful things for unlawful ends, we ask amiss, James 4.3. The end
why we desire such a mercy must be such, as God approves of by his Word, as
well as the thing it self. To desire gifts of Edification for ostentation,
though according to the Will of God as to the thing desired, yet as to the end
it is abominable.

As concerning the matter of our Prayers, we are to believe, as has been said,
so as to God we are to believe several things. Indeed scarce any of his
Attributes but some way or other we are to act our Faith upon in Prayer, but I
shall choose some few on which the eye of Faith is especially fixed in Prayer.

The first is Gods Omniscience, for else we shall be at a great loss.

I. If we believe not this, how can we be assured that God hears our Prayers.

For 1. In respect of the number of Prayers, there being Millions of Prayers
put up at the same time to God, if he be not Omniscient how is it possible he
should hear all, if any should not be heard, how know thou that thine is not
the Prayer that is not heard.

2. In respect of the Secrecy of Prayer; for except God know our hearts he
cannot know our prayers, for it is the heart that prays, the tongue only
speaks, Orat men's, lingua loquitur.

3. If God knew not the heart, the poor soul who prayed with sighs and groans
that cannot be expressed should find no acceptance, when the hypocrite that
speaks much and means nothing, shall be heard for his much babbling.

4. The Saints ask such things that require infinite Knowledge and Wisdom to do
for us; for when we desire God to make us to know him, it requires more wisdom
than for us to teach an Infant the Mathematics. So we desire God to cure us of
our spiritual distempers, alas they are so various, so contrary, so deeply
rooted in our Natures, we are such froward unruly Patients, that it requires
infinite Wisdom to heal us; for when God goes to cure our Pride by afflicting
us, then our impatience is increased: That which is the cure of one corruption
increases another.

5. If we believe not Gods Wisdom and Omniscience we cannot acquiesce in Gods
answer of Prayers, for we may suffer but not acquiesce in Gods answer of
Prayers.

II. We are to believe Gods Providence that he rules and orders all things.
Whosoever thinks that all things are ruled by second Causes, by the Power and
Policy of men, or by the Stars or chance, they will not Pray at all, or go to
God merely as a refuge: We shall pray to God, but trust to our selves, or to
medecines when we are sick, and to our food when we are well. We may be
confident we shall be delivered, but we shall not at all trust that God will
deliver us. To strengthen our Faith in this we must know, That those things
that seem to be least within the compass of Providence, are wholly guided by it.

1. Things Natural; God makes the Sun to arise, and the Rain to fall, Mat. 5.
Gives to every seed his own body, 1 Cor. 15.

2. The smallest things they escape not Providence; God numbers the hairs of
our head, Mat. 10.30.

3. Things casual, Pro. 16.33. That which we call Chance medley, is
providential as to God: The man 1 Kings drew a Bow at a venture, and yet God
directed it to an hairs breadth.

4. The Counsels of men, yea against God, yet are ordered by the determinate
Counsel of God, Acts 2.23.

5. Things most unruly; The raging Sea goes so far and no further by Gods
decree: the roaring Lion cannot destroy a Swine, not afflict nor tempt a Saint,
without Gods leave, Job 1. Luke 22.32. The wrath of man as well as the rage of
the devil, is ordered and restrained by the Wisdom and Power of God, Psalm. 66.

6. The skill and inventions of men, Isa. 28.27, 28.

7. Sin it self, whether of Omission or Commission, as silence and discord in
Music, serves to make the Harmony sweeter.

III. Gods Omnipotence is to be believed, else we will stagger through
unbelief. This was that in which the eminency of Abraham's faith did appear,
Romans 4.21. and of the Centurion's, Matthew. 8. and Christ far more blames them
that question his Can than his Will, for he does not so much as reprove the
Leper, Matthew. 8. but so sharply reproves him, Mar. 9. hat he makes him weep,
because he said, If thou can, and he says, If thou can believe, to show
that we cannot believe if we do not believe Gods Power. We doubtless are
generally faulty this way, though we are ashamed to own it, as you may see by
this instance. If we have two children sick, the one whose death would be far
more afflictive to us, has some cold or some other small distemper, the other
of some mortal disease, and given up by Physicians; thou prayest for the
recovery of both, but for which of those two recovery art thou least confident,
is it not of his who is most sick? and why so? but because thou questionest
Gods Power or Providence: If thou shall say my sins are so great God will not
hear my prayers and heal my child, for if indeed that were the reason of thy
fearing that God will not hear thee, thou would rather fe^r it as to thine
other child, since his death would be more afflictive.

Now the Saints have more reason to strengthen their Faith in the Omnipotence
of God in Prayer than wicked men, for because the things worldly men desire
need not Omnipotence to do: A creature may do what they desire, except God will
withdraw his common Providence, for one that is worth an hundred thousand
pounds can make a poor man rich; and some Medicines in an ordinary way of
Providence have virtue to cure many Diseases: But the things the people of God
desire cannot be done but by Omnipotence, Ephesians. 1.19.

IV. We must act our Faith upon his Goodness and Bounty, for we must not only
have high thoughts of Gods other Excellencies, but of his Goodness also, of his
abundant willingness to do us good, and loathness to afflict us, for surely he
never afflicts us but in case of necessity, 1 Pet. 1. If need be you are in
many tribulations. When he afflicts us he only gives us necessaries, but when
he bestows mercies, he gives us not only for our necessity, but richly to
enjoy. When we go to a Covetous man for money, he parts with every penny as with
a drop of blood; for us to think God parts so with his Mercies, that he is hard
to be entreated, and that he is an hard Master either for work or wages, are
thoughts utterly unworthy, and shamefully dishonorable to the Goodness of
God. If thy child, whose finger if it should but ache, thine heart aches, should
think thou grudgest him every bit of meat he eats, thou would think him a
wretched child unworthy of thy tender affections; and must it not be far
worse in thee to have such thoughts of God? since tam pius nemo, tam pater
nemo. Was it so great a grief to Peter to have Christ question his love? John
21.17. though he had given but sad testimony of his Love but lately; and can it
choose but much offend God for thee to question Gods Love to thee, nay his
Goodness in it self, when God has given thee no cause of either, Mal. 2.1. We
should go to God with as much confidence of his Love, and readiness to do us
good, as the child does to the tenderest Parent, as we do to the dearest friend
we have in the whole world, and much more abundantly: If we do not believe that
the goodness of God is as much above the goodness and love of our dearest
friend, as we account his Wisdom and Power above our friends, we have unworthy
thoughts of that Attribute which God has most abundantly manifested, and would
have most glorified; and the love our friend bears us is but a drop from and of
that Ocean that is in God. Doubtless God loves his enemies more then we love
our friends; he loves us more (if we love him) then we love our selves or him.
Surely God loves the weakest Saint on earth more than the highest Angel in
heaven loves him; for when God says that he So loved the world, it was such a
Sic there was no Sicut for it, it might not be said as the Angels loved God. Ah
we deal unworthily with God in having base low thoughts of his goodness, he
has little deserved it at our hands, he that has done such wonders and
miracles of Mercies for us, and has promised to do more; Say that every mercy
is too great for thee to receive, but say not that any is too great for God to
give: Surely, surely God is more willing to give, than we are to receive
mercies.

But you will say, If God be so willing to bestow mercies, why does he not
bestow them without prayers, and such importunity?

I Answer, God does not thus because he is not willing, but because we are not
fit for Mercies, for God waits to be gracious: The tender Mother had rather
give her child Cordials than bitter Pills, but her child is sick: By our Prayers
we make not God more willing, but we become more prepared for Mercies, for our
Prayers exercise, and so strengthen grace, and strong grace weakens and
mortifies corruption, and then we are fit for mercies. God only stays while he
may bless us indeed, as Jabez phraseth it. One that is in a Boat and pulls a
Rope whose other end is tied to a Rock, pulls not the Rock to the Boat but the
Boat to the Rock; so our Importunities move not God but us.

But you will say, when we pray for others this reason holds not, for their
graces are not increased by our praying for their deliverances from misery or
danger, or the Church from persecution.

I Answer. It is true, but our Prayers add to our reward, for God is in
goodness as Satan is in badnesse, and much more abundantly; whereas when
Satan has a Commission and intends to do some mischief, he as often as he can
engages Witches to put him upon doing that which he intends to do, howsoeve^
that he may involve them in the guilt, as if they themselves or that he had not
done it if they had not put him upon it. So God that the Saints may have the
reward of the good he does to others, as if they themselves had done it, or as
if God would not have done it without their Prayers, puts them upon praying for
those Mercies for others, which he will do howsoever, Esaias 59.16.

III. The Third Object of Faith are the Promises, and there are three kinds,
some to Prayer, some of Prayer, some to the Person praying. We are to act our
Faith upon all, but for brevity sake (for I am forced to Contract) I shall
answer but one Objection.

The poor Soul will say, I do not believe I have any Interest in the promises,
therefore I cannot pray in Faith. I Answer.

To obtain the Mercies included in a promise, it is not requried that we should
believe our Interest in it but the truth, not that God will perform to us but
to those to whom it belongs, though you do not believe it belongs to you, for
the promises made to Graces, are made to them that have them, not to them that
believe; as for example, the promises made to Faith are made to them that have
Faith though they believe not that they do believe, and that poor Souls doubt
that God will never make good any promise to them, proceeds not from any doubt
of Gods veracity or faithfulness, but of their own unworthiness and
non-interest in them.

IV. The fourth and main Object of Faith which our Faith must eye in our
Prayers is Christ, in whom all the Promises are yea and Amen, who has
reconciled the Person and Attributes of God, and concerning Christ we are to
believe.

I. The great love God bears to Christ, which is doubtless greater then to the
whole Creation, for to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my
beloved in whom I am well pleased. Gods Love to Christ is not only greater, but
diffusive, for the Love that God bears to Christ is as the oil that was poured
upon the head of Aaron which ran down to the skirts of his garments; so the
Love that God bears to Christ terminates not in the Person of Christ, but is
communicated to all that are his. As Haman to show the great hatred he bore to
Mordecai, would not bound his malice on the person of Mordecai; but would
destroy the whole Nation; So God thought it too small a Testimony of his Love
to Christ to be well pleased with Christ (for so he is with the Angels) but he
is well pleased in Christ with the whole World, I mean all Nations. We must
believe this, or we cannot expect any favor for his sake. His Love to Christ
is so great, that his Love to Christ is greater then his hatred to sinners; so
that any sinner may be reconciled and accepted, through Christ. God came to
reconcile God and sinners, not God and sin. As one who desires the King to be
reconciled to such a Traitor, does not desire him to be reconciled to the
Treason, but to the Traitor.

II. We are to believe the fullness of Christ's satisfaction, and the
greatness of the value and efficacy of the death of Christ; for if Justice be
not satisfied, we have no Throne of Grace, but a seat and Bar of Justice to
come before. The Blood of Christ has a pacifying, purifying, purchasing,
perfuming, reconciling, satisfying, justifying virtue. It pacifies Gods wrath,
it reconciles and justifies our persons, it purifies our Nature, it perfumes
our duties, it purchases our inheritance.

III. We are to believe the efficacy and infallible success of Christ's
Intercession. The fullness of Christ's Intercession is in this, that he does
three things for us, all that we stand in need of, according to what was
Typified by the High Priest, for he did three things.

1. He sprinkled the blood upon the Mercy-seat, hereby an atonement was made
as to our sins, they being pardoned.

2. He went in with Incense, hereby our duties were perfumed; so God is said to
inhabit the Praises of his People, and to dwell in thick darkness, i. e. in
the the thick smoke of the Incense.

3. He had the Names of the Tribes engraven on his breast or heart. Christ
pleads the love he bears to his People. Three places the names of the Saints
are written in, out of either whereof nor men nor Devils can blot them out,
viz. in the Book of Life, on the palms of his hands, and on the heart of
Christ. I may add the fourth thing the High Priest did when he entered into the
Holy Place, viz. he went in with all his rich Priestly Garments, to show we
should be clothed with the rich Robes of Christ's Righteousness, for what the
High Priest did, he did not in his personal but in his public capacity. Now
the efficacy of his Intercession was not only from the wonderful Love God bore
to Christ, from the unparalleld Interest Christ had in the Father, by these
means we may expect all acts of favor, but we have Justice on our side, for
favor is an arbitrary thing, therefore Christ is our Advocate, 1 John 2.1.2.
he presents our case not by way of Petition, but by way of pleading; for
Advocates do not petition but plead.

So then Christ does four things as to our Prayers. 1. He endites them by his
Spirit, he perfumes them by his merit, then he presents our Prayers and
Persons, for we have access through him, Ephesians. 3.12. and then superadds his
own Intercession, his blood crying louder then our sins, and better things then
our Prayers.

IV. We are to believe and improve this truth, viz. that the Father exceedingly
delights to honor Christ, and hereby God wonderfully honors Christ by
pardoning, and receiving into favor such Rebellious sinners as we are for his
sake, by forgiving, any thing for his sake. A sinner cannot please God better,
then by coming with confidence for pardon for his sake. If we come for pardon
or mercies, and our Confidence arises from our low thoughts of the number or
sinfulness of our sins, or of Gods hatred of sin, or our ability to satisfy
Justice or deserve Mercy; our Confidence is desperate impudence and arrogance,
but if purely from the high esteem we have of the incomprehensiblenesse of
Christ's satisfaction, and of Christ's Interest in Gods Love, and of the Fathers
delight to honor Christ; such Confince is precious and acceptable with God,
and whosoever has it, may go with as much freedom and assurance of favor, as
if he had never sinned, with as much as Adam in his Innocence, or the Angels in
Glory. Alas we do not believe or not improve these truths, for if we did, we
might have any thing, for Christ has Interest enough in God to bear us out,
and procure any Mercy.

V. We are to believe improve and obey Christ's Command, viz. in John 14.13, 14,
16, 23. the former truths give us great hope, but this strong Consolation, for
though such a great Person had never so much interest in some other great
Person, with whom we had to do, yet without a Commission from him we might not
go in his Name, but Christ has not only given us leave but a Command, and now
it is not an arbitrary thing, we may do or not do, but we must do. This is the
Incomprehensible goodness of God, that what is for our good he commands us,
that not only we may be put on the more to obtain what is good for us, but that
it may be an act of obedience, and so we may be rewarded for procuring our own
happiness.

So much for the things we are to believe, now for the manner of believing.

1. We are to believe these things of God and Christ with an Historical Faith.

2. With a Faith of Recumbency we are to rely upon the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of God, and upon Christ's Interest in God, etc.

3. Saints are by way of duty but not by way of a necessary Condition of
obtaining whatsoever they ask, to believe with the Faith of assurance of
obtaining whatsoever we pray for. By Faith here in the Text is not meant, that
we must without any doubt or w^vering believe, that we shall receive in kind
whatsoever we ask, even the very thing we pray for.

1. The Leper was cured though he prayed with an if thou will.

2. Those in disertion should put up no acceptable Prayers, since they have not
Faith of assurance of obtaining.

3. Christ when he comes at the day of Judgment, he shall not find this Faith
on the Earth, Luke 18.8. and yet verse. 7. it is said, God will hear those
Prayers.

4. The Apostle forbids this Faith verse. 7. therefore it is not the Faith here
commanded, for then it should run thus, you must believe you shall receive the
thing you ask for, but if you do not you must no^; many more arguments may be
brought to prove this, but these shall suffice, besides what shall be s^id in
the Positive handling this Question, viz. What Faith is required as to our
believing absolutely and undoubtedly, in kind the very thing we ask, which I
shall Answer in several Propositions.

I. When we ask Temporal blessings as we ought, we are bound to believe we
shall receive them as we ask them; for our Prayers for Temporal things should
be spiritual as to the end, and moderate as to their measure, and conditional
as to their effect upon us, i. e. if it be for our good. now since our desires
are to be Conditional, and Gods Promises of Temporals are Conditional, we must
not absolutely believe we shall receive what we ask: a Conditional promise
cannot be a foundation for an absolute Faith.

II. Our Faith and Confidence of obtaining the thing we ask, should proceed
pari passu should be as strong to the event as it is to the Conditions. If we
are very confident what we ask is for the glory of God or our good, we must be
as Confident that we shall have it; for as we are to put no Condition to
absolute Promises since God has put none, so we are to add no more Conditions
to Conditional Promises than God has put, and upon those Conditions we are as
fully to rely upon Gods performance, as upon his performance of absolute
Promises.

III. Though we cannot nor ought not certainly to believe the obtaining the
thing we ask, if it be Temporal by virtue of the Promise, yet by virtue of an
immediate assurance God may give us of receiving the very thing we ask, we may
and indeed cannot choose but expect it. We read of Gods dealings so with several
of his Saints (with Mr. Fox and many others.)

IV. As for Spiritual blessings they are of four sorts. 1. Of Edification as
gifts, such as speaking with Tongues, and Prophesying in the Primitive Church,
and the gifts of Preaching and Praying now, or

2. Of Consolation as assurance, and the Comforts of the Spirit, the
Privileges of the Kingdom of God, as Peace, and Joy, in Believing.

3. Of Sanctification, as Grace and Glory, for the former the same rules as
belong to Temporals belong to these, but for Saving Grace, as our Prayers ought
not to be Conditional, since we are sure it is for our good, and the glory of
God for us to be holy; so our Faith ought not to be conditional but absolute
and particular, that God will give us Grace and Glory, if we sincerely and
fervently ask it.

4. Yet though I should believe that God certainly will give Grace, nay and all
other things, if good for me, yet my not believing that God will give me Grace,
does not null mine interest in the Promise, but only my Comfort, nor shall it
hinder Gods performance, though it hinders our expectation of receiving.

V. Though we are not absolutely to believe we shall receive Temporal blessings
or those of consolation or edification, yet that we do not more confidently
expect the performance of such Prayers in kind, proceeds generally from our not
believing and improving the Power and goodness of God, and the great Interest
Christ has in God, and the rest that I have spoken of, for generally we are
more confident that the thing we pray for is good for us, then we are that we
shall have it.

VI. We may be as confident that the restoring of our selves or our relations
to health, or deliverance of them out of danger is for our good, as they in our
Saviors time, who prayed to him for these mercies, were.

VII. As the case stands between Justifying Faith and assurance, so the case
stands as to our receiving and our expecting the answer of our Prayers in kind.

1. As we may and shall have all the Promises that are made to Faith made good
to us, though we do not believe that we have Faith, and by Consequence do not
believe they shall have them made good to us; so when we pray for those things
God has promised to those who love or fear God, or walk uprightly, though we
do not believe we have that fear or love, or that we walk uprightly, if we have
those Graces we shall receive the Promises made to them.

2. As there are two kinds of assurance, one which comes from the Testimony of
our own spirits, when upon serious examination of our selves, we find that we
do believe; the other which comes from the Testimony of the Spirit of God,
witnessing with our Spirits; So there are two kinds of assurance of receiving
the thing we ask, one which proceeds from our believing and improving our
believing the Power and goodness of God and Christ's Interest in God, and Gods
delighting to honor Christ, by giving the mercies we ask in his name, the
other from Gods immediate assuring us that we shall receive the very mercy we
pray for.

3. As the immediate Testimony of the Spirit comes with more evidence then the
Testimony of our own Spirits, so the immediate assurance that God gives that we
shall receive the things we pray for, is clearer and fuller then that which we
have by our relying upon the Power and goodness of God, or to speak more
properly, we do more fully rely upon the goodness and Power of God when God
does immediately enable us so to do, then when we work out this Confidence by
our own endeavors, assisted by the ordinary concurrence of the Spirit.

4. As it is not our sin to want the imme^iate Testimony of the Spirit, so it
is not our sin not to have this particular assurance of receiving what we ask.
These Parallels may be far more enlarged, and will hold as I think in all
particulars.

The Use of this is, 1. For Consolation to all that love and fear God; for thy
not believing God will grant thy Prayers, shall not hinder thy Prayers from
being accepted and granted; for although if thine unbelief were built upon thy
not believing Gods Power or goodness to do what thou prayest for would hinder
thee, yet since thy diffidence proceeds from thy not believing that thou art
such an one as the Promises are made to, such thine unbelief shall not make the
promise of God of no effect, 2 Timothy 2.13. In the 11 and 12 verses the Apostle
says, if we are dead with Christ (not if we believe we are dead with Christ)
we shall live though we do not believe we are dead, if we are dead it shall not
hinder: for if we believe not, God is faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13. for suppose one
dies and leaves such an one a Legacy, though he to whom the Legacy is left does
not know of any such Legacy, yet the Executor will not therefore not give him
the Legacy; nay though he will hardly believe it when he tells him, yet he will
keep it and give it him; so the Legacies that Christ has left to the Saints,
though they little think any such Legacies are left by Christ to them, yet
their ignorance shall not frustrate Christ's Love, nay though they will not for
the present extend their hand of Faith to receive it, yet God will and does
keep Mercy for Thousands, until they will receive it, Exodus 34.7.

II. The second Use is an Use of Exhortation. 1. Put in thy Claim for Mercy,
for thy Claim will hold, not according to thy sense, knowledge or belief that
thou have an Interest, but according to the Truth of thine Interest. Suppose
thou should promise to give to every one of thy children such a gift if they
were good children. Suppose one of your children who had obeyed your commands,
and had been very inquisitive to know your will, I say, suppose such a child
should sit weeping because he thought he had not obeyed your commands, and
because he thought you were angry with him, and upon that account would not
come for your promised gift, would you not therefore give it him, nay would you
not only be pleased with his obedience, but that he took so to heart your
supposed anger; So O poor Soul that sit weeping with thine eyes full of
tears, and thine heart full of sorrow, under the sense of Gods supposed
displeasure, shall not God wipe all tears from thine eyes, and give thee the
Promises he has made to thee, though thou through the sense of thine
unworthiness do not believe thou have any Interest in them?

2. The second advice is, that thou should endeavor to obtain the Graces to
which the Promises are made, viz. Fear and Love of God, and uprightness of
heart, etc. whilst others are examining, and going from Minister to Minister to
know whether they have those Graces, be thou getting of them. For

1. Thou shall be sure to get an interest in the Promises, for they are made to
such as have the Graces, not to those that know that they have those Graces,
and if thou have a Title thou shall have possession.

2. By getting greater degrees of Graces, the trouble of examination will be
needless, it will save thee that labor, whereas otherwise thou will
perpetually be put to examination: As for instance; Thou find a spark of
fire and coverest it up again, and let it lie wet, to morrow thou will be
as far to seek, and wilt as hardly find the spark and know whether there be any
fire to morrow as to day. Another knowing where to have fire close by, knows
she can as soon fetch it from her neighbor as find it on her own hearth, if
there be but a spark or two, she therefore fetches some, and blows up into a
flame, and she lays on fuel to keep in the fire; So thou know where thou
may have Gods Love, viz. from God, who is near unto them that call upon him,
they know they may have it sooner by Prayer then find it by examination; this
they blow into a flame, and as when the fire flames we may be sure there is
fire without poring to find it; So when thy Graces are in an eminent degree
they are so apparent, that one that has but half an eye may see them.

3. By getting the Conditions to which the Promise is made, thou shall often
get what is better then the Promise it self; for the Promise is often Temporal
when the Condition is Spiritual.

III. Study much or rather Meditate much upon these great Gospel Mysteries of
Christ's Satisfaction, of Christ's Interest in the Fathers Love, and of the
Fathers delight to honor the Son, by giving mercies, and pardoning sinners for
his sake. Know that thou greatly dishonourest Christ when thou go timerously
to God for any Mercy in his Name, and it greatly argues thine infidelity:
Suppose thy friend that was bound with thee for some great sum of money, and he
hearing there were Sergeants to arrest thee, should put himself into their
hands to s^ve thee from prison, and he should be carried to prison and pay the
debt, and send thee word that he had paid the debt every farthing, if thou
should notwithstanding be afraid to see thy Creditor, or stir abroad, would
it not argue that thou believedst not thy friend had paid the debt?

IV. Go then with Confidence to God in the Name of Christ, since Christ has
bid thee, or else thou have strange thoughts of Christ.

Suppose a friend of yours should bid you go to such a great man for such a
Courtesy, and should tell thee that he had spoken to him in thy behalf, and
bid thee not fear, for he could have any thing of him that he spoke to him for,
and should bid thee go to him in his Name, and tell him he sent thee, if thou
should stand considering what to do, and should fear that for all thy
friend professed he had so great an Interest in that great man, you should not
find it so when you came to him, would not this show that you feared your
friend boasted of more Interest then he had.

Christ has plainly bid us go to the Father in his Name from him, and that we
shall have any thing whatsoever; if we doubt whether when we go to the Father
in his Name we shall obtain, does it not plainly argue our low thoughts of
Christ's Interest in the Fathers Love, and that Christ has higher thoughts of
his Interest in his Fathers Love then indeed he has. The sense of thine own
unworthiness should by no means hinder thee, except thou wentest to God in
thine own Name, for the Question in this case is not how God loves thee, but
how God loves Christ. Thou have thoughts high enough of Gods Love to Christ, if
thou know that God loves Christ more then he hates any sinner in the World.
Thy thoughts are not high enough of Christ's Love to thee, if thou think
Christ will deny thee any thing, nor have thou worthy thoughts of Gods Love to
Christ, if thou think God will deny Christ any thing, or any one that comes
to him in his Name whom he bid so to do, for in so doing he does not so
properly deny thee as Christ.

Of the cause of Inward Trouble, and how a Christian should behave himself when
Inward and Outward Troubles meet?
Genesis 42. v. 21, 22. 21. And they said one to another (yea but) verily we are
guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he
besought us and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us.

22. And Reuben answered them, saying, Spoke I not to you, saying, sin not
against the child, and you would not hear? therefore behold, also his blood is
required.


IN this Chapter we have the description of our Fathers, the Patriarchs, their
first journey into Egypt for Corn, to relieve their Famine in Canaan:

Herein is considerable, 1. Their entertainment there, it was harsh, with much
trouble, more danger; the great Lord Treasurer of Egypt would not know them,
but treats them roughly, v. 7. takes them for Spies, v. 9. rejects their
defense, v. 12. renews, and out of their own mouths reinforceth his Charge, and
suspicion of them, v. 14. threatens to commit them, v. 15, 16. commits them, v.
17. puts Bonds upon one of them till the rest should quit and clear themselves
and him of suspicion, v. 19, 20. This is their cold and sad welcome and
entertainment.

2. The consequent of this their hard and distressfull usage and entreatment,
and that is trouble of mind, horror and perplexity of spirit, And they said
one to another, etc.

The words then are the Holy Ghosts Report of the Case of the sons of Jacob,
their being spiritually trouble by way of Conviction or Judgment in their own
(which also is the Lord's) Court of Conscience.

Wherein we observe the

I. Actors Registers, Accusers, Witnesses, Judge, Tormentors,
themselves.

II. Process in judging themselves; Wherein

1. Self-accusation of the cause of their trouble, their sin, with the utmost
aggravations, viz.

1. In general, We are guilty. 2. In particular, of Envy, Wrong against a
Brother, whom in bitterness we saw without pity, and were deaf to his
entreaties; Obstinate to the admonition of Reuben, and abiding therein.
2. In self condemnation, Therefore is this distress come, and his blood
required.

III. Execution; Wherein

1. The smart, by inward terror and consternation, their heart misgiving them
is deeply affected, and that makes them very abrupt, Yea verily, i. e. Alas
what shall we do.

2. The circumstance of the time when, couched in And.

1. In general, many years after the offense was done. 2. In special, now that
they were outwardly in an afflicted condition.
Doct. 1. Every man has a Conscience within himself.

2. The guilt of sin turns a man's Conscience, i. e. himself against himself.

3. Conscience is apt to be very sensible, when it is awakened, not only of sin,
but particular sins, and the particular circumstances and degrees thereof to
the utmost, and charge all upon a man's self, not upon Gods Decrees or
Providence, nor upon the Devil or evil Company, etc.

4. Envy, unnatural affection, cruelty, deafness to the entreaties of the
distressed, obstinacy against warning and admonition, continuance in sin
without repentance, etc. are very heinous and dangerous.

5. The accusations and condemnations of Conscience are terrible, or cause
terror beyond all expression.

6. There is a time when God will call over sins that are past, and charge them
upon the Conscience.

7. Inward trouble of mind sometimes yea usually comes upon the people of God
when they are outwardly in some distress.

I shall speak of the two last, and in them something of all the other, saving
the fourth, containing the particular matter of Fact, viz. cruelty and blood,
which I shall not meddle withal.

These then are the two Doctrines: 1. There is a time when God will call over
past sins with horror, etc. 2. This time of inw^rd horror falls in with
outward trouble.


Doct. 1. There is a time when God will call over sins that are past, without
repentance, and charge them upon the Conscience with horror.

Here Is the Case; The sons of Jacob had formerly trespassed against God in the
matter of their Brother, And they said, etc. now and not till now that we read
of, is the guilt and horror of it reflected upon their Consciences. In sin,
the act passes, the guilt and consequent remains.

Sin is like some poison, which may be taken at one time, and work at another,
it may be seven years after: 'Twas now more then seven and seven years, that
the poison of this sin began to work.

It Is true of Family sins, Hos. 1.4. National sins, Ezekiel. 4.4, 5. Lam. 5.7.
Personal sins, as here: And that is the Case


1. Not only of the wicked, as in the case of Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou do ill
sin lies at the door, to shut out Mercies and let in Judgments; and that as a
fell M^stiff, or a sleeping Lion, ready to take thee by the throat, whenever
the Lord awakens guilt in the Conscience.

2. But also of the Godly, Psalm. 19.12. and 25.7. Job 13.26. Thou make me to
possess the sins of my youth.

Reas. 1. From God.

1. God remembers all, Amos 8.7. As I live says the Lord, I will forget none
of their works. 1 Samuel 15.2. I remember what Amaleck did, etc. God has three
Books:

1. Of Prescience, wherein he writes down our names, and his purposes
concerning us. The Arminians deny that Book.

2. Of Providence, wherein he writes down our names and all his care over us.
The Epicure and Atheist deny this as also the former.

3. Of Postscience or remembrance, wherein he writes down our names and all the
particulars of our carriage toward him.

1. Whether they be good; no act of Piety or Charity, not a cup of cold water
from the Spring of Love, not a drop of tears from the Spring of Godly sorrow,
not a sigh from the bottom of a broken heart, but its taken notice of, botled,
recorded, Mal. 3.16. Or

2. Bad; not a wicked thought, a malicious scoff or wicked action, word,
motion, but God marks it, and sets it down in the Book of his remembrance.
Psalm. 50.21.

viz.

1. In Speculo decreti. 2. In Causis particularibus.
Gods Knowledge, (called foreknowledge, and remembrance in respect of us and
the things known) is as his being, altogether in puncto aeternitatis. There is
not in God first and second of time, and cause, no was and is to come, but all
is. There is not with God beginning succession and end, but his name is I Am,
and so is knowledge as himself, yesterday, to day and the same for ever, 2 Pet.
3.8. The knowledge of men is as of one standing on the shore, where some ships
are past, and out of sight one way, others to come, and out of sight another
way, others in sight right over against him; but the Knowledge of God as of one
on the top of an high Mountain, where with one view all things are present,
Heb. 4.13.

Job 14.17. as the Clerk of the Sizes seals up the Indictments for the next
Circuit, nay God himself will bag them, and seal them up with his own hand and
signet, Deuteronomy. 32.34. God speaking of the provocations of his People, says he,
Is not this laid up in store wtih me, and sealed among my treasure? So strict
and earnest is God, for security, as we say, Sure bind, sure find. What more
sure and safe then that which God himself lays up in Bag and Cabinet, and
seals among his Jewels? As when God makes up his Jewels of Mercy, he will
remember them, Mal. 3.17. So when he casts up his treasures of wrath he will
remember them.

Exodus 24.7. he will by no means acquit the guilty ( i. e. Unless the blood of
sprinkling for repentance and remission be applied.) said again, Plalm 68.21. I
will wound the head, and again, Esaias 65.20. The sinner an hundred years old is
accursed.

Now as the Godly look to have God as good as his word for good, Zach. 1.6.
so the wicked must look to have God as good as his word for evil. Did not my
Word take hold of your Fathers?

5. No time can remit Gods anger: if you offend a man, and he Psalm. 7.11. God
is angry with the wicked every day, for the sins he commits one day; the Anger
of the Lord, unless he works a change in us abides upon us, burning to the
bottom of Hell. Psalm. 90.11. O! as his fear is, so is his wrath, and a
thousand times more.

6. Lastly, the sinner is as much under the power of God at one

As the People of God are born up with that word Behold the hand of the Lord is
not shortened that he cannot save, Es. 59.1. So the wicked sink under the terror
of that word. Ezekiel. 22.14. Can thy heart hold and thine hands be strong when I
shall visit, when I shall deal with you says the Lord?

This is the first Reason from God.

Reas. 2. From Sin. In a Twofold Consideration of every sin, wherein there are
two things which make sin unrepented sure to be called back.

1. There is in every sin a breach of the eternal rule of Righteousness. John
3.4. Now the breach of an Eternal Law, must needs be Eternal, unless he which
is Eternal, make it up ( i. e. Christ in giving repentance and remission.) Make
a breach in a stone wall, you may come many years after and find it as you left
it, and it must hold as long as the wall holds if it be not made up; even so it
is in this case. Let one come from the dead and warn us, those poor cursed
castaways are still, and must be still, and ever, crying out under the wrath of
God. What is the reason I pray? verily not only because they sinned out of an
affection and spring to sin for ever, but also because every sin is objectively
infinite and eternal, being against the Infinite Eternal Law of the Eternal
God; now the Law being wronged by the sinner, demands and solicits the Justice
and Vengeance of God against him, till it be satisfied to the utmost farthing,
therefore till then ( i. e. for ever) must the wrath of God abide upon him; and
if time wears not out the breach of the Eternal Law in Hell, much less does it
make any alteration therein here, while thou doublest and treblest thy sin, by
going on with an impenitent heart.

Deu. 32.5. Jer. 13.23. Jer. 17.1.
so we may say of every sin (which is hatred and so murder of the Blessed God)
as to God, there is always some mark or token whereby he is known; and that is
the macula, which sin does impresse upon him; now this also, is an indelible
Character, as the former of Guilt was (save only when upon the penitent
heart-changing application of the blood of sprinkling there is made an
alteration of the case.) It is plain, Jer. 17.1. It is written with a pen of
Iron and the point of a Diamond. Jer. 2.22. Though thou take thee much nitre,
and wash thee with much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the
Lord. David cries out so, Psalm 51. O! wash me, purge me! etc. this is the
second reason from sin.

The third is from the sinner himself, i. e. from his own Conscience.

There is in every rational Creature, a certain thing called Conscience, upon
the account of which also sin must needs be kept upon the file for a back-blow.
Know here that

There are diverse acts of Conscience, and all of them unavoidable, 1.
Directive, as to that which is to be done, it being the Law written in the
heart, it points to all the duties and sins, whereby that Law is kept or
broken, warning from the one, and putting on to the other, Genesis 39.9. How shall
I do this, and sin, etc. Psalm. 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned my
feet into thy testimonies; thus Conscience is a Monitor.

2. Reflexive, both gratulatory and reprehensive, as to all that which is doing
or done. 1. Considering, observing, and recording, whether it be done, or no,
the matter of fact simply with the natural Circumstances of action negative and
positive, both in the point of Omission and Commission. Item this is done or
not done.

2. Taking notice and recording the quality of the fact in a comparative act,
comparing it with the rule, together with the moral Circumstances thereof; thus
Conscience is a surveyer, witness, Register. Item in the doing or omitting of
this and this the Law is broken, and the forfeiture and penalty is incurred.

3. It applies this and sets it home upon the sinner, thou art the man. This
thou have done, verily thou art guilty, etc. thus Conscience is a Judge also,
and gives sentence touching both the sin and sinner, pro or ^on as the Case is.

4. It never leaves nor gives over these acts of warning, observing, recording,
witnessing and judging, till Judgment take place, and the Law, and sentence be
fulfilled upon the sinner. Verily I am guilty, etc. thus Conscience is
Tormenter and Executioner also, executing its own Sentence by affecting the
heart, and moving the affections as of joy and boldness if the Case be good;
so of horror and fear, shame and sorrow, if the Case be bad, etc.

Now these acts of Conscience, though happly for a time suspended as it were,
are unavoidable, upon a double account: and Conscience cannot be bribed.

1. Because of that relation, that Conscience has to God, it ever takes God's
part, and God it is; it is Gods deputy, and Viceroy; and so it is voice and
judgment is the very Voice and Judgment of God himself; who can and will
maintain it in its office, till he brings forth Judgment unto victory.

2. Because of it is relation to a man's self; it is Sensus and prejudicium
Judicii Divini. Nothing so intimate to a man, and inseparable from life, as
this bosom Judge, and God's Court within a man, it is a part of a man's Soul and
self as subordinate to God and his Judgment; So that if a man can run away from
God, or himself, then he may escape the reflection of his sin upon him, but if
not, then know, Jer. 2.19.
it must be an evil and bitter thing, that thou have departed from God in any
known sin, either to thy penitent amendment or penal condemnation and
confusion, and that upon all accounts. 1. In respect of God. 2. Of Sin. 3. Of
the Sinner himself. Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall reprove thee, thine
own iniquity shall correct thee; all the time thou abidest in sin thou art
gathering either Hemlock to poison thee, or Wormwood to make thy life bitter.

1. Instruction: 1. See then the malignity and danger of sin. Fools

2. See the vanity, sinfulness, and desperate danger of presuming upon any
bottom of peace and satisfaction or security, whilst sin remains: of a truth
thy peace and hope thereof shall be as a Spiders web, and as the giving up of
the Ghost, and thy presumption must end in despair; bribest thou thy self with
a persuasion of peace, presuming and leaning

1. Upon Gods Patience? remember forbearance is no payment or forgiveness, nor
sign thereof.

2. Upon outward Privileges? Matthew. 7.21. God knows thee not, whilst thou art
a worker of iniquity.

3. Upon the Mercy of God? He is holy, and therefore must be just; and because
just, angry; and because angry ever angry, unless Christ be thy Peace upon
Faith, and a through change.

4. The Blood of Christ? though it be an ocean, yet not a drop of it can do
thee good, unless it turn thee from all thine iniquity, Acts 3.21. all this is
but Physic in thy pocket.

5. The Promises of the Gospel? they are sweet, but poison to the impenitent;
as bread to a dying man.

6. Upon thy Faith in all this? whilst impenitent, all is but notional and
imaginary, and so thy peace and happiness is but a notion.



I shall here do two things, 1. Give you some directions how to put you in the
way to escape this doom. 2. To awaken my self and you to the serious use of
them by some Motives.

1. Then if you ask how, I Answer.



Lam. 3.20. Let us search our ways and turn etc. this the miscarriage. Jer.
8.6. No man considered, and said what have I done; the first step to peace with
God, is Enquiry, Es. 21.12. If ye will enquire, Enquire, Return, Come.



Lev. 26.41. So shall thou prevent the Condemnation of the Lord, though thou
can not satisfy the Justice of God in the least, 1 Cor. 11.31.
yet thou must glorify it to the utmost thou can.



6. Fly to the Lord Jesus, and the mercy-seat in his blood, 1. For Acts 5.31.
none can take up the quarrel between God and thee save only Christ alone; he,
he is the way; God's way to thee for grace and mercy, 1 Samuel 2.25.
and thy way to God for Faith. Lord I am a guilty helpless creature, but thou
have laid help upon one that is mighty to save, from the utmost to the utmost.

7. In him therefore cry to God for mercy and grace with thy whole Psalm. 51.
I have defiled my Soul, Lord wash wash me, I have wounded and cast away my
Soul, Lord heal me, Lord save me etc.

8. Cry for mercy till God have mercy upon thee, Psalm 123.2.3.

9. Accept of Christ upon the terms of the Gospel, not thine own, or Lord what
would thou have me to do? Consent and resign thy self stooping to his
Articles of Peace; Acts 9.6.
to deny thy self, of the dearest, bear the heaviest, do the strictest, as he
shall call, not that thou can do any thing, but upon these terms, if he will
receive thee, and furnish thee with grace, thou will follow, and cleave to him
with full purpose of heart.

10. Cashier and discharge in thy purpose, and endeavor in dependence

11. Upon these terms consenting to embrace Christ in the offer of

2. The motives. 1. The comfort of this way 1. Now then there is no
condemnation etc. their iniquities shall never be remembered: Romans 8.1. Psalm 32.
God sees no iniquity in Jacob, there is no fury in God. O! Blessed is the man
to whom God imputes not his sin, etc. now Christ is Jehova thy Righteousness.
Thy Judge is thy Advocate, thy God reconciled. Thy Comforter is come to apply
Christ in all that he is for thee, to thee, and shall abide for ever with thee,
he is thy seal unto the purchased possession, the Law is satisfied, the curse
is removed, all the Promises thine, and the Spirit of Promise to confirm thy
title thine, the stain or mark of sin washed off quite, as to Justification and
present acceptance; and in part begun as to Sanctification and purity of heart
and life. Thy Conscience is pacified with the blood of sprinkling, as to what
the Word declares concerning thee, though not as to what thou feel; and
where the Judge acquits, there Conscience, which is the Sergeant cannot
condemn: but that it is not always set right according to the Word.

The terror of being yet, and going on in sin
Do thou go on to add sin to sin, not caring how many sins thou loadest thy
Conscience withal, as if there were no time of reckoning? Numb. 32.23. Be ye
sure your sins will find you out.

Sic mihi semper contingat tractare and bear amicos non dulcibus verbis sed
sanis terroribus Bern.
Do not say, Have thou found me O my enemy? or as the wicked one, Art thou come
to torment us before our time? But as thou love thy soul, take all I say in
good part, for God knows I speak out of tender respect to your eternal good.
Consider then,

1. The innumerable number of sins thou stand guilty of, Ps. 19.12. Who
knows the errors of his life? Methinks there is no sad sight in the world but
the sinner in his sins.

Suppose you had seen Herod covered over with worms, alas what is this to one
worm of Conscience.

Suppose you had seen every member in the Senate run upon Caesar to give him a
stab, would not you have given him over for dead a thousand times? Brethren,
every sin you commit is an envenomed knife to stab you at your very heart.

Suppose again you should see a malefactor at the Bar for a Capital crime, the
evidence clear, O! you will say 'twill go hard with him; but when you see
another, and another, and many other Indictments sworn home against him, and
every one touching his life, will you not say there is no hope, he is a dead
man, and all the world cannot save him. Remember this is thy case, and it will
be certainly called over.

If one poison be enough to dispatch a man without an antidote, what does that
man mean that drinks off a thousand poisons, and refuses the antidote of the
blood of Christ.

If one sin ^e as a thousand milstones to sink all the world into the bottom of
hell, what do thou mean to tie so many thousand milstones about thy own neck.

2. Old debts vex most, the delay of payment increases them by Use upon Use,
and the return of them being unexpected, a person is least provided for them.
We count old sores breaking forth incurable. Augustus wondered at a person's
sleeping quietly that was very much in debt, and sent for his pillow, saying,
Surely there is some strange virtue in it, that makes him rest so secure. My
brethren, if one debt unto Gods Law be more then the whole Creation can
satisfy, what do any of us mean to rest secure with so vast a burden upon our
Consciences and account: O! take heed thou be not surprised and arrested
with old Debts. O! thou remembrest former iniquities against us. Psalm. 79.8.


3. God will call over and charge thy sins upon thee, when all the sweet is
gone, Thou make a shift to swallow the hook with pleasure when it is covered
with the sweet bait; O! but when that is digested, or disgorged, and the naked
hook piercing and raking thy heart, what will thou do then! O! how bitter is
the Pill when all the sugar is melted off. Now this will be thy case; Job found
but a taste of it, and O! how he cries out, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter
things against me, i. e. bitternesses.

4. With old sins must come old wrath, Romans 2.4, 5. Think thou that thou
shall escape the judgment of God: What, and despisest the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, not knowing that the goodness of God (does not only
give thee a space of, but) leads thee to repentance. But after thy hardness
and impenitent heart, treasurest (tunnest) up against thy self, wrath against
the day of wrath, etc.

There be three sorts and degrees of wrath will come with old sins.

1. Wrath for old sins.

2. Wrath for the forbearance of that Wrath.

3. Wrath for the abuse of that forbearance: O! what will thou do in the day of
thy visitation.

5. The former admonitions, etc. nips of Conscience will come again, and they
with the present will be unsufferable, beyond all that can be expressed: This
is their terror here, say they, he besought us and we would not hear; and
says Reuben, Said I not to you, did I not tell you, warn you what it would
come to, and ye would not hear. O! he which hardens his neck to reproof shall
surely be destroyed. O! timely and fair checks and warnings, obstinately
rejected, are the wracks of Conscience, the sharp sting and teeth of the worm
thereof.

6. And what will now become of thee! as the Lord lives thou will come to thy
distracting, misgiving thoughts, Yea but, and verily we are guilty, etc.
Methinks, says Luther, every cloud is loynd with thunder against me: Thou will
take every visitation from God as a messenger of death; nay that God himself
sets in against thy life. Suppose you saw two desperate enemies grapling,
closing in upon each other; O! (...) account for every particular) God comes to
the sinner (as to Adam in the cooll of the day) in his cold sweat, Genesis 3.8.
when his Sun is setting, and he is going to make his bed in the dark; his life
and Soul sits on his pale trembling lips, ready to take her flight in^o
Eternity, and whereas thou were before, as the deaf Adder, or the wild Ass
snuffing up the wind, or the Dromodary traversing his way, without all regard
of any check, now, taken in thy month; Oh! my contempt of the means of Grace;
Oh! my profaning Sabboths, Sacraments; Oh! my breaking bonds of Oaths,
Covenants, Promises, and casting away cords of discipline and government; Oh!
my malice against God's People; Oh! my hardening my heart against the Word and
the Rod, etc. as the rankling thorn in the flesh pains most when thou go to
bed.

5. Before this, in a time of outward Calamity and distress, and this is the
second Doctrine from the special Circumstance, when they were troubled. And now



This is the Case here the Patriarchs (the children of the Promise) are in
distress and danger, by their Brother Joseph's seeming severity toward them.
And they said one to another, we are verily guilty, etc. with the pressure on
the outward man, comes a snare upon the Conscience.

If any find it o^herwise, (as there are some, with whom when there is a storm
without, there is a calm within, and when a storm within, there is a calm
without) let them bless God; but in the experience of Gods People, it is often
found, that when their outward condition is troubled, their inward state and
frame is full of perplexities and fears.

David found it so, Psalm 116.3. The sorrows of death compassed me and (then
also) the pains of hell got hold on me, I found trouble and sorrow, i. e. very
much perplexity both inward and outward at once. So again, Psalm 31.22. 1 Samuel
23.26. Psalm. 42.7.
In my have (i. e. when I was flying for my life before the face of Saul, and
hard put to it) then I said, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Thus it was
with Jona 2.4. in the depth of his distress says he, I am cast out of thy
sight; sad conclusions! touching not only Gods providential care over them, but
his love toward them. Thus with Paul, 2 Cor. 7.5. without were fightings,
within were fears, i. e. Spiritual conflicts.

We find the whole Church in the Lam. at the same pass, Lam. 3.17.18. Thou
have removed my Soul far from Peace, I said, my strength and my hope is
perished from the Lord: alike sad is that ( Ezekiel. 37.11.) Swoon of Israel's
Faith, when they were in the Captivity.

You Will ask what the reason and cause of this should be?

1. It arriseth from their ignorance, especially in the fundamental David. Plam
73.12, 16. is dangerously tossed in his Spirit upon waves of temptations, and
much staggared about his condition, his feet were almost gone, he almost
wrackt, and cast away. See the reason veis. 22. of Psalm 73. So foolish was I
and ignorant: ignorance is darkness, 'twill either find fears or make them.

2. This arises from the ill and imprudent carnal management of a Luke 15.12,
13.
and not as the Prodigal to go afarr off; it is hard to keep close to God in
prosperity, when we have much of this World to live upon, and content our
selves with; to live upon God, and make him our content and stay, as if we had
no other life nor livelihood but in him; we are very apt in such a case to
contract a carnal frame, let go our hold of God, discustome our selves to the
exercise of Faith, abate and estrange our affections from God; See how it was
with David, Psalm 30.7. I said I should never be moved, thou have made my
mountain so strong. I solaced my self in these outward accommodations, as if I
needed no other support strength or content, and there were no fear of a
change; no care now to make God my constant joy and stay, and reckon upon God
only for my portion, and that I must follow him with a Cross, and be conformed
to my Savior in being crucified to the World; what comes of this v. 7. Thou
hidest thy face, and I was troubled, viz. because he had too much indulged a
life of sense. Children that are held up by their Nurses hand and mind not to
feel their feet and ground; when the Nurse lets them go, they fall as if they
had no feet or ground to stand upon. Or thus: we are like Children, which
playing in the golden Sunshine, and following their sport, stray so far from
their Fathers house, that night coming upon them ere they are aware, they are
as it were lost, and full of fears, not knowing how to recover home; the World
steals away our hearts from God, gives so few opportunities for the exercise of
the life of Faith, and such advantages to a life of sense, wears off the sense
of our dependence on God and need thereof; so that when we are put to it by
affliction, we are ready to miscarry, ere we can recover our weapon, or hold.
Faith is our cordial, Psalm 27.13. now if it be not at hand (as in health when
we have no need of it, it use to be) we may faint ere we recover the use of it.

making his calling and election sure, but he is especially put upon this work
in affliction, then he considers, then searches more then in his ordinary
course. Afflictions are as sharp, searching winter-weather, will search whether
your house be tite or no; those garments walls and windows that will serve in
Summer of prosperity will be found defective in Winter of adversity; then how
stands the case between God and me, what ground of my confidence, what evidence
that I am in Christ, etc. though the least degree of Faith will save the house
from falling; yet 'twill be a poor cold uncomfortable dwelling in Winter,
unless you mend the cracks, and flaws to defend you against driving pierceing
winds and storms.

Job 36.8, 9, 10. If they be bound in fetters, and held in the cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work and their transgressions wherein they
have exceeded. 1 Kings 17.18. Do thou come to call my sin to remembrance in
slaying (afflicting me with the loss of) my son.

In stormy change of weather, when clouds gather black over us, and it begins
to drop; then we feel it in our bones, what bruises or aches we have gotten.
When a man is arrested by one Credi^or, all his debts come in upon him. Even so
when a man is arrested with sickness or some other outward distress, then
come in upon him, the debts, wherein he is bound over unto the Divine Law; when
all is well with us, we can easily cast these debts on the score of Christ, but
now it is hot work. Affliction is the glass of sin, and the opening, and
awakening the Conscience to see it, and thence comes the Trouble upon the
Spirit; It is not all the stormy winds upon the face of the earth, but some
generated in the bowels thereof which makes the earth shake.

5. It arises from Satan. When the eye of Conscience is most open, Jobs Case,
even in those which he knows are out of his reach, (where least strength and
ground to do any thing there;) he is most malicious, as it appears in his bold
attempts upon our Lord: If he cannot run thee upon a rock, yet he will disquiet
thee with a tempest, if he cannot rob thee of thy grace, yet he will of thy
peace and comfort.

6. It arises from the weakness of faith, and strength of sense, apprehending
Job. 33.10. Behold, he finds occasion against me, he counts me for his
enemy. (Also 16.12.14.) and in the Church. Lam. 2.4, 5. God has bent his bow
like an enemy, etc. and ver. 5. O! if thou come to that of Jacob, Genesis 42.36.
Surely all these things are against me, and in them God against me, it is sad
with thee. This is the triumph of Faith, If God be with us, who can be against
us? This the shreek of the Fainting, God is against me, and then who can be for
me?

7. It arises from Gods withdrawing. Thus with Christ; when God David, Psalm.
116.3.
when the sorrows or dangers of death compassed him about, then the terrors of
hell took hold upon him, (i. e.) terrors arising from this, the withdrawing of
the Divine Love and Countenance. Mar. 14.34.
Now come his astonishing, dismaying fears and sorrows, pressing even to death,
making him as it were to shrink from the great work of his own mercy. Now he
cries out as his Type, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1.
Mat. 27.
The perpetual shreek of them which are cast away. When we can with David
encourage our selves in our relations to, 1. Sam. 30.6.
and interest in God, then every, even the heaviest burden, even death it self,
is light, and we can in Christ's strength shake it off, or run away with it, as
Sampson with the Gates of the City. But as when the Sun is down or eclipsed the
flowers fold up and droop; or when the face before the Glass turns away, the
face in it vanishes: Even so when God hides his face, and we doubt of our
Title and Interest we are troubled, and then we are as Sampson when his
Covenant broken, and his locks, the sign thereof, cut, we are as other men, our
strength is gone, any cord will bind us, any burden sink us, Isa. 64.7.



1. A word to them which are yet in their sins out of Christ; And it is 1. Of
Conviction. 2. Counsel.

1 Conviction, and terror to them which are out of Christ. If Gods People be
liable to inward and outward trouble at once, wherein yet there is not a drop
of wrath; What shall the visitasion of the rest be wherein there is not a drop
of saving pity? If they may be so hardly put to it which yet are ever secretly
and mightily supported, what shall they do that have no strength but their own
to bear up under the mighty hand of God? Surely if they smart sevenfold: the
wicked must be avenged seventy times sevenfold. If the cup of affliction, by
reason of the bitter ingredient of inward perplexity, be so bitter to them,
what becomes of them for whom the dregs of that Cup are reserved? The godly may
stand condemned at their own Bar, but the wicked at Gods too, and nothing
remains to them but a certain expectation of execution without a change. O! if
Jacob halt, sure Esaus back and bones must be broken; If the righteous be (by
reason of sharp afflictions within and without) scarcely saved, (to whom yet
all afflictions are through grace ever sufferable, short, and sanctified,)
where shall the sinner appear when his sins and sorrows shall meet together?
There be three days wherein thou shall never be able to hold up thy head, and
yet thou must appear: First, A day of extreme Calamity; Secondly, Of Death;
Thirdly, of Judgment. Oh! remember how sad it goes with the godly in a day of
outward Calamity because of inward trouble joining with it through gradual want
of Knowledge, Faith, and Evidence, the venom of sin, unmortified malice of
Satan, not yet quite trodden under their feet, and the withdrawing of Gods Grace
and Countenance in part? And consider how thou will speed, which have no saving
Knowledge, no Faith, no Interest, art under the reign of sin and Satan, whom
the holy and jealous God cannot endure to behold but with revenge and
execration. Psalm. 27.13. David had fainted (in his affliction) had he not
believed, etc. Surely then thou must utterly faint because thou have not
obtained an heart to understand and believe to this day: The Children of God,
notwithstanding all their inw^rd and outward pressures, can say as Paul sighs
for them all, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed,
(so as there is no way to escape or bear up;) We are perplexed, but not in
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not quite destroyed. But
if thou look not to it betimes, such a day will come upon thee, as wherein
thou shall be so beset with trouble, that thou will be absolutely concluded,
and shut out from all relief; so perplexed, that thou will despair; so pursued
(by the avengers of bloud^) that thou will be quite forsaken of heaven and
earth; so cast down, that thou will be utterly destroyed, and dashed in pieces.
Oh! if trouble, such trouble may seize on Gods dear ones, what reprobate fear
and astonishment shall take hold on thee that art a stranger, a slave, an
enemy, and yet secure and presumptuous in that condition?

2. It is a word of Counsel to thee, as to be an alarm to thy security, so an
Antidote to thy presumption and censoriousness in reference to the godly. The
men of the world can easily pass over the beams of raging wickedness in
themselves and their own, but they maliciously and proudly aggravate the motes
of infirmity in the godly. If they carry themselves unbecomingly by any
impatience under the hand of God: now they are hypocrites presently, now they
sink, notwithstanding they would seem to have special interest in, and
acquaintance with God to bear them up. Thus was Job censured, even by his
friends, for which God censures them, and that with wrath, Job 42.7. Thus Gods
People serve themselves, but especially they have this measure from the men of
the World, They see them droop and walk heavily under some outward burden,
which they think is but ordinary; they see them faint, having drunk of the cup
of affliction which is common, but alas they consider not what may be (the
weight of their burden) within, what bitter ingredients may be in their Cup, as
to their inward man. Now the Spirit is the man, the mind is the strength, and
they are not aware how tender the love of God has made that, and how grieved
and broken that may be upon some spiritual account between God and them. Joab
reproves David for mourning so excessively for Absalom, (and at first sight we
may think it strange that so eminent a Saint as David should so take on for an
outward loss more as it seems than for the loss of Gods favor and grace) but
Joab did not know and consider what visitation there might be within David,
while God stood over him with that outward rod; how God might set on that
outward blow with some inward smart, and rebuke upon his Spirit in such an
intimation as this, O! David, thou that were so obliged to me more than
thousands, I Will make thee know it is an evil and bitter thing to provoke me, and
dishonor my Name as thou have done, thy child is dead, Absalom is gone with a
curse, and Adonijah shall follow, and now what have thou gotten by hearkening
to temptations, and pleasing thy self in the enticements of thy naughty heart?
no question but there were some such workings of God's displeasure within him,
and therefore no wonder he took on so heavily, as Psalm. 39.11. therefore do not
pass sentence upon the Godly in their extremities till thou can hear and see
all the bitterness of their Condition.

2. The second word is to the Godly. 1. They which are not but

1. Art thou in a state of freedom and exemption, bless God; thy lot is very
comfortable, but be not secure, indulge not thy self with a persuasion, that it
will always last. For

1. Thou have married Christ with his Cross, or not at all, thou art delivered
from the Curse indeed, but thou art appointed to the Cross, and can not with
integrity except any part thereof, that without or that within.

2. Outward afflictions and troubles may be many, and heavy; one upon the neck
of another, and by reason of them though they come single, thou may endure an
hard brunt, and have enough to exercise thy whole strength of Faith, and
patience.

3. Inward Affliction my come, and that is far more heavy and grievous, the Soul
is infinitely more tender then the body, and yet scalding water upon the eye,
can very hardly be endured. O then! a wounded spirit, who can bear that?

4. It Is not improbable, nor unusual, that both these rods may come upon thee
at once, and then thy Affliction is as a load upon a broken back; now thou will
have thy hands full indeed, and very hardly be saved; now thou will need not
only all the strength which thou have, but all which thou might have had.

2. You Will say Sirs what shall we do?

I Answer (as in natural distempers.) 1. You must take some preparatives, and
prophulacticks, to prevent the disease if it may be, or at least to break the
strength of it, if it does come, that we may not sinck under it.

2 Some Cordials, Restoratives, and Therapenticks for the Cure of the malady
when it is come; I shall endeavor by the Grace of God to help you in these two
Cases, and conclude.

1. Then for Direction by way of Preparation.

1. Labor to be well seen in points of saving knowledge, especially John
16.33. These things have I told you, etc. ( viz. the great things of the
Gospel, such as those, v. 28. That I came from the Father, i. e. to purchase
all, and I go to the Father. i. e. to procure and apply all) these things say
the Disciples thou have spoken plainly, thou have given us clear evidence and
full information of these, etc. points of knowledge: And what advantage did
Christ's teaching and their learning and understanding of these great matters
tend to? That in me ye might have peace (when) in the World ye shall have
tribulation. Christ had promised he would not leave them comfortless, Joh.
14.18. and this is the course he takes, and the way he puts the Disciples into,
to prevent or prepare for Tribulation, that it might not spoil them of their
inward peace, viz. Instruction and knowledge. O! the Lord give you with utmost
diligence to follow on to know, and to work in what you know into your hearts;
So shall you have that within you, which (in dependence on Christ in the many
points well understood) will be of singular use, and advantage, to quiet and
compose your Spirits in all your Troubles and L^nguishments; grounds of
knowledge are grounds of support and comfort.

2. In order to the forenamed second cause of this distemper, be sure the just
shall live (i. e. every part, degree, and act of life) by his Faith; this again
is the order the great Physician of our Souls prescribes, John 14.1. Let not
your hearts be troubled, why how shall they prevent or help it? believe! they
were believers already. O! but they must still in reference to every change and
condition, or occasion of life, especially in order to this, that they may not
be troubled in trouble, that the storm get not into their hearts, to shake, and
shatter them within, they must believe, i. e. they must be much in the acting
and exerciseing of Faith, upon the grounds thereof; it is sad that I shall now
say. We come to some Christians in their dumps and despondencies, show them the
Promise, Christ in it, the way to it, they are so to seek, that they scarce
know what we mean; we are as Barbarians to them, they are ready to faint under
our hand, before we can (as it were) stanch their bleeding, or apply any
plaster, or cordial, or make them understand their way and ground of support
and comfort, and all this for want of use and exercise of Faith; the acting of
any faculty (where life is not come to the declining state, as it never fares
with the life of Grace) strengthens that faculty; and that person can readily
even in the dark to his rest or cordial, where he uses himself to be;
therefore, take a Christian which makes conscience to bear his weight on the
ground and object of Faith (Christ in the promise of free grace to a sensible
lost undone sinner) let World, and Devil, conspire to trouble him, and God try
him, says he, I know not what to do, but I Will try my old way, it is good for me
to draw near still, I Will do so still as I use to do, Psalm. 73.25.
I Will cast my self down and away upon free grace in Christ in the promise; I Will
lay the weight of my sinking spirit there, I Will renew my hold, life,
expectation there; this is my old path, I Will never be turned, or beaten out
here. This Christian in this strength may challenge all the gates of Hell. This
was David's course, Psalm. 71.5. Thou art my trust from my youth, Es. 26.3.
etc. thence was it, that he could say in Psalm. 56.3. At what time I am afraid
I will trust in thee, his shield and sword was always in his hand, therefore
he could make use of it when fear and inward trouble offered themselves;
afraid? alas, who is not, but, what course will you take then, even what
course you use to take, i. e. believe, use Faith always, and have it now.

viz. short and dim Evidence; give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure; for if you do so, you shall never fall, i. e. under the power of
sin and wrath, which make up the spiritual burden; but so an abundant
entrance shall be administered to you into the Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.10.
etc. i. e. you shall have a safe and secure, peaceable, quiet, comfortable,
well assured passage through all the straights and storms we can meet withal
on this side the Kingdom, even death it self; rest upon Christ always by Faith
of adherence on Gospel terms, and you are safe: but rest not, sit not down with
this Faith, for it is not enough to comfort you in an evil day (though to
support it is.)

O! but I have labored and waited, and yet cannot obtain.

But go on and thou can not miss it (for it is promised, Es. 32.17.57.19.
Romans 8.16, etc.) and thou shall have assurance in thy greatest need; better
affliction find thee in this work and persuit, then put thee upon it (as for
certain it will to thy cost.) When affliction comes, then first for a man to
begin to put the question, am I in Christ? am I in the state of Grace? favor
of God, etc? O! thou will find it hard to get above thy fears, but Psalm. 46.1.
God is a very present help in time of trouble, i. e. for assurance in a
darksome state when thou can make no shift without it; do thou very much seek
God for it in thy freedom, and thou shall be sure of it in thy need, he will
be very much found (Hebr.) as before, give all diligence to make, and thou art
sure.

4. Add hereunto in order to the promoting of a well-grounded evidence viz.
such as these.

1. I was never humbled enough; my sore was never searched to the bottom; can
my cure be done with so little pain?

2. I never knew the beginning, or manner of my conversion; can Grace like dew
come without noise, in in-sensible degrees? Surely I am at best, but a resined
moralist.

3. I can be heartily, and excessively afflicted for outward losses, etc. but
sin, as sin, is not such a burden to me; and the loss of God's favor goes
not so near me.

4. I can pour out my heart in vain delights, but have little liveliness of
affection for Spiritual things.

5. I grow heavier, and heavier in duties, and I think were it not for shame, I
should be ready to lay them aside, and tread them under foot, so little joy do
I take in them, so little good do I get by them, and the like.

Now what do thou? shift off and let pass these and other like doubts,
without endeavoring by what means thou can, to salve, and assoyl them with
some resolution and satisfaction; this will be of ill consequence, I Will tell
thee what will come of it, they will return upon thee and be as motes in thy
eyes, gravel and thorns in thy feet, when the hand of God is upon thee; where
is if they were well weighed, there would scarce a scruple be found in them.

i. e. Joh. 1.9. if we confess, and Lev. 26.40. and now if this or that sin
return, what may thou say; truth Lord, Psalm. 32.5.
I am guilty, and my guilt thou do justly suffer to be awakened in this evil
day, and hour of temptation, but Lord thou know this, and this sin in
paticular has been my burden, under which I have poured out my heart in groans
and complaints, imploring and applying Christ in the promised grace of pardon,
and power in reference to it, and thou have heard it and known it; in this case
though affliction seem to search out iniquity, yet it shall not be found; but
when affliction starts some sin, which thou did wink at or slightly pass
over, then thou will find trouble and sorrow indeed.

Es. 27.9.
the design of the Lord in affliction is mortification, now if thou joynest thy
hand in the same work, God is ever with thee in the same way, and not against
thee; but in case thou connivest at, hidest, shelterest some known corruption,
then thou can hardly apprehend God, but as thine Enemy coming against thee.

As it was with the City of Abell, 2 Samuel 20. they were terrified at the
approach of Joab and David's Army, Oh! says the woman upon the wall, art thou
come to destroy the Inheritance of the Lord? no says Joab, but there is a
traitor Sheba harbored here, etc. It Is he that put the City into fear and
danger, and made Joab seem their Enemy, when his head was delivered all was
quiet; now when thou insistest on the business of mortification, thou will joy
when thou fallest into tri^ulation, as it was with Jael, Judge. 4. having done
execution upon Sisera, come says she to Baruc, etc. Welcome my Lords, I know
whom you pursue, here he is dead at your feet, behold the nail in his temple!
O! says one visited with the stroke of death, I have been long getting down
this body of death, and now God will do all my work at once; be not slack in
this work, and afflictions will be more joyous than grievous.

7. Yet again, to come to the root of this malignity, and in order to minus
gaudebis, minus dolebis, the less thou joyest, the less thou ruest; the less
thou layest a World-interest near thy heart, the less that affliction which is
the parting work, will go to thy heart; therefore let all creature comforts and
advantages be loose about thee as thy clothes, which thou may easily lay
aside, and not as thy skin, which cannot be pulled off without great torture;
affliction endangers nothing but that which is outward, therefore let not thy
excessive respect to that which is without thee, make thy affliction an inward
terror. If thou countest the World of no value, thou will be able without
inward perplexity and fear to pass through all places of danger and plunder;
as the Travellour, when he carries but a small matter, which he knows if he
looses, it will not at all undo him. Besides If thou love the World, the
love of the Father is not in thee, and this will be a desperate venomous sting
to thy Soul in thy affliction; if thou would not have the World thy plague
and thy poison in the enjoying, thy wrack and thy terror in the loosing,
comply with the Word and Spirit of Grace in the application of a Christ
crucified for the crucifying and mortifying of thy affections unto every
earthly interest.

8. In reference to the eighth cause (unacquaintednesse with affliction) much
in the knowledge of the necessity, nature, and design of afflictions.

1. Necessity. 1 Pet. 1.6. If need be you must be in heaviness for a time. In
respect of the terms of the Covenant which lie in this, deny your self, and
take up your Cross, etc. And in respect of our disposition, we cannot be
without them to wean us from the World, to imbitter the creature to us, to
conform us to a crucified Savior, and make us partakers of his holiness.

2. The nature and design of Afflictions; They are fire not to consume our
gold, but to purge away our dross; they are not revenging Judgments, but
fatherly medicinal Corrections; not judicial Poison, but remedial Physic, etc.
Therefore 1 Pet. 4.12. Think not strange, be not strangers (as the word
imports) to the fiery and greatest trial, and thou will not be dismayed when it
comes. Even Poison may be habituated and made innocent. If a stranger come in
unexpected into our house, grim and armed with Instruments of mischief, we know
not whence he is, nor what he comes for, it will startle and appale us: But if
we be acquainted with him and his design, and expect him, we are quiet, and
composed to entertain him. So when Affliction comes, we can say, This is the
Cup my Father gives me, who I am sure means me no hurt, this is but what I
looked for every day, etc. Enure we therefore our selves to the Cross, and make
it familiar, conversing with it in our meditation and expectation. See thou
one afflicted with the loss of a Wife, another of a Husband, another of a
Child, another of Estate, another begging bread in Prison or distress, etc.
bear part of his burden in sympathy and pity, and readiness to succor him, and
put thy self in his or her case, supposing thou were so and so (it will do thee
no hurt) what should thou do? And so God will make thy burden light, Psalm.
41.1. So thou will be prepared to entertain and meet the burden, and it shall
not fall upon thee, and upon thy spirit to crush and sink thee, etc. Think
often, and think not amiss (have no hard conceits) of affliction, and it shall
not be hard upon thee. Take this Course, and then as for the malice of Satan,
in accusing and tormenting, and the seeming severity of the Lord, in
withholding and withdrawing; thou shall not need to trouble thy self, for Satan
is a restrained and conquered enemy and cannot hurt thee, and God is reconciled
and will not hurt thee; He may try thee by intercepting the sweetness of
fruition; He will never curse thee by intermitting or breaking the firmness of
the Union; and if he hide his face for a moment lament after him, and he will
visit thee with everlasting kindness of his compassion, which change not,
though there may be a change as to what thou feel.

Thus much for the Preventives to prepare for double afflictions upon the
inward and outward man before they come. Now secondly, what shall they do that
are already under them?

Negative. Do not go about to settle thy mind by diversion, or turning

2. Design not a little ease; the sore that is but skinned over will break out
again and be more dangerous, put in therefore for a cure, and that not partial,
but through.

Positively take this course upon the sense of thy condition, and the i. e.
consent with all thy heart to receive him, and rest upon him on the terms of
the Gospel, to be saved by him only in his own way, at his own rate; this is
the course David, Jonah, the Church in the places aforenamed took, this is the
course the Lord prescribes, Isa. 50. ult. Who. etc. Let this child of light,
(and such thou art if thou take this course, Fear to sin against God, and
hearkenest to this word I now speak) sitting in darkness and seeing no light
(there is the depth of trouble of mind) trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
himself upon his God; His name is the Lord God, gracious,, etc. Emanuel, a
Savior, Exodus 33.19.
spreading his arms all the day long (any time before the night of Death close
thy eyes and Christ's bowels) even to the disobedient, and will in no wise cast
out or lose any that come unto him upon all his own terms. Thou dear troubled
heart, how will thou heal and settle thy self, what will thou do? Will thou
first make satisfaction by thy mourning, humiliation, reformation, purpose of
amendment, and so commend and ingratiate thy self to Christ. Thou nestlest upon
a false bottom, and thy heart deceives thee; sound rest and peace is not to be
had this way, if it be thy first, principal, or only way.

On the other hand, are you willing to let Christ let you into heaven, and not
lead you his own way, i. e. under his Government in all things, then you run
away from Christ, and cannot be saved by him as such: But do thou freely and
willingly consent upon the sense of thy lost condition to take Christ for all
purposes, for Grace and Glory? Thou art welcome to him; and let this be thy
rest, in coming to him burdened and weary, willing to take his yoke upon thee,
Mat. 11.28. He saves thee to the utmost, only upon coming. Let this be
satisfaction and settlement in thy trouble, from whatever cause it comes. Oh!
how clear is this way according to the contents of the Covenant of Grace which
is thus. Christ stands always ready to receive any that is willing to come to
him upon his terms, and will never cast them off.

Oh, but if he were my God and my Christ, I would come to him and believe in
him.



Oh! but I have long stood out against his invitations, and rejected his
importunities, Christ has called graciously, and I have heard. His Spirit has
knocked, and my Conscience has pressed me to believe and come, and yet I have
stood out, and now I may expect he will throw me away with indignation; I have
denied mercy so many times, and mercy will surely now deny me; and here comes
in thy trouble.



Oh! but I have made my address, and seemed to come to him, and have made
profession, and been taken for a Believer many years, but I have falsified with
him. I am a studied hypocrite, and have compassed God with lies: Surely then
there is no mercy for me.



Oh! but now come? This would be only self and slavish fear; my necessity
compels me now; I can make no other shift: There is no ingenuity in such a
faith as I am like to put forth in this my extremity.

etc. and all is well. The occasion of believing always extremity and
necessity, for none ever came to Christ as long as they could make any shift
without him, but the cause if thou come is the mighty power of God to make
thee unfainedly willing upon all the terms; and thou art no less acceptable to
God because thou art constrained by Grace upon the pinch of thy necessity to
come, Romans 11.32. Hos. 5. ult. God puts thee to this pinch that he might hear
of thee; in that latter place it is as if God had said, Well, I have called
again and again, and used variety of means with this people, but all in vain; I
will take another course I will leave them, go to my place, hide my self, that
trouble, and horror, and anguish shall take hold on them, and what then? Shall
it be unseasonable and too l^te to come? No, then they will and shall seek me
early; see how welcome a sinner is in this case to Christ. The Prodigal, he
runs his course, spends all in riot and luxury, and was reduced to utter
extremity, and then he bethinks himself of coming home. I will go, there be
many mansions in my Fathers house, and I perish for want of bread; being upon
this knowledge of his Fathers fullness drawn, Luke 15.
and upon sense of his own lostness, driven he comes; And what salutation do
you think his Father might give him? What are you come indeed? In good time?
You, that have all this while taken your swinge in all wickedness, as long as
you could live; my house was not good enough for you; and now, that you have
laid me under the reproach of your leudness, and fulfilling your lusts as long
as you had a penny in your purse, or a rag to your back: Do you now come to me?
There is no duty or affection to me that swayes you hither, but you are
compelled by the extremity you have brought your self to: Get you gone with a
sorrow, and never look me in the face more. Thus we would have thought, but it
is quite otherwise, his Father, when he did but say he would come, meets him
afar off, falls on his neck, kisses him, brings him home, provides the best
Room, the best Robe, the best Kid, all the best, and there is great joy; His
Father do h not question what draws, or what drives; whether he comes out of
compelling necessity, or out of ingenuity and dutiful affection; But he is
come, that is enough. This my son was dead, and is alive, was lost, and is
found; and there is all done that possibly may make him welcome; apply it for
your encouragement to believe, and settlement in your undoubted interest by
faith. Though you seem to come late, and out of necessity, yet Gods thoughts
are not your thoughts, yours may be thoughts of wrath, etc. But Gods are of
pity, love, acceptance upon your coming. Thus you see your way is immediately
to come and cast your selves upon Christ on the terms of the Gospel and your
great trouble shall be removed. Make not a judgment of your condition from what
you feel, but from what you hear, from the word of grace which now gives
sentence on your side.

i. e. is most suitable to your present condition, as in point of fear to sin,
Isa. 50.10. Lostness, Mat. 18.11. Poverty of spirit, Longing and thirsting
after righteousness, etc. Mat. 5.3, 4, 6. and so one Grace and Promise will
draw in all.



Thus accepting Christ in the Covenant, in the strength of the grace thereof.
Give up thy whole self to Christ in a Covenant of willing universal unreserved
obedience, and say with David, Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken what the Lord will
say, for he speaks peace to his people, that (by the power thereof) they turn
not again to folly.

In what things must we use Moderation, and in what not?
Phil. 4.5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.


WHat St. Austin said in his days of another Scripture, that it stood more in
need of good practicing, than any Learned Interpretation; that may I say in
these days wherein we live, concerning the words I have read to you at this
time. I shall not therefore detain you, with showing their coherence,
(especially considering their entireness) or with any glossing upon them; but
h^st to open the nature of this Duty, and press the practice thereof upon you
all. In the Verse you have two general parts.

1. An Exhortation to the showing Moderation, which being in materia
necessaria, is a command.

2. The Argument enforcing it, The Lord is at hand.

The former will bound my present discourse, which I need not alter, but
according to the Grammatical order the words stand in, might consider the
personae, res, and actiones expressed therein, all which make up the whole of the
Duty enjoined: yet if you please to have the Proposition formed, take it thus.

It is God's Command, and our Duty to let our Moderation be known unto all men.
Which I shall prosecute, according to the order of Nature, in this method. 1.
In opening the nature of Moderation. 2. In showing it is exercise. 3. By whom
and to whom. 4. Why. And lastly, make Application.

Moderation opened.
1. Concerning the nature of Moderation, or what it is; wherein the signification
of the word, description of the thing, it is subject, kinds, rule, and extremes.
And here I confess I enter upon an unbeaten path; the word (...), and (...),
which descends from it, (and for which, by a G^aecisme, it is used in the Text)
being of such multifarious signification, and no where in Scripture rendered in
that extent as here, nor any where else (that I can find) by Moderation, which
also occurs in no other place of all the Bible. It signifies properly that
which is fit, decent, due, meet, convenient.

(...). Hesych. (...). Etymol. Modestia dicta est a modo, ubi autem modus nec
plus est quicquam nee minus Cicer; est autem modestia in animo continens
moderationem cupiditatum. Idem 3. Rhet.
And is accordingly rendered by former Interpreters modestia; not as opposed to
pride or haughtiness, in it is strict Philosophic acception, (which some not
attending to, have therefore quarrelled with) but that which does moderate our
actions, in which sense the Masters of that Language frequen^ly use it; and by
later, for avoiding that ambiguity, Moderatio, from whence is formed our
English word Moderation. Which (in it is latitude) is not any particular Grace
or Virtue, but that fit and proper temper we ought to observe in the governing
of our hearts and lives: that equal Judgment which should command our wills and
affections, and all our humane actions, which are capable of excess or defect,
by proportioning them according to the quality of the object, and the end for
which, and whom they are employed, for the preserving of peace within our
selves and with others; that there may be no contumacy or rebellion in our
affections to disquiet our selves, or in our actions to disquiet others. So
that moderation according to it is Subject, is either that of the mind, which is
as the cause, or of the will and affections in their actings, which is as the
effect, from all which the whole man is denomin^ted Modorate. The former, or
that of the mind, is that part of Christian prudence, which proportions our
actions to the Object which the will chooses, and it is end, according to the
variety of circumstances the agent is in, by applying the general rules of
Scripture for our walking, to our particular actions, and is accordingly well
rendered here, by one of the Ancients rationabilis conversatio, Ambros, in loc.
your reasonable or equitable conversation. The latter, of the will, pertains
to the several and particular virtues therein, especially those that serve for
the restraining our most strong and impetuous passions, which offer the
greatest violence to the equality of our minds. And therefore although it most
properly be of the judgment, yet being most conspicuous and discernable in the
exercise of such Virtues, it does according to the quality of the Object about
which they are conversant, assume their several notions and names. The most
violent passions in reference to our selves being, the lusting power after the
good things of this life, and consequently the grief which arises from the want
or loss of them, it is therefore in reference to the former, Temperance (in
it is large acception,) and the l^tter, Patience; and in relation to others, the
raging power of anger and revenge, with what flows from them, in which regard
it is in the Magistrate, Clemency; and humanity, meekness, gentleness,
lenity, in all. In this variety is the word used by Authors Sacred and
Profane, which I will not clog you with. (...) opponit Hermog. (...), etc.
Isoc.
And for this cause it consists in that mediocrity which approaches nearer to
the extreme of defect, and consequently is opposed to violence, impetuousness,
or inordinacy of affection (not as placed upon undue objects, for that is
materially evil, and to be wholly declined, not moderated, but upon lawful
immodera^ely) and in general to all excess in humane actions. Hence it is, (by
the way) as I conceive, that it is commanded so frequently in Scripture by
negative Precepts; as love not the World nor the things of the world, Jo. 2.15.
take no thought for your life, for the morrow, Matthew. 6.24, 31, 34, verses.
Fear not them which kill the body, Matthew. 10.12, 31. Luke 12, 4.7. Let not your
hearts be troubled, Joh. 14.1. and many the like, which I cannot stand to
mention: and some times by the action contrary to it is opposite vice, as Matthew.
5.39, 40, 41. Turn the other check, let him have thy claoke also, go with him
twain, i. e. rather than violently resist, and revenge thy self. Moderation
then being no particular Grace or Virtue (as you have heard) cannot have any
peculiar object, but only in common with the principles, and actions wherein it
is employed; whereby it becomes incapable of any future accurate division in^o
several kinds. For although it be of a general consideration, yet not as a
Principle which acts upon it is object, but that which peculiarly respects the
actions themselves when the object is pitched upon, it being Moderations office
to regulate and govern Principles in their actings upon their due objects
chosen, that they exceed not therein. So that as all those Graces and Virtues
which respect the manner of actions, as zeal, sincerity, etc. that respect the
moral quality, as this does the moral quantity degree, or measure of them, are
of so many several kinds, as the actions are wherein they are convers^nt; so
also is Moderation. And in regard our particular actions are so very many, so
diverse, and clothed with such infinite variety of circumstances; it is
impossible to lay down any certain Rule, that may determine wherein Moderation
in them all should consist: the (...) or the things that are just necessary and
convenient, and no other, being always in particular actions very difficult to
define, as the Plilosopher acknowledges, who says, there is nothing more full
of difficulty then in every thing to find the mean. The Rule he lays down to
walk by, is Reason, and a prudent man's determination; the best nature affords,
and are especially good for the Duties of the second Table, which he only
(though not to all) speaks of; yet we (through the goodness of God) have a more
sure and certain one to guide us, to which we shall do well to take heed, even
the Scriptures, which are able to make us wise to salvation. It will be worth
our while, to speak briefly what we can, touching the Rule, which in general
must guide and determine our Moderation. For which end we must know, that all
our humane actions, which are capable of moral good or evil, are of two sorts,
especially according to their objects, Religious, or Civil. The former requires
a Spiritual principle, end, and rule, by which we must perform them for their
manner and measure, which Scripture does abundantly for the internal by it is
particular, and sufficiently for the external, by it is general precepts,
declare. For the latter or Civil actions, as a natural principle, and end
referrible to Gods glory; so also for their manner and measure, the general
Rules of Scripture to allow, and prescribe them, is all we can reasonably
expect, and is sufficient for the same. In the application whereof, Reason and
prudent determination are three ways subservient.

1. In judging the nature or quality of the objects in general, which we are
particularly employed about, (as the good things or evils of this life, in the
particulars wherein we are conversant) according to what Scripture declares
them to be, when it speaks of them, especially not comparitively, but
absolutely what they are in themselves.

2. Of the end God has ordained such things for, about which he has commanded
us to be employed, and accordingly to proportion our actions. It being a known
Rule in the Schools, Omnium appetibilium finis est mensura, or, that the end
is that which must prescribe the measure of our actings, according to it is
double respect, rei, and personae, for what, and for whom the action is.

Lastly, in due consideration of the circumstances of the Agent, wherein is
such great variety, not only in regard of the person, which involves the end
for whom the action is, but all the adjacent circumstances, that herein occurs
by far the greatest difficulty. For example, in meats and drinks. Consider
diligently their nature in those set before thee; then their end, for
refreshing us, not feeding our lusts; and of thy self, what is sufficient and
convenient for thee in the circumstances thou art then in, and accordingly use
them, or put a knife to thy throat and refrain, as the Wise man speaks, Prove.
13.2. for that which may but be sufficient for one, may serve for another to
make his belly his God: yea that which may be only convenient to the same
person at one time, may be gluttony and excess at another. And as about
things, so in our dealing with others much more variety, both in respect of our
selves and those we have to do withal. As we must remit that to one, we need
not, nay some times ought not to another, according to our own and their
capacity; as they are poorer or richer than our selves, as they are weak, or
wilful and malicious opposers of truth or equity; and a thousand such like
considerations, which occur in our actions, which though always sufficient in
themselves to de^ermin us, yet because of our shortness of sight, are often
but as the uncertain twinkling starlight to us, whereby to steer our course.
All that is said of Moderation will more clearly appear, if we consider it is
Extremes from the nature of God's Commands, which are of two sorts. 1. Some
are affirmative, and those either general what we must do, etc. and imply the
end for which, and all the circumstances that necessarily attend our doing it:
Or particular, and express the circumstances external, as time and place, and
internal (usually called the manner) which comprehends the quality, and the
moral quantity or proportion, (we are speaking of,) which implies the
intenseness, frequency, and duration of our actions. These continually oblige
us, though not to continual practice, but only when God requires; the former by
way of more absoluteness, the latter more conditionally, as depending
thereupon. 2. The other sort of precepts are negative, some what we must not
do, and so consequently at once forbid all the concomitants of such actions as
are prohibited; others not forbidding us the object, but rectifying us about
it, in the end we most do it for, manner how, etc. both which obliges us to
continual observance, and in morals to the contrary duties. By which it
appears, in our not right proportioning our actions, we sin in omission, by
not doing so fully as he commands, in commission when we do those things that
are our duty, but exceed therein, and go beyond the bounds God has set us, and
this is formally immoderateness, which is rectified by Moderation. As for
actions materially evil, as Jonah's being angry with God, hating virtue, and
loving vice, etc. which are absolutely forbidden, no proportion is to have
place, but it and all other circumstances together with the action, wholly
avoided or suppressed, because toward undue objects forbidden us there can be
no defect, in regard there should be no action, and therefore no Moderation or
government thereof. For instance in those two great Commands, on which hang all
the Law and the Prophets, as our blessed Savior tells us, Matthew. 22.46. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy Neighbor as thy self, Luke
10.27. Here Is the grace of Love required to act toward God, the manner
expressed, in heart, soul, strength, mind, the measure in the four all is (the New
Testament adding one to the three of the Old Testament, so far is the Gospel
from detracting from duty,) here can be no excess, in regard we can never love
him as he deserves, not only in regard of what he has done for us, but is to
us, being our end and happiness: and toward our Neighbor, the manner
expressed, as thy self, i. e. truly and sincerely, but not with all thy heart,
etc. that is only God's due, who is absolutely to be loved for himself, others
for him. Herein alas Grace is defective, but never exceeds, so that Moderation
has here no place, for if we love any person or thing more than God, Christ,
and our selves, it is not the action of Grace but sinful affection, which is to
be moderated. For he that with his natural affection loves Father or Mother,
Wife, or Child, which yet they ought greatly to love, more then God or Christ,
is no^ worthy of them.

I am not ignorant all this while, that this word (...) is most frequently used
in a forinsecal or Law sense, more strictly; the Moralists, Schoolmen, and
Civilians borrowing it from Aristotle, and restraining it to that particular
Moderation of mitigating strickt Justice in the execution of humane Laws, and
so is rendered equitas equity. Which is either that of the Magistrate in his
public capacity, and is so clementia clemency, and is opposed to cruelty; the
Magistrate being obliged as not to write his Laws in blood, like Draco's; so
also not to execute them with cruelty, (though where requisite with severity;)
but to moderate them by the Law of Nature, other Laws, former prcedents,
constant customs, which has the nature of Laws, or the reason and end of the
Law, which is more equitable (and more Law say some) than the letter, and
amongst Christians by the written Laws of God, that there may be convenientia
poenae ad delictum, or a proportioning punishment to the quality of the
offense, all circumstances (which the Law cannot possibly foresee or provide
for) being duly considered. This includes all Superiors, Political,
Ecclesiastical, Domestical, etc. and is frequently joined with Justice and
Judgment in Scripture, as executed both by God and man, Psalm. 98.9.99.4. Is.
11.4. Prove. 1.3.2.19.17.26. Micah 3.9, etc. Or secondly that of private persons
(or public in their private capacity) which is between party and party, when
according to the rules of equity, we omit what the rigor of the letter of the
Law would adjudge us, thereby neither injuring our selves or others, which is
usually called probitas or honestas; by us, common honesty that should be
'twixt man and man. And hence some borrow it and restrain it to that carriage
the Law takes not cognizance of, in our meekness and gentleness, making it
that single Virtue the Moralists call mansuetudo, we meekness. But though it
be all these, yet it is also more, these not reaching the latitude of the word
(...) nor the extent of the duty here in joined; the word being not used here
in that strict sense the Philosophers use it, (as the learned Grotius well
observes upon the place: (...). Hesych. (...) Etymol. (...), Suidas. (...),
etc. i. e. (...) Scoliast. in l. 1. Thucyd.
) but for that equalness of mind and spirit that becomes us in our
conversation, and diffuseth it self through many, very many other actions than
are proper to these Virtues: and, though sometimes restrained to this, or that
particular kind of Moderation, yet in it is latitude (as the best Philologers
tell us) denotes mediocrity, indifferency, equality, or the like. And in this
general acception, which I may call the Moral or Theological Sense, not
restraining it to (though not excluding) the forinsecal and stricter
acceptance thereof, I shall through Gods assistance handle it. The rather,
because our Judicious and Learned Perkins, has in a peculiar little Tractate
already spoken sufficiently to that particular, of the Moderation of Justice by
the Magistrate, and private persons, in reference to their remitting from the
rigor of the Law, which every one may peruse, and I seriously wish they would
also practice.

2. General now follows; The exercise of Moderation, The exercise of Moderation.
wherein the case proposed is included, viz.

Case. Wherein must we practice Moderation.

Which necessarily implies the external object, or about what our Moderation
must be conversant, and appear to all: call it the object of the faculty or of
the action, or of Moderation, when employed in governing these, and so has the
same object with them (as is said before) it all comes to one.

And formally includes. 1. What it is that we must Moderate; or the faculty, or
principle, of what kind soever internal and external, from which the action
flows. 2. In what actions. And 3. How, or the measure and proportion to be
observed in such our actions. Which three are always distinct in themselves,
though not always easily distinguishable to us, and therefore often seem
coincident. I shall therefore join them together in the prosecution of the Case.

For the general Object of Moderation, or about what it must be exercised and
appear. Negatively.

1. Not such things as are materially good. About such things, or in such
actions as are materially good, Moderation has no place; because all the good
we can possibly do, is too little, so that there can be no excess in these,
and therefore no Moderation; for the Office of Moderation being to restrain
excess, where there can be none of this, that can have no employment. e. g. we
cannot believe in, hope, love God and Christ too much, nor hate sin, and Satan
(as the Schoolmen affirm, in regard of his wholly loosing the Image of God too
much. In all our internal religious duties, and actings of Grace, as such, no
Moderation therefore can or ought to have place.

2. Not about such things as are materially evil. For herein we cannot be
defective. Where the object is absolutely forbidden us, and no circumstances
can make the action good, there we are wholly to abstain, or suppress the
action, if in it; there being inordinacy in the principle or faculty; for
though Moderation is to govern even the principle, yet not in the choice of
it is object, but in it is exercise about a due object chosen that it exceed not.
And though we call any great acting upon an undue object, or great omission
toward due, immoderate, because of their excess, yet this is not properly
immoderacy, for so every sin would be it formally, whereas those only which
respect the moral quantity of our actions, are properly immoderacies. Both
these sufficiently appear by what is said before.

Positively. But about such things as are in themselves of an indifferent
nature, and neither absolutely commanded as things materially good, or
absolutely forbidden, as those materially evil, but only conditionally
according to the circumstances we are in. Which though of an indifferent
nature, yet become morally good or evil to us, as we are actually conversant
about them. In these properly may be excess, in regard of which Moderation is
to take place to restrain, and keep all within due bounds, being formally the
modification (to use the School term for once) of such actions. Wherein we must
carefully distinguish of the several formalities of the object, Grace and
Nature being conversant about the same object, but not in the same respect.

For it is exercise therefore, or what, wherein, and how we must practice it.

Which I shall speak of 1. Absolutely in reference to our selves, for
preserving peace within, as it is to be exercised toward the good and evils of
this life.

2. Relatively, or in relation to others for external peace, wherein we must
exercise it, in civil and in Religious matters. The former I shall call
Moderation toward things, the latter toward persons.

1. Moderation toward things.
1. First then for Moderation toward things, as it is absolutely taken in
reference to our selves: this being so clearly enjoined in the Text, as appears
not only by the word (...), but the duty (...). The Apostle not saying, use
Moderation toward all men, but let it appear to all men, which even that which
is internal does in our external conversation. But though there be abundance of
excellent fruit on this branch of Moderation, yet in regard I conceive that
toward persons principally intended, I will not stand to shake it down, but
only point you out briefly the boughs, on which it especially grows, that you
may gather it your selves, and proceed to the second, Moderation toward
others, which I shall only prosecute afterward in all the following discourse.
Now the good things of this life being either internal, of the mind as parts,
learning, etc. of the body, as health, strength, beauty and the like; or
external, as the riches, honors, relations, and lawful pleasures of the World,
and what comprehended under them: And the evils of this life, such as are
contrary to these, as shallowness of parts natural or acquired, sickness,
weakness, death, deformity, poverty, losses of friends or estate, infamy,
reproaches, troubles, wars, hunger, thirst, nakedness, imprisonment,
captivity, banishment, and such like: we are toward these to exercise
Moderation.

1. Toward the good things of this life. 1. We must moderate our Judgments in
the valuation of them. As forbidden fruit must not be looked upon, so lawful
must not be judged by us more desirable then it is. As we may not undervalue
these good things, and with the Stoic despise and cast them away; so we must
not overvalue them, beyond their intrinsic worth and the ends for which God
allows them, the end and use being the measure of every things estimation. For
though every creature be good in it self, and some better in themselves, and to
us than others: yet those that are the best, and best for us that the World
affords, are still but creatures, who are most of them serviceable only to our
bodies, that they may be serviceable to our Souls, in the service of our
Heavenly Father: which when we too much estimate, we quickly fall to admire,
and so bow down to them, and commit idolatry with them. For an overvaluation of
the Judgment, begets in us admiration, and so an over-valuation of them also
in our affections. These sensitive objects make such impressions upon our
imagination when absent, and our passions when present, that if Grace and
Reason moderate not our Judgment of them, our whole man becomes inflamed
therewith, and violently carried out toward them, by an excessive admiration
of their seeming excellency, love to them for the same, and desire after them,
for their apprehended sutablenesse, hope to obtain them seeming possible, using
means for obtaining them, and delighting and glorying in them. Therefore our
Savior prescribes wisely, that our hearts may not be in them, the light of our
minds being single, Matthew. 6.22, 23. When Achan (Josh. 7.21.) judged the
Babylonish garment goodly, and the silver and gold, then he quickly coveted and
took them. Let thy Moderation therefore begin here, and consider the character
Solomon upon good experience gives them, that they are all to us in this
degenerate state vanity of vanities, yea vexation of Spirit.

2. Moderate thy will and affections, in their love, desires, hopes, after the
getting or keeping these things; according to the ends for which God allows
them thee in particular, and with subordination to his pleasure and providence
in the event. We must value, love, desire, God and Christ, and hope in them,
absolutely and for themselves, and Grace absolutely, but for the enjoyment of
them (and consequently for our own happiness;) but so must we not these
things; but only conditionally, as God in his All-wise-disposing providence
sees meet to dispense to us, (he having so only promised them,) and for those
ends and so far forth as they are convenient for us, according to Agars desire,
Prove. 30.8. Which convenience is to be measured by the estate the Providence of
God has set us in, and the circumstances wherein we are. As so much health,
strength, refreshment, comfortablenesse in our lives, as God sees good for us
and may render us serviceable to him; so much food, raiment, profit, pleasure
as he pleases to bestow, and so far forth as convenient for us, according to
our present condition, for our health, and other ends now mentioned to which
they refer; but neither these nor any other good things of this life
absolutely, or for themselves, so as to make them our end and happiness, or to
be fuel for our lusts, must we either love desire or hope for. It is not thus
desiring the lawful pleasures, profits, honors of this life, which St. John
speaks of 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 16. but the immoderacy of the desiring them which he
calls lust, and says is of the World; as well he may, seeing this is the
Trinity that it genenally worshipeth more than the blessed Trinity of Heaven.
Is it not the cry of many, nay most, who will show us any good? but of how few,
Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us! Psalm. 4.6. How do men
grasp at these things in their desires, which are as boundless as the Ocean;
as craving as the Horse-leach daughters still crying give, give; as unsaiable
as the grave; and as unsatisfied as hell and destruction toward which they are
traveling. What Libanius observed so long since, (...).
(and it is worth the observing) holds as true at this day. It Is difficult,
says he, to meet with a man, satisfied and not complaining of his condition.
If he want any bodily good, as beauty, strength, etc. or, If none of these, yet
not thankful, if he want some of the mind, if he be not an Orator, Physician,
skilful Commander, or the like. And especially in riches and honors. He that
has one field, would have, and complains if he have not two; he that has, two
for four he that has ten, for twenty, and he that has twenty, twice so many;
and so on, no number satisfying his desire. For though it be great before, when
we enjoy any thing it then seems small to us; as a thousand talents of Gold,
when we have them are small to two, and two to ten, and so on. In honors
likewise, he that governs a City is not satisfied because he governs not the
Nation, and if the Nation, that not more; as Cyrus, Darius, and Xerxes mighty
Princes, yet they wanted Greece they thought, which caused their Expeditions
against it. Thus passing by still what we have, and reckoning what we have not,
never think we enjoy enough. (...), every one herein being injurious to God,
not injuriously dealt with by him. Keep therefore thy heart, and moderate it
that it break not out in these things with all diligence, lest the swarms of
these lusts, what ever sweetness they seem to bring with them, sting thee to
death.

3. Moderate thy pursuit and endeavors after the acquiring and retaining
these, by the ends for which, and subordination wherewith thou may and
ought desire them. This speaking only the execution of the former
particular, must needs be accordingly bounded. What we may lawfully desire,
that we may use lawful means to attain, and so far forth as we must desire, so
far only must we use the means. We must seek the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness absolutely and in the first place, then the things convenient
for us in this life, according to their subserviency thereto, and his seeing
good to bestow upon us. As it is the Statue Law of Heaven, that in the sweat of
our brows we should eat our bread, and should be our daily prayer, that our
Father which is in Heaven would give us this day our daily bread, i. e. all
things requisite and convenient; So is it that we should not lay up for our
selves treasures upon earth, not serve these as our Masters, nor take thought
for our lives, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we
shall be clothed (which three are the total sum all these externals amount to
in their use) Matthew. 6.19, 24, 25, etc. Our blessed Savior from the 19th verse
of that Chapter, forbidding this immoderate pursuit in those negative precepts,
which he presses with several cogent arguments and expostulations; and not
absolutely, but so as they be not our treasures that we set our hearts upon,
our Masters that we serve, when as they are but our Servants, and so as that we
oppose them not to, and set them in competition with the treasures in Heaven,
and God our great Master whom we ought to serve even in the following our
employments for these; as appears verse. 19. and 24. nor absolutely our taking
thought, but our too sollicitousnesse about the choice of, and using means, and
especially their event, and so consequently what shall become of us, if we be
not blessed but blasted therein, as appears by the word (...), and last verse of
the Chapter. And yet (alas!) after all this, how do we seek them as if they
were our treasure, our happiness, our all? as if here was our continuing City,
wherein we should always live, and have these treasures, and none other to
come that has better? Though these be things after which the Gentiles seek,
yet they will be excusable who know no better in comparison of thee and me, who
know the true Pearl of price, are invited and called to better dainties, and
yet make light thereof, one preferring his Farm, another his Merchandise,
Matthew. 22.5. And yet though the generality of the Gentiles which had not the
Gospel, as the Jews in our Saviors time, were so immoderate; yet many of them
were such as appears by their works, and lives; as I fear will rise up in
Judgment in this particular, against most of us that call our selves
Christians. They beholding the busy World (as one of them speaks of the Souls
in the other) as the Ant carrying a straw, or some little thing of like moment,
into her hole in the Molehill; which yet dazels our eyes with their seeming
luster, and makes our hearts say of these our houses as if they were our homes,
it is good for us to be here.

4. We must moderate our whole man in the use and enjoyment of these, in our
loving, delighting, rejoicing and glorying in them. We must not in our using of
them, exceed the bounds within which they are allowed us; nor in our love
toward them, 1 John 2.15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in
the World, by taking too much complacency and delight in them; nor our
rejoicing, Eccles. 11.9. if thou do, know, for all these things God will
bring thee to Judgment. Nay our Savior when the Disciples returned with joy
that the Devils were subject to them, Luke 10.17. which was a divine and
extraordinary gift, calls them off, and shows them a fit matter of rejoicing,
wherein they could not exceed, not absolutely forbidding, but limiting them
with a rather, but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven, Ver.
20. nor in our glorying in them, Jer. 9.23, 24. Oh what need of moderation
here! In our eating, drinking, sleeping, lawful recreations, raiment; in the
using of our parts, Learning, Riches, Honors, and other Creature comforts! If
the enjoyment of these outward things had been so considerable, think you our
blessed Savior, who could have commanded them, would have wanted them? What
are the best of them? Are thy Riches any thing, but of the earth, and earthly?
Thy Pleasures any thing, but a little titillation of the flesh, of no permanent
nature, lives but one instant and dies as fast? Thy Honor any thing, besides a
hollow echo, or noise that like the circle of the water, is but of little
circumference and soon gone? Does not every cross wind, or wave, break and dash
it away? Is not he that is great in this City, scarce known in the next? He
that is King in one nation, unknown to many other nations? How short lived, I
pray? Have there not been many great ones we never heard of? Those we read, do
we not skip their names often, not troubling our selves with the thought or
remembrance of them? If we do, what are they the better? Read Psalm. 103.14, 15,
16, 17, 18. Nay, have not the greatest judgments of God followed excess in
things lawful? I will trouble you with none but a few Scriptural Examples: Two
of the greatest the World ever knew, the flood, and destruction of Sodom and
the rest of the Cities of the Plain; to what are they ascribed but Security and
Excess? They did eat, they drank, they married Wives, they were given in
marriage: What follows? The flood came and destroyed them all, Luke 17.27.
Likewise in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded, (all again things lawful in themselves) but the
same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven,
and destroyed them all, v. 28, 29. If David too much pride and glory in the
number of his people, and fall to numbering them, God quickly follows with
Pestilence, and makes them decrease seventy thousand, 1 Chronicles. 21.14. If
Nebuchadnezzar will vaunt, Is not this great Babylon that I have built, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? While the word is in his
mouth there falls a voice from heaven, The Kingdom is departed from thee, and
he is turned to grass with the Oxen, Dan. 4.30, 33. And his Son Belshazzars
great Feast fills up the measure, for which he was that night slain and his
Kingdom taken, Dan. 5.1, 30, 31. If the rich man will think thus, and so will I
do, and say, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry: He is not only stigmatized for a fool, but this night
shall thy soul be required of thee follows, Luke 12.19, 20. Nay, if the wicked
servant begin to eat and drink with the drunken, his Lord will come
unexpectedly, and cut him asunder, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites,
Mat. 24.49, 51. How great then this sin is, Gods judgments being always equal,
and proportioned to our offenses, what slight thoughts soever we may have of
it, you cannot but by these Examples perceive. Nay rather what a big-bellied
Monster is it? Full of many deadly sins, full of Atheism, unbelief, idolatry,
carnal security, preferring these things before God, Christ, heaven and
happiness. Take heed and beware therefore herein, lest while they speak thee
fair, they wound thy heart.

^ Toward the evils of this life; 1. We must moderate our fears of these
befalling us, according to the good they threaten to deprive us of. As we must
not fear these groundlesly, so when there is just cause, and apparent danger,
we should not be senseless, and secure, nor fear all alike, or over-fear any.
Security is the forerunner to destruction, 1 These. 5.3. which these should
awake us out of, but not so affect us, or affright us, as to put us past our
selves and our duty; when the storm threatens us, we must not, with Jonah, be
asleep, but praying and endeavoring, as the poor Mariners, for preservation;
Or as the Disciples, Lord, save us, we perish, though they were too fearful, in
regard of Christ's being with them, who was sufficient security for their
safety. There is a provident fear, that opens our eyes to foresee dangers, and
quickens us in the use of lawful means for their prevention; such was the good
Patriarch Jacobs, of Esau his destroying him and his company; that makes him
pray, send presents to his brother, divide his bands, and use all prudent means
of preservation, Genesis 32. This we must have, for security and putting far away
the evil day, when God threatens us even with temporal judgments, is a great
sin, and has a woe pronounced upon it, Amos 6. whereas this makes us wisely
serve the providence of God. But then there is a diffident fear that distracts
us, and cuts all the nerves and sinews of lawful care and endeavors, that
brings a snare with it, ( Prove. 29.25.) and often drives us upon unwarrantable
means, or makes us sit down in despair. This we must beware of, by a due
moderating our fears according to the impendent evil, which must be judged by
its opposite good. Not fearing all evils alike, the loss of some wealth like
the loss of our health, because health is the better good; no nor all evils of
the same kind alike, not a Tertian Ague like the Stone, this by its exquisite
pain, depriving us more of the natural comfort of health, and more endangering
our lives. And not over-fearing the greatest, viz. Death, called by Job, The
King of terrors (15. and 14.) and by the Philosopher, (...), of all terribles
the most terrible, which our Savior, as man, feared with a natural fear, yet
charge we should not over-fear it, Mat. 10.28. Luke 12.4. Ye^, though we
should fear political or public evils, as Wars, Famine, Pestilence, more than
our own personal (of which you see I speak only all along) in regard those are
greater, the public good being be ter and to be preferred before any private,
yet not these too much.

2. We must moderate our grief and trouble for these according to the good we
want, or lose by them. There are imaginary evils, that are of our own creation,
begot, brought up, and nourished only by our own brain; these we must carefully
avoid, and if formed, not be cruel to our selves in being compassionate to
them, but d^sh them in pieces. And the^e are real evils, which come not forth
of our own dust, nor spring out of the ground, but are from above, of Gods
creating and framing, Amos 3.6. Isa 45.7. Jer. 18.11. These we are not to be
senseless under, but duly affected with, and yet not over-affected, so as to
murmur and repine, much less quarrel with God. A Stoical apathy becomes us not,
and yet better than quarrelling at Go^s Providence, it coming nearer
moderation; for wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment
of his sin, (Lam. 3.39.) little reason whilst thou art living, seeing it is
less than thy desert, and no reason even for death and hell, for they are but
equal to thy desert; if thou confess thy self a sinner thou must confess this.
Plato said, that God does (...), Sympos. l. 8. Q. 2.
which is expounded by Plutarch well; That God is said always to act the
Geometrician, in regard of his equal dealing with all men, in proportioning
rewards and punishments to their deserts: And a greater than he, yea, the
greatest that can be, God himself, appeals to the sinners own conscience, Is
not my way equal? are not yours unequal? Ezekiel. 18. which whole Chapter is a
defense of his equity. Troubled then we may be, murmuring and discontented we
must not be. Nay, troubled we ought to be, as the evils are greater or less,
which must be judge^ by the good they deprive us of; more for public, because
that good is greater, less for private evils, because ou^ own good is not equal
to the communities. But in the body politic it is quite otherwise than in the
natural body, we are usually too senseless under public, and too sensible of,
and immoderate under our own particular evils: rather apt to quarrel with God,
like Jonah, for a Gourd, or some inconsiderable concerns of our own, than be
troubled at the destruction of a great Ninevey; more troubled at our own houses
being on fire, or child sick, than all our neighbors in the City about us
burnt and dead. Therefore Scripture accordingly calls for affection for the
public, and forbids it in our own concernments, in regard we are generally
defective in the former, and excessive in the latter. Nay, even toward others
when just cause of compassion, if excessive. So our Savior, when the women
lamented his death, (which was matter of grief as in respect of him, though of
greatest joy in it self as to them and the world, (bids them, Weep not for me,
but for your selves, and your children, in regard of the public calamities
that were coming upon Jerusalem, Mat. 23.27, 28, 29. Every particular being
concerned in the community. Now of these evils, seeing all are privations of
good; Some are of the good we want and never enjoyed, as deformity of body,
defect in parts, constant poverty, etc. and here we must beware we judge not
those evils which are none, and so trouble and torment our selves without
cause, and reproach our Maker, saying, Why has he made me thus? Why am I no
nobler born, no more beautiful made, no greater heir, no quicker Parted? Why am
I not as such, or such, not as they, this, or that? When thou have what is
suitable and convenient for thy condition; for this all may say of those that
excel them, (and the best of imaginary excellencies,) as well as thou. Other
evils are of the good we have enjoyed and are deprived of; as sickness of
health, losses of friends and estate, reproaches of our good name, imprisonment
of liberty, and the like, which are incident to our present state. These are
they especially which the world lament, and cry out after, as foolishly as
Micah, (Judges 18.24.) Ye have taken away our Gods: and what have we more? and
say thou what aileth us? We must not here be too passionately excessive,
either in the degree or duration of our trouble; we must be affected with the
providence of God in these evils, according to their greatness to us (a little
loss in it self may be great to a poor man, as the Widows two mites was more to
her than their far greater sums was to them that cast them in, the death of an
only child greater than when a number) and so trouble and sorrow for them; but
discontented we must not be, nor distracted in the duties God requires; nor
refuse to be comforted because our Husbands, Wives, Children, Pleasures,
Honors, Riches are not; for as there is a time to weep, so a time to take up,
and refrain from weeping; we must love them so as we may lose them, that when
we do, we may not lose our selves, Amavi haec omnia tanquam amissurus, let us
every one say at parting with them, I loved you so as I can lose you. Take heed
of murmuring with the Israelites, cursing thy Stars with the profane, of
discontentedness which the best are apt to fall into, nay, wish for death
rather than life, as several of the Prophets. Maintain that equilibrious frame
in thee (as David, 2 Samuel 15.26.) Here I am, let God do to me as seems good
to him, which is the mother of patience, and like it makes these evils (though
not none, yet become) none to us.

Thus I have done with moderation toward things, most of whose particulars
mentioned, you have pressed by the Apostle Paul, and by the same argument of the
Text, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. The time is short, It remains that both they that
have Wives, be as though they had none: and they that weep, as though they wept
not: and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as
though they possessed not: and they that use this world as not abusing it: for
the fashion of this world passes away. And though I have stood longer upon
this than I intended, and promised both you and my self, in regard the fruit
hung so thick about me, that I could not but pluck some of it, and after I had
tasted it, more; yet I hope it will prove so pleasant also to the taste that
you will pardon me; especially considering how much this moderation toward
things conduces to that which respects persons; (the contentions in the world
arising usually from our want of moderation to the things of the world, as in
civil matters it is patent, and in religious though less obvious, yet most
frequently as certain, that these are the springs from which they flow:) and
how necessary it is for us all to know and practice it, for licitis perimus
omnis, we usually perish by the hand of these lawful things.

2. Moderation toward persons.
Having spoken of moderation, as it respects our selves, for preserving peace
within, (this as all government having peace for its end) which appears and is
made known to others by our conversation; let us now look abroad, as we are
members of the public, and have to do with others, and see what moderation we
must use for the preserving external peace. Now each Christian having a double
capacity, as a man his civil capacity in the State; as a Christian, his
religious capacity in the Church wherein he lives; I shall speak to both these,
in reference to peace Political and Ecclesiastical; to the former more briefly,
being so near akin to that part we have already dispatched.

1. In Civil matters.
Herein we may be considered Actively or Passively. 1. Actively. We must
moderate our speeches that we give no just provocation thereby, according to
prudence. That we may neither provoke those of whom, or to whom we speak, we
must duly consider the nature of the matter we speak of, and the quality and
temper of the persons concerned.

In our discourses with others; not trifling in weighty matters, and fervent in
trifles of no moment; not rashly to thy Superiors without respect, not
superciliously to thy Inferiors, not co^tentiously to thy equals; we also must
have regard to their temper, if passionate and angry, with soft not grievous
words, or if tender and meek-spirited, with the like (for these two different
tempers must be al^ke, though for different ends dealt with all) if
contumacious more sharply, if flexible gently, if teachy or jealous, more
tenderly and cautiously, if equal with more freedom and liberty; and so of all
others. Yea we must also observe their present condition, if distressed, or
joyful and comfortable, and the like; and the disposition they are in, (which
for the most part is sutably thereto,) as sad and dejected, or cheerful and
pleasant, beyond their accustomed temper, and accordingly moderate our
speeches, as the Wise Man advise^h, Prove. 25.20. At no time stir^ing up
contention, or speaking swords and darts, but as the wise whose tongue is
health, Prove. 18.6. and 12.18.

In our Judging, characterising, and censuring of others, we must also consider
for what, of whom, and to whom we ^o it; not for every failing and weakness or
miscariage, nor upon slight grounds; not readily taking up a reproach against
our neighbor, and rashly venting it, Prove. 10.12. nor jealously framing one,
and according thereto passing verdict; for though there be a charitable and
godly jealousy we may exercise toward those we have special interest in, or
charge over, such as St. Paul's toward his Corinthians (2 Cor. 11.2.) and Job
his children (1.5.) in reference to our admonishing or other dealings with
them, yet not to our judging and censuring them to others. And when the
carriages of others are such as no due candor can excuse, we must rather
interpret them better, than aggravate them as worse, according to the favor of
charity to the offender, though in no wise to the offense. Nor this without
necessity, nor to every one blazoning others, nor of all alike without respect
to quality, age, temptations and the like, of which and all other
circumstances, consideration must be had, and due allowance made.

In our rebuking and reproving of others, we must likewise see, that it be a
matter so deserving, and consider the persons we so deal with. (In counsel and
admoni^ion though prudence be required, yet in them we assume not so much to
our selves nor apt so passionately to miscarry.) Great need of this in
Superiors, Masters especially toward Servants, and Scholars, that they deal
with them according to their dispositions, forbearing (or as the Greek
moderating) threatening, Ephesians. 6.9. and Prove. 11.24. and Parents often toward
children, Fathers provoke not your children, lest they be discouraged, Colos.
3.21. And as great need of Superiors moderating their passion toward
Inferiors, so great need of these using prudence toward those and their
equals, Rebuke not (therefore says Paul to Timothy, 1 Ep. 5.1.) an elder, but
entreat him as a Father, and the younger men as Brethren.

2. We must moderate our contests with others according to equity. So long as
sin, Sath^n, and meum and tuum, thine and mine, are in the World, there will
be strife and contention about the things of the World. And where interest
ing^ges us, we are subject to be byast thereby, and drawn away by our passions
from all equality. Great need therefore of Moderation here. 1. In considering
the matter that it be of moment, and the person we have to do withal whether
faulty; and not about toys, and rashly with any tha^'s next us we think upon
the blush guilty, enter the lists of contention and strife. Go not forth
hastily (says Solomon) to strive lest thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, when thy neighbor has put thee to shame, Prove. 25.8. 2. If so, In
trying by all fair means the obtaining thy right, whether of estate, good name,
honor, or the like, by arguments and persuasions, by seeking accommodation, by
willingly referring it to the equal judgment and determination of others or the
like. Agree (says our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5.25.) with thine Adversary
quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; (i. e. to the Magistrate, as Luke
expounds it, 12.58.) lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge,
and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison. 3. If
these will not prevail for thy right, In voluntary yielding some part thereof
rather than contest. It must be thy own right thou must yield, not another,
(except thou be entrusted therewith, and so far forth as he consents thereto)
for this being a gift, must be of such things as are our own, which thou
ought to do for peace-sake. How eminent was Abraham for this, ( Genesis 13.8,
9.) who stood not upon his terms of superiority with Lot, though his Uncle and
Guardian formerly and Governor, nor his right, nor his Nephews first seeking to
him, and the like, but that there might be no strife, offers him his choice of
the Land; if thou will take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if
thou depart to the right hand then I will go to the left; and performs
accordingly. How far are we from following our Father Abraham's example! how
many that will not yield others any of their right but by compulsion of Law!
how few that yields their own right voluntarily! How far or how much we must
yield, our own and those we deal with, circumstances best determine. We must
not be injurious to our selves, for as St. Austin says well, quis aliis aequus
qui sibi iniquus? who that is unequal to himself will be equal to others? We
must not yield that which is greatly to our detriment, except our yielding be
as easy terms as further contesting (as it proves often when we proceed to
Law, etc.) and here that may be very considerable to one, that is but small to
another, as poorer or richer, for matters of estate, as entering the stage of
the World, or well known in it, for credit and good name, etc. And very
considerable to the same man at one time that may be small at another, as if
upon preferment to have reports made of him, or the like. Nay there may be
grounds for not yielding the least we can possibly obtain, which we must
conceal from the public (though we may satisfy private Christians) as when
we know our estate is small, though (living upon credit) others judge it great,
or the like cases. But here is not such difficulty; every one knowing his own
circumstances for the most part pretty well, (which should be a ground for our
charity, that we censure not men whose circumstances we know not:) nor are we
apt to miscarry in departing from our own interest. We should especially
therefore consider the condition and circumstances those are in we have to do
withal. If greater, we usually make a virtue of necessity, and yield most where
we should yield least; but here in our speeches and carriages we should
especially yield, and least we can of our purses, and on the contrary, if they
be meaner and poorer. Not when others are low, or in present exigencies, to
take them by the throat saying, pay me what thou owe ( Matthew. 18.28.) but to
be equal, merciful, and considerative of others as well as our selves, and
accordingly to deal. 4. If all thou must yield will not satisfy, In thy
chargeable appeal to the Civil Magistrate. As all lawful means must be assayed
for public peace, before by War appeal be made to God; so should all lawful
means be used before we appeal to his Vicegerent, for private peace. And when
we do with charity to the person against whom we proceed, for it is a great
mistake to think we cannot be in charity and Law together. And though with
vigilance and circumspection, yet not with violence and passion, to manage the
prosecution. Lastly, In the issue or event of appeals. If we overcome In
admitting equal compensation for thy loss of riches, credit or the like thou
contests about. For some men's natures, others necessities are such as make them
obstinate and persist to their ruin and destruction; and Laws in some things
are severe (though just,) which though the Magistrate moderate according to
equity, yet often adjudge more than we should take. And if thou be overcome and
lose thy right; by no means seeking revenge or righting thy self, but use
Moderation in committing thy cause to him that judges righteously.

3. We must moderate our whole carriage and conversation toward others
according to the rules of Modesty and sobriety, Prove. 25.6. Avoid all occasions
of giving just offense to others. Seek peace and pursue it, but fly occasions
of quarrelling and strife, lest the wrath both of God and man pursue thee.
Consider that not only hatred and wrath, but variance, emulations, and strife
are reckoned amongst the works of the flesh, which they that do shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God: whiles peace, long-suffering, gentleness, and
meekness (fruits of the Spirit) shall, Gal. 5.20. -- 23. Let not thy immodest
looks efface others modesty, nor thy gestures offend their gravity. Offic. l.
1. c. 18.
For St. Ambrose extends this Moderation to gestures, g^te, and bodily motions,
speaking also his own experience herein, how he refused to admit one into
Orders merely for his immodesty in these. Let not then any taunting jests,
bitter sarcasms, or any other words, or mimical gestures, foolish wagers,
recreations or the like, become snares to entrap thy pe^ce with others.
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest (or
grave and venerable (...)) whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, speak these
things, do these things; and the God of Peace shall be with you, Philip. 4.8, 9.

2. Passively. Thus we are considered in our suffering from others; wherein as
we must cordially fo^give them all, Matthew. 6.15. So in our carriage we must
moderate our Spirits, passions, speeches, actions, and punishing thereof,
toward those that are the offenders.

1. We must moderate our Spirits by an equal bearing with the weaknesses and
natural infirmities of others. He that has no rule over his own Spirit, is
like a City that is broken down, and without walls, Prove. 23.28. i. e. soon
overcome. We must consider their years, as the fervor of youth, teachinesse of
old age; their temper, some are more dull and phlegmatic, others more
melancholy and suspicious, some more choleric and boysterously passionate,
others more agil quick and sprightly; their education, some are with study
morose, others according to those they converse with, more rude, or
complemental and courtly; according to which, and their present condition, we
should give due grains of allowance, in our speeches and conversation toward
them, and retain our equality of mind, as the Orator said, tranquillus animus
meus, qui aequi boni facit omnia. 1. By a prudent dissembling them, 1 Samuel
10.27. By a charitable 2. covering them ( Prove. 10.12.) 3. Interpreting them;
not putting any sinister interpretation but most favorable, nor agravating the
offense, 1 Cor. 13.5. and 7. 4. Admonishing them, Matthew. 18.15. Gal. 6.1.
Lastly, pardoning them; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, etc.
Colos. 3.13.

2. We must moderate our passions in their due exercise, in case of greater and
wilful offenses, according to the nature and quality thereof. Our anger toward
such offenders, aversation of them, severity with them, and the like; avoiding
of and suppressing, all wrath, envy, malice, revenge and the like sinful
passions that have the stamp of Hell upon them, ( James 3.15.) which come
thence and lead thither, Gal. 5.20. and 21. In Gods cause we must be angry,
against sin; and in the publick's against the impediments of pe^ce and truth,
Nehem. 5.6. Acts 17.16. (but these I am not speaking of) in our own we may be
angry, but we must not sin. Ephesians. 4.26. Whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the Judgment, says our blessed Savior,
Matthew. 5.22. In which three things are considerable. 1. With whom, and that's
clearly the Offenders, not every one that is next us. 2. For what, which the
Philosopher, and all acknowledge difficult to determine, being in particulars;
the only help is from the consideration of the quality of the offense. 1. Not
for every trifle, but materal in it is self or in it is consequence. 2. Not for
natural defects and weaknesses, as when they are slow of parts, weak of
strength, or the like, and can do no better; (here we may find fault and
admonish gently to quicken, not be angry to discourage, those we have power
over, or interest in.) 3. Nor for purely involuntary, and c^sual offenses, such
as no due circumspection could prevent. But for errors and mistakes which might
have been avoided, carelessness and negligence in the doing or omission;
wilfulness or maliciousness in the end for which others offend us. When these
appear, and as they appear more or less, we may be angry; least for the first,
more with the next, and most with the last of wilfulness and malice. Lastly
the measure of our passion is considerable, which must not be beyond the nature
of such offenses, in the degree or duration. Be angry, and sin not, (the same
words in the Original, the Septuagint renders, Psalm 4.4. by, stand, in awe,
and sin not, when we are angry with others, we had need stand in awe of God
that we sin not) let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, neither give place to
the Devil. Ephesians. 4.26, 27. i. e. we must neither too deeply, nor too long be
angry, lest the Devil who is ready at hand take occasion thereat, to blow us
all into a flame of wrath, malice, revenge and what not, all which are to be
wholly avoided.

3. We must moderate our speeches and actions toward such wilful offenders. By
no means rendering railing for railing, or evil for evil, but overcoming evil
with good, Oh that our blessed Savior's known precept, was but as known in the
practice, Matthew. 7.44, etc! and that his copy was but writ after by us; how
would the World be reformed thereby! If those many places of holy Scripture, of
forbearing, and forgiving one another under the penalty of damnation were duly
believed, they would marvelously restrain men at least, and becalm the World.
But let us see our practice.

1. By a prudent silence, or slighting the presumptuous offenders of us, when
secret, or not greatly to our detriment. Not to hearken or regard every
reproach, scorn, contempt that is cast upon us; nor every trespass of our
neighbor, 2 Samuel 16.10. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is
his glory to pass over a transgression, Prove. 19.11. It is his glory not only
as it shows a spirit above such dealings, but wisdom many times more ashaming
and silencing such thereby, then by our contending with them.

2. By yielding to the unequal demands of others for peace, wherein we are
solely concerned, and not greatly prejudiced. How eminent is our Saviors
example herein, who though free from tribute, yet rather than he would offend,
works a Miracle for the solution thereof, Matthew. 17.27. He fairly shows first
that he is so, and then notwithstanding pays, whose wisdom and practice herein
let us follow.

3. By admitting equal compensation, or less than our wrong, for such manifest
injuries as we may and ought to right our selves in, when the offender is
willing to make us satisfaction. If in our reputation, let us not insist too
much upon the punctilo's of honor; if in estate, upon the strict terms of
right; but herein observe the golden Rule by putting off self, and putting on
thy neighbor, doing to him, as thou would he should do to thee, Matthew.
7.12. Nay in real wrongs of estate, we should in case of their incapacity of
recompencing, accept for present, verbal satisf^ction till they be better
enabled, and if never, to lose all rather than by imprisonment, or otherwise to
bring upon them (and often theirs also) utter destruction, Matthew. 18.29, 30.
Plut. Symp. l. 8.
For as the Moralist well (...) but not (...), though all Justice be equal, yet
all equality is not Justice, but that which is proportioned to persons.

4. Lastly, We must moderate our prosecution of such injuries and wrongs, as we
ought to vindicate our selves from and see punished. Though we must forgive all
injuries as to our selves by charity to others, yet we may, nay we must in some
cases have so much charity also to the public and our selves, that in
notorious injuries, we should do right to both in the prosecution of such
offenders, as will not otherwise be restrained or do us right. If thy brother
sin against thee not only seven but seventy seven times a day, thou must
forgive him, Matthew. 8.22. i. e. If he frequently wrong and injure thee; (for so
the word sinning when against us signifies, as the Sept. 1 Samuel 19.4. Genesis
42.22. and elsewhere frequently use the Greek words, (...), If any man
trespass against his neighbor, that is injure or wrong him) yet thou must
constantly forgive him; but notwithstanding thou may seek thy right from
him, and if by no fair means can obtain it, prosecute him before the
Magistrate for the same. Nay thou not only may but sometimes must.

1. When God is concerned therein; as in the Churches right. Thus Moses though
the meekest man upon earth would not abate Pharaoh an hoof, (Exodus 10.26.) for
thereof must we serve the Lord (says he) and we know not with what, until we
come thither, i. e, Canaan. A Minister may yield his own, but he must not the
Churches right.

2. In case of trust from others. Either from the public, or private persons,
which allow us not to make terms of concession but stand upon strict Justice
and right. Here so far as others consent which are proprietors, we should
compose, yield, and take up controversies; further we justly cannot; for in
cases of trust, a man must be regulated by the will of those that entrust him;
as Arbitrators and Sollicitors for others; So Executors frequently and
Guardians, that are entrusted for those that are young, and not yet sui juris
at age to consent, and dispose of their own; and the like cases, wherein the
entrusted are responsible for what is not legally done therein; the Laws
determination being by all presumed just.

3. In our own personal injuries, wherein the public is concernd. 1. When
public peace, order and government are much violated and broken thereby. As in
notorious thefts, attempts of murder, and the like; which if tolerated the
World would become a great latrocinium, and slaughterhouse, wherein the
longest sword and strongest arm would sweep away all, a place for beasts but no
quiet habitation for men. 2. When the public emolument or estimation suffers
in our injuries. As Magistrates, Ministers, and all others employed in public
affairs, when grossly defamed, so as the public is thereby reflected on; ought
fairly to vindicate their integrity so far at least, that those that employ
them, and the public suffer not thereby. And lastly, when thy serving the
Public, and consequently the public good is thereby hindered. How ample is the
Apostle Paul in his own vindication against the false Apostles defamation of
him, in his Second Epistle to the Corinths, which is much of it Apologetical.
And good reason, for where the person is traduced, his employment is not likely
to be much effectual, or advantageous to the Public, and his Example less; as
Quintilian, L. 2 Instit. c. 2.
and many others, yea, constant experience tells us. In these cases thou must
do thy self justice, but so moderately as not doing to others injustice thereby.

In all other merely personal wrongs and injuries, when they are considerable
in themselves, or their issue to thee, provided thou can no other way obtain
right, thou may publicly prosecute thine Injurers, Opppressors, public
Defamers, and the like wrongers of thy Estate, Reputation, and other thy
temporal good things; in charity and according to Equity, equally seeking thy
own right and good, not thy neighbors wrong, much less ruin and destruction.
And thus for moderation toward others in Civil matters.

In Religious matters.
Although I have spoken in the opening the nature of moderation, and the
general Object, that which might serve to direct us herein: Yet lest I be
mistaken, and thence any of you mistake your duty; I shall further open this
particular Object, by speaking to it negatively about what moderation is not to
be practiced, and positively wherein it must.

Negatively. 1 Not in matters of faith. For the believing these being not only
absolutely required of every Christian, and in that measure that we cannot
fully come up to, in regard of the great truth and reality of spiritual objects
and their revelation, (the best being (alas!) miserably short and deficient
herein:) but also internal, (the profession of these being matter of practice)
Moderation cannot possibly here have any place, much less that which respects
others.

2. Nor in matters of moral practice, such as the Moral Law requires, and grace
and virtue should perform. For in these can be no excess either in degree or
duration. We cannot love God too much, nor with grace our neighbor, nor too
constantly. Consider Father, Mother, Wife, Children as moral Objects, so we
exceed not, as natural goods, and so in the exercise of natural affection, we
frequently (as is said before) do exceed, which is discernable especially by
the end; with grace we love them for God, with the moral virtue of love for the
relation they stand in to us, with the affection of love, when we sinfully
over-love them for our selves, for though the natural affection co-operates
with the former, yet it solely exceeds. But it being difficult for us to
discern these formalities in objects, and the operations of principles about
them, it is our only way to have recourse to Gods Laws, (which though founded
upon the nature of things, yet shows us plainly our duty, where we cannot
discern them) which, in all things wherein we may exceed, (as in the Externals
of the First Table, and the duties of the Second) not only prescribe us what,
and also particularly how to act by positive Precepts; but lest we should
miscarry by Negative also, which respect the end, manner, measure, etc. of such
duties, restraining and bounding us that we exceed not. Both which are Moral,
and comprehended in this particular, it being equally moral not to over-love,
as to love thy Neighbor, the former being forbidden as well by the Negative,
as the latter enjoined by positive Precepts.

In Negatives which forbid the action absolutely, (as Blasphemy, Adultery,
etc.) no need of any such Precepts to regulate us; for the actions being not to
be done, no need of direction for their manner, and consequently no place for
Moderation; such being to be subdued, and suppressed, not ordered or regulated,
as I have formerly spoken, and in things only indefinitely forbidden (as
Swearing, Traveling on the Lords day, etc.) when we are to practice them, we
have the rules for Positive actions, Affirmative, and Negative to direct us
sufficiently.

3. Nor especially in the weightier matters of the Law or Religion. I must
speak a little to this; because that may be commanded absolutely in it self,
which comparatively when it comes in competition with other duties of greater
moment, becomes only conditional. For Affirmative Precepts are so many, it is
impossible they should bind ad semper; so that when two or more duties come
together, man, in regard of his finite capacity, being not able to perform them
at once, must duly consider the weightiest, and that do; it being requisite in
terms of inconsistency, that the lesser always give place to the greater, and
cease pro hic and nunc, or for that present to oblige us. Thus David's eating
the shewbread, and the Disciples plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath day,
when hungry, is defended by our Savior, Mat. 12. Yea, even frequently the
externals of the First Table, give way to the weighty exigent duties of the
Second, (as the sanctification of the Sabbath, to the defending the City in the
Macchabees case) according to that, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Hos.
6.6. Not only rather than sacrifice, but in such cases not sacrifice. God
dispensing with the lesser, so that its omission becomes no sin: as is clear in
our Saviors practice in his healing the man with the withered hand, etc. as
well as in his defense of his Disciples, Luke 6. For that may be our duty and
necessary at one time, which at another (when a weightier comes that should
take place) cease to be so, by virtue of the reason and consti^ution of the
Laws themselves that the Superior Law take place.

Therefore under the notion of moderation to omit Moral, and especially the
great and necessary duties required, and practice only the less, is Pharisaical
hypocrisy, not Christianity. If to do the great duties of Religion, God
requires of us, be accounted immoderateness, let us say with David, If this be
to be vile, we will be more vile still. Gods Laws admit of no (...), or
dispensation from us, but what he has admitted himself, we must neither add or
detract, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Thou can neither mitigate their execution, nor any other,
besides himself, on thee for thy transgressing them. Digest. de legib. and
senatus. cons.
If the wise Romans were so careful to preserve their Laws from others than the
supreme dispensing wi^h them, lest they should prove a Lesbian rule, much more
the Great and Wise God has reason to keep up the authority of his Laws, and
expect our punctual observance of them. Moderation in Religion, and religious
Duties, is the devilish Precept of Machiavel, not the Doctrine of the Gospel,
or St. Paul. To engage or wade no further in Religion, than temporal interests
will permit u^ to come safely again to shore, was the resolution and speech of
a great Courtier of France, than of heaven: and of such as resolve more to save
their skins than their souls. How does Christ every where arm those that will
be his Disciples against their desisting from their necessary duty, for the
offense of the world? Is so far from concealing this, that it is the first
thing he tells them of, invites them upon no other terms than the Cross; tells
them they must trust him in this world for compensating them in the future,
etc. Mat. 16. from 24. to ult. And how eminent was he in the practice of this?
How did the Zeal of Gods House eat him up, and he persist in doing the work he
was sent about, notwithstanding all the offense the Jews took? And yet in his
own private concerns, how meek, gentle, patient, which none can be ignorant of
that read the Gospel, and which he commands us to learn of him, Mat. 11.28.
Great then is the mistake of those that think Zeal and Moderation (which were
thus eminently concentred in Christ) should be inconsistent. No lovelier match
than of this blessed couple in our souls, nor of more universal use to us
throughout the course of our lives, if rightly ordered, the one for God, the
other for the World; that giving life and intenseness in our duties toward
him, this restraining us in our personal concernments; that edging and
quickening us in desires, motions, and endeavors for heaven, and this stopping
us, and retarding the wheels, when we drive too furiously after our own
interests; that according to knowledge supplying us with resolution for, and
fervor in the great Duties of Religion, this according to charity duly
qualifying them in the less, that our love to God and one another may walk hand
in hand heavenward, and neither leave the other behind.

Positively. It must then be in matters of opinion, and Christian Liberty, and
Indifferency, as they all refer to practice. And here let none expect I
should determine what things are only matters of Opinion, Liberty, and
Indifferency (which so much trouble the World) what not; For every one herein
must, according to the Scriptures, be in some respect judge for himself and his
own practice, 1 Cor. 10.29. Romans 14.4.12. Upon which I shall proceed, and show
our moderation in Principles, Passions, Speeches, and Practices.

1. We must moderate our Principles or Judgments concerning these, by forming
them according to the nature of truths and duties. This is necessary, not only
in regard of our selves, (for as the Judgment, such is the practice;) but
others also, for the moderating our prejudices toward them. We must therefore
carefully distinguish between matters of faith and necessary duty, and matters
of opinion and conditional practice. For though every ray of truth be excellent
in it self, and absolutely there be no minimum in religione, Val. Max.
as the Heathen said; yet comparatively there is great difference in truths,
some differing from others, as one star from another, in glory. Nor have all
the like clearness of revelation, nor shine forth with that luster as others;
nor all a like consequence. Some are (...), great in themselves, clear to us,
and weighty in their consequence, Mat. 23.23. These we must hold fast, practice
carefully, contend for earnestly, 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 1.13. Jude 3. Others are
such, as salva religione, we may, and do differ in, both in judgment and
practice, without the endangering our happiness; For the Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans
14.17. i. e. in the opinion or practice of those, the false Apostles would have
obtruded as necessary. In these things our Principles should give us leave to
meet one another in our Practice; keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the
former, and the bond of Peace by the latter, as the Apostle enjoins, Ephesians. 4.3.

2. We must moderate our passions in these; our heat and fervor for them, our
anger against those that differ from us in them. In these things wherein the
way to heaven is broad enough, there may be difference without division; and
let any take heed how they s^raighten it, taking upon them to be wiser than
Christ, who well knowing humane frailty, so chalked it out to us, telling us,
He that does the will of his Father (not that is for or against these things)
is his brother, sister, and mother; and consequently should be brethren and
sisters amongst themselves. It is strange to consider, how upon principles and
prejudice once sucked in, Passion blinds men in their own opinions and
practices, and what woeful divisions has in all Ages arisen thence? That the
Eastern and Western Churches, wherein were so many Grave, Holy, Learned, and
Wise men, should so fall out as to make a separation; every one would be ready
to think and say, surely it was some great matter that occasioned it; would you
know? Nothing but about the time of the observation of Easter. Though Irenaeus
and others were mighty Advocates for Peace, yet nothing would serve Victor
Bishop of Rome, but exact Uniformity in these indifferencies, and thence arose,
about two hundred years after Christ, that great breach of Unity betwixt those
two great and famous Churches. How does all the zeal and fervor we should
bestow upon the great things of Religion run out at this time amongst us about
these things! May not I say, quorsum haec perditio? Wherefore do ye spend your
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not? Why do we stand thus busily hewing good Timber into Chips, and leaving out
the Figures, spend our time in the bare Ciphers? How many on both sides at this
day make it their Religion, to be for or against those things that they account
indifferent in themselves! So true is the Moralists observation, that the devil
always labors, That mankind may either wholly neglect a Deity, or be wholly
taken up in the Externals of Worship. Quite contrary to Scripture, that
teaches us to mind every thing as of consequence in its place, to do the great
and weighty things, and not to leave the other undone. My beloved, the wrath of
man workeeh not the righteousness of God; When Elijah that good Prophet was
discontented, 1 Kin. 19. and passionately requests he may die, Ver. 4. and
professes his zeal for the great things of Religion, Ver. 10. God passes by
him, but in the great and strong wind, or in the Earthquake, or in the fire the
Lord was not, but in the still small voice, Ver. 11, 12. showing him, and us
thereby that he is not in our Passions; and if not for the great, how much less
for these things of Religion; wherein the Apostle's rule for peace and
edification ( Romans 14.19.) should be observed. God never suspended his Churches
peace upon these, for if I should not love others, till I knew they were of all
my opinions, and my practice in these, I might perhaps never love any.

3. We must moderate our speeches, in our discourses of, debates and contests
for, or against these. Some speeches we are too apt to we must wholly forbear,
others we must moderate. 1. We must beware of judging and censuring others for
these. We may in apparent transgressions of Gods Law censure upon occasion the
offenders, though not rashly, or for hypocrites, reprobates, or the like; but
for these we must not at all, Romans 14.4, etc. For in these, through another
knowledge that may not be a sin in him which would to thee, and thou judge
sinful therefore in others for want of charity. How much malice, and how little
candor do we use in this! How do we almost make it the characteristical note of
Christianity, to be of such or such a way which none account essential to
Religion! We are apt (as those in Africa in Tertullians time) to account it
enough that we or others are of such a party; and to impale the Church, and
impropriate Christ and salvation every one of us to our own side. And this many
times the most, by the Vulgar, so true is that of Seneca, Qui pauca recipient,
facile pronunciant; Those that discern the least, being apt to judge most. 2.
We must take heed of despising and contemning others for these, Romans 14.3. As
the former of not judging, so this of not despising, is a necessary duty
internally as to our selves, and in our carriage and speeches especially, as
they respect our external duty toward others; our sinning in both arising from
uncharitableness, in that to others liberty, in this to that we judge their
weakness. Our hearts and tongues are too apt to follow our judgments, and break
out into these exorbitancies; but, my Brethren, these things ought not so to
be; judge not, censure not according to outward appearance, or inward
prejudice, but righteous and charitable judgment rather, that we mutually bear
with one another in these. And when we have occasion to discourse or debate
concerning what things are such, or their practice; not measuring all men's
judgments by the model of our own apprehensions; or like Dictators, thinking
our selves infallible, obtrude those things for necessary, which it may be
others of as piercing sight account but indifferent, or those things for
indifferent which they reckon amongst the number of unlawfuls, but modestly
declaring our judgments herein. For as I told you in the entrance, I take not
upon me to determine what are such, nor the Magistrates duty, (concerning
which, I think he said well and wisely, That it were good they require as
little as they can (what is necessary for the safeguard of Religion as contained
in the Scriptures) and subjects practice as much as they can;) but only for the
direction of every one how to order their conversation in the diversity of
Judgments that are amongst us.

4. We must moderate our practicing of these according to the circumstances we
are in, and as they are convenient and expedient for us. Sometimes the practice
of these must be wholly waved; for the Laws concerning them being conditional
as to their doing or not doing: (though not as to the manner thereof,) and not
absolute as of necessary duties, their practice becomes suspended on such
conditions; which (besides that I formerly mentioned, viz. when they come in
competition with greater matters) are especially three. In regard of our selves
dissatisfaction of Conscience; In regard of others, known scandal, and
disturbance of public settled peace. When any of these cases occur, wherein the
condition on which the command is suspended is awanting, the command there (as
all other conditionals) become negative. For we are obliged absolutely in moral
duties to do them, and for the manner rightly, they being no ways suspended as
to practice, but in these only absolutely for the manner, that if we do them we
do them rightly; and conditionally if we be satisfied in our judgments, and
offend not others thereby, or disturb the public peace; the first being
knowledge in our selves, the other two charity to others, if we do them. And
therefore where there is no place left for charity to others, as in case of
equal scandal on both hands, thy doing or forbearing; there thou art at
liberty. In which case in smaller matters, that which is least observable is
best; in greater matters according to thy concernments and charity to thy self,
and for general good (if the public be interested in thee.) For when we cannot
know on which side, our doing or not doing most evil to others lies, charity to
our selves preponderates supposals of the issue.

But time permits me not to launch out into discourses of these cases, my
Subject also confining me to the exercise of Moderation, which when the action
is to be wholly omitted, is not required, it is office being only (as I have
often said) in the regulating of actions. As we must therefore use modesty in
our speeches for or against these, so also in our practicing them according to
convenience and expediency, not too violently running our selves out of breath,
or a-tilt at others, in our practicing them, but with that equalness of spirit
and candor toward others as becomes us, Romans 14.19. and 23. 1 Cor. 11.16.

Thus I have done with the Case, wherein I have been too large (I confess) in
the whole, though perhaps too short in several particulars, and I hope not very
tedious in any. A little more time for that which remains will give a release
to my pains and your patience.

The Persons.
For the third General the Persons. 1. Who must exercise this Moderation, and
that is in a word all. 2. To whom, and that is also all with whom we have to do,
of all ranks degrees and qualities, Superiors and Inferiors as well as ^quals,
of all tempers and carriages, not only to the gentle, but also to the froward,
not only to friends and those equal and fair to us, for then what singular
thing do we, but to those that are, or we repute our Enemies, that despitefully
hate us, and injuriously persecute us, as our Savior teaches, Matthew. 5.44. 3.
Before whom, and that is expressed in the Text all men; our conversation in all
the good and the evil things of this life, and toward all, must to all that
see and observe or hear thereof be known to be moderate.



1. This is no other than what God himself exercises toward us. In all his
dealings with mankind, from the fall, to the consummation and end of the World,
this does eminently, and always will appear, so that good reason we should do
it; That we may be the children of our heavenly Father (Matthew. 5.45.) who
spares us continually when we offend and sin against him. If God was not more
moderate than man, the World would quickly crack about our ears; for if man had
power to his will, it would scarcely be habitable; but he that has power, if
he should but exercise it even justly, and not use moderation, it would no
longer be inhabited. Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all, should not
thou have had compassion on thy fellow servant, Matthew. 18.32.33.

2. Christ did use Moderation eminently toward us, and has left us his
example to follow, in our exercising it toward one another. Though he was
equal with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form
of a servant, and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even to the
death of the cross, Philip. 2.7. whose example how pathetically does the
Apostle urge, v. 1, 2. that nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but
in lowliness of mind, esteeming others better than our selves, not looking
every man on his own things but the things of others, v. 3. and 4. likewise
Matthew. 11.25. and many other places well known.

3. Because we have all need of this from one another. We are all men subject
to like passions; nay usually those that need it most from others, use it
least; such as are passionate and boisterous, and though good men, yet as a
wise man said of one of such a rugged temper, though he had grace enough for
seven others, yet had little enough for himself. But yet if there be any so
equal tempered by nature, so polished by education, so ruled by grace, in all
things, and toward all, that he h^th no need of moderation from others, let
him take the first stone, and violently throw at his neighbor. Read I pray,
Matthew, 18. from v. 21. to the end, which is the great Scripture for our
Moderation to one another, and is most ample therein, where you will see both
the equity, and necessity thereof to salvation.

For the last particular which is the Use and Application of this Moderation
toward one another.

1. Use of Information That it is not enough that we have Moderation (which all
pretend to, though few practice) but we must show it, nay not only show it
sparingly, or at some times, and to some, but usually, frequently, constantly
and to all men.

Use 2. Therefore of Exhortation. Wherein let me plead with you a little, for
Moderation toward one another, this so much awanting, and yet so necessary
duty, besides the equitablenesse thereof in the Reasons, consider briefly the
necessity, utility, and jucundity thereof.

1. How necessary? Are there not (...) or difficulties? have all the like
apprehensions? Is not the balance of reason very deceitful? Are any of us
infallible? nay does not the pretense thereto declare the contrary?

2. How profitable is this to us all? Moderation does not a little conduce to
the health of our bodies, as the great Hippocrates and experience tells us,
nothing more destroying us than not only immoderateness in things, but our
passions against others; and not less to the peace and tranquillity of our
minds, for the enjoyment of our selves; and most to the serving and enjoying of
God. If good Jonah be in a passion, he is not only weary of his life, but his
praying is nothing but quarrelling with God, Jonah 4. Nay it has an especial
promise both from God and Christ, the meek shall inherit the earth, Psalm.
36.11. whom our Savior therefore pronounces blessed, Matthew. 5.5. whosoever
therefore may curse them, or count them fools for the same, he having blessed
them, blessed they shall be.

3. How sweet and pleasant a thing is Moderation both to our selves and others?
It being the foundation of that sweet fellowship and Communion of Saints, which
is one great Article of our Creed.

Experience tells every one how sweet the fruit of moderation is, so that
felicity and it (as the Heathen said) constantly dwell together, Val. Max. l.
9. c. 5.
in Families, in Nations, all the world over. Without it, this World would be a
desert, barren of all comfort, and nothing but a vast howling Wilderness for
Bears and Wolves, not Civil men or Christians to dwell in. Let therefore the
necessity of Moderation persuade thee, let its profit, and pleasure draw and
allure thee to the practice thereof.

Lastly, to these Motives let me add that of the Text, The Lord is at hand. For
so I look upon this, and all other arguments subjoyned to exhortations and
commands; for though they be materially reasons to convince, yet are formally
motives to persuade and quicken us to the duties enjoined. Flesh and blood may
say, others are insolent, and the more we are ready to bear, the more they are
apt to injure us, as the Heathens to the Christians of old cried, Blessed are
the poor, and so plundered them; Therefore Ululandum inter lupos, we must
retaliate like for like. Oh no, says the Apostle, (...), the Lord is nigh to
observe them, and how they carry in his Family, whose wisdom governs their
petulancy, and whose power and goodness can overcome all their malice and
unkindness; is nigh to observe thee, and to help thee in his due time if
injured: and is nigh also to judge both, to punish those that miscarry, Mat.
18.34, 35. and reward those that herein are his children. The not believing
this, that the Lord is at hand, in his Providence, and with his Judgment, is
the great reason of the want of Moderation in the World. Let us therefore all
live under a continual sense of this, and all pray for, and practice
moderation. Finally, be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another,
love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous; not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto
called that ye should inherit a blessing, (1 Pet. 3.8, 9.) and that the Lord is
at hand, ready to bestow it upon all those that make their moderation known
unto all men.

How may we have suitable conceptions of God in duty?
Genesis 18.27. And Abraham answered and said, Behold now I have taken upon me to
speak unto the Lord, which am but Dust and Ashes.


THis Text presents to us Abraham's standing before the Lord, pleading for the
preservation of the Righteous in the destruction of Sodom, and for the
preservation of Sodom (if possible) from Destruction, for the Righteous sake.

That which we have in it more especially to take notice of in reference to
this present exercise, is with what apprehensions or conceptions of God Abraham
did speak to God, did deport himself towords God, did manage this great
undertaking with God. Concerning which Four things present themselves for our
Observation;

1. That those Apprehensions or Conceptions Abraham had of God, did highly
exalt and magnify the greatness and excellency of God in his heart -- Behold
now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord; One who has Exellency, and
Sovereignty, and Majesty, and Dominion, and Power, and Glory.

2. That they were such Conceptions of God as did humble, vilify, and abase
Abraham in himself in comparison of God; -- I have taken upon me to speak unto
the Lord, which am but Dust and Ashes; A sinful, weak, worthless, frail piece
of vanity and mortality.

3. That they were such Conceptions of God as did represent him Gracious,
Propitious, Benevolous to the Creature, notwithstanding the gre^tnesse and
excellency of God, and the meannesse and unworthiness of the Creature; Thus
much seems to be comprehended in the Note of Admiration, Behold -- O what
admirable condescension is this in the Great God, O what wonderful mercy and
grace is this, that such a poor, vile creature should have liberty to speak to
him, to parley with him!

4. That they were such apprehensions of God as did beget in Abraham a faith of
Acceptance wi^h God in the performance of that duty; without which it had been
dangerous presumption in him who was but Dust and Ashes to take upon him to
speak unto the Lord.

This Example of Abraham I shall endeavor to draw forth for our Practice and
Imitation; He who is made to us a Pattern of Faith, may be to us a Pattern of
true Worship; and such apprehensions or conceptions Abraham had of God in
speaking to him, Such conceptions of God we are to have in our Prayers and
performances to him.

For which end I shall lay down this General Proposition.

That such as speak to God, or speak of God; such as draw near to God or have
to do with God in any part of Divine Worship, must manage all their
performances with right apprehensions and due conceptions of God.

The truth of this General Proposition I shall endeavor to manifest and make
clear by laying down Four particular Propositions which must give evidence to
it.

The First Proposition is this; That we cannot have any true, right
apprehensions, or conceptions of God, except we have a true knowledge of him;
Such as have not known God have slighted him, Who is the Lord says Pharaoh,
that I should obey him; I know not the Lord; Exodus 5.2. Such as know not God,
nor desire to know him, are so far from drawing near to God, that they drive
him as far from them as they can; they say unto the Almighty, Depart from us,
who desire not the knowledge of his ways, Job 21.14.

What Counsel Eliphaz gave Job (whom he supposed to be a greater stranger to
God than indeed he was) may be an useful instruction to us; Job 22.21. Acquaint
thy self with God -- To know God and to be known of God is our highest
privilege; Acquaint thy self with God and be at peace; the reason why any are
real enemies to God, is, because they know not God; and the reason why many
think God is an enemy to them is, because they are not acquainted with God, so
intimately as they should; Acquaint thy self with God (says he) -- and thereby
Good shall come unto thee; But what Good? and how shall this Good come? It is
partly expressed v. 22, 23, 24, 25. but more fully v. 26, 27. For then shall thou
have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face to God; Thou shall
make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows;
So that except we know God aright, and have some acquaintance with ^im, we
cannot delight our selves in God, we cannot make our prayer to him, nor lift up
our face unto him.

The Second Proposition is, That we cannot know any thing savingly of God
further than he is pleased to manifest and make known himself to us; No man can
make known God but God himself; Moses who had seen as much of Gods glory as any
man, when he desired a further manifestation of Gods glory in a higher measure
or degree than formerly he had seen, he goes to God himself for it, Exodus
33.18. I beseech thee show me thy Glory.

The great Promise Christ makes to them that Love him and keep his
Commandments is the manifestation of himself to them by Himself, Joh. 14.21. --
I will manifest my self to them, for none else can, A Disciple puts a Question
to him about it, verse. 22. Lord, how is it that thou milt manifest thy self to
us and not to the World? We have a clear Answer to this, Luke 10.21. this very
Doctrine which is so much matter of indignation to the wise and prudent of the
World is matter of rejoicing and exaltation to the Spirit of Christ; and he
said, I thank thee O Father that thou have hid -- and thou have revealed -- For
so it seemed good in thy sight; Hence is that of our Savior, John 17.25. O
righteous Father, the World has not known thee, but these have known --

The Third Proposition is, That the clearest manifestations of God to us, and
such as can beget in us right apprehensions and due conceptions of him, are
made out to us In and By Jesus Christ Joh. 1.18. No man has seen God at any
time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him; Therefore no man ever did, or can apprehend any thing of God
truly, that is, upon a saving account, but in and by Jesus Christ.

The Divine Essence or Godhead, no man has seen or can see in it self, 1 Timothy
6.16.

Something of this Eternal Godhead is manifested in the works of Creation, Romans
1.20. The invisible things of God, viz. his Eternal Power and Godhead are
clearly seen in the things that are made; But yet this knowledge of God in the
Creature could not bear down the vain Imagin^tions, or Idolatrous conception of
God in men's hearts, as appears, verse. 21.23.

Much of the Eternal Godhead is manifested in the works of Providence; God does
great things past finding out, and wonders without number; Yet lo, he goes by
us and we see him not, he passes on also, but we perceive him not, Job 9.10,
11. God is Invisible in himself and Incomprehensible in his works; Job made it
his work to trace God in his works, Job 23.8, 9. Sometimes God was working
forward or before him, sometimes backward or behind him; Sometimes on his
right hand, sometimes at his left hand; Job follows him up and down if he might
apprehend him, and the reason and design of God in all his works, but he could
not perceive him, God hid himself from him.

Much more of the Eternal Godhead was manifested in his most righteous and holy
Law; But the manifestations of God here affrighted them that saw it; the People
cry out, Let not the Lord speak any more to us lest we dye; and Moses himself
said, I exceedingly fear, so terrible was the sight of God there, Heb. 12.21.

Hence it will follow, that the clearest, sweetest, most comfortable
manifestations of God to us, and such as can beget in us right apprehensions
and conceptions of God, are made out to us only in Jesus Christ, who is the
Image of the Invisible God, Coloss. 1.15. In whom God has made such
discoveries of himself as can no where be seen but in Christ; He is the
express Image or Character of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1.3. The exact
resemblance of all his Fathers excellencies in their utmost perfections;
therefore when Philip desired him to show them of the Father, to give them a
sight to satisfaction, John 14.9, 10. He that has seen me (says Christ to
him) has seen the Father; Believe it Philip, I am in the Father and the Father
is in me.

In the works of Crearion God is a God above us, In his works of Providence a
God without us, In the Law a God against us, In himself a God Invisible to us;
Only in Christ he is Emmanuel, God manifested in our Flesh, God in us, God with
us, God for us.

Hence follows the Fourth Proposition; That the manifestations of God to us in
Christ, are those which alone can beget those due apprehensions and right
Conceptions of God, with which we must draw near to him, and perform all our
worship to him.

As Abraham is held forth to us a Pattern of Faith, so he may be to us a
Pattern of worship, in as much as all true worship to God is performed by
Faith, by Faith in Christ; Such apprehensions thererefore Abraham had of God in
his worship, such apprehensions of God we are to have in our worship; and as
Abraham had those conceptions of God by Faith in Christ, so can we have the
like conceptions of God by Faith in Christ only.

1. Those apprehensions Abraham had of God did beget (as we have shown) high
thoughts of God, with such apprehensions of God we must perfo^m all our
worship; See what high thoughts of God his people have always had in
worshipping him, Neh. 9.5, 6. 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 6.16.

Low thoughts of God will ever perform but low, base, contemptible Service and
Wo^ship; they brought God the blind, the lame, the sick for S^crifice, Mal. 1.
Go, says God, present them to your Governor, and see if he do not scorn your
present, as undervalued by it? Ver. 8. And should I accept this at your hands
which a petty Lord will reject with indignation? Ver. 13. For I am a great
King, says the Lord of Hosts, Ver. 14.

Now such high thoughts and conceptions of God with which all our Worship must
be performed to him, can spring only from the manifestations of God in Christ,
who is the highest Revelation of the glory of God, Isa. 40.5. The brightness,
the effulgency of his glory, Heb. 1.3. When God had yielded to give Moses a
sight of his glory, he put him into the Clist of the Rock (which was a Dr.
Rainolds, Psa. 110. p. 166
resemblance of Christ, as a Learned Divine has observed) and so made his
glory to pass before him, Exodus 33.22. Certainly, Moses had here a sight of
Gods glory beyond all that ever he had seen before. Compare with this that
Text, 2 Cor. 4.6. God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of his glory in the
face of Jesus Christ: All the other manifestations of Gods glory were but dark
and dim, in comparison of those which appear in the face of Jesus Christ.
Therefore we can att^in no where such high, so great, so glorious Conceptions
of God as in Jesus Christ.

2. Abraham had such Conceptions of God as humbled, emptied, and abased him in
himself in comparison of God; and with such apprehensions of God must we
perform all our Worship to him, Psalm. 95.6. We are exhorted to come and
worship, and bow down, and kneel -- In all Worship we are to testify, as our
absolute subjection to God, so our humblest submission to him; Observe what
self-abasing thoughts the apprehensions of Gods goodness wrought in David when
he went to worship before the Lord, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19, 20.

Now such Conceptions of God, which above all others humble, and lessen, and
abase the Cre^ture before God, See Salkeld de Ang. c. 34, and 35. Aquin part 1
quest. 62. Art. 1.
they spring principally from the manifesta ion of God in Christ.

It is the general opinion of the Schoolmen, that the Angels in the first
instant of their Creation did not enjoy that sight of God we call Beatifical
Vision, and that the Angels that fell never had sight of it at all, for if they
had, they could not have fallen. But what they talk of the good Angels meriting
that Beatifical Vision of God in the second or third instant of their Creation,
is Popish foppery; Divines unanimously attribute their station and stability in
holiness to Jesus Christ: We may upon good grounds also attribute to Jesus
Christ their first admission into the presence, sight, enjoyment of God, their
state of supernatural blessedness. Pardon this digression; it is to make the
way clear for the demonstration in hand, viz. That the Angels before they had a
sight of God, or of themselves in Christ, many of them waxed proud and fell;
the same pride that ruined some might have ruined all; but after they had a
sight of God in Christ, how humble were they? That Vision spoken of, Isa. 6.1,
2. was manifestly an appearance of the glory of God in Jesus Christ, I saw the
Lord upon his Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple; what
the carriage of the Seraphims was toward God in this his appearance is
expressed, Each one had six wings, with twain they did fly; noting their ready
execution of Gods Commands: with twain they did cover their faces; noting their
natural impotency in themselves to behold the surpassing brightness of Divine
Glory; with twain they covered their feet, as humbled in the sense and shame of
their own Creature imperfection in comparison of the infinite purity and
holiness of God.

Thus, when Moses had had a sight of the glory of God in Christ, He made haste,
he bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped. Exodus 34.8. Quickly is the
soul humbled at the manifestations of God in Christ. In Christ we have seen God
humbling, emptying, lessening, dishonouring himself for us, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
Who can be proud that has had a true sight of God humbled for him?

By the manifestatio^s of God in Christ are begotten the deepest soul
humiliations for sin; Zach. 12.10. They shall look on Me whom they have
pierced, and they shall mourn for him -- and they shall be in bitterness for
him -- This great sorrow was not for the piercing of the Humanity of Christ
barely considered; but for piercing God in Christ, though the Godhead was not
in the least passive; therefore that blood which was shed is called, The blood
of God, Acts 20.28. and that person who was pierced called, The Lord of glory,
1 Cor. 2.8. Sins against the manifestations of the Love, Mercy, Grace,
Compassions, Goodness, and Glory of God in Christ beget the deepest humiliation
of soul in all our Confessions.

3. Abraham had such Conceptions of God as did represent him gracious,
propitious, benevolous to the Creature, a bountiful rewarder of him that
serves him, notwithstanding the greatness of God, or the unworthiness of the
Creature.

Such apprehensions we must have of God in all our approaches to him, in all
our performances of duty and worship.

When Cain could not apprehend so much favor and grace in God as could pardon
his sin and remove his punishment he then went out from the presence of the
Lord, Genesis 4.13.16. That is (as Interpreters of good note render it) he left
the Church of God in his Fathers Family, the Worship of God, the Ordinances of
God, the service of God, the profession of God and all: Such as cannot have
apprehensions of God as gracious, propitious, will not come into the presence
of God.

Nor such as cannot apprehend him a bountiful rewarder of them that come to
him; They bid God depart from them who question whether God can do any thing
for them, or whether there be any profit in his service, Job 21.14, 15. and Job
22.17. when those mercenary hypocrites had lost their worldly profits and
preferments which they had gained by the profession of Religion, when the tide
was turned, and prophanness only countenanced, they cast off all, and said, It
is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances, Mal. 3.14, 15.

But he that comes to God must have such apprehensions of him as render him
Gracious as well as Glorious, Merciful as well as Righteous; for we come to God
sitting on his Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult. and we have to deal with mercy for
supply to all our needs.

And he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. Why did David prefer the lowest
place or office in the House or Church of God (a Porters pl^ce) before the
highest preferments in the Tents of ungodliness, Psalm. 84.10. He gives the
reason, Ver. 11. For the Lord is a Sun and shield; A Sun to confer all good, a
shield to preserve from all evil; He will give Grace and Glory, what can a man
desire more? Yet if there be any good thing beside Grace and Glory he will not
withhold it; such a bountiful Master is God in his House, and such a one his
Servants apprehend him.

Now, we cannot have right apprehensions and due conceptions of the Grace,
Mercy, Good will of God to us, but from the manifestations of God in Jesus
Christ; It is God in Christ reconciling the World to himself, and beseeching us
to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. When God gave Moses a sight of his
glory in the Clift of the Rock, I will, says God, make all my goodness pass
before thee, and he proclaimed the name of the Lord, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Lord,
the Lord God, M^rciful, Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and
Truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin; He presents himself in his
richest robes of State, and all his Attribu^es arrayed in a Livery of Grace.

Nor can we have right apprehensions of God as a bountiful rewarder of his
Servants, but through the manife^tations of himself to us in Christ; for we
cannot expect the reward of Debt, but of Grace; God in Christ, and upon the
account of Christ is ^he most bountiful Rewarder; So Christ tells his
Disciples, Joh. 12.26. If any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am
there shall my servant be also: If any man serve me, him shall my Father
honor; We serve the Father in serving the Son; never was service rewarded with
such honor; For (says Christ) The Father himself loves you because ye have
loved me, and believed that I am sent of God, Joh. 16.27.

4. Abraham had such apprehensions of God as did beget a comfortable persuasion
of faith for his acceptance with God in that his drawing near to him.

It is the mind of God that such as come to him should have such apprehensions
of him as one that will accept them, embrace them, when he discovers nothing
but wrath and displeasure against them that stand in opposition against him,
Isa. 27.4, 5. Fury is not in me: Let a man take hold of my strength that he may
make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me; That holy man knew that
all his happiness consisted in the enjoyment of God, therefore he said, It is
good for me to draw near to God; but was he sure God would accept him? I have
put my trust (says he) in the Lord God, Psalm. 73.27, 28.

Now such apprehensions of God as beget a faith of acceptance with God in our
approaches to him, can spring only from the manifestations of God to us in
Christ; that is supposed (by judicious Interpreters) to be spoken of Jesus
Christ, Jer. 30.21. who is said to engage his heart to approach unto the Lord;
and God says, I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me;
Christ has boldness and liberty, full security of acceptance with God; and
hereby he has procured us liberty, boldness, and acceptance with God; Heb.
4.14, 16. Seeing we have a great high Priest passed into the Heavens -- Let us
come boldly to the Throne of Grace. Heb. 10.19, 21, 22. Having boldness to
enter into the Holiest -- And having an high Priest over the House of God; Let
us draw nigh to God with truth of heart, and full assurance of faith, Ver. 2.
For the acceptance of our persons and services. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have
boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.

From what has been laid down we may conclude, That such apprehensions or
Conceptions of God wherewith we are to draw near to God, to perform every duty,
and every part of Divine Worship must flow from the manifestations of God in
Jesus Christ.

The Use

1. Without due apprehensions and conceptions of Go^ we c^nnot perform any part
of that Natural Worship we owe to God, we cannot love him, fe^r him, trust in
him, pray unto him, praise him, etc.

2. Without the right apprehensions and due conceptions of God in Jesus Christ
we cannot perform aright any part of his Instituted Worship.

1. For all the Ordinances of Gods Instituted Worship (as the Sacrifices and
Sacraments under the Law, so the Sacraments and other Ordinances under the
Gospel) seem to have immediate relation to, and near dependence on Christ, God
manifested in the flesh. You may observe, they consist of two parts, The one,
Natural, the other, Spiritual; The one, Ex ernal, the other, Internal; The one,
as it were, the Body, the other, the Soul of it; The one, representing the
Humanity, the other, the Divinity of Jesus Christ: So that every O^dinance of
Worship is (as it were) a representation of Christ Incarn^te.

2. The Divine Essence or Godhead in Jesus Christ seems to be the proper object
of all Worship.

The Schoolmen have concluded (to which I find our learned and pious Divines
have given their assent) That the Essence of the Godhead is the primary and
proper Object of Worship. Dr. Owens Commun. with the H. Ghost, Chap. 8.


This Divine Essence is wholly in Christ; Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: In that Body or Humane Nature of Christ the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt, not locally, (as Locatum in loco, or contentum in
continente) but by person^l Union. And the Divine Essence, as it is in Christ,
seems to be the p^oper O^ject of all Gospel Worship: It was so under the Law in
Types and Figures; and such was the Tabernacle and Temple Worship in its
spiritual Notion.

The Tabernacle or Temple was Gods Habitation, or dwelling place, Psalm. 76.2.
There was the only place of Public Worship, Psalm. 29.2. No Sacrifice was to be
offered in any other place; There the Spiritual Worshippers had by faith a
sight of God, and Communion with God, Psalm. 63.2. Psalm. 68.24. Toward God in
this place they were to make all their Supplications and Prayers where ever, or
in what Country soever they were, 1 Kin. 8.29, 30. See Dan. 6.10. Now the
Tabernacle and Temple were a Type of the Body or Humanity of Christ, as himself
explaineth, Joh. 2.19. In which the Divine glory of the Godhead dwelt; Joh.
1.14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us (or Tabernacled in us, as
the Greek word signifies) and we saw his Glory, the Glory as of the only
begotten of the Father. Therefore what the Tabernacle or Temple was to them
under the Law, that is Christ Jesus to us under the Gospel. And as God
manifested to them in the Temple was the proper Object of Worship to them, so
God manifested to us in Christ is the proper Object of Worship to us.

3. The Flesh or Humanity of Christ is the Medium or Mean by which we have
access to God in all our Worship. This is expressed, Heb. 10.19, 20. Having
boldness to enter into the Holiest (where the Divine glory appeared between the
Cherubims on the Mercy seat) by the blood of Jesus; By a new and living way,
which he has consecrated for us through the Vayl, which is to say, his Flesh.
By the Flesh of Christ here I do not understand his Natural Flesh b^rely
considered as such, but in that notion as it is to be understood, Joh. 6.53,
54, 55, 56. where Christ speaks of eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood
unto life; where Christ's Flesh (by a Metonymy of the Cause for the Effect)
signifies the Righteousness, Satisfaction, Reconciliation, Grace, Peace, Glory
Christ procured for us by the obedience he performed to God in that Flesh; By
the Flesh of Christ in this sense we have access to God in all our Worship.

Yet is not the consideration of Christ's Natural Flesh altogether useless unto
this end; For whereas we are apt to frame Images and Similitudes of God in our
minds, the right apprehensions of God dwelling in the Humane Nature of Christ
(who is the true Image of the Invisible God) may be effectual to remove all
other Images and likenesses of God out of our minds: But then we must be
careful that we do not terminate our conceptions of God in the Man-Christ, Mr.
Byfield Comment on 1 Pet. 2.12. p. 410.
or in the Manhood of Christ, for then we shall make the Humane Nature of
Christ the Image of the Godhead, and that would be an Idol. But when we have
taken up an apprehension of the Humanity of Christ, if our conceptions pass
through the vayl into the Holiest; if we are led thereby to worship that
Godhead that dwells in it, this is a right Conception, and true Worship.

The Humanity of Christ was to the Godhead as a back of metal to a Crystal
Glass; Look on such a glass in its pure substance and it is transparent, put a
back of metal to it and it gives a beautiful reflex: So if we take up
Conceptions of the Godhead in its pure Essence, it is transparent; If we
consider God Infinite, Almighty, Immense, Eternal, what is this to the
Creature, or our comfort? If we consider him in his Power, Justice, Wisdom,
Holiness, Goodness, Truth, what is this to us? Yea, all these are against us as
we are sinners; But if we take up Conceptions of God in all these Attributes as
they appear to us in Christ, as they are backed with the Humanity of Christ, so
they make a most comfortable reflex upon us; In this glass we behold the glory
of the Lord, and are changed into the same similitude from glory to glory by
the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. In this Glass we behold that Wisdom by
which we are instructed, that righteousness by which we are justified, that
power by which we are preserved, that grace by which we are chosen and called,
that goodness by which we are relieved and supplied, that holiness by which we
are transformed, that glory to which we shall be conformed.

The Conclusion of all this is, That our right apprehensions and due
Conceptions of God must spring from the manifestations of God in Jesus Christ.

How are we To live by Faith on Divine Providence?
Plal. 62.8. Trust in Him, At All Times, ye People.


THese Words are a serious and Pathetick exhortation to a most Important and
Spiritual duty. In them we observe.

I. The Duty proposed and enjoined, i. e. A (...) Confisus est. Fiduciam posuit.
Trust. Trust in Him. Confide in, or securely repose your selves upon him, for
Assistance, support, direction, protection, provision, Deliverance, Complete
Salvation.

II. The subjects of this Trust, Or the persons on whom This Duty is incumbent,
and from whom it is expected. i. e. ye People. Wherein we note

1. The Echphonesis, that lies couchant in the words, which is apt to excite
Intention, and Affection, q. d. O ye People. So the Arabic Translator renders
the word, O Populi.

2. The universality of it is Concernment To All People: It Is an Indefinite
expression, and holds parallel with an Universal: ye (...). Singular
collectivum pro plurali, per synthesin Hebraeis usitatissimam. Moller.
People, q.d. O All ye People, of what Sex, age, degree, condition, relation
soever. Thus the Septuagint render the word, (...), and the Vulgar follows
them: sc. Omnis Congregatio populi.

3. The Specialty of it is obligation, on some People, more then others. It Is
True, All the families of the Earth must Trust in God; But there is a (...), A
more Special Tie that lies on the Household of Faith, the Commonwealth of
Israel, the Assemblies of the Saints, those that are the dearly beloved of Gods
Soul. These are strongly obliged, beyond, and above all others, To Trust in the
Lord Their God. Thus the Chaldee Paraph. Popule, Domus Israel, and the Psalmist
elsewhere, Psalm. 115.9.11. O Israel, Trust in the Lord, ye that fear the Lord,
whether Jew or Gentile, trust in the Lord.

3. The grand object of this holy Trust, or the person in whom this Trust must
be reposed: viz. in Him: i. e. the Lord Jehovah: as appears from v. 7. In Ei i.
e. Ei soli Jun. Tremel.
Him, and in Him alone, It Is an exclusive Particle. In Him, and in Nothing
Besides Him.

4. The Modification of this Trust, or the Circumstance of the Time when, and
the Duration How Long, Th^s Trust is to be Exerted.

1. Quando: when must we Trust? At what time?

Sol. At All Times. Omni Hora. Every Hour: So the Sir. version. As a True
friend is To love, so a sound Believer is to Trust at Pro. 17.17.
All Times.

2. Quamdiu: The Duration of this Trust, How long?

Sol. All the day long, Psalm. 44.8. All our lives long: All the days of their
Appointed Time must Gods Job's not only Wayt, but Trust, till their change
come. Yea, for ever, Isa. 26.4. nay, for ever and ever, Psalm. 52.8.

Having thus unlockt the Cabinet; The Jewel, or Truth, that we find laid up in
it, is This. viz.

It is the great indispensable Duty, of All Believers, at All Times,
Observation.
to Trust in the Lord, and in Him Alone.

All that I have to say on This practical Truth, I shall Couch under these six
Generals.

1. (...) That Trusting in God, is a Believers Duty.

2. What it is To Trust in God?

3. What is, and ought to be, the grand and sole object of a Believers Trust?

4. What are Those sure and stable Grounds, Those Corner stones on which the
Faithful may firmly Build Their Trust in God?

5. What are Those special and signal seasons, which call aloud for the
exerting of This Trust?

6. How Faith or Trust puts forth, exerts, demeans, bestirs it self in such
seasons?

1. (...), That Trusting in God is a Believers Duty. The Lord is, or at least
he should be The Meton. Adjuncti. Actus pro Objecto
Confidence of All the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 65.5. Trust in the Lord with
All thy Heart, Prove. 3.5. On the Arm of His Power, Isa. 51.5. On the In verbis
ejus. So Chald. Paraph. render^ our Text.
Word of His Truth, In his faithful Promises, in His freest mercies, Psalm.
52.8. In His full Salvation, Psalm. 78.22.

2. What it is To Trust in God.

Sol.
1. Negatively. To presume on God, To Tempt God, To conceive false Hopes of Gods
gracious favor and protection, whilst in a way of sin, is Not To Trust in God.
To gallop down a precipice and To say Confidently, I shall not fall: To cast
our selves down headlong from a Pin^cle of the Temple, and yet To expect the
protection of Angels, Matthew. 4.6, 7. To Teach for Hire, and To Divine for
Money, and yet to Mic. 3.11.
lean upon the Lord, saying, is not the Lord among us, None evil can come upon
us: To bless a man's self in his Heart, and to say he shall have peace, though
he walk in the imaginations of his evil heart, Deuteronomy 29.19. All this is not to
Trust in God, but To Trust in Job 15.31.
Vanity, and to spin the Spiders web, Job. 8.13, 14.

2. Positively: and so more generally, and more particularly.

1. More Generally, To Trust in God, is To Cast Ps. 55.22.
our burden on the Lord when it is too heavy for our own shoulder. To Dwell in
the secret Ps. 91.1.
places of the Most High, when we know not where to lay our Heads on earth. To
look to our Maker, and to have respect To the Holy One of Israel, Is. 17.7. To
Isa. 36.6.
lean on our Beloved, Can. 8.5. To stay our selves, when sinking, on the Lord
our God. Isa. 26.3. In a word: Trust in God, is that High Act or Exercise of
Faith, whereby the Soul looking upon God and casting of it is self on His
goodness, power, promises, faithfulness, and providence, is lifted up, above
carnal fears, and discouragements, above perplexing doubts, and disquietments,
either for the obtaining and continuance of that which is good, or for the
preventing or removing of that which is evil.

2. More particularly: Fot the clearer discovery of the Nature of Divine Trust,
we shall lay before you, It Is Ingredients, Concomitants, Effects.

I. The Ingredients of Trust in God. They are three.

1. A clear knowledge, or Right Apprehension of God as Revealed in His Word,
and Works. They and They only That Psalm. 9.10.
Know Thy Name, will Trust in Thee. The grand Reason, why God is so little
Trusted, is because He is so little Known. Knowledge of God is of such
necessity to a Right Trust, that it is put as a Synonyma for Trust. I will set
Him on high, beause He has Psalm. 91.14.
Known (i. e. Trusted in) my name.

2. A full Assent of the Understanding, and Consent of the will, to Those
Divine Revelations, as True and good, wherein the Lord proposes Himself as an
Adequate Object for our Trust. This Act the Greeks express by the word (...).
The Latins by Credere, Fidem habere. Testimonium recipere: The Hebrews by
(...). All importing Believing or giving credit to. Thus the Israelites are
said To Ex. 14.31.
believe the Lord and his Servant Moses: And Thus the Soul, that Trusts, looks
upon the words of Promise; (...) 1 Timothy 1.15.
(...); as faithful and worthy of All Acceptance.

3. A firm and fixed reliance, Resting, or Recumbency of the whole Soul on God;
Or a firm persuasion, and special Confidence of the Heart, whereby a Believer
paticularly applies to Himself the faithful Promises, of God, and certainly
Concludes and determines with himself, That the Lord is Able and willing To
make good to him the good promises, he has made. This indeed is the very
Formality of Trust; one of the Highest and Noblest Acts of Faith. This is That,
which the Greeks term (...), and which Paul so frequenly uses in several of
His Epistles. Thus Abraham is said, to be strong in Faith, giving glory to God:
and was fully Romans 4.21.
persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able, and willing, to perform.
This the Latins call Fiducia; The Schools Fiducia fidei, The Hebrews, by a
word that signifies To lean on, or cast the weight of ones body on, for
support, and stay. Thus, Isa. 10.20. The house of Jacob shall no more stay upon
him, that smote them, but shall (...) firmiter innitetur, incumbet.
stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, in Truth. Thus for the Ingredients
of Trust.

2. The Concomitants of an Holy Trust, and these are

1. An Holy quietness, security, and peaceableness of Spirit, springing from a
full persuasion of our safety. By this the Soul is freed from distracting cares
and jealousies, about our state, and condition. Hence that of the Prophet Isa.
26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect (...) pacem (...) pacem.
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because He trusts in thee. An holy
security I say, not a carnal security, like theirs mentioned, Zeph. 1.12. that
were settled on their lees, that said in their hearts, the Lord will not do
good, neither will he do evil: nor like that of the Scarlet whore, Rev. 18.6.
that says in her Heart, I sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow. No but an
Holy security as we have it, Prove. 8.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower, The Righteous runs to it, i. e. by the feet of Trust, and is (...) Et
exaltabatur. Celsus ab alto, infra se cernens Hominum genus. Sil Ital.
safe: As safe, as a man judges himself to be, when got into an high Tower
well fortified, and fears not the sharpest or swiftest darts, that can be shot
against him. Safe, as the chicken Take themselves to be, when housed under the
Ut pulli sub alis gallinae.
Covert of their Dam's wing, Psalm. 46.1. Or safe, as the manslayer is from the
pursuit of the Avenger, when Lodged in a City of Refuge. Thus when a man Trusts
in God, he does sweetly acquiesce and repose himself in Gods bosom, troubles
himself no more, casts no Jealous thoughts, about his Condition. Thus David
resolves, I will lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou, Lord, make me to
dwell in (...). Confidenter.
safety, or in Trust, Psalm. 4.8.

2. A Steadfast, well-grounded, Hope Trust and Hope are Gemini, Twins, born
together, bred up together. Hence often conjoined in Scripture. Thou art my
Hope Ps. 71.5.
O Lord God, Thou art my Trust from my youth: and Blessed is the man, that Jer.
17.7. Ps. 119.42, 43, 49.
Trusts in the Lord, and whose Hope, the Lord is. Hence the Septuagint
usually render the word put for Trust, as also in the Text (...), and Ar. Mont.
and diverse others, Sperate. Hope ye in the Lord. Hope then is that Fidus
Achates, the Faithful Companion of Trust. Now in this Hope there are two things.

1. An holy and confident expectation, and looking out after Gods gracious
presence. Trust believes and Hope expects To enjoy what God has promised. Thus
the Prophet, Isa. 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord and I will (...) Et expectabo
eum.
Look for Him. Hope looks, and looks out, as expecting Gods Appearing. Not as
Sisera's mother once did, who looked for a victorious Success, and expected,
that her son should have returned a triumphant Conqueror, richly laden with
spoils and Booty, when as the wretch lay Jud 5.28.
bleeding at the foot of Jael: Nor like those sinful, miserable people, who
Jer. 8.15.
looked for peace, but, behold no good came. No, such a vain groundless Hope,
draws a Blush into the cheek, and Covers the face with Confusion. But this is
an Hope which makes not Romans 5.5.
Ashamed: whose earnest expectation shall assuredly end in sweet fruition.

2. An humble and constant waiting on Gods Leisure. Looking out, and waiting on
God, both put together. Mic. 7.7.
Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation;
my God will hear me. Faith gets up to the Top of it is watch Tower, looks out,
sees whether Relief be coming. But suppose, None appears in Kenne: Suppose Help
deferred. Yet now it wayts, and tarries Gods time. Faith knocks at Heavens Gate.
No Answer from within, Faith knocks Again, still there is silence. However
Faith concludes, my God will Hear, yea and Answer too. But it is fit I should
wait his Time. Hab. 2.3.
The vision is for An appointed time, but at the end, It shall speak, and not
lie, though it tarry, I must, and will wait for it, because it will surely
come, It will not Tarry. Thus David, My Ps. 62.5.
Soul wayt thou only upon God, or keep thou silence unto God, for my
expectation is from Him. David, when he shuts his mouth, opens his ear: wayts,
and listens what God will say, and concludes, Contra Gentes, The Lord will in
His own Best Time, speak peace, Psalm. 85.8.

3. An Humble, Holy and undaunted Confidence. Thus Solomon, In the fear of the
Lord, in the filial, awful, Reverential fear of God, there is strong (...)
fiducia fortitudinis.
Confidence, and his children shall have a place of Refuge, Prove. 14.26. This
Holy Confidence is Nothing else, but Faith peg'd up to it is Ela. A Confident
Soul moves in an higher Orb then other Saints, leadp up the Van of the Militia
of Heaven. As Patience is nothing else but Hope Lengthned: so Confidence is
nothing less then Faith strengthened, the very Spirits, the mere Elixar of
Faith, which carries with it,

1. Christian Courage and Beatus ille, qui undique petitus, firmius stetit: qui
exhausit Daemonis pharetram, nec concedit, imo ne de gradu quidem tantisper
motus est. Nic.
Fortitude, opposite to Carnal fear and despondency of Spirit. Isa. 12.2.
Behold, God is my Salvation, I will Trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord
Jehovah is my strength. Ps. 112.7.91.5.46.1, 2, 3.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, His Heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord. Thus David undauntedly, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall
I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Psalm.
27.1. His Confidence in God quite extinguished in Him all base, sneaking fear of
man, Ps. 56.4.

2. Christian boldness and Adventurousness, opposite to Cowardice. Holy
Confidence steels the Heart of Mark. 15.43. (...).
Joseph of Aramathea to go in Boldly to Pilate, and to beg the Body of Jesus.
This was that enabled David to encounter Goliath, that made him dare to take a
Bear by the teeth, yea and a Lion by the Beard. It Is for sluggards to say
there is a Lion in the way, Prove. 22.13. But let a Believer that makes God his
Trust, but once Know his Duty, It is enough, he will with a Invictus ad
labores, fortis ad pericula, rigidus adversus voluptates du^us adversus
Illecebras. Ambros.
Courageous and undaunted mind, cheerfully undertake it, and commit both
himself and the success to God, Acts 4.13.19. -- 20.22. -- 21.13. Jer. 7.7, 8,
9. Dan. 3.17, 18. Est. 4.16. Heb. 10.34. to 40.

3. Holy and Humble Boasting, opposite to sinful Concealing of what God has
done for us. A Believer that dares not Boast of Himself, or riches, of any
thing within, that has no Confidence in the flesh, yet dares Psalm. 44.8.
boast of his God. In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for
ever. Thus the Church, challenges the eyes and ears, of All that were round
about her, saying, Lo this, this is our God, we have waited for him, and he
has saved us, Isa. 25.9.

III. The Effects of an holy Trust, and they are such as these.

1. Fervent, effectual, constant Prayer, Thus, in our text, Trust in him at all
times, ye People: pour out your hearts before him, Psalm. 62.8. while Joshua is
in the Valley conflicting with Amaleck, Moses gets him up into the Mount to Ex.
17.9.11 Ps. 86.1, 2. 1 John 5.14. Psalm. 18.2, 3.
Pray. Moses knew full well, That as Prayer without Faith, is but a beating of
the Air; so Trust without prayer, was but a presumptuous Bravado. He that
promises to give, and bids us trust His promises, Commands us to pray, and
expects obedience to his Commands. He will give, but not without our asking,
Ezekiel. 36, 37. Psalm. 50.15.

2. Sincere, universal, spiritual, cheerful, constant Obedience, They that
expect to enjoy what God promises, will be sure to perform, what God enjoins.
Holy trust takes it for a maxim, that he that contemns the Commands of a God,
as his Sovereign, has no share in the promises of a God, as Alsufficient. If we
trust in the Son, with a Faith of Confidence, we shall be sure to honor the
Son with a Psalm. 2.12.
Kiss of obedience. Thus David, Psalm. 119.166. I have hoped for thy Salvation,
and done thy Command. As Faith shows it self by it is Works, Jam. 2.18. So trust
discovers it self by it is obedience. Especially in the use of such means, as
God prescribes for the bringing about his appointed End. If Naman will prove,
that he trusts the God of Israel, he must go and wash in Jordan. True indeed,
the waters of Bethesda could not cure, unless the Angel stirred those waters:
and yet the Angel would not cure, without those waters. Paul trusted that
himself, Act. 27.24.31.
and the men with him should all get safe to Land, but then 'twas with this
Proviso, that they all kept in the ship. Gods means are to be used, as well as
Gods Blessing to be expected.

3. Soul-ravishing, Heart-inlivening Joy. Thus David, I have trusted in thy
mercy, my Heart shall rejoice in thy Salvation, Psalm. 13.5. If the Lord be our
trust and strength, he will be, he cannot but be, our joy and Isa. 12.2.
song. In whom believing, let me add, in whom trusting, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Thus trust and joy are linkt and
lodged together in that Psalm. 64.10. The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord,
and shall trust in him, and all the upright in heart shall Glory. See to what a
Cue of Joy Habakkuk's trust had raised him, Hab. 3.17, 18, 19. The Soul that
truly trusts cannot but sit down under Gods shadow with great Can. 2.3.
delight: His fruit must needs be exceeding sweet to our taste. Is Jon. 4.6.
Jonah exceeding glad with the shadow of his Gourd, how then must a Saint needs
rejoice in the protection of a God! And thus I have dispatched the second
General proposed, viz. a full discovery of the Nature of trust in God, what it
is, what it is ingredients, concomitants, effects. I proceed to the third, viz.

III. What is, or at least ought to be the Grand, and Sole Object of a
Believers trust?

Sol. The Text and Doctrine tell us, It is the Lord Jehovah, and he alone: He
is, or at least should be,

1. The grand Object of a Believers trust. Put your trust in the Psalm. 4.5.
Lord. In whom should a Dying creature trust, but in a 1 Timothy 4.10.
living God! In stormy and tempestuous times, though we may not run to the
Bramble, yet we must to this Isa. 26.4l
Rock for refuge. When the Sun burns hot and scorches, a Jonah's Gourd will
prove Insignificant; No Psalm. 36.7.
shadow like that of a Gods Wings.

2. The sole Object of a Believers trust. Holy trust is an Act of worship
proper and peculiar to an Holy God. No creature must share in it; whatever we
trust in ( unless it be in subordination unto God) we make it our God, or at
least, our Idol. True trust in God takes us off the hinges of all other
confidences; As we cannot serve, so we cannot trust God and Mammon. There must
be but one string to the Bow of our trust, and that is the Lord. More
particularly, we may not, must not repose an holy trust in any thing besi^es
God, either within us, or without us.

I. Not in any thing within us: And so,,

1. Not in our Heads, Understanding, Wisdom, Policy. No safe leaning to our own
Pro. 3.5.
Understanding. Carnal Wisdom is but an ignis fatuus, that misleads into a
Bogg, and there leaves us. Thy Wisdom, and thy Knowledge, it has perverted
thee, Isa. 40.17. He that is wise in his own eyes, will be found at last to
stand in his own light.

2. Not in our own hearts. It is Pro. 28.26.
folly, the height of folly, to trust those Lumps of flesh, that are so Jer.
17.9.
deceitful, so desperately wicked.

3. Not in our bodily strength and vigor. Those hands, that are now able to
break a bow of steel, will eftsoon hang down and Eccl. 12.1, 2, 3.
faint. The most brawny Arm, utterly unable to ward off, or wrestle with, the
assaults of Death or Sickness. Those Legs, which now stand like Pillars of
Brass, will shortly appear to be, what indeed they are, but sinking Pillars of
mouldring clay. Raise the strength of man to its highest (...), yet even then
it cannot make, so much as one Mat. 5.36.
hair, either White, or black.

4. Not in any Natural or acquired Excellencys. Be they what they will, or
should they be far more than they are: Should all the Lines of Created
Perfections meet in one man, as in their Center, yet surely that man, in that
his best estate, is altogether Psalm. 39.5.
vanity, and therefore not to be trusted in.

II. Not in any thing without us. To trust in any Creature without us, is to
feed, not so much on bread, as Isa. 44.20.
Ashes, or rather on gravel stones, which may easily break the Teeth, but can
never fill the Belly.

1. Not in Jer. 9.23.
riches: No not in the Psalm. 52.8.
abundance of Riches. Though riches increase, our hearts must not be set upon
them. Riches, when in their fullest flow are most 1 Timothy 6.17.
uncertain. Will thou therefore set thine eyes on that which is Pro. 23.5.
not? Though they seem to have a being, yet they are indeed but fair faced
nothings, gilded vanities. Or suppose they are, yet the next moment they may
not be. Like Birds on the wing, ready to take their flight. Treasures then, are
not to be made our trust. They cannot Pro. 11.4.
profit in the day of wrath. Nay, if we trust in our Riches on Earth, never
expect a portion in Heaven. Sooner shall the Mar. 10.24.
Camel go through the Eye of a Needle, than such an one pass through the gate
of glory.

2. Not in Psa. 115.8.
Idols. Baal, Dagon, Ashtoreth, and the whole pack of those senseless
Abominations, cannot save themselves, much less can they preserve their
bewitched Votaries.

3. Not in man, or humane Allies, or Assistances, Psalm. 62.9, 10. Egypt and
all her Chariots, when trusted in, prove not supporting staffs, but broken
Reeds, which run into the side, and bear not up, but wound the body, 2 Kin.
18.24. Jer. 46.25. If the shadow of Egypt be our trust, the end of that trust
will be our confusion, Isa. 30.2, 3. Might we build the Nest of our trust on
the Sons of men, Reason would bid us pitch on the topmost branches, of the
tallest Cedars, I mean those earthly Gods, the Princes of this World. But alas,
these, though styled Gods, must dye like men, Psalm. 82.6. yea, like other men.
Their breath is in their nostrils, they soon return to their dust, from whence
they sprang, and then all their thoughts, and with them, our hopes on them,
perish, Psalm. 146.4.

4. Not in any thing clad in mortal flesh. He that presumes to make flesh his
Arm, will be sure, at a long run, to find the Father of Spirits his Foe. Thus
says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
Arm, Jer. 17.5. And thus we have dispatched the third General.

IV. What are those sure and stable grounds, on which Saints may firmly and
securely build their trust on God?

Sol. There is nothing, which the eye of Faith or Reason, can discover in God,
but the arm of Trust may safely lean on. But more particularly,

1. Gods Almighty Arm and Power. The Lord has an Arm, an outstretched 1 King.
8.42.
Arm; An Hand, an Omnipotent Hand: An Hand that spans the Isa. 40.12.
Heavens, that stretches them out as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a
Tent to dwell in. On this Almighty Arm may Believers Isa. 51.5.
trust. The Lord is the strong and mighty God, Psalm. 24.8. That created the
World with a Psa. 33.9.
word, and can as easily speak or look it into its first Nothing. He is a
wonder-working God, Exodus 15.11. Elshaddai, Genesis 17.1. Able to do (...), far
more exceeding Ephesians. 3.10.
abundantly than we can ask or think. His vast power far exceeds our Wants,
Prayers, Thoughts, all that we can need, beg, imagine. We want much, can ask
great things, can think greater. Our Imaginations exceed our Expressions: Yet
Gods power far exceeds both. Psa. 81.10.
Open we our mouths never so wide, his open hand can more than fill them. Gods
power then is a most firm Basis, whereon to fix our trust. Trust ye in the Lord
Jehovah, for in the Lord Jehovah is (...) Petra saeculorum.
Everlasting strength. Creature props are not able to bear the weight and
stress of an Immortal soul. They are sandy foundations, apt to sink and crumble
under us. But an Almighty God is a Rock, A Rock of Ages, on which he, that
builds his confidence, though the Winds blow, the rain descends, and the Storms
beat upon him, yet shall he not Mat. 7.25.
fall. On this Power of God Abraham built his transcendent Romans 4.21.
faith, and David his impregnable trust, 2 Samuel 22.2, 3.

2. Gods infinite and free Goodness, Mercy, and Bounty. The Lord is good to
all, and his tender Psa. 1, 5.9.
Mercies are over all his Works. With the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption: His Bowels are as tender, as his Arm is strong. He is no
less willing than able to relieve: Therefore let Israel hope in the Lord. It is
the Psalmists Psa 130 7.
Inference. Like as a Father pitie^h his Children, so the Lord Psa. 103.13.
pitieth them that fear him. That Father, that sees his child in want, and
pities not, and pitying, if able, relieves not, forfeits the name of Father,
and may write himself not Man, but Monster. It is enough for our heavenly
Father, that he Mat. 6.32.
knows we have need of any thing. The Lord is all that to his people, yea, and
infinitely more than that which Isis Mammosa was to the Egyptians. A God full
of Dugs, and whilst he has a breast, let not Saints fear the want of Milk. The
Character that the Heathens Idolatrously gave their Jupiter, may far more
truly, indeed only, be ascribed to our Jehovah. He alone is that (...), that
Optimus Maximus, The best, as well as the greatest of Beeings. Goodness is Gods
darling Atribute; It is that which he looks on as his glory. I beseech thee,
says Moses, show me thy Exodus 33.18.
glory. Moses, thy Prayer is heard, and it shall be answered. But what says
God in answer to this Request? See Ver. 19. I will make all my goodness pass
before thee. The thing requested, was a view of Gods glory: The thing promised
was a discovery of Gods goodness. Which hints unto us, that however all the
Attributes of God are in themselves glorious, yet the Lord glories most in the
manifestation of his goodness. So then, though we have nothing to plead, or
prevail, with God, as in, or from our selves, yet there is an Orator in his
own bosom, that will certainly and effectually intercede, for our Relief, and
that is his goodness. This was that that boyed up David, this was the Cordial
that kept him from fainting; Psalm. 27.13.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
land of the living.

3. Gods many, choice, exceeding great, and precious Promises. These are the
flagons that Faith keeps by her, the Apples she h^th hoarded up in store, to
revive and quicken in a day of swooning. Who will not trust the Word, the
Promise, the Protest of the King of Kings. God has said, I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee, (...): Never, in no wise, in no case, whatever I do, I
will not do this whatever shift I make.
Heb. 13.5. The Greek here h^th five Negatives, and may thus be rendered: I will
not, not leave thee, neither will I not, not forsake thee. Five times, as one
observes, is this precious Promise renewed, that we may suck and be satisfied
with the breasts of its Consolations, that we may milk out and be delighted
with the abundance of its glory. Leave us God may to our thinking, but really
he does not, will not. Or if he leaves us for a time, a small moment, yet he
will not forsake us utterly: Desert he may, but not disinherit; forsake us, it
may be, in regard of Vision, not of Union; Change his dispensation, not his
disposition. Isa. 44 2.
Do thou pass through the waters? Thy God has promised to be with thee: He
was so with Noah, and the Israelites in the red Sea, and in Jordan. Do thou
walk through the fire? Warmed thou may be, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. The three Children were living Monuments of
this truth, God sent his Angel and delivered his Servants that Dan. 3.28.
trusted in him. The Lord has graciously engaged to create upon every dwelling
place of Mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies a cloud and Isa. 4.5, 6.
smoke by day, for her protection, and the shining of a flaming fire by night,
for direction, to be a Shield and Sun, yea, and shadow from the heat, and a
place of refuge, and a Covert from storm and from rain. In such Promises as
these holy David Psa. 119.49, 50.
trusted: This was his comfort in his affliction, the word of his God quickened
him. Gods Promises are some of his Bonds and Obligations, whereby he is held
firmly bound to Believers. These faith makes bold to put in suit, to plead the
security that God has given: Lord, says Faith, here is thy Bill obligatory,
behold, see here thy hand and seal: Discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the
Signet, and Bracelets, and Staff. Thus David, Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy word
unto thy Servant, wherein thou have caused me to hope; the word of Promise was
all that David had to show, and he counts that enough to set his Faith on work.

4, Gods inviolable, steadfast, never-failing 1 Cor. 10.13.
Faithfulness. Gods goodness inclines him to make good Promises, and his
faithfulness engages him to make those Promises good. If the word be once gone
out of his mouth, Luke 21.33.
Heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, than one Iota of that word fail. This
faithfulness of God Josh. 23.14, 15.
Joshua asserts to the height: throws down the Gantlet, and does, as it were,
challenge all Israel to show but that one thing that God had failed them in, of
all the good things that he had promised. If God in very Psalm. 119.75.
faithfulness afflicts, to make good his threatenings, much more in faithfulness
will he preserve, to make good his Promises. God never yet did, never will fail
that man that puts his trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. It is true God may frown on,
yea, and severely lash a Solomon, a Jedidiah, when they break his Statutes, and
keep not his Commandments: Nevertheless his loving kindness he will not utterly
take from them, nor suffer his Psalm. ^9 33.
faithfulness to fail. God never yet brake his word, by deceiving, nor cracked
his credit, by compounding, for less than was due, with any Mortal living. So
Faithful is God, so true to his Word, that let God but promise a Victory, and
Jehoshaphat will sound an Io Triumph 2 Chro. 20.17, etc.
before the Battle; And let but he threaten Babylons ruin, and the Angel
cries, Babylon Rev. 14.8.
is fallen. Thus then Gods faithfulness calls for Saints trust, Psalm. 146.5, 6.

5. Gods most holy, wise, Powerful, gracious Providence. This also is a prop
for trust. It is the Acts 17.25, 28.
Lord, that gives unto all life, and breath, and all things. It is in him we
all live and move, and have our being. The Pro. 15.3.
eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding of, and providing for the evil
and the good. This divine Providence the Egyptians acknowle^ged, and held forth
in that significant Hieroglyphick of a Sun pourtrayed in a Ship tossed with
wind and water, Eusebius. de prepar. Evang, l. 3. c. 3. God has an eye in the
wheels and motions of all inferior creatures, Ezekiel. 1. 18, 20. (...). Hence
that holy Symbol of our English Josiah, Edward 6th. viz. A celestial Globe
with this Motto, Nihil sine Deo. It is the Lord that feeds the Sparows that
have no Barn, and the Ravens that have no Granary. It is he that so gorgeously
clothes the Lillies, that have no Distaff. Not a Mat. 10.29, 30, 31.
Bird descends from his perch, not an hair falls from the Head without this
Father. Fear not then, ye are of more value than many Sparrows. Where God sends
mouths he will not grudge meat: And he that feeds the young Ravens will not
starve the young Mr Heron when dying to his Wife, somewhat desponding by reason
of her many children, and small provision for them.
Herons. Faith contemplates what God does, recounts what God has done, and
from thence concludes what God will do. Hence it prays with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 17.7. and 31.19. Faith reflects on former experiences, its own and
others, and by the holy skill it has in the Physiognomy of Providence, clearly
reads and collects what God will do, in wh^t God has done. It casts its eye, on

1. The experiences of others: and judges her self to have an Interest in those
very Providence of grace, which they enjoyed. Thus the Church, a thousand
years after that heavenly combat betwixt God and Jacob, tells us: That God
found Jacob in Bethel, and there he spoke with Hos. 12.4. Arrowsmith chain.
^01.4^6 Jenk on Jude part. 1 p. 286.
us: Several Ages before they were born: yet with us, i. e. with Jacob for our
good, on our account, for our Interest. Faith re^embers there was once a Joseph
in a Prison, a Jeremy in a Dungeon, a Daniel in a Den, a Peter in Chains, an
Hezekiah on a supposed death be^, and Providence assisted them, why not me?
This poor man cried, and the Lord helped him, Psalm. 34.6. and Our Fathers
trusted, and thou did deliver them, Psalm. 22.4.5. Lord ^hou art the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, why then may no I expect Salvation from thee?

2. It Is own experiences. Thus David confidently replies to Saul, that thought
him no match for Goliath. 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion and Bear, will also
deliver me from this uncircumcised Philistin; and thus Paul: He had the
sentence of death upon him: the black stones were thrown into the Urn against
him, but his God, had, and did deliver, and therefore in him he trusts, that he
will still 2 Cor. 1.10.
deliver.

VI. And Lastly, I argue from Those dear Relations in which the Lord is pleased
to stand, and own, toward his people. These cry aloud for their trust in God.
Is he not our Isa. 40.28.
Creator? Has he built the house, and will he not keep it up? he that made us,
will assuredly take care of us. We may safely give up our selves, our trust,
our all to him, who has given us our selves, and our all. This 1 Pet. 4.19.
relation the Apostle makes the ground of trust. Is he not our Redeemer? will
he part with his blood for us and yet deny us bread? Is he not our Isa. 63.16.
Father? Are we not his Children? and shall not he provide for his own
children? 1 Timothy 5.8. Has the great God put such a Philostorgy or natural
affection into the Bear, Pelican, Dolphin, Lioness, Eagle, toward their
young, and shall not he much more carry his own upon Eagles wings? Exodus 19.4.
Is he not our King, Head, and Husband? in a word, All those Relations wherein
we stand To God, or God to us, are stable Grounds of our trust upon Him, and
strong engagements of His Assistance to, and Providence over us. Thus much for
the Fourth General, the Fifth follows.

V. What are those special and signal Seasons, which call aloud for the
exerting of this Divine Trust.

Sol.
This Holy Duty is indeed never out of Season: So much the Original word A (...)
Tempestive eloqui.
(...) for time imports. True indeed our Savior says, and says Truly, My
Time, i. e. my Time of discovering my self to be a Wonder-working God, is not
Joh. 7 6.2.4.
yet come. Yea but All Time, in respect of Trust in God, is an Appointed, yea
and an accepted Time. The Wise man tells us, There is an appointed Eccl 3.1,
etc.
Time for every purpose under Heaven. A time to kill and to heal, to plant and
to pluck up, to weep and to laugh, to get and to lose, to be born and to dye.
In all these Trust in God, is, not like Snow in Harvest uncomely, but
seasonable, yea necessary. There may be indeed a Time, when God will not be
found, but No time, wherein he must not be Trusted. Nullum Tempus occurrit
Regi, says the Law, Let me add, Nec Fiduciae, and it is sound Divinity. The
time of Trusting in God cannot be lapsed. But more expressly. There are some
special Inst^nces and Nicks of time for Trust.

1. The time of Prosperity: when we sit under the warm Beams of a Meridian Sun;
when we wash our steps in Butter and our feet in Oil: when the Candle of the
Lord shi^es on our Tabernacle: when our mountain is made strong: Now, now is a
time for trust, but not in our mountain, (for it is a mountain of Ice and may
soon dissolve) but in our God. Halcyon-dayes, to some, are temptations to
security, but to Saints, times for trust: to Carnal persons Lures and Duckoys
to Pride, but to Believers, seasons for Dependence. Now it is, That a Saint
owns God as the Author, not chance, or his own Wit, and Industry, and implores
his God to be the Preserver and Blesser of his enjoyments. When our Cistern is
full, our trust must be, not in it, but the Can. 4.15.
Fountain. At our fullest Tables, we must acknowledge, that, as Bread is the
Isa. 3.1.
staff of our lives, so that staff cannot Support, unless held in Gods Hand.
Gods blessing is the only stay of that staff of Bread. Man lives not by bread
alone, indeed not so much by bread, as by the Mat. 4.4.
word of Blessing That proceeds out of Gods mouth.

2. The time of Adversity. This also is a seasonable time for trust; when we
have no bread to eat, but that of carefulness: nor wine to drink, but that of
affliction and astonishment: no nor water neither, but that of our own Tears.
Now is a time, Not for overgrieving, murmuring, sinking, desponding,
despairing, but for trusting.

In a Tempest, then a Believer thinks it seasonable to cast Anchor upward. Thus
did good 2 Cro. 20.12.
Jehoshaphat. O Our God, we know not what to do, only our eyes are unto thee.
Thus David, what time I am Psalm. 56.3.
afraid, I will trust in thee. Times of trouble, are proper times for trust, be
the Trouble, either Spiritual, or Temporal.

1. Spiritual trouble: Does the child of light walk in darkness? in such
midnight darkness, that he has no light? Now is a time to Isa, 50, 10,
trust in the Name of the Lord, and to stay himself upon his God. Does God take
Job by the neck, and shake him even to pieces? Does he set him up for his mark,
and shoot such arrows into his Soul, that the poison of them drinks up his
spirits, why Now, when God is killing, yea though he Job 13.15,
kills, Job will trust. His Faith lives in the midst of death. Is a godly Heman
so scared with the terrors of God, that he is even Ps. 88.13.15.
distracted; Though he be at his wits end, yet not at his Faiths end. Heman
w^ll pray and trust, and hope, even now, in this his day of Spiritual trouble.

2. Temporal: Is it an evil time? Mic. 7.7, 8, 9.
A time of personal distress and visitation. A time of wants or weakness, does
the Barrel of meal begin to fail, and the Cruse of Oil sink? Is there no fruit
in the Vine, does the labor of the Olive fail, are the flocks cut off from the
fold, and are there no Herds in the stall? Now, Now is a time for Habakkuk to
believe, believing to Hab. 3.17, 18.
trust, and trusting to rejoice in the Lord, and to joy in the God of his
Salvation. Throw a Jonah over board into the raging Sea, bury him alive in the
Whales Belly, let the floods compass him about, and all Gods Billows pass over
him, yet even then Jonah remembers God, and with the eye of his trust dares
look toward his Holy Temple, Jon. 2.1. to 9. Let holy Paul have the sentence
of death upon him, yet he will trust, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. and so will David, though
he walk in the very valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4. Be the trouble
what it will be, Faith knows what to do, viz. to fly by the wings of trust, to
him that is the hope of Israel, and his Savior in the time of trouble, Jer
14.8. Is. 33.2. Trust in God in a sad condition, is a believers Alexipharmacum
praestantissimum, his choycest medicine, preservative, Antidote, against
faintings, swoonings, sinking. It Is like that Corneum Indorum poculum, which
Philostratus speaks of, lib. 3. c. 1. viz. A Goblet out of which the Indian
Princes drank, and then looked on themselves as secure from the Assaults either
of fire, sword, or poison, Psalm. 37.39.

VI. And Lastly, How Faith or Trust exerts, puts forth, demeans and bestirs it
self in these signal seasons.

I. In times of Fullness and Prosperity. When it goes well with us and ours;
when the Candle of the Lord shines on us, and our Tabernacle; when our lines
fall in pleasant places, and our God makes us to lie down in green and Fat
pastures; when we are as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her
feathers with yellow gold; when, with Judah, we wash our garments in wine, and
our clothes in the Blood of grapes. Now, Now is a fair opportunity for Faith or
Trust to exert it self, yea and to appear gloriously. And indeed it requires no
less than the utmost of Faiths skill, to steer the Soul handsomely in this Serene
and smooth-faced Calm. And so

First Faith or trust looks upward, and there fixes it is Ey on God and on the
things of God.

I. On God: and so Holy Faith delivers her self, in such Effata, as these, viz.

1. How full soever my large Cistern be, It is the Lord, and the Lord alone,
that is the grand Fountain, or rather Ocean of all my enjoyments. All my Ps.
87.7.
Springs are in him. All my streams are from him. Faith freely and humbly
acknowledges, that all outward, as well as inward Blessings, That every good
and perfect gift is from Jam. 1.17.
above and comes down from the Father of lights. Every good Gift; Not only
those transcendents, of Grace and Glory, of Union with Christ here and full
fruition of Christ hereafter; but also all temporal good things, be they more
or less, even to an Hoof, or Shoo-lachet. Faith confesses, that it has
Nothing, but what it 1 Cor. 4.7.
received from God. As God in mercy has Mat. 6.33. 1 Timothy 4.8.
promised; so God in Bounty has given me these earthly enjoyments. It is the
Lord that gave, says Believing Job 1.21.
Job; Riches, Honor, Advancement, promotion, they all come of God; Not from
the East, nor West, nor South, i. e. neither this way, nor that way, nor any
way of man, but God puts down one, and Psalm. 75.6, 7.
sets up another. Faith knows, that, as all good things come from God, so
all success in business, all blessings on our Labors, Callings, Affairs, is
only from the Lord. It is the Genesis 39.23.
Lord alone, that makes whatsoever Joseph does to prosper. The Disciples may
fish, and tug all night, but till Mat. 4.19.
Christ comes, they can catch nothing. It Is the Pro. 10.22.
Blessing of the Lord alone, that makes rich.

2. Since all that I have is received of God, I may not, I must not boast,
crack, 1 Cor 4.7.
glory, as if I received it not. Let others, says Faith, thank their own
labors, wisdom, policy, parts, wickedly sacrifice to their own Hab. 1.16.
nets, and burn Incense o their own drags, as if by them their portion were
fat, and their meat plenteous. Faith leaves it to the Atheist to bless himself
in being Fortunae suae Faber, or with that Dunghill wretch, who being excited to
thank God for a rich Crop of Corn, replies, Thank God shall I? Nay rather thank
my Dung-cart. Faith is of another kind of Complexion. O f^r be it, says she,
that I should so much as in my heart, say, that my Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Dan. 4.30.
power, and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth.

3. In as much as all that I have is from Gods blessing and bounty, this whole
all shall be for his praise and Glory. Since all my enjoyments are of him, it
is but just, that all should be to Romans 11.36.
him. He that is the Alpha, the beginning of all my mercies, shall be the Diu
te m norem quod^geris, imperas. Huc omne principium huc refer exitum. Horat.
Omega, the end and Center of all my Services. These Earthly treasures, says
Faith, shall be improved, for high and Heavenly ends. Not thrown into the sink
of a voluptuous panch; not so much on an Hawk or Hound, but laid, and locked up
in Gods Treasury; i. e. the Backs and Bosoms of Christ's poor members. Faith is
resolved to improve Satan's greatest weapon (i. e. the World and it is sweetest
enjoyments) against Himself, 'twill break His Hairy scalp with His own cudgels,
turn his own Cannons against him, that is, by reducing all it is wordly
enjoyments into a serviceableness, and subordination for the glory of God.
Faith disdains to take that course way, of Curing the Lust of the Eyes, by
plucking them out, and to slake the thirst of Riches, by a profuse casting of
it into the Sea, to conquer the Worlds Honor and Applause, by Turning Hermit,
and hiding of it is Head in a lonely Cave. No, Faith prepares the Soul for a
Nobler way, of Victory, not by slighting the Bait, but by digesting of it into
Food; by using of creature comforts, as so many Rounds, in Jacobs Ladder, to
Mount it is self and others, the Nearer heaven. Faith considers, that the King
of Heaven expects His Toll, Tribute, Custom, out of all our Receipts, that
where much is given, there more is Luk, 12.48.
required: and justly fears, lest if it should not pay it is God the Interest,
it should, and that justly, forfeit and lose the Principal. Therefore the more
it is Isa. 5.2, etc,
dung'd, and dressed, and pruned, the more abundant clusters it brings forth, and
such as are acceptable to the palate of the Vine-dresser.

4. Because all my enjoyments proceed from Gods Free-Gift, or rather His Loan,
therefore they must and shall be readily surrendered, to Gods Call. If God will
continue these outward Comfors, says Faith, I will own and improve His Bounty,
and yet if He thinks fit to call in His debts, I will revere, and submit to his
Sovereignty. Let God give, and give abundantly, Job will Bless. Let God take,
Job knows, He takes but his own, and on that account will bless him then. Job
has learnt to bless a Job. 1.21.
taking, as well as a giving God. Here are Lands, Houses, Children, Parents,
dear enjoyments indeed, but yet such as are not my Fee-simple, says Faith. I
am only a Tenant at will. Luke 14.33.
All these, yea and much more, nay Life and All, must and shall be denied,
resigned, when God calls for them. A Gracious heart knows that he cannot
possibly make so much of his worldly enjoyments, any other way, as by offering
them up for Christ's sake, and resigning them to Christ's Call. Mary's ointment
could never have been carried to a better market, then it was, when poured so
freely, on her dear Saviors Head. Be a Believers enjoyments, what they will,
never so great, never so precious, suppose His Vessel laden with Pearls, yet
even these shall overboard, rather than hazard the 1 Timothy 1, 19,
wrak of Faith, or a Good Conscience.

5. Now I enjoy most from God, now, even now it is necessary that I should trust
mostly, yea, wholly and only in God. Thus Jehoshaphat, 2 Cro. 20.12. Thus Asa,
though he had an Army almost Innumerable, no less than 2 Cro. 14.8.11.
five hundred and fourscore Thousand men, All of them mighty Men of Valor, yet
he looks on all of them as Ciphers, as nothing without a God, and therefore now
puts forth his Trust in God, and flies to him for help. Here indeed was a Noble
trust. It Is difficult to trust God in our greatest wants, but more difficult,
to Trust Him in our greatest Weal. 'Twas a Brave Act of Trust in Job 13.15.
Job, when He resolves to Trust in God, though he killed Him. An High
Attainment in Paul, when He had Nothing, to be as one that possessed All
things. Yea but, when God quickens, when we Are full and Abound, when our Cup
runs over, now to Trust in a God and not in our Cup, when our sails are filled
with a Trade-wind, then to confide only in our Pilot; when we have All Things,
and yet then to look on the Creature as utterly insufficient, and to lean
wholly on Gods Allsufficiency, This speaks the most, Spiritual, and refined
Trust, and yet this is that which Faith exerts in it is fullest enjoyments.
Where Mercy Abounds, Trust Superabounds, reputing the Creature as Nothing at
All, and esteeming God as All in All.

6. These outward enjoyments are indeed sweet, but my God the Author of Them,
is infinitely more sweet. They have all, even the most defaecate of them, a
Tang and Smak of the Cask and Chanel, through which they come. At, at, Dulcius
ex ipso Font -- A Single God is infinitely more sweet, than the enjoyment of
all created Good things, that come from Him. Though indeed, I can smile, when
my Corn and Wine, and Oil increases, and bear a part with my Valleys, when
they stand so thick with Corn, that they even laugh and sing. Alas this without
the enjoyment of a God is but a mere Risus sardonicus. The leaping of the Head
after the Soul is gone. True indeed, These are some of Gods Love Tokens, but
what are These to His Person and Presence. These indeed are rich Cabinets, But
Oh the Psalm. 4.6.
Light of his Countenance, That, That Is the Jewel. In having these I can say
with Esau, I have Genesis 23.9, 11.
(...) Much; but give me Him, I can exult and Triumphing say with Jacob, I have
(...) All. These are some of His Left Hand favors, some of His Bottels of
Milk, and gifts, a fit portion for Ishmael and the sons of Keturah; But it is an
Isaac's Inheritance, waters of the upper fountains, my Soul thirsts after,
those Right Hand Blessings, His Psalm. 16.11.
presence, His Soul-ravishing presence, in which There is fullness of joy and
pleasures for evermore. These may serve for my comfortable passage, but Nothing
but Himself can content and satisfy for my Alsufficient Psalm. 78.26.
Portion. According to That, Psalm. 36.8. He alone can fill up all the gaping
chinks and chasms of my Soul. He is my Sun and shield, Psalm. 84.11. my Root and
Branch, Isa. 11.10. my foundation and Cornerstone, Isa. 28.16. my Sword and
shield, Deuteronomy. 33.29. He only can answer All my desires, all my necessities.
Deus meus, and omnia, my God and my All. Thus Faith fixes it is Aspect on God.

2. On the things of God: and so Faith concludes, I have Altiora sapio.
higher and nobler projects, designs of deeper concernment than to sit down,
ingulph and please my self in these poor, earthly, drossie, Excelsa piae mentis
generositas supra omnem rerum humanarum speciem erecta.
dirty things here below. I have many Corruptions within, these are to be
mortified: Many Temptations without, these are to be resisted; Many sweet
motions and whispers of the Spirit, these are to be cherished: many weak
graces, these are to be strengthened: Many personal, relational duties, these
are to be performed; In a word, an effectual Calling and Election to be made
sure, This above all is to be regarded. Faith discovers a World beyond the
Moon, and trades thither: Leaving the men of the earth to load themselves with
clay and coals, Faith pursues its staple commodity and traffiques for grace and
glory. Thus Psa. 39 6, 7.
David, when he had branded the Worldling for disquieting himself in vain, for
heaping up riches, and knowing not who shall gather them, with an holy disdain
turns his back upon the World, as not worth his thoughts, saying, and now Lord,
what wait I for? q.d. It is true, I have Riches, and Honor, a Crown, a
Kingdom, but is this the portion I could be content to sit down with? No, no,
My hope is in thee, deliver me from all my Transgressions, Ver. 8. Let them
that love the World enjoy it, but Lord, pay not my portion in such adulterate
coin, but in pardon of sin, and peace of conscience, This, this is that I wait
for. Thus Vulde protest f^tus sum, etc.
Luther, having a rich Present sent him, professed with an holy boldness to
God, That such things should not serve his turn. He was not taken with Pebbles,
his nobler soul slew Aquila non capit muscas.
higher, and was fixed on Pearls. It is Gods favor that the Subjects of the
King of Heaven desire rather than his preferment; like him that preferred
Alexanders kiss before a great sum of money, given by Alexander to another.
Thus Faith looks upward on God, and the things of God, and acts accordingly.

2. Faith or trust looks downward, on its fullest and sweetest Temporal
Enjoyments. And so,

1. It accurately weighs these enjoyments in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and
so makes a just estimate of them as to their worth and value. Faith knows that
generally men look at the things which are seen, and therefore the things, that
seem best, that glitter most, are the best delights of most of the children of
men, the desire of their eyes, the joy of their hearts. These they over-rate,
and not only esteem them highly, but adore them superstitiously, as a God, or
their chiefest good. But now Faith brings these to the touchstone and standard,
and there interprets them as they are, according to their just value, finds
them to be but the delights of sense, fortune ludibria, the sports of Nature,
the Trials of humane folly, at the best but helps of humane frailty.
Particularly, faith passes a twofold judgment on them, Negative and Positive.

1. Negative; and so faith concludes.

1. These, and all such like earthly enjoyments, never yet, of themselves,
benefitted any man for heaven. True, some things are so good in themselves,
that he that has them cannot but be good, and the better for them: Such as are
the grace of God to us, and the graces of the Spirit in us. These find us evil,
but make us good. But no man was ever made good merely by riches and worldly
wealth. These indeed have found some really good, and made them less good than
they were, and have found many seemingly good, whom they have made stark
naught. How often has a fat preferment spoiled a good Preacher, and caused
him, with him, when the fish is caught, to lay aside his Net! Usually the more
we have of this World, the less we mind the World to come. Our place in Paris
makes us forget our portion in Paradise. That earth which we tread under our
feet, gets up into our hearts, and makes them more earthly than the earth we
tread on.

2. This high mountain, on whose top I stand, adds not a Cubit to my stature in
Gods eyes. God values not, as men do, by the rate or Subsidy-book. Not many
Wise, not many Noble, not many Rich, but God has chosen the Jam. 2.15.
poor of this World, Rich in faith.

3. Therefore my true blessedness does not, cannot consist in the fullest
confluence of these worldly enjoyments. I may not, I dare not with that rich
Luke 12.19.
fool sing a requiem to my soul, and bid it take its ease, for it has goods
laid up for many years. Here is not my rest. Faith, like the Turtle, finds no
rest for the sole of its foot even in a deluge of Creature Comforts. Suppose a
Believers Psalm. 144.12, 13.
sons as plants grown up in their youth, and his daughters, as corner stones
polisht after the similitude of a Palace, suppose his garners full affording
all manner of store. His Oxen strong to labor, and his sheep bringing forth
thousands, and ten thousands in the streets, though the blear-eyed World should
pronounce him Ver. 15.
happy, that is in such a case, how would the Believer immediately reply with
the Psalmists Epanorthosis, (or, in express contradiction rather to so gross a
mistake:) yea, blessed are the people; they rather, or they only are blessed
which have the Lord for their God. Thus Faith concludes Negatively.

2. Positively. That Divine Lesson which Solomon, the wisest of mere men, had,
by such difficult, and costly experiments at length learnt, Faith has got by
heart, and in the face of the World concludes with him: Eccl. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. The assertion is repeated, as in Pharaohs
dream, to show its certainty, and the Term of Vanity doubled, to manifest the
Transcendency* and multiplicity of this Vanity. There is a fivefold Vanity,
which Faith discovers in all its Creature enjoyments, viz. in that they are:

1. Unprofitable. Thus the Preacher, What Eccl. 1.3.
profit has a man of all his labor which he has taken under the Sun? What
profit! Why, he has filled his hands with Air, he has labored for the Wind,
Eccl. 5.16. Just so much, and no more, than Septimius Severus got, who having
run through various and great employments, openly acknowledges, Omnia fui, sed
nihil profuit. Creature comforts are not bread, Isa. 55.2, 3. They profit no
more than the dream of a full meal does an hungry man, or that Feast which the
Corn. a Lap. Comment. in Isa. 55.2.
Magitian made the German Nobles, who thought they fared very deliciously, but
when they departed, found themselves hungry. In a day of wrath, sickness,
death, can riches profit? Prove. 11.4. Ezekiel. 7.19. Just as much as a bag of gold
hung about the neck of a drowning man.

2. Hurtful and pernicious. Solomon observed that Riches were kept for the
Owners thereof to their Eccl. 5.13.
hurt. Hence it is that Pro 30.8, 9,
Agur prays against them: Give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee; as
if abundance made way for Atheism, in those that know not how to manage it.
Maximilian the Second was sensible of this, who refused to hoard up a mass of
Treasure, fearing lest by falling in love therewith, of a sovereign Lord, he
should become a servant to the Mammon of unrighteousness. Now the hurtfulness
of Creature Comforts shows it self in several particulars.

1. Faith knows, that they are apt to puff up and swell the heart with the
Tympany of pride. Hence that great Caution, Deuteronomy. 8.10. to the end. The usual
Attendants on riches are Pride and Confidence. Hence Paul to 1 Timothy 6.17.
Timothy, charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high
minded. How apt are men to be lifted up with the things of this lower World!
Riches at once sink the mind downward in covetous Cares, and lift it upward in
proud conceits. To see a man rich in purse, and poor in spirit is a great
rarity.

2. Faith knows, that great enjoyments are great snares and powerful temtations
to many other lusts, such as are Covetousness, Lust, Luxury, Security, etc. The
plenty of places often occasion much wickedness in persons. Rich Sodom was a
nursery of all impiety. Jesurun, when he waxes fat, is apt to kick, Deuteronomy.
32.15. And when Israel is fed to the full, Ezekiel. 16.39.^0.
then she commits abomination.

3. Faith is sensible how apt temporal comforts are to make us slight
spiritual graces, and heavenly Communion.

1. Spiritual graces. Our digging for silver, and searching for gold, makes us
too too apt to neglect that which is better than thousands of gold and silver,
even durable substance. The radiant-splendor of these things here below,
dazzles our eyes to those things above. Whiles Martha is much Luke 10.41.
cumbred about many things, she forgets to act Mary's part, and to pursue that
one thing necessary. How often do outward comforts entangle the spirits, weaken
the graces, strengthen the corruptions, even of good men! There was a serious
truth in that Atheistical scorn of Julian, who when he spoiled the Christians
of their outward estates, told them, He did it to make them more ready for the
Kingdom of heaven. Many really godly lose much in spirituals by gaining much in
temporals; they have been impoverished by their riches. They are, indeed, rich
in grace, whose graces are not hindered by their riches, whose souls prosper
when their bodies prosper. To see the daughter of Tire come with her gift, to
see the Psalm. 45.12.
rich among the people, entreat Christ's favor, and give up themselves to Him;
This indeed is a rare sight. To be rich or great in the World, is a great
temptation. When we flourish in the flesh, we are apt to wither in the Spirit.
The scorching Sunbeams of prosperity too too often cause a drouth, and then a
dearth, a Famine in the soul, and make us throw off those robes of
righteousness which the wind of affliction makes us to gird on the faster. The
World is of an encroaching nature, hard it is to enjoy it, and not come into
bondage to it. Let Abraham cast but a litttle more than ordinary respect on
Hagar, and it will not be long ere she begin to contest with, yea, crow over
her Mistress.

2. Spiritual Communion with God. Worldly comforts are always dogd with
worldly business, and this too often eats up our time for Communion with God.
It is a very difficult thing to make our way into the presence of God through
the throng of worldly encumbrances. Worldly employments and enjoyments are
exceeding apt not only to blunt, but to turn the edge of our affections from an
holy commerce with God. Faith knows what a Task, what an Herculean labor it
is, after it has past a day amidst worldly profits, and been entertained with
the delights and pleasures a full estate affords, now to bring an whole heart
to God, when at night it returns into his presence. The World in this case does
by the Saint as the little child by the mother, if it cannot keep the mother
from going out, it will cry after to go with her. If the World cannot keep us
from going to Religious duties, it will cry to be taken along with us, and much
ado there is to part it and our affections. Thus Faith discovers the danger and
hurtfulness of Creature-enjoyments. But more than this.

4. Faith knows that these outward things are perishing, as well as
unprofitable and hurtful. Mutable, inconstant, fading Faelicitas umbratilis.
Vanities. Bubbles, Pictures drawn on Icy Tablets, grass growing on the tops of
houses. Faith has seen and heard the Providence of God ring the changes of
men's Estates all the world over. Now exalted and lifted up, within a while
deprest and cast down. Now honorable, eftsoon abased, the rich becoming poor,
Naomi becoming Mara. Hills levelled into Valleys, and great Mountains becoming
Plains. That spoke of the wheel which is now aloft, (as that Captive King told
his Conqueror) is quickly turned to the ground and brought low. The best
earthly estate, is in it self a tottering estate. No Psalm. 30 6, 7. Summis
negatum est stare diu.
mountain so strong but may soon be moved. What we call substance, Faith knows
is but a shadow, and has no continuance. There is no assurance in any earthly
inheritance. How soon does God sequester it from us, or us from it. These
Externals cannot be held with all our care, nor kept with all our policy and
power. The best of earthly excellencies may soon be taken from us. Jobs Job 19
9.
Crown quickly falls off from Jobs head. Not only is all flesh grass, but all
the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field, Isa. 48.6. Not only is
man of a brittle Constitution in nature, but all the perfections which he has,
be they either Moral or Civil accomplishments, on this side grace, are brittle
too. Reason, Scripture, Experience, abundantly attest this truth. The 1 Cor.
7.30.
fashion of this world, says the Apostle, passes away: As fashions in the
world alter and change every day, so does the fashion of this World.
Creature Comforts are not so properly Possessions as Quod miraris, pompa est.
Ostenduntur istae res, non possidentur, and dum placent, transcunt, Sen. Epist.
110.
Pageants, which whilst they please us, pass away from us in a moment. Those we
have here are running banquets, delicate, and served in with state, but soon
over.

5. Faith makes yet a farther discovery, and finds that these Creature Comforts
are false, deceitful, lying Vanities. Which appears,

1. In the report they make of themselves, and of their own worth. If you look
upon the bill of the creature, it puts down not only an hundred for fifty, but
a million for a mite. Like the Title pages of some empty Pamphlets, more in
them than in the whole Book.

2. In the Promises which they make to us. It promises that in the enjoyment
thereof we shall be happy, whereas we are both poor and miserable in the
fullest possession of the Creature, unless God himself be our portion. It
promises to ease us of our cares, yet it does but multiply them, like drink to
a dropsie-man, so far from slaking that it enflames the thirst. Riches are not
food, but fuel to our desires, and are so far from satisfying, that they but
widen the throat. They do not allay our appetite as bread does, when received
and digested, but inflame it, as oil does, when cast into the fire. It
promises to protect us, but performs no more than the great tree does from a
soaking and lasting storm. It promises to continue with us, though Father and
Mother forsake, yet it will not, whereas it usually proves like Absoloms Mule,
then apt to go from under us, when we most need it. Thus the Creatures are
deceitful, i. e. They are objectively deceitful; through the deceitfulness of
our hearts and lusts, we are deceived about them, if not by them. They
frustrate our expectation, when our hopes of advantage by them are at the
highest: seldom or never make good to the enjoyer, what they promised to the
expectant. Like Ionah's Gourd, when most needed, then they wither: Like Hesters
invitation of Haman to a Banquet with the King, which filled his bladder with
windy hopes, but soon after ended in his Ruin.

6. And lastly, Faith knows, that Creature Comforts are Isa. 55.2.
unsatisfying Vanities. This the Philosopher saw by the dim eye of Nature,
concluding, That the World being Orbicular, of a round figure, could never fill
up the Corners of an heart, which is Triangular. The C^eature were a God to us,
if it could do this to us: Kindle thirstings it may, but quench none: C^n beget
a thousand fears and cares, but quiet none. Here the eye is not Eccle. 1.8.
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. The soul still crying out,
Give, give. It is God alone satisfies, Psalm. 36.8, 9. It is only a God in
Christ that can give the soul rest, Mat. 11.29. God would not rest from his
works of creation, till man was formed. Man cannot rest from his longing
desires till God be enjoyed, and then, and not till then can an holy David sing
a Lullaby to his soul. Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.
Faith having thus expressed her judgment concerning the true Nature and worth of
Creature Comforts, concludes her work in three resolves.

1. In the midst of these my enjoyments, I must take heed that my heart sits
loose from them. These handsome Pictures must be only hanged on the wall, not
glued to it. Though riches increase, I may not, must not set my heart on them.
Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. 62.10. Use them I may, love them I may not, 1 John
2.15, 16. My affections may perchance pitch, but must not fix on these things
below, Col. 3.2. Look upon them I must with an holy indifferency, and use them
as if I used them not, 1 Cor. 7.31.
possess them as if I possessed them not. The zeal of my Spirit must be for
Heaven, and heavenly things. My soul must press hard only after God, as David's
did, Psa. 63.1, 8.

2. Though I have all these comforts, yet I may not, must not inordinately,
immoderately, carnally delight and rejoice in them. Thus the Apostle enjoins, 1
Cor. 7.29. It remains, that both they that have wives be as if they had none,
and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and they that buy as though
they possessed not, and they that use this World as not abusing it. As we are
apt to underdo, to do too little in heavenly things, so we are apt to overdo,
or to do too much in worldly things.

Our two great faylings are, viz. That we do but make use as it were of those
things we should enjoy, and that we enjoy those things we should only make use
of. Oh the Divine Art of holy moderation in the use of our sweetest worldly
enjoyments is known and practiced by few.

3. And lastly, As I may not over-love them, nor inordinately delight in them,
says Faith, so least of all may I put the least trust or confidence in them. I
must not in the least lean upon them. Not say to Gold, to sine gold, Thou art
my confidence, Job 21.24. i. e. My soul may not securely rest and rely on gold,
or golden enjoyments, as if these could stand by me, when all friends fail, as
if these would not see us want any thing, nor suffer us to be wronged, as long
as they last, which, God knows, is but for a moment. All these enjoyments can
neither make me better nor wiser, not render my life more safe and comfortable,
not sanctify our souls, nor satisfy our desires: Therefore says faith, I
will trust in God only, whom I can never trust too much, not in the creature,
which I can never trust too little.

II. In times of sadness, afflictions, wants, sufferings, miseries; when the
hand of the Lord is gone out against us, and he greatly multiplies our sorrows.
When he breaks us with breach upon breach, and runs upon us like a Giant, when
his Arrows stick fast in us, and his hand presses us sore, when he sows
Sackcloath on our skin, and defiles our horn in the dust. When we are fain to
eat ashes like bread, and to mingle our drink with weeping. Now, now is a time
for a Saints trust to bestir it self to purpose. In this storm and tempest,
wherein the waves mount up to heaven, and go down again to the depths, Faith
sits at Helm, and preserves the soul from shipwreck. Faith takes this Serpent
by the tail, handles it, and turns it into an harmless wand, yea, into an
Aarons rod, budding with glory and immortality: Faith encounters this seeming
Goliath of Affliction, grapples with it, not as a match, but as a vanquished
Underling. Let misery dress her self like the cruellest Fury, come forth
guarded with all her dismal attendants, sighs, groans, tears, wants, woes,
Faith sets its foot on the neck of this Queen of fears, insults and triumphs
over her. When the heart and flesh are apt to fail, when soul and spirit are
apt to sink and swoon away, Faith draws forth its Bottle, and administers a
reviving Cordial. In a word, in a Sea, an Ocean, a Deluge of trouble, amidst
all storms, winds, tempests, yea, an Herricane of sorrows and miseries, Faith
knows where and how to cast Anchor. According to that of our Savior, (...) Ne
perturbetur, commoveatur.
(...). Let not your Heart be Troubled, so Troubled, as a ship tossed in a
Tempest: ye Believe in God, Believe also in me. Faith is that great Antidote,
Cordial, Panacea, Catholicon, Heal-All of all Diseases: This is That, that
makes a Believer Live in the midst of Death. But more particularly in This
Tempestuous Condition, Faith does these three Things.

1. It warily avoids some dangerous Rocks, and Quicksands. 2. It heedfully
looks to it is Bottom in which it sails. 3. It accurately observes it is Compass,
by which it steers.
I. There are some Rocks, Shelves, Quicksands, like Scylla, and Charybdis,
against which, in such a dark Condition, the Soul is apt to split it self.
These Faith avoids with utmost Care, and They are Six.

1. Distracting, distrustful, carking, corroding, heart-dividing,
heart-stabbing Cares. Faith according to the Apostles Phil. 4.6.
command, (...): is carkingly Careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer
and supplication makes it is requests known to God. True indeed, a Believer is
not, may not, dares not be, slothfully, negligently careless of his Body,
Estate, Relations, Affairs, particular calling, Romans 12.17. Faith knows, that
He that endeavors not by honest, prudent, diligent, care and foresight, To 1 Timothy 5.8.
provide for his own is worse than an Infidel. And yet Faith is far from All
carking Cares, such as distract the Head, and Matthew. 6.25, etc.
divide the Heart from other and Better Things. Faith takes no thought for its
life, what it shall eat, neither for the Body, wherewith it shall be clothed.
Faith leaves that to God, who feeds the Sparrows and clothes the Lillies. It Is
for Gentiles and unbelievers to cry out solicitously, what shall we eat, or
what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? My Heavenly Father
knows that I have need of all these Things. It belongs to him to provide. It Is
his work, I leave it with him. All that 1 Pet. 5.7.
Care, I cast upon him, He does and will care for me. I may not, must not,
says Faith, speak against God, as did the Psalm. 78.19, 20.
Israelites, saying, Can God furnish a table in the Wilderness? As he has
given waters, can he give bread also, can he provide flesh for his people?

2. Carnal Counsel, using unlawful, and Carnal Confidence, Trusting in Lawful
means. Say not when God pursues, Hos. 14.3.
Ashur shall save you, and you will ride on horses. In sickness Faith will not
run first to the Physician. That was Good 2 Cro. 6.12.
Asa's great sin. 'Twas Holy David's great failing, to say, (though but in his
Heart) Nothing better for me then to escape into the Land of the 1 Samuel 27.1.
Philistines. Alas poor David, to what a shift art Thou now driven? what to the
uncircumcised Philistines? Is it because there is not a God in Israel? Oh thou will quickly find this starting Hole, to be, only a going out of Gods Blessing,
into a warm Sun. To think by Sinning to avoid suffering, is by saving the
finger, to make way for a stab at the heart. To pursue, and obtain Deliverance,
by unlawful ways, is to fish with, and lose, an hook of Gold, and only to
catch a Gudgeon. To preserve the Body, but to destroy the Soul.

3. Stinting, and limiting the Holy one of Israel, to this or That particular,
means, way, time, and manner of Deliverance: so as to say, if God help not this
way, Nothing will do. If not now, never. Faith remembers, This was the
Israelites God provoking Sin. They Psalm. 78.41.
limited the Holy One of Israel. Thus Naaman, 2 Kings 5.11. Behold, says he, I
Thought He will surely come out, and stand, and call, and strike, and No other
way will serve Him. He thought Thus, and Thus, But the man was no less blind,
than Leprous. He was at once both proud and vain in his Imaginations, and He
shall know that the Almighty will not sail by his Narrow Compass, nor dance,
as, I may so say, after his Pipe. God has more ways to the wood, than One,
and always more than many out of it, though we at present see them not. God
has Extraordinary means to bear up, when Ordinary ones fail. God can turn
poisons into Antidotes: Hindrances, into Furtherances: destructions themselves
into Deliverances. Has Elijah no meat? rather than fail, The devouring 1 King.
14.6.
Ravens shall be his Caterers. Is Jonah in danger of Drowning? rather than sink
a Jon. 2.10.
Whale shall have commission, to be both His ship and Pilot too, to set him
safe on shore. Faith knows, that an Almighty God, can work, with, yea and
without, above, contrary to means, and does on purpose many times stain the
pride and glory of some means, that seem most probable, that we may observe and
adore his wise Providence in finding out, and blessing the use of others more
unlikely: that we may prefer his Jordan, before our Abanah.

4. Impatient fretting, murmuring, and quarrelling against Gods Dispensations.
This was poor Jonah's great stumble. Peevish man! do thou well to be angry,
and that with thy God? yea says He, to the very death, Jon. 4.9. The most
foolish Answer that ever dropped from the mouth of an Holy man. Humble Aaron was
better instructed. He knew, It was no safe kicking against the Pricks. That
Nothing was to be got by striking again, by repining against God, but more
Blows. And therefore when God had killed both his sons at a blow, He humbly
Holds his Lev. 10.2, 3.
peace: his heart and tongue were both silent. True indeed, we may not be
senseless and stupid under sufferings. Had all the Martyrs had the dead Palsy,
before they went to the stake, Their sufferings had been far less Glorious. But
yet, though we may not be stupid or Stoical, we must be patient and submissive.
Though we may not be like the Caspian Sea, that neither ebbs, nor flows, yet we
must take heed of being like swelling, roaring waves and billows. Though Gods
Turtles may, through infirmity, flutter, yet they may not be like Bulls, when
caught in a net, raving. I was Psalm. 39.9.
dumb, says David, because thou did it. Away then with those surly looks,
that do as it were, enter a protest against what we suffer: nay more, beware of
those murmuring eccho's and replies of Spirit within, against God, who though
they seem to yield and run, yet, with the flying Parthian, shoot their Arrows
backward, in discontent against God.

5. All sinful and ungrounded Doubting of Gods love, in and under sufferings.
How Gods Heart inclines, cannot infallibly be gathered from Gods Hand. Faith
many times discovers Love in Gods Heart, when it sees nothing but frowns on
Gods forehead: and knows, that frequently when His Tongue chides, His Jer.
31.20.
Bowels yearn. Is Ephraim a dear son? is he a pleasant child? Is he? Alas no,
Rather he is a pettish, untoward, undutiful child. True, but yet a child, and
therefore, since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, my
Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him. Yea more, Faith
is so far from Arguing, that God has thrown His Love out of His Heart, when he
Takes his Rod into His Hand, that it rather from thence argues the quite
contrary. I am now therefore beloved, because chastised. Whom I love, I rebuke
and Rev. 3.19. Amos 3.2. Heb. 12 6.
chasten. Faith knows, that a Fathers Correction, is so far from being an
argument of wrath, that it is one of the clearest Evidences of Love. Better far
to be a chasten'd son, than an undisciplined Bastard: No Anger like that, Isa.
1.5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more, and
Ezekiel. 16.42. I will be quiet, and I will be no more Angry. Ephraim is joined to
Idols, Let him alone, Hos. 4.17. Then is God most Tunc maxim irascitur, quando
non irascitur. Super omnem iram miseratio ista. Bern.
angry of All, when he refuses to be Angry.

6. Fainting, sinking, desponding, despairing, under Gods Correction. As Faith
looks upon it as a great sin to despise the Lords chastening, so it holds it
for no small infirmity, to faint, when corrected by him, Heb. 12.6. This was
that for which David so roundly chid, and rated His Soul, why art thou cast
down O my Soul, why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust thou in God, Psalm.
42.11. If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength is but small, Prove.
24.10. It argues thee to be a man of a short, narrow, pusillanious, poor, low
Soul, to faint and sink in such a day. Thus we have shown you the Rocks, the
Dangerous Rocks, which Faith warily avoids.

II. Faith heedfully looks to it is Ship, or Bottom, in which it sails. Wherein
she views the Keel, Ballast, Sayls; takes Care That these be Tite, and in good
Condition.

1. The Keel, Bulk, or Body of the Ship, in which Faith sails, and That is Holy
Contentation. This was the Grand, and Highest Lesson, that ever a Believing
Paul learnt, and practiced. viz. Phil. 4.11.
In every estate Therewith to be content. What some observe of that Earthly
Angel, That glory of Her Sex, the Lady Jane Gray, That she made misery it self
seem amiable, and that the night-cloathes of Adversity did as much become her,
as Her Day-dressing, is much more True of Holy Contentation, It renders every
Condition, even the Blackest, lovely. An afflicted Christian, If contented, may
Truly say with the Spouse, Can. 1.5. Though I am black, I am Comely. Faith
therefore mainly looks to this, and professes, that though she cannot be
satisfied with the whole World for Her portion, yet she must, will be, and is
contented with the least pittance of it for Her passage. Has an Agur Food, what
though Course, (...)
ordinary Commons? Prove. 30.8. yet it is Food: Has John Baptist raiment, what
though of Mat. 3.4.
Camels Hair? yet it is Raiment: and so long Faith looks upon Her self, as
obliged to be therewith content, 1 Timothy 6.8.

2. The Ballast, that poyses the Ship, and That Is Humility. This is that that
keeps the Soul steady and makes it ride out the Storm. Pride is that, which
swells the Heart, Now when a Member is swollen, though it grows bigger, yet it
grows weaker, and so the more unfit and unable to bear any burden laid upon
it. It Was Humility that steeled Athanasius against all His Adversaries, and
sufferings, in that he was, as Nazianzen reports him, as truly low in Heart,
as really High in worth. The Humble Soul judges it self Genesis 32.10.
less than the least of mercies, justly obnoxious to the greatest Judgments,
and therefore no wonder if it can patiently want or undergo any thing.

3. The sails, whereby this well ballasted Ship is carried, and that is
Heavenly mindedness. This indeed is Faith's Top, and Topgallant, whereby it
sails with a full forewind into it is Port and Haven. Faith minds, savours, sets
it is affection on things Above, not on things below, Col. 3.2. It Is Heart is,
where it is Treasure is, in heaven. Faith knows, That mixture of Earth and dross
much weakens the Soul, and makes it unable to suffer, whereas a Soul quickened
with heavenly-mindedness, that flies high and looks beyond the Stars,
concludes, that a little, a very little of the dreggy creature will serve turn
to pass it through this worldly Pilgrimage, and this greatly enables for
suffering; and Thus Faith heedfully looks to her Bottom.

III. Faith accurately observes its Compass, by which it steers. Now there are
several points in Faiths Compass, or if you will, there are several choice
Maxims or Axioms of Faith, by which a Believer sails, in and through the
Blackest Storms and Tempests. Such as These.

I. What ever the stone be that is Thrown, it is the hand of Heaven flings it. In
all the evils we either fear or feel, Faith looks beyond the Creature, and
carries up the Heart unto God. No evil in the City, No penal evil, either on
me, or mine, but the Am. 3.9,
Lord has done it. Thus David, Dum^, because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. and
The Lord has bid Shimei curse, 2 Samuel 16.10. David could read Gods Hand at the
foot of the Commission, though His Commanders could not. Thou could have no
power against me, unless Joh. 19.11.
given thee from above, says our Savior to Pilate. And Holy Job when plundered
of all, says not, The Lord gave, and the Chaldeans, and Sabeans, have taken
away; The Lord enricht, but Satan has robbed me: No, but as if they all had
been but Ciphers, and mere standders by, The Lord gave and the Lord only, or at
least chiefly, has taken, Job. 1.21.

II. Let the King of Heaven do his worst, yet even Then, He can do no wrong.
This is a grand Maxim in the Rolls of Eternity. One of the Fundamental Laws of
Heaven; and that because,

1. God is the most Sovereign God, The Supreme Lord, That knows no Law but His
Own Will, which is the Highest and most unerring Rule of Righteousness. Gods
Hand is Gods only Rule, and therefore what ever Line He draws, it must needs be
right. Our God is a Law to Himself, who only can write on His Imperial Edicts
and proceedings, stat pro ratione voluntas. God does and may justly do,
whatsoever pleases him, Dan. 4.35. and can most justly resolve the Reason of
all His Actions i^to his own will, That gteat Potter may do with his clay, what
he pleases, and that without the least Control or contradiction, Romans 9.20,
21. On this Account, Faith counts it wisdom, not to play the Censorious Critic
on Gods Administrations, considering that He alone is (...). According to that
of Elihu, Job 33.12, 13. God is greater than man, why do thou strive against
him, for he gives not account of any of his matters.

2. God, as he is most just in himself, so also he acts most justly to me,
says a Believer. Faith justifies God in all his proceedings, i. e. subscribes
and gives Testimony to the Righteousness of God, even in his sharpest
Corrections. Thus David, I Know O Lord, that thy Judgments are Ps. 119.75
right. Thus the Church, when under the Babylonish Captivity, (the heaviest
Judgment ever inflicted on any people) yet then humbly sets her seal to Gods
Justice. The Lord is Lam. 5.18. Neh. 9.33.
Righteous, for I have rebelled against him.

III. It Is not sit, that poor, weak, short-sighted, sinful creatures should be
their own Carvers. If they should, they would, like rash children, cut either
Too much, or Too little, or Their own fingers. Well for us, That as our Psalm.
31.15.
Times, so our Conditions, are not in our own, but in Gods hands. Not what I
please, says Faith, but what my God pleases. He knows best what is good for
his people: and I know, had God granted my requests, and fulfilled my desires,
I had long since been undone. The cooling drink which I so passionately desired
in my burning Paroxysm, would have added to my flame, and quickly dispatched me
to the house of darkness. Hence it was, That the honest Shepherd, being asked,
What weather it should be to day, replied, even what weather I please. Not so,
says the Other, but what pleases God. Yea so, replies the Shepherd, for
whatever pleases God, shall be sure to please me.

IV. Better to want Outward Comforts, Than enjoy them without my Fathers good
will. Israel had been better to have been without Quails. They had sour sauce
to their sweet meat; while the Flesh was in their mouths, The Numb. 11.20.
plague of God was in their nostrils. You will needs have this, and That, and
The Other Thing, why, Take it, says God, but then take my Curse with it too: The
Sack, but poison with it. You shall have it, but in wrath. See 1 Samuel 8.5, 6,
10, 11, 12. Hos. 13.11. Rachel you will have children, or else you will take
pet and Genesis 30, 1.
dye. You shall have children, a Benjamin to your Joseph, which yet shall prove
a Benoni. His Intrat will prove your Exit! his life your death, Genesis 35.18.
Better were it for David to be without Michol, than that she should, being
enjoyed, become a 1 Samuel, 18.21.
snare.

V. Seem it never so ill, yet it is Really well. On these Two Accounts.

1. It cannot but be well with him, with whom God is. 'Twas not Ill with the
three children, though in a fiery Furnace, so long as God was There, Dan. 3.25.
Suppose David walking in Ps. 23.4.
the Suburbs of death and danger, yet not ill with him, because God with him.
When God says I will bewith you, as he has, Isa. 43.2. and I feel Him, says
Faith, It is infinitely more to me, than if he should say, peace, health,
credit, honor, plenty, shall be with Thee. God being with me, is all these,
and infinitely more. In these I could have but a particular good: In a single
God I have all good. Now God, who is with his people, at all times, is most
with Them, and most sweetly with them in The Domitianus in Jovis sinu. Sueton.
worst Times. As their afflictions increase without, so do their Consolations
within, 2 Cor. 1.5. when the child is most sick, then it is most dandled on the
mothers knee: when it begins to faint, Then is the Closet ransackt for the
choicest Cordial. This, blessed Baynham found, when at the stake He told the
Bloody Papists, O ye Papists, said he, you talk of Miracles, behold here a True
One, These flames are to me a bed of Roses. God is wont to give Believers, in
such a time, their Exceedings, their five messes. That part of the Army, which
is upon Action, in the field, and upon hard service, shall be sure to have
their pay. What are all the promises, but vessels of Cordial wine, tunn'd on
purpose against a groaning hour, when God usually, and speedily broacheth them,
Psalm. 50.15.

2. All is well, that ends well. Now, says Faith, all sad and gloomy
dispensations, have sweet Ends, whether I respect God, or my self.

I. In respect of God. And that

1. For the manifestation of His Infinite Wisdom, who so contrives the passages
of His Providence, as that One shall qualify Another. God knows, that should I
Always prosper, I should have been apt to swell and presume, and therefore he
pricks my bladder, to let out that wind. Had I been always fed with sweet
meats, It Is very probable I might have surfited, and therefore He mingles my
sweets with these Tart Ingredients. Were not this Base added to my Trebble, I
should never have made any Harmonious Music.

2. For the declaration of His Almighty Power. God many times brings his people
into such a condition as not to know what to do, that they may now know what
the Lord can do. Thus, Deu. 32.36, 39. The Lord shall judge his People, when he
sees their power is gone: and see now, That I, even I am He, and there is no
God with me. Thus, Psalm. 106.8. Nevertheless he saved them for His name sake,
but what Name? even That Glorious one of His Power, that he might make His
Power known.

II. In respect of Believers. The life of every Saint is a Tragae-comedy, and
the Last Act of it crowns the whole play. Mark the upright man, and Behold the
just, for the Psalm. 37.37.
End of that man is peace. Out of the Eater shall come meat. This affliction
and That affliction, yea the whole series of them shall work together for my
Good, Romans 8.28. Saints good is Gods Aim. As Love is the principle He
constantly Acts from, so the Saints good, is the End He propounds and aims at
in All His dispensations. From this He never swerves. The fire of Love never
goes out of His Heart, nor the Saints good out of His Eye. When He frowns,
chides, strikes, yet then his heart-burns with Love, and His thoughts Are To do
them good, Jer. 24.5. -- and 29.11. Deu. 8.2.16. But what good? Much every way,
chiefly with respect to their Corruptions, graces, services, glory.

1. Saints Corruptions, To purge and subdue them. This is All the fruit, the
Taking away of their sin, Isa. 27.9. Afflictions are Gods brine and pickle to
preserve the Saints from putrefying. Paul's thorn in the flesh, was given Him to
prevent and mortify Pride, 2 Cor. 12.7. All the Harm which the fiery Furnace
did the young men in Dan. 3.23, 24. was but to burn off their cords. Our Lusts
are cords, cords of vanity, fiery trials sent on purpose to burn and consume
them. Adversity like Winter-weather, of great use to kill weeds and Vermin,
which the Summer of Prosperity is wont to breed. God is fain to rub hard many
times, to fetch out the dirt, that is ingrain'd in our Nature. This Thunder
serves to clear the Air from infectious Vapors. This Bitter potion purges out
Ill Humors. Be the Teeth of thy Troubles, never so many, never so sharp, It Is
but to file off thy Rust. This Tempestious Tossing in the Sea, will more purge
the Wine from It Is Lees. It clarifies the Soul. According to that Zech, 13.9. I
will bring a third part through the fire, To refine them as Silver.

2. Saints Graces. And that

1. For their Trial and experience. That the trial of your Faith etc. 1 Pet.
1.6. The fire tryes the Gold, as well as the Touchstone. Diseases, not only
need, but Try the Art of the Physician; and Tempests the skill of the Pilot.
The Saints Sufferings are but as so many Touchstones. Now, now shall the Saint
clearly Know, whether the Conscience be sound or foundred, if it will pace well
in Rough ways. Here, here is the Faith, i. e. the Trial of the Saints Faith
and patience, Rev. 13.10.

2. For their Increase and Growth. The snuffing of the Candle makes it burn the
brighter. Hence it is that the Saints glory in Tribulation, Romans 5.5. because
their sufferings add strength to their graces. Never are Gods spiritual
Nightingales apt to sing more sweetly, then when the Thorn is at their Breast.
Saints are indeed made of precious metal, and yet they are too too apt to lose
their Edg. Hence it is That God by afflictions whets and sharpens them. He
beats and bruises His links, to make them burn the brighter; loads his choicest
Ships with sufficient Ballast, To make them sail the steadier: bruises His
Spices, to make them send out an Aromatic Savor, Jer. 22.21. Isa. 26.16. Heb.
12.10.

Object. But I find not this precious benefit.

Sol. Afflictions do not presently work, at least thou may not presently feel
their operation. As Christ to Peter, what I do, thou know not now, John
13.7. but thou shall hereafter: So afterward it brings forth the fruit of
Righteousness, Heb. 12.11.

3. With respect to Saints future services. Great sufferings are many times
sent to prepare Saints for extraordinary Services. See it in Genesis 41.40, 41.
Joseph and Paul; Joseph thrown into a pit, sold a slave into Egypt, there cast
into a prison, by All fitted for a Palace, and to be a Nursing Father to the
Church. God bestows more Chopping and Hewing on Cornerstones, because He
intends, they shall not only support, but adorn the Building. God means to
build high upon them, therefore lays his foundations very low; Intends to sell
these Diamonds at an high rate, and thence it is, He spends so much Time and
Art in cutting them.

4. With respect to the furtherance of their future Glory. Christ went from a
Cross To Paradise, so do Christians. The Master was made perfect through
sufferings, Heb. 2.10. So are Saints, his Servants. Though the Saints Cross
cannot merit, yet it makes way for a Crown of Life, Jam. 1.12. Their Light
afflictions which are but for a moment, occasionally work for them, a far more
excellent, and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

VI. Be it really Ill, never so ill, yet It might well be worse. Be the
suffering what it will, yet whilst here, whilst Above ground, It Is far less
then I have Ezr. 9.13.
deserved. Blessed be God, cried out that Mr. Whitaker.
Man of God, when in the Paroxism of His Gout, This though sharp, is not Hell.
The worst that we can feel here in not the 100000 part of what we have deserved
hereafter. Every step on this side Hell is mercy, says a sensible Believer.
God is gracious in His greatest severity, remembers mercy in the midst of
Judgment. As it is said of Ashur: His shoos were Iron and Brass, yet he dipped His
foot in Oil, Deuteronomy. 33.24, 25. So God Tempers his greatest severities, with the
Oil of Mercy. Corrects but in measure, Is. 17.6. nay in Mercy, in infinite
Mercy. I that have deserved the blow of an Executioners Axe, am sent away with
the Lash only of a Fathers Rod. God only lops off some luxuriant branches, when
in Justice He might cut up the Vine, both Root and Branch, and cast both into
Everlasting flames.

VII. And Lastly, Be it now never so Ill, it will certainly be Nemo desperet
meliora Lapsus Sen. T^ag.
Better. Thus the Psalmist. All thy waves are gone over me, yet the Lord will
command His loving kindness, Psalm. 42.7, 8. Thus the Church, Mic. 7.7, 8, 9.
More particularly Faith concludes.

1. My Afflictions, though Lasting, will not be Everlasting. Though the night
be dark and long, yet there will come a daybreak, and comfortable Dawn: my God
will not always chide, neither will he contend for ever, Is. 57.16. Rev. 2.10.

2. My greatest Extremity of Distress, is Gods fairest opportunity for
Deliverance. When the Cassians are most infested with Locusts, then and not
till then do the Seleucidian Birds come in to their Assistance. Cause. Hier. l.
6. c. 31. Now, now will I arise says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.36. Cum duplicantur
lateres, venit Moses. In the Mount there will God be seen, Genesis 22.14.

3. And Lastly. Superata Tellus Sydera donat. Boet. Faelix post fata. Ad
delicias juvat ire periclis. (...).
Heaven will pay for all at last. Where every Tear shall be wiped off, Rev.
21.4. The plesantness and security of the Port, will make more than full
Amends, for the danger and difficulty of the passage. And This is That, wherein
Faith Triumphs, as knowing, That, He that for Christ's sake, in obedience to
Christ's will, in conformity to Christ's Word, in aiming at Christ's glory,
wears the sharpest Crown of Thorns Here, shall by Christ have His Temples
incircled with the fairest Crown of Glory hereafter. As in this life an hundred
fold, so in the World to come, Life Eternal, Mark 10.30.

How may we cure Distractions in holy Duties?
Mat. 15.7, 8. Ye Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying,

This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their
lips, but their heart is far from me.


IN this Chapter you will find a Contest between Christ and the Pharisees,
about their Traditions and old Customs, which they valued above the
Commandments of God, as it is usual with formal men to love Chains of their own
making, and to make conscience of a Tradition when yet they can dispense with a
Commandment, and thereby discovering themselves to be very hypocrites, who are
more in Externals than in Internals, in show than substance, minding the
formality rather than the spirit and life of Service to God; our Lord confirms
his censure by the testimony of the Prophet Isaiah, Ye hypocrites, etc.

I shall not stand explaining the words. [Drawing nigh] is a phrase peculiar to
Worship, especially to Invocation. [ mouth and lips] are put for all external
Gestures, and that bodily exercise which is necessary to the worship of God,
especially for words. [But their heart is far from me] it chiefly intends
their habitual averseness from God, but may also comprize the wandering and
roveing of the mind in duty, which is a degree and spece of it, of that I shall
treat at this time, and my Note will be:

That distraction of thoughts, or the removing of the heart from God in
Worship, is a great sin, and degree of hypocrisy.

The Text speaks of gross hypocrisy or a zealous pretense of outward Worship
without any serious bent of heart toward God; but any removal of the heart
from him in times necessary to think of him is a degree of it; for though
distractions in Worship are incident to the people of God, yet they are
culpable, and do so far argue the relics of hypocrisy in them. I shall show.

1. The greatness of the sin.

2. The Causes.

3. The Remedies.

First, That there is such a sin, sad experiences witnesses, vain thoughts
intrude importunately upon the soul in every duty, in hearing the word we are
not free, Ezekiel. 33.31. nor in singing, but chiefly they haunt us in Prayer, and
of all kinds of prayer in mental Prayer, when our addresses to God are managed
by thoughts alone, there we are more easily disturbed, words bound the thoughts
and the inconvenience of an interruption is more sensible, as occasioning a
pause in our speech; and as in mental Prayer, so when we join with others, to
keep time and pace with their words, unless the Lord quicken them to an
extraordinary liveliness, we find it very hard, but how great a sin this is, is
my first task to show. I shall do it,

1. By three general considerations.

2. By speaking particularly to the present case.

First Generally.

1. Consider how tender God is of his Worship, Lev. 10.3. He has said, That he
will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him. To sanctify is to set apart
from common use. Now God will be sanctified, that is, not treated with as an
ordinary person, but with special heedfulness of soul and affection becoming so
great a Majesty; when you think to put him off with any thing, you lessen his
excellency and greatness, and do not sanctify him, or glorify him as God, and
therefore God pleads his Majesty when they would put a sorry Sacrifice upon
him, as if every thing were good enough for him. Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the
deceiver which has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord
a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts. To be slight
in his service argues mean thoughts of God. Eccl. 5.2. Be not rash with thy
mouth, nor hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in heaven, and thou
upon earth. We forget our distance, and by a bold profaneness are too
fellow-like and familiar with God, when we are not deeply serious and exact in
what we do and say in his presence, but only babble over a few impertinent
words without attention and affection: Certainly, God is very sensible of the
wrong and contempt we put upon him, for he notes all, Heb. 4.13. All things
are naked and open to him with whom we have to do. And he will not put it up,
for he tells us, Exodus 20.8. That he will not hold them guiltless that take
his Name in vain; and he will be as good as his word: For the least disorders
in Worship have been sorely punished, witness the stroke from heaven upon
Aarons Sons, Lev. 10.2. The breach made upon Uzzah, 2 Samuel 6.6. And the havoc
made of the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6.19. The diseases that raged at Corinth, 1
Cor. 11.30. And though judgments be not so rise and visible now upon our
unhallowed approaches to God, yet he smites us with deadness where he does not
smite us with death, for a man is punished otherwise than a boy, and judgments
are now spiritual which in the Infancy of the Church were temporal and bodily.
Certainly, we have all cause to tremble when we come before the Lord.

2. The more sincere any one is, the more he makes conscience of his thoughts,
is more observant of them, and more troubled about them, Isa. 55.7. Let the
unrighteous man forsake his thoughts; then he begins to be serious, and to
have a conscience indeed when his thoughts trouble him. So David, Psalm.
119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love. We think thoughts are
free and subject to no Tribunal, if there be any error in them, we think it is
a very venial one, they betray us to no shame in the world, and therefore we
let them go without dislike and remorse: But a child of God cannot pass over
the matter so, he knows that thoughts are the immediate births of the soul,
and do much discover the temper of it; that there Actions begin, and if vain
thoughts be suffered to lodge in him, he will soon fall into further mischief,
and therefore he considers what he thinks, as well as what he speaks and
does; and if at all times, especially in Worship, where the workings of the
inward man are of chief regard, and the acts of the outward only required, as a
help to our serving God in the Spirit, Phil. 3.3.

3. Carelessness in Duties is the high way to Atheism. For every formal and
slight Prayer does harden the heart, and make way for contempt of God; Men
that have made bold with God in duty, and it succeeds well with them, their awe
of God is lessened, and the lively sense of his Glory and Majesty abated, till
it be quite lost; by degrees they outgrow all feelings and tenderness of
conscience, every time you come to God slightly you lose ground by coming,
till at length you look upon Worship as a mere Custom, or something done for
fashions sake.

Secondly, Particularly. 1. It is an affront to God, and a kind of mockery; we
wrong his Omnisciency, as if he saw not the heart, and could not tell man his
thought. It is Gods Essential glory in Worship to be acknowledged an all-seeing
Spirit, and accordingly to be worshipped in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24.
Thoughts are as audible with him as words, therefore when you prattle words,
and do not make conscience of thoughts, you do not worship him as a spirit. We
wrong his Majesty when we speak to him in Prayer and do not give heed to what
we say; surely we are not to prattle like Jayes, or Parrots, words without
affection and feeling, or to chatter like Cranes, or be like Ephraim whom the
Prophet calls a silly Dove without an heart. A mean man takes it ill when you
have business to talk with him about, and your minds are elsewhere; you would
all judge it to be an affront to the Majesty of God if a man should send his
clothes stuffed with straw, or a Puppet dressed up instead of himself into the
Assemblies of Gods people, and think this should supply his personal presence,
yet our clothes stuffed with straw, or an Image dressed up instead of us, such
as 1 Samuel 19.12, 13.
Michol put into David's bed, would be less offensive to God than our bodies
without our souls; the absence of the spirit is the absence of the more noble
part: We pretend to speak to God, and do not hear our selves, nor can give any
account of what we pray for; or rather let me give you Chrysostom's Comparison,
A man would have been thought to have profaned the mysteries of the Levitical
Worship, if instead of Chrysostom. Hom. 74. in Mat.
sweet incense he should put into the Censer Sulpher or Brimstone, or mingle
the one with the other. Surely our Prayers should be set forth as Incense,
Psalm. 141.2. And do not we affront God to his face, that mingle so many vain,
sinful, proud, filthy, blasphemous thoughts? What is this but to mingle
Sulpher with our incense? Again, when God speaks to us, and knocks at the
heart, and there is none within to hear him, is it not an affront to his
Majesty? Put it in a Temporal Case, if a great person should talk to us, and we
should neglect him, and entertain our selves with his servants, he would take
it as a despite and contempt done to him. The Great God of heaven and earth
does often call you together to speak to you; Now if you think so slightly of
his speeches as not to attend, but set your minds adrift to be carried hither
and thither with every wave, where is that reverence you owe to him?

It is a wrong to his goodness, and the comforts of his holy presence, for in
effect you say that you do not find that sweetness in God which you expect, and
therefore are weary of h^s company before your business be over with him; it is
said of the Israelites when they were going for Canaan, that in their hearts
they turned back again into Egypt, Acts 7.39. They had mo e mind to be in
Egypt than under Moses Government, and their thoughts ever ran upon the
fleshpots and belly cheer they enjoyed there; we are offended with their
impatience and murmurings, and the affronts they put upon their Guides, and do
not we even the same, and worse in our careless manner of worshipping? When God
has brought us into his presence we do in effect say, give us the world again,
this is better entertainment for our thoughts than God, and holy things; if
Christians would but interpret their actions, they would be ashamed of them; is
any thing more worthy to be thought of than God? The Israelites hearts were
upon Egypt in the Wilderness, and our hearts are upon the World, nay, every
toy, even when we are at the Throne of grace, and conversing with him who is
the Center of our rest, and the fountain of our blessedness.

2. It grieveth the Spirit of God, he is grieved with our vain thoughts as well
as our scandalous actions; other sins may shame us more, but these are a grief
to the Spirit, because they are conceived in the heart, which is his Presence
Chamber, and place of special residence; and he is most grieved with these vain
thoughts which haunt us in the time of our special addresses to God, because
his peculiar operations are hindered, and the heart is set open to Gods
adversary in Gods presence, and the World and Satan are suffered to interpose,
in the very time of the reign of grace, then when it should be in solio, in its
royalty, commanding all our faculties to serve it; this is to steal away the
soul from under Christ's own arm, as a Captain of a Garrison is troubled when
the enemies come to prey under the very walls, in the face of all his forces
and strength: So certainly it is a grief to the spirit when our lusts have
power to disturb us in holy duties, and the heart is taken up with unclean
glances, and worldly thoughts, then when we present our selves before the Lord;
God looks upon his peoples sins as aggravated because committed in his own
house, Jer. 23.11. In my house I have found their wickedness; What is this but
to dare God to his very face? Solomon says, Pro. 20.8.
A King sitting upon his throne scatters away evil with his eyes. They are
bold men that dare break the Laws when a Magistrate in upon the Throne, and
actually exercising judgment against Offenders; so it argues much impudence,
that when we come to deal with God, as sitting upon the Throne, and observing
and looking upon us, that we can yet lend our hearts to our lusts, and suffer
every vain thought to divert us: There is more of modesty, though little of
sincerity in them that say to their lusts as Abraham to his Servants, Genesis 12.5.
Tarry here while I go yonder and Worship, or as they say, the Serpent lays
aside her poison when she goes to drink: When a man goes to God he should
leave his lusts behind him, not for a while, and with an intent to entertain
them again, but for ever: However this argues some reverence of God, and sense
of the weight of holy duties, but when we bring them along with us, it is a
sign we little mind the work we go about.

3. It is a spiritual disease; the soul has its diseases as well as the body;
the unsteady roaving of the mind, or the disturbance of vain and impertinent
thoughts is one of those diseases: Shall I call it a spiritual madness, or
feavor, or shaking palsy, or all these? You know mad men make several
relations, and rove from one thing to another, and are gone off from a Sentence
ere they have well begun it: Our thoughts are as slippery and inconsistent as
their speeches, therefore what is this but the frenzy of the soul? What mad
Creatures would we seem to be if all our thoughts were patent, or an invisible
notary were lurking in our hearts to write them down? We run from Object to
Object in a moment, and one thought looks like a mere stranger upon another, we
wander and run thorough all the World in an instant; Oh, who can count the
numberless operations and workings of our mind in one duty! What impertinent
Excursions have we from things good to lawful, from lawful to sinful, from
ordinarily sinful to downright blasphemous. Should any one of us, after he
has been some time exercised in duty, go aside and write down his thoughts,
and the many interlinings of his own prayers, he would stand amazed at the
madness and light discurrency of his own Imaginations.

Or shall I call it the feavorish distemper of the soul? Aegri somnia is a
Proverb; in feavors men have a thousand fancies and swimming toys in their
dreams, and just so it is with our souls in Gods Worship: We bring that curse
upon us spiritually which corporally God threatened to bring upon the Jews, I
will scatter you to the ends of the earth. We scatter our thoughts hither and
thither without any consistency; the heart in regard of this roving madness is
like a runnagate Servant, who when he has left his Master, wandreth up and
down, and knows not where to fix; or like those that are full of distracting
business, that cannot make a set meal, but take their diet by snatches.

4. It argues the loss and non-acceptance of our Prayers; you are in danger to
lose your Worship, at least so much of it as you do not attend upon; and truly
to a man that knows the value of that kind of traffic, this is a very great
loss; You that are Tradesmen are troubled if you happen to be abroad when a
good Customer comes to deal with you: the Ordinances of God are the Market for
your souls, if you had not been abroad, with Esau, you might have received the
blessing, and gone away richly laden from a Prayer, from the Word, and the
Lords Supper, but you lose your advantages for want of attention. Allowed
distractions turn your Prayers into sin, and make them no Prayers; when the
soul departs from the body, it is no longer a man but a Carcass: So when the
thoughts are gone from Prayer, it is no longer a Prayer, the Essence of the
duty is wanting. What is Prayer? (...), as Damascene defined it, The lifting up
of the heart to God; Many have prayed without words, but never any prayed
without lifting up, or pouring out the heart, If a man should kneel, and use a
gesture of Worship and fall asleep, no doubt that man does not pray: This is to
sleep with the heart, and the words uttered are but like a dream, have but a
slight touch of reason in them, a mere drowsy unattentive devotion, the soul
is asleep though the eyes be not closed, and the senses locked up. Can we
expect that God should hear us and bless us because of our mere outward
presence? We are ashamed of those that sleep at a duty, and this is as bad or
worse, they may sleep out of natural infirmity, as weakness, age, sickness,
etc. But this does more directly proceed from some sleightness or irreverence:
Well then, with what face can we expect the fruit of that Prayer to which we
have not attended? It is a great presumption to desire God to hear those
requests, a great part whereof we have not heard our selves; if they be not
worthy of our attention, they are far more unworthy of Gods. Cypr. de Orat.
Domin.
Cyprian or Ruffinus, or whoever was the Author of the Explication of the Lords
Prayer in Cyprians Works, has a notable pass^ge to this purpose, Quo modo te a
Deo exaudiri postulas, cum te ipse non audias? Vis Deum esse memorem tui cum
rogas, cum ipse tui memor non sis? Thou art unmindful of thy self, thou do
not hear thy self, and how can thou with reason desire the blessing and
comfort of the duty which thou thoughtest not worthy thine own attention and
regard.

I would not willingly grate too hard upon a tender conscience, it is a
Question that is often propounded, Whether wandering thoughts do altogether
frustrate a duty, and make it of none effect? And whether in some case a
vertual attention does not suffice? There is an actual intention, and a vertual
intention; The actual intention is when a soul does distinctly and constantly
regard every thing that is said and done in a duty: And a vertual intention is
when we keep only a disposition and purpose to attend, though many times we
fail and are carried aside; this Aquinas calls primam intentionem, out of the
Scripture we may call it, The setting of the heart to seek the Lord, 1 Chronicles.
22.19. Now, what shall we say in this Case? On the one side, we must not be too
strict lest w^ prejudice the comfort and expectation of Gods people; when did
they ever manage a duty but they are guilty of some wanderings? It is much to
keep up our hearts to the main and solid requests that are made to God in
Prayer. But on the other side, we must not be too remiss lest we encourage
indiligence and careless devotion: Briefly then by way of answer, There is a
threefold distraction in Prayer, distractio invita, negligens, and voluntaria.

1. There is distractio invita, an unwilling distraction, when the heart is
seriously and solemnly set to seek God, and yet we are carried besides our
purpose; for it is impossible so to shut doors and windows but that some wind
will get in; So to guard the heart as to be wholly free from vain thoughts, but
they are not constant, frequent, allowed, but resisted, prayed against, striven
against, bewailed, and then they are not iniquities, but infirmities, which the
Lord will pardon; he will gather up the broken parts of our Prayers, and in
mercy give us an answer; I say, where this distraction is retracted with grief,
resisted with care, as Abraham drove away the fowls when they came to pitch
upon his Sacrifice, Genesis 15.11. It is to be reckoned among the infirmities of
the Saints, which do not hinder their Consolation.

2. There is distractio negligens, a negligent distraction. When a man has an
intention to pray, and express his desires to God, but he prays carelessly, and
does not guard his thoughts, so that sometimes he wanders, and sometime
recovers himself again, and then straies again, and is in and out, off and on
with God: as a Spaniel roveth up and down, and is still crossing the ways,
sometimes losing the company he goes with, and then retiring to them again. I
cannot say, this man prays not at all, or that God does not hear him, but he
will have little comfort in his Prayers; yea, if he be serious they will
minister more matter of grief to him than comfort; and therefore he ought to be
more earnest and sedulous in resisting this infirmity, that he may be assured
of audience: Otherwise, if his heart be not affected with it in time, by
degrees all those motions and dispositions of heart that are necessary to
prayer will be eaten out and lost.

3. There is distractio voluntaria, a voluntary distraction; when men mind no
more than the task or work wrought, and only go round in a track of accustomed
duties, without considering with what heart they perform them, this is such a
vanity of mind as turns the whole prayer into sin.

Secondly, The causes of this roving and impertinent intrusion of vain thoughts.

1. Satan is one cause, who does Maxim insidiari orationibus (as Cassian
speaks) lie in wait to hinder the Prayers of the Saints, when ever we
minister before the Lord, he is at our right hand ready to resist us, Zech.
3.1. And therefore the Apostle James, when he bids us draw nigh to God,
bids us also to resist the devil, Jam. 4.7, 8. Implying thereby, That there
is no drawing nigh to God without resisting Satan. When a Tale is told, and
you are going about the Affairs of the World, he does not trouble you, for
these things do not trouble him, or do any prejudice to his Kingdom: But when
you are going to God, and that in a warm, lively affectionate manner, he will
be sure to disturb you, seeking to abate the edge of your affections, or
divert your minds; Formal Prayers patterd over do him no harm, but when you
seriously set your selves to call upon God, he says within himself, This man
will pray for Gods Glory, and then I am at a loss; for the coming of Christ's
Kingdom, and then mine goes to wrack; That Gods Will may be done upon earth as
it is in heaven, and that minds me of my old fall, and my business is to cross
the Will of God; he will pray for daily bread, and that strengthens
dependence for Pardon and Comfort, and then I lose ground, for the devils are
the Ephesians. 6, 12.
Rulers of the darkness of this World; He will pray to be kept from sin and
temptation, and that is against me. Thus Satan is afraid of the Prayers of the
Saints, he is concerned in every request you make to God, and therefore he will
hinder or cheat you of your Prayers; if you will needs be praying, he will
carry away your he^rts. Now, much he can do if you be not watchful, he can
present Objects to the senses which stirs up thoughts, yea, pursue his
temptations, and cast in one fiery dart after another, therefore we had
need-stand upon our guard.

2. The natural levity of our spirits, man is a restless creature, we have much
a do to stay our hearts for any space of time in one state, much more in holy
things, from which we are naturally averse, Romans 7.21. When I would do good
evil is present with me (...), Oh consider this natural feebleness of mind,
whereby we are unable to keep long to any Employment, but are light fethery
tossed up and down like a dried leaf before the wind, or as an empty Vessel
upon the waves, it is so with us in most businesses, especially in those which
are Sacred, the Apostle bids us pray without ceasing, and we cannot do it
whilst we pray; he is a stranger to God and his own heart, who finds it not
daily, this is an incurable vanity, though we often repent of, yet it is not
amended, a misery that God would leave upon our natures, to humble us while we
are in the World, and that we may long for Heaven; the Angels and blessed
Spirits there are not troubled with those things, in Heaven there is no
complaining of wandering thoughts, there God is all in all, they that are there
have but one Object to fill their understandings, one Object to give
contentment to their desires, their hearts cleave to God inseparably by a
perfect love, but here we are cumbred with much serving, and much work begets a
multitude of thoughts in us, Psalm. 94.11. The Lord knows the thoughts of men
that they are but vanity. When we have summed up all the traverses, reasonings,
and discourses of the mind, we may write at the bottom this as the total sum,
here is nothing but vanity.

3. Another cause is practical Atheism, we have little sense of things that are
unseen and lie within the vail, in the World of spirits; things that are seen
have a great force upon us, offer it now to the Governor, says the Prophet
Mal. 1.8. God is a far off, both from our sight and apprehension, senses bind
attention: if you speak to a man your thoughts are settled; and you think of
nothing else, but in speaking to God you have not like attention, because you
see him not, Exodus 32.1. Make us gods to go before us: Aye that we would have a
visible God, whom we may see and hear, but the true God being a Spirit, and an
invisible Power, all the service that we do him, is a task performed more out
of custom than affection, in a slight perfunctory way.

4. Strong and unmortified lusts, which being rooted in us, and having the Soul
at most command will trouble us, and distract us when we go about any duty;
each man has a mind, and can spend it unweariedly as he is inclined, either to
Covetousness, Ambition, or Sensuality, for where the treasure is, there will
the heart be, Matthew. 6.20. set but the Covetous man about the World, the
Voluptuous man about his pleasures, and the ambitious man about his honors,
and preferments, and will they suffer their thoughts to be taken off? surely
no; but set either of these about holy things, and presently these lusts will
be interposing, Ezekiel. 33.31. their heart goes after their Covetousness: the
sins to which a man is most addicted, will ingross the thoughts, so that this
is one sign by which a man may know his reigning sin, that which interrupts him
most in holy duties, for when all other lusts are kept out. Satan will be sure
to set the darling sin a work to plead for him; if a man be addicted to the
World so will his musings be, if to mirth and good cheer and vain sports, his
thoughts will be taken up about them, if to the Inordinate love of women, his
fancy will be rolling upon carnal beauty, and he will be firing his heart with
unclean thoughts.

5. Want of love to God and holy things; men are loath to come into Gods
presence for want of Faith, and to keep there for want of love; love fixes the
thoughts, and dries up those swimming toys and fancies that do distract us,
we ponder and muse upon that in which we delight, were our natural hatred of
God and of the means of Grace, changed into a perfect love, we should adhere to
him without distraction, we see where men love strongly they are deaf and blind
to all other objects, they can think and speak of no other thing, but because
our love to God is weak, every vain occasion carries away our minds from him,
you find this by daily experience, when your affections flag in an ordinance
your thoughts are soon scattered, weariness makes way for wandering, our hearts
are first gone and then our mnids, you complain you have not a settled mind, the
fault is, you have not a settled love, for that would cause you to pause upon
things without we^riness, Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and
in that Law does he meditate day and night, Psalm. 119.97. O how I love thy Law,
it is my meditation all the day. David's mind would never run upon the Word so
much, if his heart were not there, thoughts are at the command and beck of
love, where love bids them go they go, and where love bids them tarry
they tarry, the Saints first delight and then meditate.

6. Slightness and irreverence, or want of a sense of Gods presence, a careless
spirit will surely wander, but one deeply affected is fixed and intent, Jonah
when he prayed in the Whales belly, could he have an heart to forget his work?
Daniel when he prayed among the Lions, could he mind any thing else? when we
are serious and pray in good earnest, we will call in all our thoughts and hold
them under command. This Question was put to Basil, how a man should keep the
mind free from distraction, his Answer was, Basil. in Regulis brevioribus.
(...). That is, that this evil came from slightness of heart, and unbelief of
Gods presence, for if a man did believe that God were before his eyes searching
the heart, and trying the reins, he would be serious, all things are naked and
open to him, with whom we have to do; God looks on, and so do the Angels, he
looks on the heart, and will not you be serious? Scholars that have a
trewantly mind, yet the presence of their Masters forces them to their Books,
the Great God who tells man his thought, he sees, our desires and thoughts
speak louder in his ears than our words; therefore possess the heart with a
dread of his glorious presence, and with the weight and importance of the work
we are about, were we to deal with another man in a case of life and death, we
would weigh our words, and not rove like mad men.

7. The Curiosity of the Senses these occasion a diversion, it is the Office of
the fancy to present as in a glass whatsoever is received by the External
Senses, or offered by the memory, and so the understanding takes notice of it,
the wandering eye causes a wandering heart, Solomon says, Prove. 17.24. The
fools eyes are to the ends of the earth, first his eyes rove, and then his
heart, the Apostle Peter says, of unclean persons, that they have eyes full of
adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. (...) of the adulteress (as the word signifies) the eye
is rolled upon the object, and then the dart by the fancy is transmitted to the
heart, Senses are the windows and doors of the Soul, keep the Senses if you
would keep the heart, Job was at a severe appointment with his eyes, Job. 31.1.
it is good when we go to God to renew these Covenants, to agree with the heart
that we will not go to God without it, with the eyes and ears, that we will not
see and hear any thing but what concerns our work; 'twas a strange constancy
and fixedness which Josephus de Bellis Judaeorum.
Josephus speaks of, when Faustus, Cornelius, and Furius, and Fabius, with
their Troops had broken into the City of Jerusalem, and some fled one way and
some another, yet the Priests went on with their Sacrifices, and the holy rites
of the Temple, as if they heard nothing, though they rushed on them with their
swords, yet they preferred the duty of their Religion, before their own safety:
and strange is that other Instance of the Spartan Youth in Plutarch, that held
the Censer to Alexander whilst he was sacrificing, and though a coal lighted
upon his flesh, he suffered it to burn there, rather than by any crying out he
would disturb the rites af their Heathenish Superstition: certainly these
instances should shame us Christians, that do not hold the Senses under a more
severe restraint, but upon every light occasion suffer them to trouble and
distract us in worship.

8. Carking and distrustful cares, when we are torn in pieces with the cares of
the World, we cannot have a composed heart, but our minds will waver, and our
dangers will recurr to our thoughts, and hinder the exercise of our Faith; God
took special care of the Jews when they went up to worship, that they might
have nothing to trouble them, and therefore he says, Exodus 34.24. none of the
Nations shall desire the Land when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord
thy God thrice in the year; and Augustinus quest. 161. in Exodus
Augustine gives this reason of it, lest they should be distracted with
thoughts about their own preservation, vult Deus intelligi ut securus quisque
ascenderet, nec de terra sua sollicitus esset, deo promittente custodiam; and
one of the arguments by which Paul commends single l fe, is freedom from the
encumbrances of the World, that we may serve the Lord without distraction, 1
Cor. 7.35.

Thirdly, Remedies, I might speak many things by way of mere counsel about
guarding the Senses, the use and abuse of a form, etc. but all these are but
like external applications in Physic or topical medicines, as the binding of
things to the wrists of the hands, etc. which work no perfect cure of a
disease, unless the distemper be purged away, therefore I shall speak to those
things that are most effectual.

1. Go to God and wait for the power of his Grace, David speaking of it as his
work, Psalm. 86.11. Unite my heart to the fear of thy name, fix it, gather it
together (...) (says the Septuagint) make it one, the heart is multiplied when
it is distracted by several thoughts, God has our hearts in his own hand, and
we can keep them up no longer then he holds them up, when he withdraws his
grace we lose our life, and seriousness, as meteors hang in the air as long as
the heat of the Sun is great, but when the Sun is gone down, they fall; as long
as the love of God and the work of his Grace is powerful in us, we are kept in
a lively heavenly frame, but as that abateth the Soul swerveth, and returns
to vanity and sin. We read, Acts 16.14, 15. that the Lord opened the heart of
Lydia, so that she attended to the things that were spoken of Paul: attention
there bears somewhat a larger sense then we now consider it in, namely a deep
regard to the doctrine of life, yet this Sense of fixedness of spirit cannot be
excluded, go to God then, pray him to keep thy heart together, he that has set
bounds to the Sea, and can bind up the waves in a heap, and stop the Sun in its
flight, certainly he can fasten and establish thy heart and keep it from
running out.

2. Meditate on the greatness of him before whom we are; it is of great
consequence in duties, to consider whom we take to be our party, with whom we
have to do, Heb. 4.13. in the Word God is the party that speaks to us, thou
shall be as my mouth, Jer. 15.16. as if God spoke by us, 2 Cor. 5.20. it is God
speaks, and the Heathen King of Moab showed such reverence, that when Ehud
said, I have a message to thee from God, he arose out of his seat, Judge. 3.20.
so in prayer you have to do with God, you do as really minister before him as
the Angels that abide in his presence, Oh if you could see him that is
invisible, you would have more reverence. Omnino nos oportet orationis tempore
curiam intrare caelestem illam, utique curiam in qua rex regum sedet in
stellato solio circumdante eum innumerabili and ineffabili beatorum spirituum
exercitu, ubi and ipse qui viderit, quia majorem numerum non invenit, millia
ait millium ministrabant ei, and decies centena millium assistebant ei, quanta
ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta illuc humilitate accedere debet e
palude sua procedeus and repens ranuncula vilis, quam tremebundus quam supplex,
quam denique humilis and sollicitus, and toto intentus animo majesti gloria in
praesentia Angelorum, in consilio justorum and congregatione assistere poterit
vilis homuncio. Bernard, de quatuor modis orandi.
A man that is praying or worshipping should behave himself as if he were in
Heaven immediately before God, in the midst of all the blessed Angels, those
ten thousand times ten thousand that stand before God; Oh with what reverence,
with what fear should a poor worm creep into his presence; think then of that
glorious all-seeing God, with whom thou can converse in thoughts, as freely
as with men in words; he knows all that is in thy heart, and sees thee
thorough and thorough, if you had spoken al those things you have thought upon,
you would be odious to men, if all your blasphemy, uncleanness, worldly
projects, were known to those that join with us, should we be able to hold up
our heads for blushing? and does not the Lord see all this? could we believe
his inspection of the heart, there would be a greater awe upon us.

3. Mortify those lusts that are apt to withdraw our minds, he that indulgeth
any one vile affection will never be able to pray aright, every duty will give
you experience what corruption to resist, what thoughts are we haunted and
pestered with when we come to God? God requires Prayer that we may be weary of
our lusts, and that the trouble that we find from them in holy Exercises, may
exasperate our Souls against them; we are angry with an Importunate beggar that
will not be satisfied with any reasonable terms, but is always obtruding upon
us, every experience in this kind should give us an advantage to free our
hearts from this disturbance; the whole work of Grace tends to Prayer, and
the great Exercise and Employment of the Spiritual life is, watching unto
Prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. and that Prayer be not interrupted, 1 Pet. 3.2.

4. Before the duty there must be an actual preparation or a solemn discharge
of all Impediments, that we may not bring the World along with us; put off thy
shoos off thy feet, says God to Moses, for the place whereon thou stand is
holy ground; surely we should put off our carnal distractions when we go about
holy duties. Gird up the loins of your minds, says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet.
1.13. an allusion to long garments worn in that Country, it is dangerous to come
to Prayer with a loose heart. My heart is fixed (says David) O God my heart is
fixed, Psalm. 57.7. that is, fitted, prepared, bended to Gods Worship, the Soul
must be set, put into a dexterous ready posture. Claudatur contra adversarium
pectus, and soli Deo pateat, ne ad se hostem Dei accedere tempore orationis
patiatur. Cyp. lib. De Oratione Domini. There must be a resolved shutting of
the heart against Gods enemy, lest he insinuate with us, and withdraw our minds.

5. Be severe to your purpose, and see that you regard nothing but what the
duty leads you unto, it is the Devils policy to che^t us of the present duty
by an unseasonable interposition, Satan begins with us in good things, that
he may draw us to worse, what is unseasonable is naught, watch against the
first diversion how plausible soever, it is an intruding thought that breaks a
rank; in this case say as the Spouse, Cant. 3. I charge you that you awake not
my Beloved till he please; such a rigid severity should you use against the
starting of the heart, if Satan should at first cast in a thought of
blasphemy, that would make thee quake and shake, therefore he begins with
plausible thoughts, but be careful to observe the first straglings, Est
praeterea optimum ad attendendum remedium si imagines rerum irruentes non solum
non advertas, non excutias, non examines, sed ita te habeas quasi eas non
aspicere digneris: nam ipsum ad vertere, and examinare istas cogitationes
evagari est: and jam adversarius aliquid a nobis extorsit etc. Jacobus Alvarez.
yea be not diverted by thy very strivings against diversions, and therefore do
not dispute with suggestions but despise them: nor stand examining temptations
but reject them, as blind Bartimeus regarded not the rebukes of the People, but
cried the more after Christ; or as Travelers do not stand beating back the
Dogs that bark at them, but hold on their course; this is to be religiously
obstinate, and severe to our purpose. Satan contemned has the less advantage
against you, when he is writing images upon the fancy, do not vouchsafe to look
upon them: A Crier in the Court that is often commanding silence, disturbeth
the Court more than they that make the noise; So disputing with our
distractions increases them, they are better avoided by a severe contempt.

6. Bring with you to every holy Service strong spiritual affections, our
thoughts would not be at such a distance from our work if our affections were
more ready and more earnestly set; it is the unwilling Servant that is loath to
stay long at his work, but is soon gone; could we bring our selves more
delightfully to converse with God, our hearts would hold our minds close, and
we would not straggle so often as we do, therefore see you do this, or you do
nothing. I was glad (says David) when they said unto me, come let us go into
the House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. Were we of this frame of spirit many
directions would not need. Now what should hinder us from being thus affected?
Are not the Ordinances of God the special means of our communion with him? And
the throne of grace, the very porch of heaven? Can we be better than in Gods
Company, pleading with him for our souls good, and waiting for his blessing?
Therefore let us be glad, and rejoice in his presence, and you will not easily
find such outstrayings of mind and thought.

7. Remember the weight and consequence of the duties of Religion; that is a
cure for slightness; you are dealing with God in a Case of life and death, and
will you not be serious? With what diligence and earnestness does an Advocate
plead with a man in a Case wherein he himself is not concerned, either for the
life of another, or the inheritance or goods of another, Si cum sublimi homine
non dicam pro vita, and salute nostra, sed etiam pro alicujus lucri commodo
supplicamus totam in cum mentus, and corporis aciem defigentes, de nutu ejus
trepida expectatione pendemus non mediocriter sormidantes, ne quid sort
ineptum and incongruum verbum misericordiam, audientis avertat? quanto magis
cum illi occultorum omnium cognitori pro imminenti perpetuae mortis periculo
supplicamus etc. Cassian Col. 23. c 7
and wilt not thou plead earnestly with God, when thy soul is in danger, when
it is a Case of Eternal life and death, as all matters that pass between God
and us are? Certainly, if we did consider the weight of the business, the heart
would be freed from this garish wantonness; if Christ had taken thee aside into
the Garden, as he took Peter, James and John, and thou had seen him praying
and trembling under his Agonies, thou would have seen that it is no light
matter to go to God in a case of the salvation of souls, though thou have never
so much assurance of the issue, for so Christ had; the frequent return of
Christian duties makes us to forget the consequence of them. In hearing the
Word be serious, it is your life, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Hearken unto the words of the
Law, for this is not a vain thing, because it is your life, thy everlasting
estate is upon trial, and the things that are spoken concern your souls, every
act of communion with God, every participation of his grace has an influence
upon Eternity; say therefore as Nehemiah in another case, Nehem. 6.3. I am
doing a great work I cannot come down. Can you have a heart to mind other
things when you are about so great a work as the saving of your souls?

8. Let every experimental wandering make you more humble and careful. If men
did lay their wanderings to heart, and retract them, even every glance with a
sigh, the mind would not so boldly, so constantly digress and step aside, all
actions displeasing are not done so readily, therefore it is good to bewail
these distractions, do not count them as light things; Haec omnia nonnullis qui
sunt crassioribus vitiis involuti levia, atque a peccato paene aliena videntur,
scientibus tamen perfectionis bonum etiam minimarum rerum multitudo gravissim^
est. Cassian Col. 23. cap 7.
Cassianus speaking of these wandering thoughts, says, The most that come to
worship, being involved in greater sins, scarce count distraction of thoughts
an evil, and so the mischief is increased upon them; It is a sad thing to be
given up to a vain mind, and such a frothy spirit as cannot be serious;
therefore if we do soundly humble our selves for these offenses, and they did
once become our burden, they would not be our practice; Hooker on Acts 2 37.
One says, that Huntsmen observe of young dogs, that if a fresh game come in
view, they leave their old sent, but if soundly beaten off from it, they kindly
take to their first pursuit; the application is easy, did we rate our hearts
for this vanity, and pray against the sins of our prayers with deep remorse,
this evil would not be so familiar with us.

9. A constant heavenliness and holiness of heart; if men were as they should
be, holy, (...), 1 Pet. 1.14. In all manner of conversation; In solemn duties,
good and proper thoughts would be more natural and kindly to us; they that live
in a constant communion with God, do not find it such a tedious business to
converse with him, if they have any excursion of thoughts it is in their daily
work, and the offices of the common life, which they are ever seasoning with
some gracious meditations and short ejaculations; When they are in duty they
are where they would be; constant gravity and seriousness is a great help to
them; Men allow themselves a lawless liberty in their ordinary conversations,
and then in Prayer they know not how to gather up their hearts; such as men are
out of prayer, such they will be in prayer; We cannot expect that pangs of
devotion should come upon us all of a sudden, and that when we come reaking
from the world, we should presently leap into a heavenly frame.

10. The next remedy is frequent solemn meditation; If the understanding were
oftener taken up with the things of God, and our thoughts were kept in more
frequent exercise, they would the better come to hand. There is a double
advantage comes to us by meditation.

1. The soul gets more abundance of heart-warming knowledge, and therefore will
not be so barren and dry, which certainly is a cause of wandering, Psalm. 45.1.
My heart inditeth a good matter, and then my tongue is as the pen of a ready
Writer; A man that boyleth and concocts truths in his heart has a greater
readiness of words and affections, There is a good treasure within him, Mat.
12.35. out of which he may spend freely; Gobbet of Prayer.
one expresses it thus: He that has store of gold and silver in his pocket,
and but a few Brass farthings, will more readily upon every draught come out
with gold and silver than brass farthings: So he that has stocked his heart
with holy thoughts will not find carnal musings so rife and frequent.

2. By use a man gets a greater command over himself; When we constantly leave
the thoughts at random, and never lay restraints upon them, it is in vain to
think we shall keep them in order when we please, fierce Creatures are tame to
those that use to command them; Every Art is difficult at first, as Writing,
Singing, Playing upon an Instrument, but we get a facility by use and exercise:
Yea, not only a facility, but a delight in them, and those things that at first
we thought impossible, by a little practice grow easy; Certainly, Pro. 11.29.
the way of the Lord is strength to the upright, and the more we set our selves
to any good thing, the more readily and prepared are we for it.

How must we in all things give Thanks?
1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God
concerning you.


THE more comprehensive any mercy or duty is, the greater they are.

There are three duties here together, which the Apostle exhorts to; all which
have a kind of universality annexed to them, of which my Text contains one.

Psalm. 126.6. Psalm. 97.21.
1. Rejoicing: We must rejoice evermore, for even holy mourning has the seed of
joy in it, which the soul finds by that time its over, if not in it.

Though not in the heretical sense of Euchi^e^ and Messaliens. Chrysostom. Orat. 2.
de orand. Deum.
2. Prayer: Pray without ceasing; We must be ever, at least, in a holy
disposition to this duty, when we do it not actually. "Prayer is the wall that
compasses the City, there must be no gap in it. "It is as the Sun in the
Firmament, it must always keep its round.

3. Thanksgiving: In every thing give thanks, etc.

Observe in the words these two parts: 1. A Duty enjoined. 2. A Reason annexed.


I. In the Duty note four things.

1. The matter of it, thanksgiving. 2. The object of it, implied, God. 3. The
performers of it, Believers, for to them he writes, 1 These. 1.1, 2, 3. 4. The
extent of it, in every thing. It is pleasing and acceptable unto God. Bez. in
locum.

Vel ista per anthypophoram dicta sunt. Id. ibidem.

Illud autem (...) referendum non ad gratiarum tantum actionem, sed and ad
preces. Grot. Annot. in locum. Comment. in 1 Ep. ad These. Doctr.



II. In the Reason we have three things.

1. The ground of the duty, it is the will of God, the revealed will of God,
the rule of all obedience.

2. The manner of declaring Gods will to us in this behalf, it is the will of
God in Christ Jesus; it is a Gospel duty, Christ Jesus was the Prophet and
Messenger of it, it is suitable to the mind of Christ, it is accepted of God in
Christ and for Christ. Lastly, Christ himself was a pattern of it, This is the
will of God in Christ Jesus.

3. The specially Application, This is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you.

Mr. Calvin does excellently show the sweet harmony between these three duties,
how one helps the other; but I cannot insist on that.

The lesson then which the holy Ghost would have us learn in the Text, is thus
sum'd up:

It is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning Christians, that in every
thing they give thanks, that they be thankful, as our word is more proper to
our purpose.

For though we have nothing of our own that good is to give God but thanks, yet
neither do we properly give him that, 1 Cor. 4.7. 1 Chro. 29.14. Philip. 2, 13.
seeing both our giving and the right manner of doing it, even in thanksgiving
is of the Lord.

Our continual praying shows that we are always beggars, and our continual
thanksgiving shows us always debtors. Our thanks then indeed is the rebound of
mercy heavenward whence it came, and a holy reflection of the warm sunbeams of
Gods benefits shining on us.

That which I principally aim at in the pursuance and pressing of this Truth,
is, not only to speak somewhat to it in the nature, necessity, and excellency
of it, but to the extent of it as a special Case, How Christians may be said to
give thanks in every thing, and why?

1. Who are properly concerned in this duty.

2. Why, and upon what grounds are Christians bound to give thanks in every
thing?

3. How, and in what manner are Christians to give thanks in every thing?

4. How in afflictions, and why?

5. How shall we bring our hearts to give thanks to God in every thing?

Who are, or ought to be thankful?

The Lord has a return and tribute of praise due to him from all creatures:
Psalm. 148.
David names animate and inanimate creatures, and bids them sing Hallelujah; as
if all the world were but one consort of musical Instruments tuned to Gods
glory. But he looks for it principally from men and Angels. From all men.

(...), Romans 1.20, 21. (...), etc.
It is charged as an inexcusable sin incapable of any Apology, upon natural men,
that when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful.

Upon which place Beza brings in Galen a heathen man, praising and blessing
God, not with sacrifices and sweet incense, but acknowledging and proclaiming
the Wisdom, Power, and goodness of God, etc. I write this, says he, as a
Hymn, and account it the true worship of that God.

The law of Thankfulness is written upon the hearts of very heathens, as may
be proved at large not only from Heathen instances, but Scripture also; as the
Philistims, when they had taken Sampson and killed Saul; Judge. 16.24. 1 Samuel
31.9. Dan. 5, 23.
and Belshazzar, who praised the gods of silver and gold, brass, iron, wood
and stone, etc. which although it be enough to shame unthankful Christians,
yet it signified little; for all wicked men though they have cause, yet they
have no heart to this work, at least not often, nor at all as it should be.

Some are so curious as to enquire whether reprobates in hell have not cause to
give thanks that their torments are less then the merit of their sins, and for
that the justice of God is glorified in the inflicting of them, but this is
foreign to our case.

The persons engaged, and most bound to this duty are the Thessalonians that
believed, and all the faithful upon the same account.

Now howbeit all the service we perform to God, both mediate and immediate
worship, Polanus.
the duties of both Tables, yea and the whole work of our Christian obedience
in a holy conversation, be but a return of thankfulness unto God, yet
Thanksgiving in the Text and Doctrine, Thankfulness described.
is taken more strictly for a particular part of Gods worship, distinct from
Prayer (of which he spoke immediately before) which sometimes includes praise
and thanks too, By which we render due praise to God for all or any of his
benefits promised or bestowed, and that with our hearts, Filliucius out of
Aquin We praise God for all his perfections, we thank God for his benefits.
lips and lives.

Some affirm that much of Religion is seen in piety to parents, observance to
our betters, and thankfulness to our benefactors. God is indeed all these to
us. Yet the proper notion of our thankfulness refers to God as our benefactor,
every benefit from God makes the receiver a debtor: thankfulness is rather the
confessing of our debt then the payment of it; and for as much as we are bound
always to be thankful, it does acknowledge we are always beholden to God,
and allwaies insolvent.

Now a child of God is bound to be thankful to God above all men, because, 1.
He is more competent then any other. 2. He is more concerned then any other.


I. More competent by acts of reason and grace too. All that the Scripture
speaks as to the duty of thankfulness, may be referred to these Heads.

1. To know and acknowledge the Lords mercies.

2. To remember them, i. e. to record and commemorate them.

3. To value and admire them.

4. To blaze and proclaim them.

In all which a gracious soul is much more competent then a mere natural man,
though endued with quick understanding, strong memory, and great eloquence.

For the Spirit of God has enlightened his soul, and taught him this lesson;
he is principled for it, he is a well tuned instrument; his heart boyleth with
good matter, and his tongue is as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1,
as David speaks on this occasion, when he spoke of the praises of the King, in
his Song of Loves.

This Spirit of God in a thankful soul, is as the breath of the Organ, without
which the pipes make no sound; yea as the breath of the Trumpetter by which the
Trumpet gives a certain and melodious sound.

This is it that makes that noble Evangelical spirit, yea that heavenly
Angelical spirit in Christians: See a place for it, Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20.
Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit,
speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns, etc. giving thanks always for all
things unto God and the Father in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: showing
that what wine does in Poets and good fellows, it makes them sing and roar out
Catches, by which they make music to the devil; so the Spirit of God in Saints
is the principle of all true thankfulness and holy joy toward God; and indeed
there was a very gracious frame of spirit this way in Primitive Christians.

II. More concerned, as h^^ing received more then others; to whomsoever much is
given, of them much is required, Luke 12.48.
a proportion of duty according to the degree of every portion of mercy;
whether you consider what is given, or what is forgiven you.

There are two things which every gracious soul will acknowledge; No man (says
he) in the world has deserved less of God than I, and none has received more
of God than I, how much then am I concerned to be thankful?

I have read of a holy man, that was seen once standing still with tears in his
eyes, and looking up to heaven, and being asked by one that passed by why he
did so, said, I admire the Lords mercy to me that did not make me a Toade, that
Vermin being then casually at his feet.

The least common mercy affects a gracious soul, that knows his desert nothing
but misery. 2 Samuel 9 8.
Mephibosheth bowed himself and said, What is thy servant that thou should
look upon such a dead dog as I am. When David had told him he should have his
Lands, and eat bread at his Table. When the Lord spares our lives, and gives us
common mercies, we must admire and adore his goodness.

And this leads me to the second general Question.

Why, and upon what grounds Christians are bound to give thanks in every thing?

It is the will of God in Christ Jesus.

The will of God in Christ Jesus is the clearest Rule, and the highest
Obligation to any soul for the performance of any duty. O that men would now
adays study more, act by and hold fast to this rule: And ask conscience in the
performance of every duty, is this the will of God in Christ Jesus?

It was meet that this duty of thankfulness should be pressed and practiced under
the Gospel, because it argue; a spiritual and noble frame of Soul, the highest
pitch of grace, which is a true Gospel frame.

David under the Old Testament had a New Testament heart in this particular;
his Psalms, which were all penned upon emergent occasions, are all Tehillah and
Tephillah, Prayer and Praise; his Heart and Harp were so tuned to the Praises
of God, to Psalms of Degrees, to Hallelujahs, that some have thought the Lord
is praised with those Psalms in Heaven.

Zach. 12.8. Greg. Hom. 20. in Ezekiel.
Yet is it promised under the Gospel, that he that is feeble shall be as David;
which some understand as to Praise and Thanksgivings, upon the account of
Gospel grace.

More punctually, this is the will of God in Christ Jesus, i. e. Jesus Christ
shows us the duty of thankfulness both by Pattern, and by Precept, for he was
not only usherd into the World with Songs of Thanksgiving by Angels, Luke 1.46,
68. Luke 2.13, 14, 20, 29.
by Zachary, by Mary, by Simeon, by the Shepherds, etc. but the Lord Jesus
himself was a great Pattern and President of Thankfulness all his life long,
and in this also was a true Son of David: He thanked God frequently and
fervently, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, Matthew. 11.25.
and have revealed them unto babes, when his Disciples preached, and cast out
devils.

Thus also when he raised Lazarus, Father, Joh. 11.41.
I thank thee that thou have heard me.

When he was to eat common bread, Mark 8.6. Luke 22.19.
he blessed it with giving of thanks. Much more, consecrated bread.

Thus was he a Pattern of thankfulness, he did in every thing give thanks.

In like manner we find him reproving the nine Lepers for their unthankfulness,
which shows that he held out thankfulness as a duty, Luke 17.16, 17.
personally he gave a Pattern and Precept for it.

Now though this were enough to show it, the will of God in Christ Jesus, yet
these words reach further; namely, to show that is the strain of the Gospel in
the Apostles Doctrine and Practice, for they through their Commission, and the
great measure of Gods Spirit in them declared the will of God in Christ Jesus,
They worshipped, Luke 24. ult.
and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the Temple,
praising and blessing God. Amen.

What the Apostle Paul's spirit was in this (by whom so much of the will of God
in Christ Jesus is revealed and penned) I need not rehearse, for all his
Epistles breath out the praises of Gods grace.

Thanks and Praise is the homage we owe to God for all we have and are,
Therefore in every thing to be rendered.

We live precariously, and at mercy; Act. 17.28. 1 Cor. 15.10.
by the grace of God we are what we are. God in his sovereignty might have left
us in the womb of nothing, and never made us, and have crushed us into nothing
as soon as he made us, for has not the Potter power over his Clay? Romans 9.
Every moment we depend on him, and hold all from him, his power over us is
arbitrary and infinite; to this sovereign God we owe all, and therefore our
thanks, Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again,
Romans 11.35, 36. Dan. 5.25.
for of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen. For not considering this Belshazzar smarted, The God in whose hands
thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified. The birds
that lift up their bills, at every drop they take, may mind us of this duty.
Common and constant mercies deserve special thanks, because constant.

3. Christians must give thanks in every thing, because they have spiritual
mercies innumerable and invaluable superadded to common mercies, special and
spiritu^l mercies in Christ Jesus, Blessed be God who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3, etc.
Blessed be God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope through the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, to an inheritance incorruptible, etc. Blessed be God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3.
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all
our tribulation, etc.

Papists distinguish grace into grace freely given, and grace that makes men
grateful to God the giver of grace, Gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum
faciens, Bellarm. Valentia, etc.
this distinction is idle and untrue, for all grace as freely given obliges us
to be grateful, but yet special grace binds us to a more special gratitude;
namely, sanctifying and saving grace.

The decreeing and sending of Jesus Christ to and for poor sinners, the opening
a fountain of grace in and by him, the making and ratifying a Covenant of
grace, whereof the Lord Jesus is the Angel and Mediator, The precious promises
both absolute and conditional thereupon, with all other choice Gospel
Privileges of grace and glory, as far as Gods alsufficiency, and the infinite
merit, satisfaction, and righteousness of the Son of God can teach, this
deserves a suitable proportion of thanks and blessing from us both here and in
heaven. Psalm. 63.3. Meiosis.
Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee. i.
e. I will render special and continual praise for this above all other things.

How, and in what manner Christians are to give thanks in every thing.

Act and the Object both. 1. That is, how a man can always have his heart and
tongue exercised unto this duty.

2. If he could be supposed to do this, yet it seems that every thing is not a
fit subject matter of Thanksgiving: For a great part of our life being sin and
misery, which is rather the ground of mourning than of thanksgiving, our
thankfulness seems to be restrained to a narrower sphere than what the Text
holds out.

First, Can a Child of God in any sense give thanks for sin? Answ. No, not
properly: Because,

Ezekiel. 5.11.
1. That which is the ground of detestation cannot be the ground of
thanksgiving; but sin is a detestable thing.

Gal. 3.10.
2. That which produces a Curse, cannot properly cause blessing; but sin is a
cursed thing.

Romans 6.5.
3. As we may not sin that grace may abound, nor do evil that good may come of
it, so sin cannot be the ground of thanksgiving, being contrary to the Honor,
Image, and Will of God.

4. Sin is none of Gods Creatures, Deus non est author, sed ultor peccati.
therefore a plague and not a benefit, therefore the subject of sorrow and
shame, not of thanks.

Nevertheless improperly, by accident, occasionally and consequentially (as men
speak) sin is a ground of thanksgiving. How? That the Lord by his unlimited
power can so master sin, and by his infinitely wise providence can so permit,
dispose of, and bound sin, and by his free grace pardon sin. Yea, make grace
superabound, where sin did abound, fetching light out of darkness, and make
great sinners become great Saints, and from all lay a foundation, and raise a
revenue of infinite glory to himself, this is praiseworthy in God.

Now as Pilate and Herod, Judas and Jews are not to be praised for their
treachery and cruelty against Christ, although they did, by all they did,
fulfill and execute Gods Decrees in that behalf, Act. 4.27, 28.
so no man must thank sin, or God for sin, albeit God has extracted Treacle
out of this Viper.

Wherefore when we read of a holy man that said, He was more beholding to his
corruptions than to his gifts and graces, because the former made him humble,
the latter made him proud. Or when we hear another cry out, O felix culpa, etc.
Oh happy sin of our first Parents, happy Tree of Knowledge, that bore such
fruit, that brought forth such a Promise, such a Savior, etc. I say, when we
he^r such Rhetorical strains as these from the Devour, Ancients, or Moderns, we
must understand them warily.

Yet when the Lord does demonstrate the glory of his Attributes in overruling
and pardoning sin, to the salvation of poor sinners, there is reason we should
magnify him to the height.

1. Because all the dishonor which God has in the World is upon the account
of sin.

2. Because we our selves having dishonored him much that way, it is meet we
adore and admire him the more in the power of his grace, that can fetch a Pearl
out of this dunghill, and by such a foil set off his glory.

Let us then, as many as profess to be made partakers of this grace, speak good
of the Lord for it, and give others occasion so to do, as the Romans did to
Paul; God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin: Romans 6.17.
but ye have obeyed from the heart the Form of Doctrine which was delivered
you, i. e. That ye were once sinners, and are now Saints.

2. Come we then from Moral evil, to Penal evil; that is, if we may not give
thanks properly for sin, without sin; whether may we give thanks for crosses
and calamities.

rationem beneficii sed supplicii, they are not benefits but punishments.

But whereas the Lord has so ordered that all things shall work together for
good to them that are good, and crosses, are some of those things, they are
hereby sanctified and become the matter of thanksgiving to a child of God.

And this was that noble primitive frame of spirit among Christians: under what
providence soever, dark or light, sweet or sour, they were thankful in all:
always thankful.

St. Augustine upon the 132 Psalm commends that ancient custom among
Christians, Aug. Epist. 77. Quid melius and animo geramus, and ore promamus,
and calamo exprimamus, quam deo gratias? hoc nec dici brevius, nec audiri
latius. nec intelligi grandius, nec agi fructuosius potest, Deo gratias. --
in whose mouths you should always hear these words, Deo gratias, thanks be to
God, when they met and saluted one another, Deo gratias, God be thanked, when
they heard any tidings, of persecution or protection, favor or frown, gain or
loss, cross or comsort, still Deo gratias, the Lord be thanked; at which
custom the Circumcellians pick quarrels, but St. Austine defends it as
laudable and religious; what says he, shall brethren in Christ not give God
thanks when they see one another? What better thing can we speak, or think, or
write, than this? God be thanked; nothing can be more compendiously spoken, nor
more gladly heard, nor more solemnly understood, nor more profitably acted,
then this, God be thanked. Thus he. Such a frame of heart had holy Job, the
Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Psalm. 34.1. On Psalm. 115. (...), etc. Hieron.
And such a one was in the sweet singer of Israel, I will bless the Lord at all
times. -- Notable is that of Chrysostom; there is nothing (says he) nothing
we can study more pleasing to God, than to be thankful, not only in good days,
but when things likewise fall out cross; this is the best Sacrifice and
oblation we offer God; of a like spirit was famous Mr. Bradford Martyr,
speaking of Queen Mary, at whose cruel mercy he then lay. If, said he, she will
release me, I will thank her, if she will imprison me I will thank her, if she
will burn me I will thank her, etc. So says a believing Soul, let God do with
me what he will, I will be thankful. --

This made one of the Ancients to say, it is peculiar to Christians to give
thanks in adversity. To praise God for benefits, this Jew and Gentile can do;
but to give God thanks in dangers according to the Apostles sense, and in
miseries, and always to say blessed be God, this is the highest pitch of
Virtue; for a true Christians language is this, I cannot tell how I should
suffer less, these things are but little to my sins, I deserve much more at the
Lords hands; here is your Christian, such a one takes up his cross, and follows
his Savior: no loss or cross can dishearten him, but as the Poet says, if the
World break and fall about his ears, he would not be afraid. Thus St. Hieron.

By whom it should seem, that to give God thanks for crosses and afflictions is
(...) to be numbered among those singular things which Christians are bound to
excel in beyond Heathens and Publicans, as to love enemies, to bless them that
curse, etc. to which our Savior exhorts, and commands. Matthew. 5.


Papists indeed tell us they are Counsels and not Commands, and therefore
required only of perfect ones in order to merit, and supererrogation, which is
a blasphemous fancy; those duties, and so this of thankfulness, in every thing
is required of every Christian, virtute precepti, this is the will of God
concerning you, says my Text.

Why and how do we give thanks in and for afflictions.

I. We must give thanks for good, afflictions are not evil but good: Psalm.
119.67, 68, 71. Biel and others.
David tells you so, and wherein, which every child of God also finds. To this
agrees that of the Schools, that crosses are not evil, but good.

1. Because inflicted by the Lord who is the chief good.

2. Because suffered by the Lord Jesus, who is the chief good.

3. They conform us to the Lord, who is the chief good.

4. They prepare us for communion with the Lord in Heaven, which is our chief
good; therefore be thankful for crosses.

II. We must thank God for every token of his Fatherly love; Heb. 12.6.
but now crosses and troubles are such Fatherly love tokens. Whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives; therefore give
thanks for them, as well for the rod, as for bread.

This is thank-worthy, this is acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20.
God will thank us for suffering patiently, therefore we must thank him for
inflicting it as a tender Father on beloved sons.

Would you be counted bastards? Alexander cashiered one of his name that would
not fight; Et cum blandiris pater es, and cum caedis pater es. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
the Eagle is said to cast off those young ones that cannot bear the sight of
the Sun; and some Germans counted such children spurious brats that could not
swim: So our Heavenly Father will never own them for his children that will not
submit to his rod, and kiss it too. Lord when thou stroakest and when thou
strikest thou art alike a Father, says St. Austin.

III. The Lord by afflicting his People does prevent sin, and purge it.
Therefore give thanks for it, for th^s is good, because it frees us from the
greatest evil.

2 Cor. 12.7.
1. He prevents sin by it, lest (says Paul) I should be exalted above measure,
there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me.

2. He purges sin by it; by this (says the Prophet) shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged. Isa. 27. Chrysostom.


Now do we not thank and pay the Surgeon, that lets out our bad blood, that
launceth our festred sores, that cuts out our proud and rotten flesh? yes
surely we do thank him; do we not also thank the Physician, that keeps us to a
strickt diet, confines us to our chamber, gives us bitter pills and potions, and
crosses our appetites? yes we do thank him, for hereby he cures a disease,
defends and preserves both our health and life.

Now what else I beseech you does the Lord do more or less by all that we
suffer at his hands, and does not he deserve our thanks, as well as the
Physician and Surgeon?

When we are vexed and pinched, then ought we more especially to give the Lord
thanks, who as a most indulgent Father will not suffer our corruptions to
spread further, Lib. 5. de just. cap. 23.
but represses and corrects them by severe strokes and scourges: says
Lactantius.

Prove. 23.14.
Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not dye: thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his Soul
from Hell. (...). Naz. (...) Exodus 15.26. Tuto, cito, sine dolor.
O blessed rod that can do this! Gods rod does it surely. Then it is better to
go to Gods house of correction, than to the place of torment; happy children
then who have the Lord for their Father and for their Physician; this he takes
for one of his eminent titles, the Lord thy Physician, Exodus 15.26. he does it
skilfully, easily, safely, quickly, thoroughly, according to all the properties
of the best Artists, therefore thank him.

IV. We must thank the Lord for afflicting us, and for laying the cross upon
us, because it is so far below what we deserve at his hands. What is a drop of
Wormwood sweetened, to the gall of bitterness? to the Lake of fire and
brimstone? hear what Zophar tells Job: O that God would speak, and open his
lips against thee, and that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom, Job 11.5,
6.
that they are double to that which is! know therefore, that God exacteth of
thee less than thine iniquity deserves.

The like says holy Ezra; and then surely we have much more cause to say so;
and is not this ground of thankfulness. If thou suffer a thousand evils, thou will never suffer what thou meritest, (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 41.1. Cord
Gregorium lib. 2. in Ezekiel. Hom. 16.
says that Father.

Jesus Christ drunk off the dreggy part of the cup for us; we do but as it were
sip for fashion, that we may seem to pledge, for to drink as he drunk it we
cannot, we need not, Matthew. 20.22.

Thank God then that thou have so little a share of it, when all was thy
portion by right and justice; this is thank worthy.

V. We must give thanks in every thing, even in and for afflictions, under the
rod and cross, because thereby the Lord does discipline us, and learns us much
which else we never would have learned.

By this David learned Gods Commandments, Ps. 119.71, 72.
and they became dearer to him than thousands of gold and silver.

By this the Lord opens the ear to discipline, says Elihu; Job 36.8, 9, 10 The
Cross teaches more the way to heaven, then all the Sermons of the Doctors.
Taulerus.
even when men are bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction: then
he shows them their work, and their transgression that they have exceeded: he
opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that they return from
iniquity. For as wax unless it be heated and softened takes no impression of
the Seal; so no man unless exercised with much affliction will receive the
prints of divine wisdom.

The word commonly used by the Holy Ghost in the New Testament for chastize,
(...). Heb. 12. Luke 23 22.
signifies properly to teach a child as a Schoolmaster or Father with a rod;
this is Gods way of teaching, and the best Scholars in Christ's College have
come by their learning this way, Lam. 3.27. Multa tulit, fecitque puer,
sudavit, and alsit
it is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth; by this the Poet
says, wise Ulysses was trained up. We use to say, they are usually the best
Scholars that have bought their learning dearest. I am sure this is the
choicest Saints Accademy.

VI. Give thanks in and for afflictions because hereby the Lord fits us for
Heavenly glory.

Saints are called vessels of mercy prepared unto glory; Romans 9.20. Sub malleo
premitur aurum tunsionibus, ut vas fabricetur magni precii: Sic veluti sub
malleo sunt justi, premunturque laboribus, ut fiant vasa magnae gloriae.
Gerhardus. Act 14.32.
but how do men make, and prepare vessels? if it be a vessel of earth, the
Potter beats the clay to make it well tempered, then he moulds it on the
wheel, then he bakes it in the oven, and then it is fit for use.

If it be a vessel of wood, it has many a turn and many a cut, before it is fit.

If it be a vessel of gold or silver, it has both heats and knocks before it
be complete.

So must every vessel of mercy be served before it be fit for glory; we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. Thus the Apostle Peter
tells us also, that the trial of our Faith being much more precious than gold,
1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Crux est coticula fidei. Hieron Cant. 4.16.
will be found to the praise and glory of God; for the cross is the whetstone
of Faith, and all other Grace, setting an edge and luster upon it; it is the
awakening of the North wind and South wind, to make these spices flow.

Aug. in Psa. 26.
The stone that is most hewed, cut, carved, and polished is usually set in the
chiefest part of the building. So are suffering Saints prepared for the highest
degrees of Glory.

For these are prepared the aureolae, those additional flowers and ornaments
that all shall not partake off say the Schools.

Rev. 20.4.
Those only that were beheaded or slain for the witness of Jesus, reigned with
Christ a thousand years. So that it may be said of the Lords sufferers, Psalm.
68.13.
as David speaks, though ye have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as the
wings of a Dove covered with silver, and her feathers with gold. This may be
truly said, when the Lord shall charge our vile bodies, and fashion them like
to his glorious body.

Genesis 48.14. ut intelligeremus benedictionem non nisi per crucem haberi posse.
Tert. de Bapt. cap. 8.
Notable and curious is that of Tertullian upon Jacobs blessing the two sons of
Joseph with his hands a cross (which is granted by all) de cussatis manibus)
that he might bless Ephraim the youngest with the blessing of the firstborn,
that we might know no blessing comes to us more kindly and properly than by the
cross; therefore give thanks in and for thy afflictions.

VII. It is a very high privilege for a Christian to be conformed to Christ,
Oportet nos crucifigi cum crucifixo, ut glorificemur cum glorificato. Macar,
hom. 12. Phil. 3.10. Romans 8.29.
to be Conformists to Christ, is to be nonconformists to the World, Romans 12.2.
but now what does more conform us unto Christ than the Cross? therefore give
thanks for it. That I may know the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death. This is part of that excellent knowledge for which he
accounted all other worldly privileges but dung. To this conformity in
afflictions unto Christ we are predestined. This Privilege appears in verse
17. If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together.

Luke 24.26. Christus prius ipse bibit potionem quam suis paravit. Bern. parv.
Sermon. Luth. in Exodus cap. 15.
This way Christ entr'd into glory. Ought not Jesus to have suffered these
things, and so to have entered into glory? now if we will enter with him, we
must follow after him, how? by taking up his Cross.

Christ like a good Physician first tasted the medicine that he gave his
Patient. The Cross of Christ sweetens our sufferings in the bitterness of them:
as that piece of wood sweetened the waters of Marah, being cast into them.

Therefore John wrote to the Saints as partakers together of a great
privilege, Rev. 1.9. verse. 3.
when he said, Companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of
Jesus Christ.

Then never hope to go another way than the Captain of our salvation has led
us, for if we baulk his track we are lost, Aug. in Psa. 52.
must we not then give thanks for affliction that conforms us to our head?

VIII. The Cross is a Christians banner, his honor, and the special favor of
the Lord toward him, therefore be thankful for it.

Let not this seem a riddle or paradox, Phil. 1.^.
I have you (says the Apostle) in my heart, for as much as in my bonds and in
the defense of the Gospel, ye are all partakers of my grace; where by grace
many understand, a special act of Gods favor to him and them, wherewith they
were to account themselves highly graced.

Hence he says again a little after, verse. 29. Utrumque ostendit dei donum,
quia utrumque dicit esse donatum. Aug. Velasquez in locum. Phil. 2. 1 Pet. 4.14.
to you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to believe, but also to
suffer for his sake. This he accounts a peculiar gift of God to them, whereof
but few in comparison do partake.

Hence says one upon that place, it is a most noble, yea and almost divine
thing to suffer for the Lord Jesus.

For the Lord gave Christ himself on this very account a name above every name.
Mark what the Apostle Peter says, If ye be reproached for the name of Christ
happy are you, for the Spirit of God and of glory rests on you.

Which words must be understood emphatically the highest manifestation, and
operation of the Spirit of God. (...) The Spirit, per He emphaticum.
Gods Spirit manifests it self variously in several subjects, but in
sufferers for Christ the very Spirit and quintessence of glory seems to be
extracted and poured on thee.

Upon all these accounts and many more such, we are to thank God for crosses,
and corrections, because the good of them does flow from Gods goodness, not
from their nature.

When the Horseleech by the Physicians direction sucks our blood, and thereby
performs a cure, the Horseleech is not to be thanked, but the Physician for his
application. So the Lord can make the bloody persecutors of his people to be
instruments of good to his people, no thanks to them but to him for it.

How shall a Christian bring his heart to this holy and heavenly

Hearken to these few directions, and lay them up in your hearts,

I. Pray earnestly for the Spirit of God; Canticum novum and vetus homo male
concordant. Aug.
without that Spirit thou can never pray or praise God duly, because not
spiritually; none can sanctify the Lord God in his heart (which is the first
Principle of this work) but he whose heart the Lord God has sanctified.

The Holy Spirit breathing in a man, makes him a living Organ tuned to and
sounding out his praise.

Psalm. 33.1.
Praise is comely for the upright, but as uncomely in a carnal mouth as a Jewel
in a swine snowt.

Non musica cordul^ sed cor, Non clamans sed amans cantat in aure dei. 1 Cor.
14.15. I will sing with the Spirit.
The pompous dresses and melodious quires of magnificats without the Spirit of
God breathing among them, is but as a sounding brass and a tinckli^g cymbal.

For indeed without the Spirit of God in men, they neither can not will
remember the Lords mercyes, nor consider them, nor value them, nor be affected
with them, nor blaze the praise of them. The dead says David do not praise
thee; dead hearts produce dead works, it is the Spirit that quickens.

II. Labor to get a continual quick sight and sense of sin: this will make
thee sensib^e of every mercy, and thankful for it. So the provocation, and
merit of sin is nothing but curses, death and wrath being due to it, that yet
thou should be so tenderly spared, and instead of miseries should enjoy
blessings, how should thou be affected with this, Genesis 32.10. per Psalmos. 1 Timothy 1.12, ad 17. Invitat ad magna, qui gratante^ accipit modica. Cassiod.
Anima immersa sanguini Christi aurea reddi^ur, ut manus in aurum liquefactum
injecta deauratur. Chrysostom. Psalm. 111.9.
as Mephibosheth was with David's kindness to him; an humble broken heart is
the most thankful heart, this was most eminent in the most eminent Saints, 1
Jacob, 2 David, 3 Paul, etc.

He that knows he has forfeited all, knows he deserves nothing but the reward
of that forfeiture, which is wrath; and he that deserves nothing, thanks God
for every thing, even for the least drop, and crumb.

III. Behold every mercy coming to thee in the stream of Christ's blood, and
through the Covenant of Grace; this gives the mercy both an estimate and a
relish; this does both sanctify it, and sweeten it, and sublimate it; a crust
of brown bread coming thus, is better then a purse full of gold another way; as
that Kings kiss to one friend, was said to be better gold, than a cup of gold
which he gave another friend.

He sent redemption to his people, he remembered his Covenant for ever, holy and
reverend is his name. The deliverance there was in David's account, and that
truly the more thank worthy, as being upon a covenant account, for thus every
mercy is a token of the Lords favor to his favorite; it is that which makes
common mercies to become special mercies.

Non tam, beneficium, sed ratio beneficii attend^n^a est.
Carnal men, so they enjoy mercies, they mind not which way they come in, so
they can but have them; but a child of God knows that every thing that comes
through Christ's hands is the better for it, and tastes the sweeter by far.

IV. Look on thy mercies as answers to thy Prayers, and bless the Lord for them
on that account; for that is double mercy.

1. That God has inclined and directed thine heart to beg such a mercy; for
this is a special act of the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.26, 27.

2. That he has answered such Prayers, for this is a sign he accepts thee in
Christ. Many blessings come in unasked for, and unlooked for: yet these require
thankfulness.

But when the Lord is inquired of for the things we have, and does grant them
to us, this is a blessing, upon his own institution, and a seal to his promise;
hear David, Psa 66.16, 17.
Come near (says he) and I will tell you what he has done for my Soul, I
cried to the Lord and he was extolled with my tongue; as if he had said, this
was a signal favor for the Lord to grant what I petitioned him for, and
therefore deserves a special acknowledgement.

For this Hanna calls her son Samuel, i. e. asked of God; 1 Samuel 1.20. Genesis
29.33.
and Leah calls her second son, Simeon, i. e. hearing, because God heard her
Prayer for him.

And Rachel called her son Nepthali, i. e. wrestling, Genesis 39.8.
because she wrestled for him; now as Samuels should be Lemuels, i. e.
dedicated to God, so all our mercies we get by Prayer, should be the more
solemnly dedicated to the Lord by thanksgiving, and such a frame of a thankful
heart is a spiritual frame.

V. When any of Gods dealings do either draw us or drive us nearer to God, this
is a special mercy. When we consider that well, we cannot but be greatly
affected with it, and will be accordingly thankful for the mercy, or the
dispensation is thereby the more merciful: mercies are drawing cords,
afflictions are whipcords, to drive us; by both we are brought nearer to God,
thank him.

If the chief Shepherd hunt us together, and keep us from straggling, and bring
us under command, this is a mercy to Christ's sheep. If the Lord hedge up our
ways with thorns that we cannot find our lovers, Hos. 2.6. verse. 8, 9.
this is a mercy.

And if the Lord recover his mercies from us, that in the want of them we may
know he was the Founder and Fountain of them, this is a mercy.

When Absalom burnt Joab's corn, it was to make Joab (who before that kept off)
come to him. Amos 4:6, to v. 12.
So all the angry dispensations of God toward his children are that they
return to him.

That storm that sinks and splits some ships, drives others faster into the
Haven. So do the troubles of this World make a true Christians voyage toward
Heaven, the speedier.

VI. That Soul that is truly, and spiritually thankful, will so order his
whole conversation, that God may have the glory of it. This the Psalmist who
was well skild in this Art, seems to point at often. Who so offers praise
glorifieth me, Psalm. 50.23.
and to him that orders his conversation aright will I show the Salvation of
God.

We cannot better glorify God than by a well-ordered conversation, this is in
every thing to give thanks indeed. So likewise in praise the Lord, Psa. 106.1,
2, 3.
Hallelujah: O give thanks to the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever. There is 1. The Doxology. 2. Invitation. 3. The Reason, that we
should, and why we should give thanks always.

But who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord, who can show forth all his
praise, i. e. it is impossible for any man in the world to do this great duty
aright, and as he should; Blessed are they that keep judgment, that do
righteousness at all times; As if he had said, This indeed is a vast duty, but
yet he makes the best essay toward it, that sets himself constantly to serve
God and keep his Commandments.

Now this no man can do neither perfectly, but only by the merits and in the
strength of Christ, he making it the desire of his soul to serve the Lord it is
accepted, though endeavors fall short, and therefore is pronounced blessed.

James 1.25.
For to be a doer of the work by Evangelical obedience makes him blessed in his
deed; labor then to bless the Lord, not only in words, but in deed, and you
shall be blessed.

VII. If we would offer thanks to the Lord acceptably, Let us do it in the name
of the Lord Jesus. Thus are we directed by the Spirit of God. Ephesians. 5.20.


Per eundem est decursus beneficiorum and recursus. Rev. 8.3, 4. Heb. 13.15.
1. Because all mercy comes to us by him.

2. Because nothing is accepted but in him.

3. Because it is one part of his Priestly Office to receive the Prayers and
Praises of the Saints in his golden Censer upon the golden Altar, with much
incense. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name. Alluding
to that of the Prophet, Hos. 14.2.
who calls it, The calves of our lips; that through Christ's propitiatory
Sacrifice our Eucharistical Sacrifices are accepted, and that we must offer
these under the Gospel continually jugiter; Juge sacrificium.
Alluding to the daily Sacrifice, now this must needs sanctify our service,
because the Altar sanctifies the Gift, and therefore mention is made of a
golden Altar in this case.

Is it the Will of God in Christ Jesus that in every thing we give thanks?

1. Those that in nothing will give thanks, at no time, for no mercy; these are
swine that devour all that drops from the Tree of Gods bounty, and never look
up whence it comes. These are worse than the Ox and Ass that know their
Owners and Masters cribs. Isa. 1. Per raro grati homines reperiuntur. Cicero.
These are mere Heathens, who though they profess they know God, yet do not
glorify him as God, nor are thankeful. These are like Buckets that run
greedily down into the Well when they are empty with open mouth, but when they
be full they turn their hinder part upon the Well that filled them. Thus do
unthankful men call greedily for mercies, and when God has filled them, they
turn the back, and not the face.

2. Another kind of unthankful men is that sort, who having received mercies
from God arrogate the honor of them to themselves.

Let Papists and Pelagians, old and new, who attribute more to free will than
to grace, which the one makes the root of merits, the other gives the casting
of the scale in man's conversion to it; let these see how by such Principles
they can acquit themselves from the crime of Sacrilegious ingratitude, for they
rob God of his glory; and then let them hear not me, but Saint Austine
thundering against them, O Lord, Soliloq. cap. 15. Qui de bono suo, o Domine,
gloriam sibi quaerit, and non tibi, hic sur est and latro, and similis diabolo,
etc. Hab. 1.15, 16. Dan. 4.30.
he that assumes the glory of any good he has to himself, and ascribes it not
to thee, that man is a thief, and a robber, and like the devil, who robs
thee of thy Glory.

Thus also they who attribute their Riches, Children, Honors, Victories,
Health, Safety, Knowledge, etc. to their Wits, Labors, Merits, these are
ungrateful robbers of God.

Thus they burnt Incense to their Drag, and Yarn.

Thus Nebuchadnezzar gloried in the great Babel of his own building.

Thus the Assyrian also ranted, and vaunted himself, Isa. 10 13, 14, 15.
as if by his own great Wisdom and Valor he had conquered the Nations.

But mark the end of these men: How the Lord took it, and how he dealt with
them for it; He turned Nebuchadnezzar out to grass among the beasts; He kindled
a fire in the Assyrians Forest, and burnt it; He struck Herod that he was
eaten up with worms, because he gave himself, Act. 12.23.
and not God, the glory.

3. Another sort of unthankful ones there is, that seem to be very thankful,
but it is only complementally, and with the lip. These are like Apes that eat
up the Kernel, and leave God the shells; they care not to go to the cost of a
heart, or a life-thankfulness; they are cursed hypocrites, they put him off
with the blind and the lame in Sacrifice, Mal. 1.14.
and never once give him the Male of their Flock. God will pay them in their
own coin; they are thankful in jest, and God will damn them in earnest.

Lact Instit. c. 3. Non constare homini ratio pietatis potest, etc
That man (says Lactantius) cannot be a godly man, that is unthankeful to his
God. Materialiter per connotationem, and adhaerentiam.
And Aquinas says, That unthankefulness has in it the root and matter of all
sin: For it denies or dissembles the goodness of God, by which we live, move,
and have our being, yea, and all our blessings, the thankful acknowledgement
whereof is our indispensable homage unto God.

Unthankfulness was a huge ingredient into Adams sin: To sin against his Maker
as soon as he was made: Yea, by whom he was so fearfully and wonderfully made
little lower than the Angels. Psalm. 139.


Unthankfulness was the sin of Noah and Lot after their deliverances, the one
from water, Genesis 9. Genesis 19. Deuteronomy. 32. Ezekiel. 16. per totum.
the other from fire.

The sin of Israel, that forgot their Rock, their husband that found them in
the waste howling wilderness, and when they lay in their blood; no eye pitying
them, cast out to the loathing of their persons.

The sin of David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9.

The sin of Solomon, 1 Kin. 11.9.

The sin of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.

Peremptoria res est ingratitudo, hostis gratiae, inimica salutis. Bern. Sermon
1. de 7 miser. Ingratitudo est venius urens, and exsiccans fontem gratiae,
fluenta misericordiae. Idem.
The great sin of the Gospel is unthankfulness, by sinning against the light,
love, free grace, and rich patience of God in it; this is to turn his grace
into watonness; to prefer darkness before light, to neglect so great salvation,
not to come under Christ's wing when he calls to us, to despise his goodness and
long-suffering, leading to repentance, not to come to him that we may have
life; to resist his Spirit, and trample on his blood.

The sin of the greatest sinners in the Book of God is unthankfulness.

The sin of the Angels that kept not their first station; The sin of Cain in
his offering; The sin of the Sodomites.

Quousque se diffundit gratia, to patet ingratitudo.
The sin of the Old World; The sin of Saul; The sin of Jeroboam the son of
N^bat; The sin of Nabal; The sin of Hanun; The sin of Judas; The sin of Julian;
And of Antichrist, all is unthankfulness.

Exhort.
I shall conclude with a solemn exhortation to all that hear this word, and
profess the Lord Jesus, and to be ruled by the Will of God in Christ Jesus
revealed, that they study and practice this great, this comprehensive duty of
thankefulness. Consider, that no People in the world have such cause of
thankfulness as Christians: Cresentibus donis crescunt donorum rations. Deuteronomy.
32.6.
They have received more mercy than any, therefore there is the more of them
required, therefore the Lord takes their unkin^ness the more unkindly. Sins
against m^rcy will turn mercy into cruelty, and patience into fury.

To be unthankful to a bountiful God, is for a froward child to beat his
mothers breasts that gave him suck, and to kick his Fathers bowels.

The Lord, that he might upbraid his Peoples ingratitude, compares them to a
Bullock that was fatted in good pasture, and then kicked. Deuteronomy. 32.15. to Ver.
25. And what this cost you may read there.

When the Lord would preserve in his People the memorial of his mercies see how
he orders them: Deuteronomy. 26.1, to 10.
Every man was to come with a basket of fruits, and the Priest was to take it,
and set it down before the Lord, and he that brought it was to make a solemn
confession of his own poverty and wretchedness, of Gods goodness and
faithfulness to him, and of his engagements to the Lord for the same. Hereby,
the Lord let them know that they had all from him, and held all at mercy, and
this was their homage that they paid him. Oh what shall we then render to the
Lord for all his benefits? Who were Syrians ready to perish, who with our
staff past this Jordan, and now are two bands; who have not only nether
springs, but upper also, the Lord having opened a fountain and a treasure for
us.

Think of this all you Malcontents and murmurers, read over your mercies,
preserve a Catalogue of them, compare them with what othe^s enjoy. It is not
with you as with Heathens, you have the Gospel, if it totters, as if it were in
a moving posture, from you, thank your unthankfulness for it.

You have had it with peace and plenty, and if that has glutted you, and the
Lord is now curing your surfeit by a sparer diet, thank your wantonness for it.

Yet consider Turks and Tartars are not in your bowels, burning your houses,
ravishing wives and daughters, killing old, sick, and infants, carrying away
the rest Captives, drinking healths in your dead Nobles skulls dug out of
their graves, yet all this is done among the poor Protestants in Transylvania,
Sword, Famine, and Pestilence making havoc in that flourishing Country, not to
speak of other places, what is felt or feared; is not this ground of thanks?

Consider yet again, what we have had long, and still have, though the Land is
full of sin from one end to the other. What we have deserved, and yet do, even
to be stripped naked of all life and liberty, peace and plenty, to have our
doors shut up, our lights put out, our Teachers all driven into corners, the
good Land to spue us our, and the abomination that makes desolate to enter in
among us, our Land to keep her Sabbaths because we profaned the Lords
Sabbaths; the voice of the screech-owl to be heard instead of the voice of the
Turtle; It is the Lords mercies we are not consumed: For what privilege or
Patent have we to be secured and indempnified above others?

How long ago had Divine Justice made short work with us, if Divine Patience
had not been stretched to long suffering: if Mercy had not held back the hand
of Gods Vengeance, as the Angel caught Abraham's Knife when it was lifted up to
kill his Son? For surely methinks Mercy and Justice have been long wrestling,
and the Lord has said long of England, as he said of Ephraim, How shall I give
up England, how shall I make thee as Admah and Zeboim, as Sodom and Gomorrah?

Now consider this all ye that forget the Lords benefits, lest he come not only
as a Moth to you, as he seems to do already in your Trade, in your Health, in
your Food, but as a Lion to tear and go away. Wherefore, would you value your
mercies, consider others miseries; would you thank God for them, consider your
abuse and unworthiness of them; would you continue and increase them, Haud
quicquam ita proprie terris representat caelestis habitationis statum, sicut
alacrita^ deum laudautium. Bern. Ser. 1. in Cant.
be thankeful for them; would you taste sweetness in them, get a sanctified use
of them; would you honor God in every condition, make a holy improvement of
every dispensation; would you be Christians indeed, In every thing give thanks,
for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. Turn your hearts
and tongues to it here, and you shall be chosen into the Quire of Angels to
perform it for ever in Heaven.

How may we get rid of Spiritual Sloth, and know when our activity in duty is
from the Spirit of God?
Psalm. 119.37. part ult. Quicken me in thy way.


THis Psalm shines and shows it self among the rest -- Sicut inter ignes Luna
minores. A Star in the Firmament of the Psalms, of the first and greatest
magnitude; this will readily appear if you consider either I. The manner it is
composed in, o^ II. The matter it is composed of.


1. The manner it is composed in is very elegant.

2. The matter it is composed of is very excellent.

I. The manner it is composed in is very elegant, full of art, rule, method,
Theological matter in a Logical manner, a Spiritual Alphabet framed and formed
according to the Hebrew Alphabet.

II. The matter it is composed of is very excellent, full of rare sublimities,
deep mysteries, gracious activities, yea glorious ecstasies. The Psalm is made
up of three things.

1. Pra^ers. 2. Praises. 3. Protestations.

1. Prayers to God. 2. Praises of God. 3. Protestations unto God.

My Text belongs unto the first, and may fitly be styled David's Letany, where
you have.

1. His Libera Domine, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity.

2. His exaudi Domine, Quicken me in thy way.

In this, these three parts are considerable.

1. The Act, Quicken. 2. The Subject, Me. 3. The Object, thy way.

In the prosecution of which Scripture I shall do these three things.

1. Explicate the Terms. 2. Deduce a Corollary. 3. Resolve the Cases.

I. For Explication. Quicken. There is a twofold quickening.

1. Proper and moral. 2. Improper and metaphorical.

1. Proper and moral, which is twofold. 1. Total. 2. Partial.

1. Total. Which is the raising a dead body to natural life; thus was Lazarus
raised, Hist. Ang. lib. 5. cap. 13.
John 11.43, 44. So was Drithelme of Northamberland raised if credit may be
given to Bid.

2. Partial which is the restoring a body declined and decayed with sickness,
or sorrow to Spirits and vigorous energies. So was David, whose body by grief
and sorrow was made a mere Skeleton, Psalm. 31.10, 17. Hezekiah by sickness
brought so low, that he was become spiritlesse, yet he was raised up again,
upon which he composes that rare Hymn or Canticle of praise to God, Isai.
38.10.

II. Improper and metaphorical, which is likewise twofold.

1. Total. 2. Gradual.

I. Total, which is the raising of a Soul stark dead in sin to Spiritual Life,
Ephesians. 1.2. and you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins.

II. Gradual, which is the raising of a dull and drousie Soul from sloth and
sluggishnesse to high, yea highest degrees of vivacity, and activity; for this
you have David praying here, and in Psalm. 143.11. Quicken me, O Lord, for thy
Names sake. In this description it will be very necessary to explain sloth, and
activity.

1. Spiritual Sloth is threefold.

1. Resolving Sloth. 2. Delaying Sloth. 3. Disturbing Sloth.

1. Resolving Sloth, is, when a Soul is settled upon it is lees, and resolves to
lie still, and never to stir in that momentous concernment of its own eternal
Salvation. Solomon excellently deciphers this, Prove. 26.14. As the door turns
upon his hinges, so does the slothful upon his bed; as the door turns upon the
hinges, and never stirs from his place, so the slothful turns upon the bed of
security, and never turns from his purpose. Jer. 44.16, 17. they were resolved
to worship the Queen of Heaven, come life, come death. Such was the Soldiers
resolution, who had on his Target God and the Devil pictured, under God si tu
non vis, under the Devil iste rogitat.

2. Delaying Sloth, when a person does intend to look after Soul-concernments,
but not yet, they will borrow day, a little time. Much like that sluggard,
Prove. 6.10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep. When the sluggard is called to arise in the morning, he resolves to do
it, only entreats one little, one short nap more, and then he will arise. So
when some are called to awaken, arise and walk with God in his way in the
morning of their age, they crave one short nap more first, and then they will
do it; give them leave to get such an estate, to obtain such an honor, to
match such a child, to satisfy such a lust, and then will they be for God.
Such a sluggard was Austin, a little longer, O Lord, a little longer,
presently, presenly. Matthew. 25.10. Paululum, paululum, modo and modo, and hoc
erat sine modo. Aug. lib. confess. Plutarch. in Moral.
the five foolish Virgins resolved to have oil in their lamps and vessels, only
they would take a nod. Oh how dangerous is delaying Sloth? the Virgins
deferring, provokes Christ to denying. Archias being merry at supper, had a
letter sent him that concerned his life, and though desired to read it, puts it
up into his pocket, saying, (...). I Will mind serious things tomorrow, but he
lived not unto the morrow, to mind those serious things. Such another sluggard
was the rich man, Luke 12.20. Stulte hac nocte. Toll moras: semper nocuit
differ paratis. Lucan.
Alexander being asked how he came to conquer the World, replied, Nunquam
differ volens; if you will overcome more than Alexander did, not only the
World, but also Satan, and your own flesh, the worst and strongest enemy of
all, you must carefully lay hold on every lock of opprotunity, and
expeditiously improve the same.

3. Disturbing Sloth is, when a person does intend and endeavor to walk in
Gods way, but Sloth as rust hinders the wheels of his Soul from coming to, and
running in the way of God. The Torpedo if it touch but any part of the angle
that a man holds in his hand, Plin. not. hist. lib. 32. cap. 1.
corpus torpescere facit, it benums and stupifies all the members that they
cannot stir or strive. Such malignant influence has. Sloth upon the Soul; the
chariots of Saints Souls should drive as Jehu's heartily and furiously, 2 Kings
9.20. and not as Pharaoh's chariots heavily and faintly, Exodus 14.25. all the
agility of the Soul, and all the ability of the body are required in Gods way,
and about Gods work, whatsoever comes short of this is Sloth, as whatsoever
comes short of Virtue is Vice.

2. Activity in duty is a victorious conquest over the Great Goliath Sloth, and
riding triumph in the way, work, and worship of God; activity is a David's
dancing before the Ark with all his might; there are three things which concur
and contribute to complete this activity in duty.

1. Tota animi intentio. Bas. in reg.


2. Inexplebilis cupiditas agendi. Brev. resp. 259.


3. Assiduitas in action.

1. A streining and stretching of the soul to the utmost peg, and highest pin,
a putting of it upon the tenter-hooks in service.

2. An unsatiable and unsatisfiable desire or longing for the effecting and
accomplishing of a duty.

3. A constant and continual waiting and working until the duty be perfected;
these three were exactly in Archimedes the Geometrician; he was drawing his
Mathematical lines when Marcellus entered the gates of Syracuse, yea when the
Soldiers entered his Study, that he never minded them, there was the intention
of his mind; when the Soldiers pulled him by the sleeve, he cries out let me
alone to finish my Scheme; there was his inexpleble desire of perfecting it;
when the Soldiers drew their swords to run him through, he yet plied his
business; there was his assiduity in his action; here was Hoc age indeed. Oh
what a shame would it be for us Christians, if a Heathen in his way should
outgo, and outdo us in Gods way. I shall commend two Texts of Scripture to you,
which do most lively obumbrate tepidity, and fervidity, Romans 12.11, 12. Not
slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. (...). In
festinatione non lenti, here festina lent is out of doors. We must fly as
upon the wings of the wind; our heart must be like the Primum Mobile to wheel
and whirl us about with a most rapid motion; (...) assidue operam nava^^s.
fervent in spirit, boiling or burning hot, all on fire and flame, serving the
Lord, continuing instant in Prayer, strenuously and steadfastly wrestling with
God, as Jacob did, who as a Prince had power with God, Hos. 12.3. this is that
Ultimum virium which is expected, and only respected of God; God accounts
nothing else Prayer but this, Isa. 64.7. And there is none that calls upon
thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. Ea fide and fidu^ia,
ut Dei manus teneat A Lap. in Loc.
i. e. with that Faith and fortitude to hold Gods hands, as Moses, Jacob, and
others did; the Cock is a rare Emblem of this activity, who raises, and rowses
himself, claps his wings, and then crows with all his might, Heb. 6.11, 12. We
desire that every one of you do show the same diligence. verse. 12. That you be
not slothful, not of a slow pace, to want fire, yea and feet too, that not run
in Gods way. (...). ex (...) and (...). non curro. Segnis, quasi se ignis, sine
igne.
Non amo nimium diligentes was the saying of a Heathen; but God will never say
so, because we can never be too diligent and devout in his service; and surely
if Jacob did serve Laban toto conatu, Genesis 31.6. with all my power have I
served your Father, then much more should we with all our industry and
endeavor serve our Father.

Thy way, by way of Emphasis, in opposition to and exaltation of, above all
other ways.

There is a fourfold way.

1. Via Mundi, the way of the World, and that is spinosa, thorny.

2. Via Carnis, the way of the Flesh, and that is insidiosa, treacherous,

3. Via Satanae, the way of the Devil, and that is tenebricosa, darksome.

4. Via Domini, the way of God, and that is gratiosa, gracious.

This way is twofold.

1. Via velata, a concealed way, and that is of his Privy Counsels.

2. Via revelata, a revealed way, and that is of his public Commands.

1. Via beneplaciti, of his Privy Counsels, Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are
his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? He that shall go about to seek
and search for that way, must return a Non est inventa, and shall prove himself
a true Ignoramus, ver. 34. For who has known the mind of the Lord? And who
has been his Counselor; the best of mortals were never honored with that
title, to be one of Gods Privy Counselors.

2. Via signi, of his public and common road of Commandments, Psalm. 119.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way: Who walk in the way of the Lord, v. 27.
Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, Isa. 2.3. He will teach Sions
Scholars of his ways, and they will walk in his paths, Isa. 30.21. Thine ears
shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it.

We must not be so impudent as to desire to walk in the way of his Privy
Councils, (...) Theod. dial. 1:
nor so imprudent as not to walk in the ways of his public Commands.

The secret things belong to the Lord our God: But those things which are
revealed, belong to us, and to our children for ever, that they may do all the
works of this Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Having thus planed my way to the Text, or
rather explained the way in my Text, I proceed to the deduction of a Corollary
or Conclusion from the words, which is the second thing I premised and promised.

Every Saint is very apt to be a slug in the way and work of God. Quicken me
(says one of the chiefest and choicest of Saints) in thy way; and it is as
much as if he should say in plain terms, Ah Lord, I am a dull Jade, and have
often need of thy Spur, thy Spirit; This Prayer of David seems proof enough to
this point; but if you desire farther confirmation, I shall produce an argument
instar omnium, that none shall dare to deny, nor be able to disapprove, and
that is drawn from the topic of your own experience, and this is argumentum
lugubre, like a Funeral Anthem, very sad and sorrowful. Do you not feel and
find, to the grief of your own souls, that whereas you should weep as if you
wept not, rejoice as if you rejoiced not, and buy, as if you possessed not:
Inverso ordine, you weep for losses as if ye would weep out your eyes; you
rejoice in temporal comforts as if you were in heaven; and you buy as if it
were for ever and a day, Psalm. 49.11. But e contrario, You pray as if you
prayed not, hear as if you heard not, work for God as if you worked not. Now we
know experto credas; a man that sticks fast in a ditch needs no reasons to
prove he is in, but remedies to pull him out. Your best course will be to
propose the case how you may get rid of this unwelcome guest spiritual sloth;
Eheu! quot (...) habet sanctus David, vel potius spiritus sanctus ad suam
Cytharam. Par.
it is a case we are all concerned in. Asini aures quis non habet; Every man
and mortal has some of the Asses dullness and sloth in him; and therefore I
have brought a whip of ten strings to scourge this sloth and dullness out of us.

1. Keep a strict watch over your eyes at all times, especially when you are in
duty; the eyes are the Portholes that Sin and Satan creep in at; (...).
it is accounted a great piece of charity to a man's body to close his eyes when
he is dead: I am sure it is more charity to our souls to close our own eyes
whilst we are living. Apperuit nobis in Paradiso oculos satan. nunc omnis labor
in eo nobis est, ut eos iterum Clandamus and obturemus. Luther.
See what a strict guard Job keeps upon his eyes, that would not permit them at
any time to view vain or wanton Objects, Job 31.1. I have made a covenant with
mine eyes, why then should I look upon a maid? And the Prophet seems here to
imply, that unless God would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity, he
should never be quickened in his way; It is removere prohibens, beholding vanity
forbids the banes between the soul and quickening. If you will keep your houses
warm, you must keep your doors shut: If you will keep your hearts hot in a
duty, you must keep your eyes shut. If those doors stand wide open for all
comers and goers, either your soul, Dinah-like, will be gadding out, or Satan
will be getting in, by which the poor soul will be defiled and deflowred.

2. Send sin packing bag and baggage; these two mutually generate one the other.

Matter me gennit, eadem mox gignitur ex me. Sin begets sloth, and sloth begets
sin: Sloth in David made him sinful, and sin in David made him slothful. Aegris
corporibus simillima est, aegritudo animi. Cic. de fin. 7. 13.
Sin is the souls sickness, now sickness makes men lazy, lither, loath to stir.
There is a disease incident to man's body, called the Lethargy, which makes him
drowsy, sleepy, negligent, and forgetful, it springs from a cold Cathar of a
pitchy and glutinous nature which cools and benums the brain: Sloth is the
Souls Lethargy, which makes it sluggish, negligent, forgetful, this arises from
the Cathar of sin, benumming and stupifying the heart; and of all sins, turn
Covetousness out of doors. There is a dise^se in the body, Aurugo, ab aureo
color, ut Med.
called the yellow Jaundice, which makes the persons look yellow all over, this
springs from the overflowing of the gall, which over-spreading the whole man,
makes it liveless, listless: Covetousness is the yellow Jaundice of the soul,
which arises from the overflowing of the heart with love to yellow gold, by
which a Christian is dulled and deadned. Thrust a Knife into the earth, and it
takes away the edge; throw earth upon the fire, and it deadens the heat: let
but earthly-mindedness creep into the heart, it takes off the edge, and deadens
the heat of it to or in any exercise of Religion. Solomon calls it an evil
disease, Eccles. 6.2. Indeed, the worst of diseases, a complicated disease;
this disease does not only dead, but destroy the soul, 1 Timothy 6.9. Drowns men
in perdition, Ver. 10. The love of money is the root of all evil. Foenus
pecuniae, funus animae. Leo.
The birth of money is the burial of the mind; therefore our Savior, Luke
12.15. bids us take heed and beware of Covetousness: A double Caution, that we
might have a double care. Above all keepings keep Covetousness out of thy
heart, Pro. 4.23. for that will not only hinder thee from being active in duty,
but help thee to be active against duty. The Pharisees, who were covetous,
derided him, Luke 16.14. They that drink of the water of the River Hipanis, at
first are delighted with it, Solinus, c. 14.
but afterward are so hurt by it, that non injuria execrantur. It is most true
of Chrysorroas, the yellow River, at first draught it pleases, but afterward it
makes them so dead drunk, that they become dormice for ever after.

3. Frequent a quickening Ministry, Ver. 50. Thy Word has quickened me. The Word
of God is quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12. (...)
living and operative, not only formaliter, and in it self, but also
virtualiter, in the virtue and efficacy of it, it makes men lively in their
operation. Acts 7.38. (...), Oracles making lively. Jer. 5.14. Ignis
animantibus vim dat mirisicam. Vario.
I will make my words in thy mouth fire. Fire, as it is the most noble, so it
is the most active Element, and makes other things active. Creatures almost
dead for cold brought to the fire are made active and nimble: Witness Aesops
Snake which the Country man brought in his hand, but when it had received heat
from the fire it disturbed the whole house. Dr. Ames relates, that there was
once such cold Preaching in Paris that the Protestants were constrained to go
into the Country to a godly Minister to be warmed; A godly Minister will warm a
cold heart, and put quickness into a drowsy spirit.

4. Make out to the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Promise and Office it is to make
us active, and vivacious. Joh. 10.10. I am come that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly. Christ came not only to make us alive,
but also to make us lively. Persons who are slothful by reason of cold
stiffning their joints, make out to the Mineral and Metalline baths, which heal
and help them: The blood of Christ is the most precious mineral hot bath in the
world, it will doubtless cure and quicken all cold and dull souls that come
into it, Zech. 13.1. It is the Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness,
Sloth, it is a very foul sin and filthy uncleanness, 1 John 1.7. And the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. The sin of Sloth, which in
some sense may be called all sin, it being Pulvinar satanae, the devils pillow
that he lays his head on in the soul, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. Come to Christ the living
Stone, and you shall come from Christ lively Stones.

5. Get quickening love to the ways of God.

Ovid. lib. 1. Amo 9.
Qui non vult fieri desidiosus, amet. Pliny tells us, That a rod of Myrtle in
the hand of a Traveller will never suffer him to flag or faint, but keeps him
fresh and lively to his journeys end. I am sure where love is in the heart, it
will carry a man in the way of God with life. The Apostles did triumph in their
tribulations; and how so? Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5.5. Orig. Is plentifully
poured out as wine into bottles, Ubi amor est, non est labor, sed sapor. Bern.
Sermon. 85. in Cant.
which makes it spiritful. Love turns all pains into pleasures, and perils into
perfumes. Love is the fore-horse in the souls Chariot, who draws all the other
affections and faculties after him. What a loadstone was Shechems love to
Dinah, Genesis 34 19. It makes him communicate his Wealth, Si tantum potuit
cupiditas, quid potest charitas? Aug.
change his Religion, circumsize his Foreskin. See how spiritual Love wrought
in Paul, it was as strong Physic, ready to work out his bowels, 2 Cor. 5.14.
For the love of God constrains us; Love has not only an impulsive, but also
a compulsive power, Metaphora a pariurientibus sumpta. Grot.
(...). Love is a grace that is always big-bellied, and is in labor, always
being delivered of some good duty or other. This Love put Paul upon exceeding
pains, and excessive perils.

1. Exceeding pains, that never mere man took the like, 1 Cor. 15.10. I
labored more abundantly than they all; It must be great pains to preach the
Gospel fully from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum. Romans 15.19. Beza.
(...), in circulo, or circuitu, making Jerusalem the Point, and the Regions
round about the Circumference, and then the space could not be less than four
thousand Miles: But if you take it in a collateral Line, taking in the Regions
of Attica, Boeotia, Achaia, Epirus, Asia minor, Cilicia, Cappadocia, etc. it
was 2000. Miles; but if you take it in a direct Line from Jerusalem to Stridon,
a Town in Illyricum, it was above a thousand Miles; and though these tiresome
journeys might have apologized for sparing, or at least for curtailing duties;
yet Paul never measured out his pains by a few sands in a glass, but spent much
time among the Saints in Praying, Preaching, Disputing. Very memorable is that
pains of his, Acts 20.7. where Paul spends all the time from the Disciples
meeting together on the Lords day, until midnight in holy Exercises.

2. His excessive perils; what a large Catalogue have you of them, 2 Cor.
11.23. ad 28. In stripes above measure: In prisons more frequent: In deaths
often: of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one: Thrice was I
beaten with rods: Once was I stoned: Thrice I suffered shipwreck: A night and a
day I have been in the deep: In journeying often, in perils of waters, in
perils of robbers, in perils by my own Country men, in perils by the heathen,
in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in
perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness; All this laid
together, well may we say with him, Nemo acrior inter persecutores, nemo prior
inter peccatores. Aug. Tom. 10. page 202.
There was never a more fierce persecutor of the Gospel, nor a more fervid
propagator of the Gospel; The first proceeded from his hatred, the last
proceeded from his love, even the love of Christ.

6. By faith apply the quickening Promise, and the Promises of quickening.

1. The quickening Promises; Promises are steel spurs that will reach the dull
heart to the quick; they are singular Plasters, if well applied, to draw out
the corruption of sloth; they are the sovereign Elixars whose quintessence will
make the soul full of spirits, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given to us exceeding
great and precious promises, Cardan. subst. l. 7.
that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature. Precious Promises,
as stones, are precious, which have egregious virtue in them, that by them we
might be made partakers of the Divine Nature, Bez. in loc: Non transformatione
natura humanae in divinam, sed participatione donorum quibus conformes divinae
naturae fimus. Par,
not of the substance of God, as Servetus stubbornly defended even to death;
But of those divine qualities and gracious dispositions, which will stand with
Gods Nature to communicate, and our nature to participate. Now Gods Divine
Nature is an Act, and our Divine Nature is active: Now the right applying
Promises will be very virtuous to make us vigorous, to come as nigh the image
and life of God as possibly we can. Plato says, it is our chiefest good, Deo
penitus conformem fieri, to bear the Character of God upon us.

2. The Promises of quickening. David presses God to be as good as his word,
Psalm. 119.25. Quicken thou me according to thy word; He is often upon this
string, Ver. 107.154. resolving not to let God alone until he kept his word,
Isa. 40.31. But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they
shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they
shall walk and not faint. Our soul, as a Be, must suck honey from this flower
to quicken it self. Say thus to thy self: Soul, God has promised I shall mount
up with Eagles wings, fly through difficulties and duties with celerity, he is
a God able, true, willing, therefore I may be assured of this assistance. Oh
this honey will enliven thee more than Jonathans honey enlightened him, 1 Samuel
14.26, 29. Who must dye because he had eaten honey, and if he had not eaten
honey he must have died.

7. Mind quickening examples. A dull Jade will put himself faster on when he
sees other horses, gallop before him. The Apostle h^ving mustered up in rank
and file the Examples of those famous. Worthies, Heb. 11. Does, Heb. 12.1.
excite them with patience to run the race that was set before them. If the rare
acts of Miltiades would not suffer Themistocles to sleep, then the famous
Actions of Gods Worthies should not suffer us to slumber. View Elias how he
went up in a fiery Chariot to heaven in his spirit, before he went in a fiery
Chariot to heaven in his person. (...) more venatorum persequentium feram.
Aret. Ignatius Epist. ad Romans
James 5, 17. Eye Paul how industriously and indefatigably he pursues, even as
a Beagle his chase with full cry, and all celerity, Phil. 3.10, ad 15. Observe
Ignatius how he goes to the beasts to be devoured, as if he had gone to a
Bridal to be married. Lastly, Slight not the Martyrs in Q. Mary's days, who
went to the fire as if they had been going to a bonefire. En amote, and hoc
parum est, amem validius. Aug lib. de Med. c. 18.
See thou this woman, (says our Savior to Simon of Mary Magdalen) with what
activity and affection she has washed and wiped my feet, (her tears being the
water, her hair the towel) let it provoke thee to more diligence and devotion,
Luke 7.44, 45. Examples are pricking and provoking goads to quicken us; fires
to light our candles by, to heat our bodies with.

8. Keep quickening company. As bad company is water to quench, so good company
is oil to quicken fervor; Bonus comes pro vehiculo.
As Iron sharpens Iron, soon gracious heart sets an edge upon another, Prove.
27.17. Holy Companions are bellows, (...), to blow up, and make burn the graces
that lie in embers, 2 Timothy 1.16. The gracious affections of Saints are called
beds of spices, Cant. 6.2. Holy conference of holy company is the rubbing and
chafing those spices to make them sent and send forth their perfumes. Alexander
where ever he came perfumed the Room with his presence; so does every believer
with his speeches. David who desires quicknings, picks out quickening company. I
am a companion of all them (rich or poor) that fear thee, and of them that keep
thy precepts, Psalm. 119.63. Paul is pressed in spirit by the company and
conference of Silas and Timotheus, Acts 18.5. the two Disciples hearts burned
within them in their journey to Emans, by that sweet discourse they had with
Christ, Luke 4.32.

9. Consider quickening considerations, they that are apt to faint and tire in a
journey, carry about their bottles of water to quicken their spirits; let these
ten considerations be such bottles to you when you tire in the journey of a
duty.

1. Consider how odious and abominable Sloth is to man or God; the Romans
judged sloth and idleness worthy of the greatest contempt. Asinus ad lyram,
Asinus ad tibiam, Zon. Annal: l. 2. Peir. 87. d. l. 3. cap. 16. Enerves animos
odisse virtus solet Val. Max. lib. 2. cap. 7.
are Proverbs of the greatest derision and disgrace: how contemptibly does
Jacob speak of Issachar, a strong Ass couching down between two burdens, Genesis
49.14, 15. yea God himself refuses the firstborn of an Ass in Sacrifice,
Exodus 13.13. Bellarmin gives this reason, because it was animal tardigradum, a
slow paced and sluggish creature, which God hates; God being a pure act loves
pure activity. Oh what thunderclaps and cracks of threatenings may you hear
from the Mount Ebal of his Word, able to make the most sluggish Caligula to
creep under his bed for shelter. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be the deceiver that has in his flock a male,
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.14. God threatens to
remove the candlestick from the Church of Ephesus, because she was grown
remiss in her first love, Rev. 2.5, 6. he terrifies the Church of Laodicea
with the menace of spuing her out of his mouth for her lukewarmnesse; the
servant who had not returned Cent per Cent for his talent, is called wicked and
slothful servant, and cast into the darkest dungeon, Matthew. 25.26.30. how would
this consideration well considered on, cause all slothful servants ears to
tingle, and their hearts to tremble.

II. Consider sloth exposes you to all manner of sin, especially these two
desperate and dangerous ones.

1. Sordid Apostasy.

2. Spiritual Adultery.

I. Sordid Apostasy. Sloth in the Soul is like Green Sickness in the body of a
Virgin, which makes her not only fall from her color, strength, stomach to
wholesome food, but also to long and lust after trash and trumpery, coals, soot,
ashes: the Galathians because they were (...), without mind and metal, do
therefore prove Apostates, beginning in the Spirit, ending in the flesh. Gal.
3.1, 3. Tepiditas si ^allum obduxerit siet Apostasia. Greg. Moral. lib. 22.
cap. 5.
falling off from fervor will turn to falling away to folly. The slothful man
will not bring his hand to his mouth, Prove. 19.24. it is expounded of a
slothful Minister, who will not bring voci suae vitam suam, his works to his
words; though this be an undoubted truth of lazy and slothful Ministers, yet
the Provetb holds true of all sluggards tendency to falling away in their hand
from their mouth, i. e. from what they have formerly professed. Consider how
great and grievous a sin Apostasy is, it was the first sin that ever was
committed, it was the sin of the Devils, for which they were cast out of
Heaven, and cast down into Hell, Heb. 10.38. if any man draw back my Soul shall
have no pleasure in him; a metaphor taken from a sluggish Jade, who finding the
load come heavy, draws back again; the backslider in heart, much more in hand,
from Gods way shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. i. e. he has run
away from his Captain, Colors, Cause, and he shall have Marshal Law for it; it
will be worth my pains and your patience, to give an instance what severe
Martial Law God has executed on all Runnagadoes and Revolters.

1. Ministers. Judas who revolted from his Master and Ministry, turning from
being a guard to his Savior, to be a guide to the Soldiers, Acts 1.17.
afterward hanged himself, his bowels burst out of his belly, and so he took his
proper and peculiar place in Hell, verse. 18.25. John Speiser Preacher at
Ainsborough in Germany, Sc^lt. annal. 118.
who preached so profitably and powerfully that the common strumpets left the
Brothel-houses then tolerated, and betook themselves to a better course, Anno.
1523. yet afterward revolting to the Papists, he perished miserably.

Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 12. Ut condimentum sit aliis Aug. lib. 16. de Civ.
Dei. c. 30.
2. People. Remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32. who turning back to Sodom, was
turned into a pillar of salt to season us, that we may be preserved from the
stinking sin of Apostasy. Lucian a great Professor in the days of Trajan, but
revolting, was torn in pieces, and devoured of Dogs. The Emperor Julian the
Apostate was wounded with an arrow none knowing from whence in his War against
the Persians, who throwing his blood up to Heaven, died, scornfully crying,
Vicisti, Galilaee, vicisti.

II. Spiritual Adultery. Bodily sloth exposes to corporal Adultery.

Quaritur Aegisthus. David's instance clears it sufficiently, 2 Samuel 11.2.
Spiritual sloth exposes to Spiritual Adultery. Romans 1.21, 23. When they knew
God, they glorified him not as God. What follows upon this slo^h in not
glorifying God as he ought to be glorified, verse. 23. They charged the glory of
the incorruptible God into an image like to corruptible man, and to birds,
G^avissimum peccatum Aqui, 2a 2ae quaest. 94. act. 3. Pri^cipa ecrimen, and
summus hujus saeculi reatus. Tert. Omnis qui ad paradisum redire desiderat,
oportet transire per ignem and aquam. Aug. in sermon. ad Lipp.
and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Sloth is the highway to
Superstition, and idleness the road-way to Idolatry, 1. Cor. 10.7. neither be
you idolaters, as were some of them, as it is written, the people sat down to
eat, and drink, and rose up to play; by which is implied, their idleness was
the cause of their idolatry. When Demas grew lazy and slothful in his Ministry,
he turned Priest in an Idols Temple, where he had less work and more wages, 2 Timothy 4.10. consider idolatry and superstition are God-provoking,
Land-destroying, Soul-damning sins; no wonder John should conclude his Epistle
with keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5.21.

III. Consider how impossible it is, that creeping Snails in Gods way should
ever get to their journies end; fair and softly goes far, but never so far as
Heaven, Matthew. 11.12. The Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force, Brugens. Non dormientibus provenit regnum caelorum, nec otio
and desidia torpentibus beatitudo aeternitatis in geritur. Prosp. de vit.
contempl. Qui stadium currit, eniti debet, and contendere qua^ maxim possit ut
vincat. Tul. 3. off. Petent cum ardore. Humanum quiddam dico^ Eras. Sicut non
qualitatis sed aequalitatis. Cyprian was (...). Naz. Orat. 18.
(...), a metaphor taken from storming Cities and Castles, they storm Heaven,
hang their Petarhs of Prayers on heaven gates and blow them open, that get
Heaven by a conquest; storming is not work either for the fearful or the
slothful, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run that you may obtain; not creep, but run, not run,
but so run, not indifferently, but industriously, as the racers in the Istmian
Games (to which the Apostle here alludes) who did stretch and strein their legs
and limbs that they might gain the prize, Luke 13.24. strive to enter in at the
strait gate: Heaven has a very strait gate, we must crowd yea crush our selves
if ever we get in, (...), play the Champions to a very agony, for many I say
unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, (...), shall seek with
industry and endeavor.

IV. Consider how equitable it is that you should be as active in the way of
God, as you were once in the way of sin and Satan, Romans 6.19. I speak after
the manner of men, i. e. I speak Reason as well as Religion; as you have
yielded your members servants unto uncleanness and to iniquity, unto iniquity.
As, not of quality but equality, even so now yield your members servants to
righteousness, unto holiness; even so: in the same manner and the same
measure: this very consideration wrought effectually upon Paul himself, who as
he had formerly sinned more than all, so afterward he labored more than all;
the time he could not recover by recalling, he does recover by redeeming. What
a peircing, and prevailing spur would this be to a dull and sluggish soul. Ah
soul, what a shame, what a sin is this, to be a slow s^a^l in the way of ^od,
that have been a swift Dromedary in the way of sin.

V. Consider ho^ you contradict your own Prayers, your very Pater Noster,
wherein you desire Gods will should be so done by you on earth, Angelos (...)
esse putat Plutarch.
as it is done by the Angels in Heaven; now those winged Mercuries and
messengers of Heaven do speedily and sprit^fully execute the Commandments of
God, Psalm. 103.20. Bless the Lord ye his Angels, which excel in strength, that
do his Commandments, harkening to the voice of his word; These heavenly
Pu^sevants stand listening to know their Princes royal pleasure, and then they
go to execute it.

1. With all celerity, and speed, they are said to have wings, Isa. 6.2. which
are the Emblems of velocity, v. 6. the Seraphim came flying to Isaiah with a
coal from the Altar. Gabriel is sent post from Heaven, Dan. 9.21. being c^used
to sly swiftly, extraordinary have, that he seemed weary and tired; the Angels
flying upon Gods embasie is always very swift: the Schoolmen make a doubt
whether they do ab extremo ad extremum transire; yet it seems they can mend
their pace in their flight from Heaven to Earth, and so back again, which is
(as those wise Astronomers, Clavius in Sphaeram.
who have been there to measure it) backward and forward above one hundred
sixty millions of miles.

2. With ardency and intensenesse they are called Seraphs, Isa. 6.2. Igniti,
fiery, yea a flame of fire, Heb. 1.7. Elijahs charet and horses of fire, were
Angels appearing in those forms, 2 Kings 2.11. of all the Elements fire is the
most intense and active, the mouth of fire devours and destroys all that comes
before it; many of the Heathens did worship fire for their god, because it
devoured all their other gods; these fiery Hosts of God are very devouring, one
of them in one night destroyed a hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians,
2 Kings 19.35.

3. With alacrity and cheerfulness; it is a great part of their joy in Heaven,
that they do Gods service with joy; as soon as ever they were created they
rejoiced that they should be employed in such honorable service, Job. 38.7.
When the morning Stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy;
how cheerfully did the Angels bring tidings of Christ's birth to the World, as
appears by their praising God to the highest of their power, Luke 2.14. Glory
be to God in the highest; etc. surely if you consider Angels worship, and doing
Gods will, it will make you leave off your sloth or your service; either cause
you to pray better, or not to pray at all.

VI. Consider you lose the very soul and life of your duty, if you do not
perform it as for your life and soul. You come to seek and see the face of God
in the glass of ordinances, Psalm 27.8. Lambunt petram, mel non sugunt. Cyp. de
Caen. dom.
to have communion with him, to fetch comfort from him; to get some kisses of
him, Cant. 1.3. to mortify some lust, to increase some grace, to strengthen
your assurance, to testify your duty, to express your affection, etc. now
spiritual sloth hinders you of all this; dull and drowsy eyes cannot see God,
heavy and slothful hearts cannot receive those benefits and blessings from God.
Torpor non sinit Deum esse beneficum.
Sloth is a sluce-gate to the current of Gods grace and favor. Jupiter rained
a shower of gold into Danaes lap, but God will never rain a shower of grace,
joy and comfort into a sluggards heart. If you loose the blessed sight of God
here in ordinances, you shall lose the beatifical sight of God hereafter in
glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord; then have we the kernel of a duty (every thing
else is but a shall) when our employment is on Ear^h, and our enjoyment in
Heaven; when we have so sought Gods Face, that our face comes away shining, and
we have so poured out our hearts to God, that God has powered out his heart to
us, that we return home like Bees loaded with honey, filled with the comforts
of the Holy Ghost.

VII. Consider the infinite and wonderful glory, greatness, majesty of him you
appear before and approach unto in your duties. A God you are not able to
conceive, nor I to express. See how the Scripture shadows him out unto us (and
indeed it is but a shadow in comparison of his substance) Isa. 40.12. Who has
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out Heaven with the
span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? verse. 15. behold the nations
are as a drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance:
behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing, verse. 16. and Lebanon is
not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering,
verse. 17. all things before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him
less than nothing and vanity. Quae participatione nobis veneranda sunt, in
comparatione ejus memoranda non sunt. Greg. Mor. l. 18. c. 27.
Ex pede Herculem. By this glorious description we may guess (and that is all)
at enough in God, to scare us from coming to God in a dull and drowsy manner:
the Heathens who worshipped the Sun for their god, durst not offer up any thing
but a flying horse to him in sacrifice; our God is more glorious, swift, seeing
than ten thousand Suns, therefore we should no^ (...) to offer up any thing but
a winged Cherubim, or swift flying (...) to him in service.

VIII. Consider how industrious and indefatigable an adversary you have that
lies always in ambush to wrong you, yea to ruin you. Satan is the unwearied
Peripatetick, who walks up and down for prey and spoil, Job 1.7. now the dull
soul is his prey; a slug ship is a purchase for the Pyrat, and a sluggish soul
for the Devil; it is holy and wholesome advice given by Peter 1.5, 8. Be sober,
be vigilant; because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour; Mr. Hugh Latimer 's Sermon preached in the shrouds
at Paul's Church in London. 18. Jan. an. 1548. of the Plough. page 21. Prius
conditionem, complexionem uniuscujusque perspicit, and tum tentationis laqueos
apponit. Greg. Mor. lib. 9.
the Devil (says pious and plain Latymer) is the most diligent Bishop in
England, he is ever at his plough: no Lording nor loytering may hinder him, his
office is to hinder Religion, to maintain Superstition, to set up Idolatry, to
teach all kind of Popery, where his plough goes, there away with Books, and up
with Candles, away with Bibles, and up with Beads; away with the Light of the
Gospel, and up with the Light of Candles, yea at noon-days. How should this
quicken us to be active for God and our soul, that have an enemy so active
always against God and our soul. You need not quicken a Mariner to Make out
all the cloth he can, that knows a Pyrat has him in chase at stern; timor
addidit alas, fear will spread the sails which are the wings of the ship, the
Devil the great Pyrat of souls to make prize and pillage of us and our graces,
has us in daily pursuit; how careful should we be to fill the sails of our
souls with the strong gales of the Spirit, that he may neither overtake us, nor
take us.

IX. Consider, when you slothfully perform duties, you do but mock God; to act
in the Service of God slothfully is interpretative to act scornfully. Wine is a
mocker, Pro. 20.1. i. e. Wine immoderately taken, makes men dull, dronish,
sluggish; sleepy actions in a serious business are mocking actions; drowzie
service to God is but a mockery of God. Gal. 6.7. God is not mocked, i. e. God
will not bear mockery.

X. Consider how active Christ was in doing us service, he did omnem movere
lapidem; He was so enlarged about the thoughts of doing the work, that he was
straightened until he was about it, Luke 12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized
with, and how am I straightened until it be accomplished; i. e. I have a death of
the Cross to suffer for Man's Redemption, and I am pressed with an
Antiperistasis until I have finished it: Or else, as Grotius renders it, I am
with child of my Passion, and how do I long for my delivery. I am in pain
until I am in pain, much like some women, who breed their children with more
pain than they do bring them forth. When that day of his travel came, it was
the day of his triumph, Plutarch.
Col. 2.15. Triumphing over them in it. The Atheni^^^ ^^^ru, being informed by
the Oracle, That the People, whose King should be slain in the Battle, should
be Conquerours, disrobed himself, went into the Enemies Quarters in the habit
of a poor man, with a burden on his back, that he might steal a death to make
his People Conquerours: Christ disrobed himself of the Garments of Glory,
assumed the form of a servant, endured contradictions of sinners, held his
peace when falsely charged, that he might steal a death for his People, that so
they might be more than Conquerours, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author
and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, despising the shame. Shall Christ give you such a Copy of activity, and
will you blot and blur it with sloth and sluggishness? Oh look on your Copy,
and fairly write after it.

10. Beg the quickening Spirit, this is instar omnium, none like it, as David
said of Goliaths sword. Sloth is the Kings Evil of the soul, and none but the
King of Heaven can cure it by his hand, which is his Spirit, Psalm. 119.32. I
will run the way of thy Commandments; when thou shall enlarge my heart.
Idleness is the souls prison, sloth is her shackle, the Spirit of God only can
knock off her fetters, and give Jail-delivery to her, Romans 8.26. The Spirit
helps our infirmities, of ignorance, dullness, deadness, sluggishnesse, and
enables, yea ennobles us with gracious, copious, filial affections, even groans
and sighs that are unutterable, expressions not to be expressed. Cant. 1.4.
Draw me, and I will follow thee; there is her Prayer, and her promise, and
there is no doubt of her performance; she will as certainly follow as the Iron
the Lodestone, or the Card the North Pole, Cant. 4.16. Awake O North Wind, and
come, O South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out. Awake
and come, there is the Prayer, O North and South wind, there is the Spirit, the
soul that is the Garden, gracious affections they are the Spices that flow out.

But some precious Soul whispers in mine ears (I bless God) I am not troubled
with this lethargy, my sails are so filled, that my mill goes and grinds
nimbly, only I am afraid the wind blows not from the right quarter; pray
therefore satisfy my conscience in this case, Whether my activity in duty
proceed from the Spirit of God?

We may easily be deceived by our enlargments, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. All which or any
of which way so draw and delight the heart, that (as Orpheus pipe) they or it
may make the heart dance in a duty, and yet for all this, it may be possible,
yea probable, the heart may dance after the Devils pipe, Ezekiel. 33.32. the
resolution of this case would have been fitter for some ancient, experienced
Master of Assemblies, (whose Bible is more in his heart, than head, than for so
weak and worthless a person as I am, who may truly say with Agur, (...), Prove.
30.2. Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of
a man. Yet seeing Providence has laid the lot at my door, to use Peter's words
a little altered, Acts 3.5. Though silver and golden experiences and
expressions I have none, yet such as I have I shall willingly impart and
communicate to you. If you will lend me your patience, I will give you my pains
in resolving this weighty and worthy case of Conscience, how a Christian may
know, whether his activity in duty be from the Spirit of God.

I shall commend to you these eight Characteristical Notes as so many
Touch-stones.

1. When we have beforehand earnestly prayed and prepared our souls for such
activity, when you say and do to your soul, as Jehu did to the worshippers of
Baal, 2. Kings 10.19. I have a great Sacrifice to offer O my soul, warn and
summon in all the powers and parts of soul and body, be sure that not one be
wanting, and so by reading, meditating and Prayer get our souls into a holy
frame and gracious posture; and humbly, yea heartily also beg and beseech of
God, to carry us on Eagles wings through the duty we are drawing near to, if we
mount and soar aloft as (Aquilae in nubibus) Eagles to Heaven in that duty, we
may safely and surely conclude that activity is from the Spirit. When Mariners
buy a wind of the Witches (as they do in Lapland and other places) and they
have it at every place and point, according to the purchase of the one, and the
promise of the other, they may undoubtedly conclude that wind came from the
spirit of the Devil. When we beg a wind from God and we enjoy it at the time
according to our desire, we may upon good ground say, that wind came from the
Spirit of God; this will appear very clear if you please to lay together these
four things.

1. It is Gods Prerogative to hear Prayer, Psalm. 65.2. Oh thou that hear
Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

2. It is Gods Promise to hear Prayer, Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide and I
will fill it; spread thy sails by Prayer, and I will fill them by my Spirit,
Luke 11.13. He will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask it.

3. It is Gods usual course to perform his Promise, (...), in that very kind,
Psalm. 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble; thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. I said not to the seed of
Jacob, seek ye me in vain, Isa. 45.19.

4. It has been the constant practice of Gods people to look after their
Prayers, to see what success they have had. Prayers come not out of the Ark of
their souls, as the Raven did, never to return, but as Noah's Dove, to come back
again with an Olive branch into the soul, Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what God the
Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints.
Saints do not shoot the arrows of their Prayers as children do, shoot them away
and never mind them, but as Archers that shoot their arrows up into the air,
and stand expecting their returns down again; if our activity come from the
return of Prayers, it must be from the Spirit. When Elias prays so fervently,
that fire might come down from Heaven, and consume the sacrifice, and it did
so, the people might justly cry out, the Lord he is God, the Lord he is God, 1
Kings 18.37, 39. So when we pray for fire and fervor to come down from Heaven
on our service, and it comes, we may cry, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of God.

2. When our activity carries us supra sphaeram activitatis, above the reach of
any creature; when dust is carried up on high the wind does it, when dust and
ashes are carried up on high in a duty, the wind of the Spirit does it; If a
Chemist dissolves a stone into drops of water, we may be sure some help higher
than a creature has helped him. If a heart of stone shall be dissolved into
drops of water in a duty, it must be some help higher than a creatures must do
it; if Ganymedes be carried up to heaven, it must be by the help of Jupiter; if
the soul be carried up to Heaven so in a duty (that an ecstasy rather than an
activity) it is by the help of the Spirit; if our spirit cries in a duty with
sighs and groans that are unutterable, it was enabled by the Spirit of God,
Romans 8.26. when we are carried through difficulties, doubts, duties, dangers,
that seem impossible, impassible, by reason of the Lions in the way, and the
Lions in the streets, that stand open-mouthed to devour us, Pro. 26.13. Then to
venture through all, fire, fury, faggot, this is of the Spirit of God. When
Daniel shall continue active in Prayer three times a day, with his windows
open, that all might see him, when there were Lions in the way indeed, Dan.
6.10. When Luther in outward streights shall have such inward enlargements that
he comes off from his knees, with a vicimus, vicimus. When he shall go to Worms
to own the truth of Christ, though all the tiles upon the houses were devils.
Of these Prayers, and Practices, and such like, we may say, as Protogenes of a
curious Line, none but Apelles could draw this, none but the Spirit of God
could enlarge and enable to do this.

3. When we feel and find our hearts after duty silled and fraighted with
spiritual joys, and heavenly comforts; when our soul is like a Merchants ship
returned from the Indies laden as deep as it can swim, with all variety of
Spices, and precious Commodities; When we have such inward ravishings that our
heart is a little Heaven, filled up to the brim with joy, as our Savior prayed
for us, Joh. 15.11. Enjoying that joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet.
1.8. Heaven antidated, or Heaven beforehand; when we have that joy which is
the earnest of Gods love, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
(in this life) for them that love him; but God has revealed them to us by his
Spirit. This joy is not only the fulfilling of Christ's Prayer, but also the
fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. When the King had brought his Spouse into his
Bride-chamber after her prayer, he ravishes her heart with joy, Cant. 1.4. When
David had been at Prayer, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon
me: Then comes that rapture, Thou have put gladness in my heart more than in
the time that their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7. When we
have greater joy after duty than Worldlings have after Harvest, which is their
greatest joy, gaudium messis, is messis gaudiu; The joy of their harvest is all
the harvest of their joy, which this Worlds Earthworms are likely to enjoy,
Luke 16.25. Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, says Abraham to Dives.

4. When our activity in duty is constant, like the motion of the fire in its
Orb (which Philosophers tell us) is perpetual. My soul breaks for the longing
that it has unto thy judgments at all times, Psalm. 119.20. The Spirit dwells in
us as his Temple, 1 Cor. 6.19. The body is the Temple, the Soul the Late, the
Affections the Strings, the Holy Ghost the Musician, who in all our duties
makes melody in our hearts, Ephesians. 5.19. Where the Ship is always sailing, the
Wind is always blowing, and we are sure that sailing comes from the Wind; if the
Wind lies still, the Ship lies still, is becalmed. 1 Cor. 3.17. Where the
Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, (...), freedom and liberty are opposed
to three things,

1. Necessity. 2. Co-action. 3. Restraint. Now the Spirit of God sets our heels
(ut aiunt) our hearts at liberty, not only from necessity, co-action, but also
restraint. Setting at liberty is freeing us from imprisonment, and giving
freedom to go whither we will. The Spirit admits us to that liberty which is 1.
The purchase of Christ, Gal. 5.1. 2. The Privilege of our filiation, Romans
8.21. Per nomen libertatis, non tantum intelligo a peccati and carnis servitute
manumissionem. Sed etiam fiduciam quam concipimus ex adoptionis nostrae
testimonio; convenit cum Romans 8.15. Calv. in 2 Cor. 3.7.
The glorious liberty of the Sons of God; The Spirit makes us act as it self;
Nescit tarda molimina spiritus sancti gratia. Ambr. 2 Cor. 3.6. The Spirit
quickneth, (...), makes lively, Romans 8.2. As the Spirit of life frees us from
the law of sin and death, so from the Law of sloth and deadness.

Object. But some poor soul cries out, Woe is me, I am undone, I find none of
this Spirit in me. I am none of those fixed Stars about the Aequinoctial, that
move many Millions in an hour, but a slow-paced Planet, that finishes not his
course in many years, whose motion is so dull that not discernable. Sure I am
cast out of the firmament of Gods favor, and shall be a wandering Star, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude v. 13.

Answ. It is the misery of Ministers, that they cannot speak of the
experimental sublimities of some, but others are presently desponding and
despairing. I would not for a world quench the smoking flax, or break the
bruised reed, Mat. 12.20. Yea, I would with all my soul put the lambs in my
bosom which cannot go, or but slowly; and gently lead them that are with
young, Isa. 40.11. I speak this to them that are upon the staves of Jacobs
Ladder in their ascending to heaven, to be a loadstone to draw them up, not a
millstone to drag them down. But to answer more appositely.

1. I intend it in opposition to them who live in a course of sin, yet now and
then in a duty do feel a flesh of joy, and thereupon presume of their good
estate, and not to those who with Zachary and Elizabeth walk in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of God blameless, Luke 1.7. and yet do not obtain
this constant favor.

2. I lay it down a posit^ve sign and inclusive; that those, and all those that
have constant activities, (though differing for the altitudes and degrees) may
be certain of the Spirit, as those that have Trade winds from Port to Port may
be sure they sail by the wind; or as those that have the Organ, medium, and
object rightly disposed, may be sure they see. Bellarmine tells a story of an
old man, that always arose from duty with these words, Claudimini oculi mei,
claudimini^ nihil enim pulchrius jam^ videbitis.
Be you shut, O my eyes, be shut, for I shall never behold any fairer Object
than Gods face, which I have now beheld. But not a negative sign exclusive, as
if those (that repent of sin, meditate on the Promises, pour out Prayers, walk
with God, wait on Ordin^nces) who have it not, were cast-awaies. I am confident
many that lie windbound in the harbor shall in due time get to the Haven.

3. There are four things belong to a Christian: 1. A habit. 2. An Act. 3.
Degrees of that Act. 4. Sense of all these. He may have the three first, and
yet want the sense of them. A ship may sail, and yet the Mariner not sensible
of it.

4. There is no Rule but has some Exception, no Experience in one Believers
heart but a contrary Experience may be found in another. Various are the
workings of Gods Spirit in the heart, he blows when, where, how he pleases,
Joh. 3.8. He is called seven spirits, Rev. 1.4. because of his various
influences. He does, (...), blow in a duty, if the ship be ready, but to show
he is agens liberrimum, he will sometime suspend his Act, and leave the common
Road. To conclude this, take this counsel, Stay thy self upon thy God, Isa.
50.10. Remembering he will send forth judgment unto victory, Mat. 12.20. And
take this for a Cordial, which is a spiritual Riddle, It is a comfort to have
no comfort; The desires of some are as acceptable to God, as the deeds of
others.

5. When we are enlarged, and yet we are not elated; high in Gods Spirit, low
in our own spirit. True Christians are like Canes, the fuller they are of
Sugar, the lower they bend. Quanto sublimior, tanto submissior; The loftier,
the lowlier. Every true Saints Motto: True activity is not Leaven to puff us
up, but Lead to pull us down. What Bid wished some to observe of Austine the
Monk, sent over a Legate from the Pope to his Brethren the Prelates and Bishops
of England, I may advice you to observe, that if he carried himself humbly he
came from the Lord; high in duty, and humble after duty comes from the Lord.
When David and his people had been on the Mount in their offerings to the
building of the Temple, see what a low Valley they are in the opinion of
themse^ves, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Who am I, and what is my people, that we should be
able to offer so willingly after this sort? -- For all things come of thee, and
of thine own have we given thee. Here is no haughty Pharisee, Who but I? But an
humble Publican, Who am I?

6. When activity in duty is expressed in activity in doing; when active
Prayers are turned into active Practices. Aeni. Syl. li. 2. Com. Promptiores
sunt homines promittendo quam exequindo. Dion. l. 38.
The Emperor Sigismund having made fair Promises in a sore fit of sickness of
amendment of life, asked Theodoricus, Archbishop of Collen, how he might know,
whether his repentance were sincere: Who replied, If you are as careful to
perform in your health, as you are forward to promise in your sickness. 1 Pet.
2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow
thereby. When our being high in duty makes us grow high in grace and knowledge,
2 Pet. 3.18. Even as Cedars of Lebanon, until (caput inter nubila) we lodge
our heads in heaven, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. We may be sure it is from the Spirit when
enlargement in duty, lays on us an engagement to duty.

7. When we give God the glory of all our Actings and activities. if it be
returned to his praise, it was received from his Spirit. When Rivers return to
the Sea, it argues they from thence proceeded, Eccles. 1.7. When David and his
people had showed their activity in their Present toward the erecting of the
Temple, they shut up all with a most gracious and grateful Doxology, 1 Chronicles.
29.13. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name,
Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us but unto thy name give the glory.
He doubles non nobis, to lay down man, to lift up God. When we unfeignedly give
God the glory, God has undoubtedly given us the grace.

8. When we have the Testimony of the Spirit witnessing with our spirit, that
this activity is from himself. Gal. 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. When we are so enlarged in a duty
that we do cry, Abba, Father, this the spirit witnesses is his work. The Spirit
does not witness by a clear and distin^t, either outward or inward voice,
totidem verbis, this I have wrought in thee; thus to affirm, would be a Quakers
fancy, or rather folly: But the Spirit does sweetly and secretly suggest to us
by having wrought those filial affections, and child-like dispositions of Love,
Joy, Peace, Hope, Fear, Grief, Confidence, etc. in the heart, and by enabling
us to act these gracious dispositions, as need shall require. This is the
Spirits (...), witnessing with our spirits, thus fitted and filled with peace,
and purity, with melting and mourning; the Spirit does by his impress and
impulse ratify and seal the witness of our own Spirit to make it authentic,
Romans 8.15, 16. You have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits; So that having two
witnesses it may be established.

1. The witness of conscience, which is mill testes, 2 Cor. 1.12. But our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience.

2. The witness of the Spirit, which is more than ten thousand Witnesses,
because he is an infallible Witness, that cannot err, therefore called the
Spirit of Truth, 1 John 5.6. Now these two putting their hands to the
testimonial of our activity, breed and beget that (...), 1 John 3.20. That
Confidence in God, and Evidence to God, as A Lapide interprets the word. Now as
those two Witnesses testimony in prophesying against Idolatrous and
Superstitious Worship was sufficient to evidence all their actions were from
the spirit of Antichrist, Rev. 11.3. So these two Witnesses testifying to our
souls that these activities are legitimate and laudable, are sufficient
assurance that they came from the Spirit of Jesus Christ.



Leah instead of beautiful Rachel, with a Cloud instead of Juno, with a Pebble
instead of a Pearl; and therefore they are industrious and illustrious to try,
whether their Activity in duty be from the Spirit, by those spirits that are
ingredients into their Activity.

Wherein are we endangered by things lawful?
LUKE 17.27, 28. They did eat, they drank, they married, etc.


HEre is set down what the generality of people were doing in the world, they
were bru^ish in the days of Noah before the flood came and drowned them; and
in the days of Lot before the fire came down from Heaven and destroyed them.
In Matthew c. 24.38. it is expressed by participles, they were eating, etc.
(...), etc. this shows the vigor and activity of their spirits spent on those
things in which they were engaged, and the word (...), proprie de brutis dici
volunt Grammatici, ut etiam videatur magna esse hujus verbi emphasis, quo
significatur homines brutorum instar fore ventri deditos. Beza. This word
signifies a kind of brutish feeding themselves without fear, as it is Jude 12.
but here in the Text the words run (...), etc. they are expressed by an (...)
without a copulative. Camerarius observes, haec ita (...), petita magis notant
and arguunt hominum temporis illius securitatem: so that the vehemence, and
eagerness, and intention of their spirits in the things they were employed in
is hereby noted: They were very busy, their hearts, and heads, and hands, all
taken up in eating, drinking, buying, selling, etc. the actions named, and the
comforts which they were enjoying, those natural and civil employments in
which they were engaged, all good and lawful in themselves, but they were not
well employed in them; the use of those things was lawful, but they did
sinfully use them: for there is in all these actions a narrow way and a broad
way, Matthew 21.13, 14. the narrow way which is bounded and limited, and under a
rule as to the end, 1 Cor. 10.31. viz. the glory of God, and also to the
circumstances, this there be but few that find it: But the broad way, which is
without bounds and limits, this is the common road which most walk in. Thus
far, but no further, says God; the will of God is the boundary of the narrow
way, but lust knows no bounds, and will not be prescribed to.

The very Heathens looked at their common actions as under bounds; they had
their (...), sustine and abstine, (...). Gelli. Noctes, Act. l. 7. c. 19.
Anton. Pig. l. 4.. 3. but the difficulty lies in observing the just limits in
the use of lawful things; and therefore one said well, Licitis perimus omnes,
etc. ruin usually arises from the use of lawful things, there being most
danger where it is least suspected. In all our comforts there is a forbidden
fruit, which seems sair, and tastes sweet, but which must not be touched.

The Observations may be these:

1. That all our actions natural, in eating, etc. and civil, in buying and
selling, etc. come under a rule. This is employed, else the Lord would not have
brought those great judgments on them, barely for their eating, etc. had they
not in those employments transgressed a rule.

2. Such are usually the miscarriages of men in the use of lawful things, that
they are the procuring causes of the most dreadful judgments. For we see that
the Lord makes mention of these very things lawful in themselves, as the
causes of the flood on the world, and fire on Sodom.

3 The Lord puts great weight and stresse on those very things which we take
but little or no notice of. The old world and Sodom, little thought they should
come to so severe a reckoning for their eating and drinking, etc.

To bring things to an issue as to the case concerning our danger of sin and
miscarriage in lawful things; I shall 1. inquire When lawful things become
sin to us. 2. How we may judge of our hearts and selves, and discern their
miscarriage and sin in the pursuing, enjoyment and use of lawful things? 3.
What are the sins that attend the immoderate and inordinate use of lawful
things?

As to the first I answer, When lawful comforts which are given us for helps,
become hindrances in our way to Heaven, then they become sin to us. When we by
our abusive cleaving to the creature, by our inordinate affection to it, by our
exorbitant disorderly pursuing of it, do abuse our helps, they become
hindrances to us, and as it was said of Gideons Ephod, Judge. 8.27. He made an
Ephod, which when it became an Idol, became a snare. When lawful comforts are
immoderately and passionately desired, pursued, enjoyed, then they become an
Idol and a beloved, or at least they become beloved so far as to carry it from
Christ, from duty: Now when any thing becomes an Idol in the heart, so as that
the soul begins to bow before it and yield obedience to it, then it becomes an
Idol, and what is an Idol in the heart, is a stumbling block of iniquity in our
life, Ezekiel. 14.4. it is a stumbling block an hinderance in our way: such Idols
in the heart, usually prove great offenses, and both (...), stumbling blocks
and occasions of falling; the first signifies a stumbling block to keep one off
from duty; such an offense Peter was to Christ, Matthew. 16.23. He would have
hindered him in that great work which He had to do. The second signifies a
galltrapp which will vex and trouble one in duty: so that when our comforts
become Idols, images of jealousy in our hearts, then they are stumbling
blocks, and so obstacles in our way to Heaven.

Again, when our lawful comforts by our dotage become beloveds, or greatly,
passionately beloved, then they become hindrances; when your hearts inflame
themselves with your comforts, as the Lord speaks of them Isa. 57.5. They
inflamed themselves with their Idols; when the heart does inordinately love
creature comforts, they are then turned into lusts, so that of lawful comforts
they are made unlawful lusts, 1 Ioh 2.15, 16. the things of the world, or the
profits, pleasures, honors which usually men's hearts and thoughts are taken up
withal, are good and lawful things in themselves, but being abused, they are
called, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, etc. The Holy Ghost puts
the lust that is within us, to express the profits, pleasures and honors of
the world which are without us. So that the good things of this life, by our
inordinate love to them being abused, the very nature and property of ^he
things are alt^red, for instead of proving good helps to us when lawfully loved
and used, become lusts that hinder us, for they fight against our souls, 2 Pet.
2.11. and members of the old man, and weapons in his hand to fight against God;
they become one with old Adam in us, and therefore Col. 3.5. we are bid to
mortify our earthly members; he does not say, mortify your lusts, but
members, they being all one, and make up together body of sin, one old man, as
it is called Ephesians. 4.22. Now it is certain that the old man in us, the body of
sin, is an enemy and a hinderance to us in our way to Heaven.

In this case those foul sins of Idolatry and adultery are committed with the
creature, in both which sins the heart is stolen away from God, drawn away from
the proper object. The Apostle uses that expression Iam. 1.14. (...), drawn
away by lust, or some object, in an unlawful conjunction with the heart, then
the heart comes to be g^ued to it, as God speaks, Hos. 4.17. They are joined to
Idols, fixed to them, so that as in Idolatry the heart is joined to and fixed
to the Idol, so as that it will not easily part with it, as it is Ier. 2.10.
Has a nation changed its God, q. d. no they are fixed to their Gods and they
will not change them. So it is in the sin of adultery, the heart is stolen
from the proper object; as it is Hos. 4.11. speaking of wine and women, it is
said they steal away the heart, and it is glued to that which it goes a whoring
after, so that it will not be taken off from it, Prove 2.9. When the creature
becomes an Idol in the heart, then there is idolatry committed; and when it is
a beloved there is adultery committed, the hope, and trust, and confidence of
the soul is gone, the love and care, the joy and delight of the soul is gone,
and the soul with every creature that it thus enjoyes powers out her
fornications, as the Lord spoke of them Ezekiel 16.5. and as they Isa. 23.17. are
said to commit fornication with all Kingdoms, so a heart which inordinately
loves, and doteth on, and is glued to creature comforts, commits fornication
and abomination with them.

How we may judge of our hearts, and know when they miscarry and offend in the
pursuing, use and enjoyment of lawful things?

1. When our desire of, and our endeavors after worldly things grow strong and
vehement, and very eager and impatient; as Rachel said, Give me children or
else I die, Genesis 30.1. When we begin to say, I must have such an accommodation
whatever it cost me, I must have such a comfort or I am undone: such a pursuit
after worldly comforts, argues a heart very carnal; and he that miscarries so
much in seeking after the things of this world, will not mend the matter much
when he comes to enjoy them: when the heart grows sick after worldly things
in the desire of them, usually it surfeteth when it gains it: as Amnon was
sick for his sister, 2 Samuel 13.1, 2. he had a surfeit after: and as Ahab, 1
King. 21.4. he was sick with impatient earnest longing for Naboths vineyard.
When your heart is very impatient till you do obtain your desires, you are
never well with that thing which you do so obtain: When the affections grow
strong and warm, that you can endure no opposition or contradiction in the
pursuance of your desires, but you can bear any trouble or hardship that you
may obtain the things desired, as we see in Shechem, Genesis 34. who could endure
circumcision that he might have Dinah; and in Jacob, who did endure very much
that he might have Rachel, Genesis 29.18. then there is a match toward, then in
such a case when it is gained, the heart becomes glued to it, and commits
fornication with it, and cannot endure to be touched or thwarted in the
fruition of it, as Demotrius and the Silver-smiths, when they found their Diana
began to be touched by Paul's doctrine, Acts 19.24, 25, etc. they made an
uproar, they would not endure that. When ye look on any thing with a greedy and
impatient, longing, lusting eye, that, if you do obtain it (if God does not
otherwise order it) will prove a snare to you, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
69.22. an Idol, an image of jealousy, a curse and a cross.

2. When you have raised expectations and hopes of great contentment and
satisfaction from your comforts: when you promise to your selves greater
matters from the creature than it can yield, then you miscarry when you look on
the creature through the multiplying glass of your affections and lusts, and
see them as they are so represented bigger and better than they are, and from
thence you have high valuation of them, and raised expectations also of great
things from them: when we fancy an excellency in the creature that is not, we
fancy a fullness in an empty thing, a satisfaction in an insufficient,
unsatisfying comfort, we fancy a stability in a vain, fleeting, vanishing
thing: when we fancy a fountain exc^llency in a broken cistern, as they did
Jer. 2.13. then upon this the heart is raised to great expectations of
pleasure, profit, etc. then the heart shamefully miscarries, and as it is said
Rev. 13.3, 4. there is a strange beast that turned the eyes of all the world
after it; they looked with an eye of great expectation from this beast, and
then they wondered and adored also; so that they looked with an eye of
admiration and adoration too.

3. When the obedience and willing submission of the soul is brought off to any
worldly comfort, and the soul stoops to its scepter, and the faculties like the
Centurions servants do as they are bid, such comforts which are slavishly
obeyed are sinnefully enjoyed. When we are afraid to displease them the fear is
at command, when we are careful to please such a lust, then the care is under
subjection; when we are troubled if crossed, then our sorrow is at command; if
rejoiced when that is gratified, then the love and delight of the soul are at
command; And his servants ye are to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. When the soul is
even as the servant that looks to the hand of the Master with an obediential
eye, Ps. 123.2. expecting a command, and ready to yield obedience, such a
comfort is a sin and a curse to you. Christ calls to us to deny our selves,
Matthew. 16.24. Profits, pleasures, carnal advantages say, rather deny Christ's
command. Who is obeyed? Christ says mortify your lusts; lust says gratify
us, consider who is obeyed? If family duties, and personal private duties; if
praying, holy meditation, secret close communion with God be neglected, because
multitude of worldly business and full and great Trade in the world commands
you another way, and requires the love, and zeal, and strength, and care of the
heart to another attendance, then you are under another Sovereign than Christ.
The obedience of the heart is carried to another Law, other Lords rule over
you. Now the soul that is under the command of the creature, as I have showed,
that comfort becomes a sin which usurps the throne of the heart.

4. When the soul grows very tender and compassionate toward such a comfort,
and begins to spare that above other things, then that becomes a lust, and lust
is very tender and delicate, and must be tenderly used: right eyes are very
tender, the least touch fetches tears; when thou can not endure that either
the Word of God, or the Rod of God should come too near, or so much as touch
upon such a carnal contentment, such a comfort, such a Husband, such a Wife or
Child, thou can not endure that the Lord should smite thee in any of these:
but thou cryest out, Oh spare this, as David concerning his Absalom, 2 Samuel
18.4, 5. Oh tender the young man, pray deal gently with him; and as old Jacob
with his Benjamin, He could more easily spare his other children than him, he
looked with a very tender compassionate eye on him. What ever thou do enjoy
with such a tender bleeding heart and eye, it has ravished thy heart very far,
and it is become thy Idol, and beloved very far, and thy sin.

5. When the care, anxiety, and solicitude of the soul runs out after the
comforts of this life, saying, what shall I eat, what shall I drink, how shall
I live and maintain my Wife and Children, what shall I do to get, to keep such
or such a thing? when the thoughts of the heart are taken up for protection,
for provision, to get and hold the things of this life; such comforts as are so
gotten, and so enjoyed, they are sinfully obtained and maintained, and this our
Lord Christ does clear to us, Matthew. 6.25, 26. And he warns his Disciples in a
special manner against all such cares, Luke 21.34. (...).

6. That comfort which thou art not dead unto, neither is that dead to thee,
thou will hardly enjoy with safety to thy self, or thou will part withal but
upon severe terms.

If when God by his providence calls for such or such a comfort, Husband, Wife,
Child, yet thou can not, you will not resign and give up that comfort at Gods
call; but thou growest impatient and sullen, when he does but attempt to
bereave thee of it: God may perhaps let thee have thy lust, as he dealt with
the Israelites, Psalm. 78.18, 30. but thou shall have that comfort without any
comfort, it may be with a curse.

When we cannot bear the thoughts of either absence or loss of such or such
things, cannot endure the thought of parting: it is like the tearing off a limb
from the body, when God takes away such a Husband, or Wife, or Child, or
Estate, etc. it argues that they were greatly abused while we had them. If
there were an indifferency of spirit in us, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7.29,
30, etc. That they that were married, were as if they were not married, etc.
they would part upon easier terms by far. When the life is bound up in a
comfort, it is death to part, Gen 44.22.30. as it was with Jacob to his
Benjamin. When the creature has got too great an interest in thee, that thou
can by no means bring thy heart to think of leaving it, or its leaving thee,
though God seems to call for it, the heart begins secretly to rise up against
God, and to murmur and quarrel at providence, this argues a very carnal
heart. If the heart did hang loose from these things, thou might enjoy them
with more comfort, and part with them with more ease.

7. If after God has been weaning us in a more special manner by his Word and
Rod, and taking off our hearts from our worldly comforts, yet the strong bent
of the soul is toward them; it argues much carnal love to them, that we are
not crucified to those comforts.

When the soul has its secret sinful converse and fellowship with a
creature-comfort, against its own conviction to the contrary; it may be thou
have repented, or at least have seemed to repent of such a way and course, yet
for all this, thy heart continually hangs that way: and as it is Prove. 9.17.
Her stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant, when a
stolen glance of the eye, a stolen kiss from a lustful object is still pleasant
to the soul, there is much of a meretritious carriage in that heart, it is so
far sinnefully enjoyed.

When the heart hankers much after such a thing, it is stolen away, Hos. 4 11.
when it hangs after it, as it is Jer. 22.17. Their hearts went after their
covetousness: when the heart has its secret haunts and postern doors to get
out to such or such an object, and that object has its secret passage to the
soul. There be some secret correspondencies betwixt the heart and the object,
when the lustful object has its welcome, it no sooner knocks but it is
admitted; when it has a free passage into the heart, and the heart hangs after
it, nay, perhaps admits it when it is in duty, if it comes even when we are
with God in prayer and is admitted, it argues a sinful whorish familiarity.

8. If after solemn and frequent warnings, invitations and earnest beseechings,
perhaps corrections too, God calls thee to a more strict and close walking with
him in a severer way of selfdeniall, in a more free and full enjoyment of
himself; If God would sequester thee from thy Oxen, farm, married wife, that he
might have thee more alone from the crowd, and dust, and tumult of the world;
if yet after all this, thou then set thy wits on work to frame excuses: If
Christ speak to thee as he did to his Spouse, Cant. 7.11. Come let us go and
lodge in the villages; Come let us go out of the City crowd and multiplicity
of worldly businesses, and let us retire alone that we may more fully enjoy one
another. If he says to thee as ver. 12. he speaks to his Spouse, Let us get up
early to the vineyard, etc. and calls thee off to a more early, earnest,
diligent attendance on him, and thou do as the Spouse Cant. 5.2, 3. make
lazy excuses for thy easy gainful trade and way of life thou leadest; if so
it be with thee, thou keep thy comforts upon sinful terms.

When the Arguments, and pleas, and excuses, and pretexts are for lust, when
denials, equivocations, and thy reason are all at work for lust. When God calls
to self-denial in some creature-comfort, and then the heart forms excuses for
the enjoyment of it, as they in the Gospel, they all began to make excuses,
when they were called to the Wedding Supper, their lawful comforts became a
snare and sin to them, Luke 14.16, 17. If thy heart in such a case studies
colors to adorn or set it out, or set it off, or covers to protect it, then it
is sinful; the heart miscarries in the enjoyment of its comforts, when it
studies how to hide it self in the enjoyment of it as much as may be, even from
the eye of God.

The third thing propounded was, What are the sins that attend the

I will confine my self to the sins in the Text: The first sin in their eating
and drinking, etc. was sensuality, and that is expressed by the word (...),
which as I have showed, is properly applied to b^uits, an eating after a
brutish manner, and by the (...), which notes the vehemence and intention of
their spirits, laid out in their sensual enjoyments, men are apt (especially
in abundance) to grow sensual and brutish, to use their comforts without
fear, to indulge themselves very far, and so say to themselves as the Rich
Glutton, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12.19. a sensual
brutish speech, fitter for a swine than a man; abundance of the things of this
life has a strange virtue to corrupt a man into a bruit. Deuteronomy. 32.15. Jeshurun
waxed fat and kicked. How is he degenerated to a fat Heifer or Horse, that
kicks and winseth? The Lord complains Jer. 5.7, 8. that when he fed them to the
full they committed adultery, etc. and were like fed Horses brutish and
sensual: such as gratify their lusts in eating, etc. are strong Bulls of
Bashan. Psalm. 22.12. the Psalmist says, he was compassed about with them who
were like Bulls in a fat pasture, well fed and strong, and ready to gore and
push: the great, and rich, and potent ones, are compared to these bruits: We
are very apt in the midst of comforts to grow sensual, and before we are
aware, as Noah and Lot who both were overtaken: Our Lord Christ Luke 11.34.
exhorts his Disciples against these, and bids them to beware, the word notes a
very diligent and intent study and intention of mind to what he said, least
their heart should be overcharged; it seems strange that he should give the
Disciples an exhortation against sensuality and brutish sins, but that he knew
their natures, and though they were most temperate persons, yet he bids them
beware of surfeting, knowing that if the best did not watch, they might be
overtaken with sensuality.

2. Pride, ease and idleness usually go together, the immoderate or inordinate
use of the creature, this was it which God warned his people of Deuteronomy. 8.11.12,
14. take heed when thou art full, etc. lest thy heart be lifted up. So Psalm.
123.4. there it is said, his soul was filled with the scorning of those that are
at ease, and with the contempt of the proud: they are put together. When we
fall to eating and drinking, the next thing is to take our ease, Luke 12.19.

So the Lord speaks Hos. 13.6. According to their pastures so were they filled,
and their heart was exalted, and they have forgotten me. Ease and idleness
attend sensuality, these gratify a brutish disposition very much, fulness
of bread and abundance of idleness were Sodoms sins, Ezekiel. 16.49. And the rich
glutton sang a Requiem to his soul, usually when men abound in outward comforts
they are most apt to grow lethargick and slothful, or at least they will not
take much pains, it may be they will be doing something but they will not be at
much pains especially as to their souls, Hos. 10.11. Ephraim is a Heifer that
loves to tread out the Corn, etc. but not to plow, he cares not for that, they
were wont to use Beasts in treading their Corn instead of threshing of it, now
it was Gods command that the Ox that trod out the Corn should not be muzled
but that he might eat as he did work.

Then here is Ephraim at a good lazy work that has meat in the mouth of it,
wages for work, and present pay, here is Corn, he abounds in outward things;
and though he treads out the Corn, he will not plow, that is too hard labor,
he will not go abroad in the wet and cold, and seems to have reference to those
of the Tribes that would not go to Jerusalem to worship, they would not take so
much pains: Ephraim considers his ease, he loves no hard work, Ephraim did
abound and grew rich, Hos. 12.7, 8. He drove a great trade in the world and
took pains, but yet it was in a way that might gratify his lust and carry on
his gain, but what says God to this temper, see Hos. 10.11. The Lord says he
will pass upon his fair neck, I Will make Ephraim to ride: He had a fair and a
beautiful neck, he led such a life, that though he trod out the Corn he lived
in plenty, ease, and idleness, no yoke came on his neck, he would not abide a
yoke to be put on, but by his lazy life and good trade he had a beautiful
neck, he became tender and delicate: but I Will pass over his fair neck (as some
take it) I Will cause a heavy yoke to come over his neck, and will make him work
and set him to hard labor, I Will make him a drudge, I Will make him ride, some
take it for their speedy captivity that shall tame him, by his plenty and ease
he is grown so lusty, like a restive Jade, I Will ride him, I Will set some on his
back shall ride him off his legs, and Verse. 12. Jacob shall break the clods,
the ten Tribes, this is a base druddging work to break the clods, but this
servile work shall be his. We see in Laodicea their plenty and idleness ( Rev.
16.17.) went together, and they were to be spewed out.

3. Then there is security follows this eating, etc. and usually where there is
abundance of these, and that men are much taken up with these, there is a
secure sleepy forgetful spirit goes with them: and doubtless this was the sin
of the old world, that though Noah was a Preacher of righteousness, and his
making the Ark was a public alarm to the world, yet they went on in their
way, eating and drinking, etc. very securely, promising to themselves peace and
safety: Such as are filled with what they eat and drink, are apt to drop
asleep, and then they are secure, they apprehend themselves safe from danger;
they are compared to a drunken man, that does not know in what condition he is,
in 2 Timothy 2.6. (...), the word is to return to ones self after drunkenness,
that they may awaken: for it signifies one that is secure, and so goes on in
his way, when he returns and recovers himself, he is as a man that was drunk,
and awakes and returns to himself: whence it is that God did so often caution
his people against a secure sleepy forgetful frame of spirit: and when the
Lord was to bring the children of Israel into Canaan, he still bids them they
should not forget him, Deuteronomy. 6. c. 8. v. 14. but this sin he complains of in
them, Hos. 2.13. When David was in the midst of his comforts he grew secure,
Psalm. 30.6. We find some brought in Isa. 28.15. speaking in their thoughts that
they had made a covenant with death and hell, etc. they in their secure
thoughts apprehended themselves free from danger, such thoughts ever carry
impenitency and hardness of heart with them, Zeph. 1.12. Jer. 48.11. when they
are settled on their lees, they never consider or say what have I done? Jer.
8.6. Incogitancy and security go together, a secure person never considers his
own estate, danger nor duty: When once a man grows sleepy, promising to
himself freedom from danger and good days, then he falls into some sin or
other, or some evil falls upon him. Mat. 24.48, 50. The evil servant said his
Master delayed his coming, and Verse. 49. He began to beat his fellow servants.
1. He is secure, he promises to himself safety, his Master delays, etc. 2. He
falls to beat his fellow servants: Or else they fall into some sin, Matthew. 25.5,
8. while they slept their Lamps went out, or some evil befalls them, Lam. 1.9.
Sudden destruction, 1 These. 5.3. when men grow secure as to their state, and of
a supine sleepy careless spirit, such are ever in a most unsafe, sinful
condition nigh to cursing, and on the very brink of ruin and utter destruction.

How must we make Religion our business?
LUKE 2.49. Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business.


THese are the words of our Lord Jesus whose lips dropped as an honycomb; the
occasion was this; Christ having the spirit of wisdom and sanctity powered on
him without measure, being but twelve years old, goes to the Temple, and fell a
disputing with the Doctors, ver. 46. where should Learning blossom but upon
that Tree which did bear several sorts of fruit? Col. 2.9.
Who could better interpret secrets, than he who lay in his Fathers bosom? all
that heard him were astonished at his understanding, ver. 47. in the greek it
is (...), they were out of themselves with admiration: Vsque ad stuporem
perculsi. Budaeus.
well might they admire, that he who never had been at the University should be
able to silence the great Rabbis; Joh. 7.15. How knows this man letters
having never learned? while they were wondering his Mother (who was now come to
seek him, Minime objurgans, sed rem fidenter and modeste quaerens. Brugensis.
) propounds this Question, Son why have thou thus dealt with us? ver. 48. that
is, why have thou put us to all this labor in seeking thee? in the words of
the Text Christ makes a rational and religious reply, Wist ye not that I must
be about my Fathers business? in the greek it is (...), in the things of my
Father. As if Christ had said, I must be doing the work which my Father in
Heaven has set me about, for this received I my mission and unction, Joh. 9.4.
that I might do the will of him that sent me; what am I in the world for but
to promote his glory, propagate his truth, and be as a load-Star to draw souls
to Heaven? Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business.

From this example of our blessed Savior in making his Fathers work his
business, we learn this great Truth,

That it is the duty of every Christian to make Religion his business.

Religion is not a (...) or thing by the bye, proper only for spare hours, but
it must be the grand business of our lives; Saint Paul made it so, his great
care was to know Christ, and to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9, 10. how
abundantly did he lay out himself for God, 1 Cor. 15.10. (...), I labored more
abundantly than they all, etc. Saint Paul moved heavenward, not slowly as the
Sun on the Dial, but as the Sun in its haemisphere with a winged swiftnes; he
made Religion his business.

For the illustrating and unfolding of this, there are three Questions to be
resolved, 1. What is meant by Religion. 2. Why we must make Religion our
business. 3. What it is to make Religion our business.


1. What is meant by Religion? I answer, the Latin word religio it signifies a
knitting together; Lactantius, l. 4. div. instit.
sin has loosned us from God, but when Religion comes into the heart, it does
religare, fasten the heart to God again; as the members are knit to the head by
several nerves and ligaments: Religion is the spiritual sinew and ligament
that knits us to God. The Greek word for Religion (...) Ab (...), and (...).
, signifies a right worshipping. This is Religion, when we not only worship the
true God, but in that manner which he has prescribed; by a right rule, from a
right principle, to a right end.

2. The second Question is, Why we must make Religion our the whole duty of
man, Eceles. 12.13. or as it is in the Hebrew (...) the whole of man: other
things may delight, Religion does satiate; other things may make us wise to
admiration, Religion makes us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

3. The third Question is, What it is to make Religion our business?

1. We make Religion our business, when we wholly devote our Psalm. 119.38.
Stablish thy word unto thy servant who is devoted to thy fear; as a Scholar
who devotes himself to his studies, makes Learning his business: a godly man
may sometimes run himself through praecipitancy, and incogitancy upon that
which is evil; ther^s no man so bad but he may do some good actions, and
there is no man so good but he may do some bad actions, but the course and
tenor of a godly man's life is religious; when he does deviate to sin, yet he
does devote himself to God. It Is with a Christian as it is with a company of
mariners at sea, they are bound for such a coast, now while they are sailing
they may meet with such a cross wind as may turn them back and drive them a
quite contrary way, but as soon as the storm is over, and the sea calm, they
recover themselves again, and get into the right way where they sailed before;
Isa. 5.20.
so it is with a Christian, Heaven is the haven he is bound for, the Scripture
is the compass he sayls by, yet a contrary wind of tentation blowing, he may
be driven back into a sinful action, but he recovers himself again by
repentance, and sayls on constantly to the heavenly Port. This is to make
Religion our business, when notwithstanding some excursions through humane
frailty, we are devoted to Gods fear, and dedicate our (...) to God.

chiefly; it does principatum obtinere; Matthew. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God. Si Christus pro te de coelesti sede descendit, tu propter ipsum suge
terrena. Aug.
First, in time, before all things, and first, in affection, above all things.
We must give Religion the praecedency, making all other things either
subservient, or subordinate to it. We are to provide for our families, but
chiefly for our souls: this is to make Religion our business. Jacob put the
cattle before, and made his wives and children lag after, Genesis 32.16. It Is
unworthy to make Religion come behind in the rear, it must lead the van, and
all other things must stoop and vail to it: he never had Religion in his heart,
who says to any worldly thing, in the throne thou shall be greater.

David did muse upon God, Psalm. 139.3. While I was musing the fire burned.
(...), Theoph.
Thoughts are as passengers in the soul, when we travel every day to the City
of God, and are contemplating glory and eternity, this is to make Religion our
business. Theophilact calls holy contemplation, the gate and portall by which
we enter into Heaven; a Christian by divine soliloquies, and ejaculations, is
in Heaven before his time; he is wrapd up into Paradise, his thoughts are all
packd up and gone.

4. We make Religion our business, when our main end, and Paul's ultimate end
was, that Christ might be magnified, and the Church edified: Phil. 1.20. 2 Cor.
12 19.
our aims must be good as well as our actions. Many make use of Religion for
sinister ends; like the Eagle while she flies aloft her eye is upon her prey:
Hypocrites serve God propter aliud; they love the Temple for the gold, they
court the Gospel, not for its beauty, Mat. 23.17.
but for its Jewels: these do not make Religion their business, (...). Chrysostom.
but a politic trick, and artifice to get money: but then we make Religion our
business, when the glory of God is mainly in our eye, and the very purport and
intent of our life is, to live to him who has died for us, 2 Cor. 5.15. God is
the center, and all the lines of our actions must be drawn to this center.

5. We make Religion our business, when we do trade with God every day. Phil.
3.20. Our conversation is in Heaven. The greek conversation (...), signifies
commerce and traffic: our merchandise is in Heaven: a man may live in one
place, and drive his trade in another: a Saint though he lives in the world, Vt
municipes coelorum nos gerimus.
yet he trades above the Moon, he is a merchant for the Pearl of price. This is
to make Religion our business, when we keep an holy intercourse with God,
there is a trade driven between us and Heaven, 1 John 1.3. Our fellowship is with
the Father and with his Son Jesus, God comes down to us upon the wing of his
Spirit, and we go up to him upon the wing of prayer.

6. We make Religion our business, when we redeem time from Psalm. 119.62. at
midnight will I rise and praise thee. Those are the best hours which are spent
with God, and David having tasted how sweet the Lord was, would borrow some
time from his sleep, that he might take a turn in Heaven. It well becomes
Christians to take time from worldly occasions, sinful dressings, idle visits,
that they may be the more intent upon the matters of Religion. I have read of
an holy man, who being tempted by his former evil companions to sin, he made
this answer, I am so busy in reading in a little book with three leaves, that
I have no leisure so much as to mind my other business; and being asked
afterward, whether he had read over the book, replied, this book with three
leaves are of three several colors, red, white, and black, which contain such
deep mysteries, that I have resolved with my self to read therein all the days
of my life; in the first leaf which is red, I meditate on the precious blood of
Christ which was shed for my sins; in the white leaf, I meditate on the pure
and ^elitious joys of Heaven; in the black leaf I contemplate the hideous and
dreadful torments of Hell, prepared for the wicked to all eternity. This is to
make Religion our business, when we are so taken up with it, that we have
scarce any leisure for other things. Christian, thou have a God to serve, and a
soul to save, and if thou have any thing of Religion in thee, thou will take
heed of the thieves of time, and wilt engrosse all opportunities for the best
things. How far are they from Christianity, who justle out holy duties, instead
of borrowing time from the world for prayer, they steal time from prayer that
they may follow the world.

seck, sweat, strive, bestir our selves as in a matter of life and death, and
put forth not only diligence, but violence, 2 Samuel 6.14. David danced before
the Lord with all his might: This is to make Religion our business, when we
shake off sloth, and put on zeal as a garment. We must not only pray, but pray
fervently, Jam. 5.16. we must not only repent, but be zealous and repent, Rev.
3.9. we must not only love, but be sick of love, Cant. 2.5.

Horat.
-- multa tulit, sudavit, and alsit. -- This is to be a Christian to purpose,
when we put forth all our vigor and fervor in Religion, Matthew. 12.11.
and take the Kingdom of God as it were by storm. It Is not a faint velleity
will bring us to Heaven, there must not only be wishing but working, and we
must so work, as being damned if we come short.

Use 1. Information. Information.


Branch. Hence learn, that there are but few good Christians; oh how few make
Religion their business! is he an Artificer that never wrought in the trade?
is he a Christian that never wrought in the trade of godliness? How few make
Religion their business!

complement, but not their business; they court Religion by a profession, and
if need be Religion shall have their letters of commendation, but they do not
make Religion their business. Many of Christ's Disciples who said, Lord evermore
give us this bread, yet soon after basely deserted Christ, Ioh. 6.34.
and would follow him no longer. Joh. 6.66. From that time many of his
Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.

2. Others make the world their business, Phil. 3.19. Who mind The earth puts
out the fire: So the love of earthly things puts out the fire of heavenly
affections. It was a judgment upon Korah and Dathan, Numb, 16.22. the earth
swallowed them up. Thus it is with many; the world swallows up their time,
thoughts, discourse; they are swallowed up alive in the earth. There is a
lawful use of these things, but the sin is in the excess. The Be may suck a
little honey from the leaf, but put it in a Barrel of honey, and it is
drowned. How many ingulph themselves in the creature, and drive such a Trade in
the Shop, that they quite break in their Trading for Heaven. (...).
The Farm and Oxen have kept millions from Christ. These do not make Religion
their business, but make the world their business; and what will all be at
death, but as a dream, or fancy? Hab. 2.13. The people shall labor in the
fire, and weary themselves for very vanity.

2. Branch. Hence see how hard it is to be saved! It Is not so Religion must be
our business. It Is not enough to have a smack of Religion, a touch and away,
Canis ad nilum -- but we must make it our (...), our business. How many
precepts have we to obey, how many tentations to resist how many graces to
treasure up? Religion is the work of our whole lives, and all little enough;
Lord then how hard is it to be saved? Where will the sinner appear? What will
become of the Gallants of our times, who make sin their business, Quibus cura
est ut vesles been oleant, ut digite^ annulis radirent, ut crines calamistro
rotentur. Hier.
whose whole employment is to indulge and pamper the flesh? (...). All their
care is (as Hierom speaks) to crisp their hair, to sparkle their Diamonds;
instead of steeping their souls in brinish rears, they bathe themselves in
perfumed waters, and ride to Hell upon the back of pleasure.

Use 2. Let us deal impartially with our own souls, and put Trial.
before the Lord, whether we make Religion our business? And for our better
progress herein, I shall lay down ten Signs and Characters of a man that makes
Religion his business, and by these, as by a Gospel-Touchstone, we may try our
selves.

1. He who makes Religion his business, does not place his Religion Romans 2.28.
He is not a Jew who is one outwardly. Religion does not stand only in forms and
shadows; (...).
this is to give God leaves instead of fruit. It Is often seen that the pomp of
worship destroys the purity, as the paint of the Glass hinders the light: And
it is no untruth to say, that formality may as well damn as profaneness. A
superstitious Pharisee may as well be in Hell as a drunken Epicure. A
Christians main work lies with his heart. He that makes Religion his business,
gives God the Vitals, he worships him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24. In
stilling, the spirits are strongest. The good Christian distills out the spirits
for God. Aaron must offer the fat upon the Altar, Lev. 3.14. He shall offer an
offering made by fire, the fat that covers the inwards. Verse. 16. All the fat
is the Lords. If Aaron had offered the skin instead of the fat, it would not
have been accepted. External devotion alone, is offering the skin; and they
that give God only the skin of duty, shall carry away only the shell of comfort.

Character. He who makes Religion his business, avoids every thing that may be
a remora and hindrance to him in his work. A wicked man cares not whether the
matter of Religion goes forward, or backward; he stands in the way of
tentation; and as if sin did not come fast enough, he draws it as with a
Cart-rope, Isa. 5.18. Isa. 5.18.
But he who makes Religion his business, flies from tentation, and while he is
running the heavenly race, lays aside every weight of sin which does so easily
beset him, Heb 12.1. A man may as well miss of Heaven by loytering in the way,
as by losing the way. 1 Samuel 21.8. The Kings business required have; so the
business of Religion requires have; therefore the good Christian is careful
that he be not taken off the work, and so be taken tardy in it.

Character. He who makes Religion his business, has a care to preserve
conscience inviolable, and had rather offend all the world than offend his
conscience. 2 Timothy 1.3. I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with pure
conscience. Much of Religion lies in conscience. Faith is a precious jewel,
but conscience is the Cabinet where this jewel must be kept. O faelix
conscientiae Paradisus, bonorum operum virgultis consita, variisque virtutum
floribus purpurata. Aug. ad fratr. ^n eremo. Tom. 10.
1 Timothy 3.9. Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Love is a
beautiful flower, but this flower must grow in the garden of a pure
conscience. 1 Timothy 1.5. Charity out of a pure conscience. So sacred a thing is
conscience, that without this all Religion drops in pieces. He who makes
Religion his business, labors to get conscience regulated by Scripture, (as
the Watch is set by the Dial) and having done this, he keeps his conscience as
his eye, that no dust of sin fall into it.

4 Character. He who makes Religion his business, Religion

1. Religion has an influence upon his eating and drinking; he Chrysostom
says) by the strength he receives from the creature, (...), be the more fit
for the cheerful discharge of spiritua^l services: He makes not his food fuel
for lust, but help to duty. Epicures dig their own grave with their teeth; they
feed without fear, Jude verse. 12. Irregulares gulares. Sinners fear not lest
their Table should be a snare; (...). Chrysostom. Psalm. 69.22
they fear not the process of justice; while the Wine is in the Cup, they fear
not the hand writing on the Wall. But the godly man being regulated by
Religion, puts a Knife to his throat, Prove. 23.2. that he may cut the throat of
intemperance.

2. He that makes Religion his business, Religion has an influence recreation.
The strings of the Viol must sometimes be slackned lest they break; Neque
semper arcum tendit Apollo -- God affords his people generous delights; the
Scripture allows the use of the Bow, 2 Samuel 1.18. But we are apt to offend most
in lawful things; more are killed with Wine than with poison. Religion sits
Moderatour in the soul. The man influenced by Religion dares not make play an
occupation; it is oil to quicken him in Gods service, not a Sea to ingulph him.
He who is devoted to Religion, puts bounds to the Olympian sports; he knows
where to make his stops and periods; he sets up an Herculis Columna, on which
he writes, non ultra, no further than this.

3. He that makes Religion his business, Religion has an influence buying and
selling. The wicked get a livelihood often by cozening; sometimes they embase
commodities, Amos 8.6. They sell the refuse of the Wheat. They would pick out
the best grains of Corn, and then sell the rest; sometimes they falsify their
weights, Hos. 12.7. He is a Merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand.
But he who makes Religion his business, is regulated by it in the Shop; he is
just in his dealings; he dares not hold the Book of God in one hand, and false
weights in the other; he is faithful to his neighbor, and makes as much
reckoning of the ten Commandments, as of his Creed.

4. Religion has an influence upon his marrying. He labors to parentage as
piety; nor is his care so much to espouse dowry as virtue (...). Chrysostom.
: In a word, he seeks for a meet help, one that may help him up the hill to
Heaven: this is marrying in the Lord. That marriage indeed is honorable Heb.
13.6.
, when the husband is joined to one who is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
6.19. Here is the man that makes Religion his business, who in all his civil
transactions is steered, and influenced by Religion: Religion is the universal
ingredient.

5. He who makes Religion his business, is good in his calling and relation;
relative grace does much grace Religion; I shall suspect his goodness who
herein is excentricall: some will pray ostentation than as an occupation,
because they are defective in relative duties; they are bad husbands, bad
children, etc. If one should draw a picture, and leave out the eye, it would
much eclipse and take from the beauty of the picture: to fail in a relation,
stains the honor of profession. He who makes Religion his business, is like a
Star shining in the proper orb, and station wherein God has set him.

Psalm. 26.4. I have not sat with vain persons: Diamonds will not cement with
rubbish. It Is dangerous to intermingle with the wicked, least their breath
prove infectious: Sin is very catching. Psalm 106.35, 36. They were mingled
among the heathen, and learned their works, and served their Idols, which were
a snare unto them. (...): Epictetus.
if you mingle bright and rusty armor together, the rusty will not be made
bright, but the bright will be made rusty. He who makes Religion his business,
likes not to be near them, whose nearness sets him further off from God, and
whose embraces, like those of the Spider, are to suck out the precious life.
The godly man ingrafts into the communion of Saints, and hereby, as the Siens
he partakes of the sap, and virtue of their grace: he who makes it his
business to get to Heaven, associates only with those who may make him better,
or whom he may make better.

(...)!
1. He watches his eye, Job 31.1. I have made a covenant with mine eyes. When
Dinah was gadding she was defiled, Genesis 34.1. When the eye is gadding by impure
glances, the heart is defiled. 2. He who makes Religion his business, watches
his thoughts, least they should turn to froth, Jer. 4.24. How long shall vain
thoughts lodge within thee? What a world of sin is minted in the phancie! a
child of God sets a spy over his thoughts, he summons them in, and captivates
them to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. 3. He who makes Religion his
business, watches his passions; passion is like gunpowder, which the Devil
setting on fire blows up the soul. Jonah in a passion quarrels with the
Almighty, Jonah 4.1, 9. He who is devoted to Religion, watches his passions,
least the tide growing high, reason should be carried down the stream, and be
drowned in it. 4. He who makes Religion his business, watches his duties,
Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray. First, he does watch in prayer, the heart is
subject to remissness; if it be not dead in sin, it will be dead in prayer; a
Christian watches, least he should abate his fervor in duty; he knows if the
strings of his spiritual Violl slacken, Col. 3.16.
he cannot make melody in his heart to the Lord. Secondly, he does watch after
prayer; as a man is most careful of himself when he comes out of an hot bath,
the pores being then most open and subject to cold: so a Christian is most
careful when he comes from an Ordinance, least his heart should decoy him into
sin; therefore when he has prayed he sets a watch: he deals with his heart
as the Jews dealt with Christ's sepulcher, Matthew. 27.66. They made the sepulcher
sure, sealing the stone and setting a watch. A good Christian having been at
the word, and Sacrament, (that sealing Ordinance) after the sealing he sets a
watch. 5. He who makes Religion his business, watches his temptations:
Temptation is the scout the Devil sends out to discover our forces; it is the
train he lays to blow up our grace. Satan ever lies at the catch, he has his
depths, Rev. 2.24. his methods, Ephesians. 4.14. his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. (...).
he is continually fishing for our souls, and if Satan be angling, we had need
be w^^ching: He who makes Religion his business is full of holy excubation, he
lies sentinel, and with the Prophet stands upon his watchtower, Hab. 2.1.
Solomon says of a virtuous woman, her candle goes not out by night, Prove.
31.18. the good Christian keeps his watch-Candle always burning.

8. He who makes Religion his business, every day casts up his Solomon says,
know the state of thy flock, Prove. 27.23. a man that makes Religion his work,
Lam. 3.40. Seneca.
is careful to know the state of his soul; before the Lord brings him to a
trial, he brings himself to a trial; he had rather use the looking-glass of
the word to see his own heart, than put on the broad spectacles of censure to
see another fault: he plays the Critic upon himself, he searches what sin
is in his heart unrepented of, and having found it out, he labors by his
tears, as by the water of jealousy, Numb. 5.22.
to make the thigh of sin to rot: He searches whether he have grace or no,
and he tryes whether it be genuine or spurious; he is as much afraid of painted
holiness as he is of going to a painted Heaven: He traverseth things in his
soul, and will never leave till that question whether he be in the faith, be
put out of question: Here is the man making Religion his business; 2 Cor. 13.5.
he is loath to be a spiritual bankrupt, therefore is still calling himself to
account, and wherein he comes short, he gets Christ to be his surety.

Psalm. 116.109. I have sworn I will keep thy righteous judgments. There are
some who will be rich, 1 Timothy 6.9. and there are some who will be godly, 2 Timothy
3.12. He that makes Religion his business, will not (as Luther says) be put
off with other things, he can want health, riches, friends, but he cannot want
Christ or grace; he will be godly: let the times be what they will, they shall
not take him off the work of Religion; he will follow Christ upon the water,
the floods of persecution cannot drown his zeal; he does not say, There is a
Lion in the way, he will wrestle with difficulties, march in the face of death.
The Christians of the Primitive Church cried out to the Persecutor, Ure, tunde,
divelle, Idola tua non adorabimus. Tertul.
Hew us in pieces, burn us, we will never worship your Idols: these were in
good earnest for Heaven. There is a great deal of difference between them who
go to sea for pleasure, and those mariners who are to go a voyage to the East
Indies: The first upon the least storm retreat back to shore; but they who are
imbarqued for a voyage, hold on their course though the sea be rough and
stormy, and will venture their lives in hope of the golden harvest at the
Indies. Hypocrites seem religious when things are serene and calm, but they
will not sail in a storm: Those only who make Religion their business, will
hold out their voyage to Heaven in the midst of tempests and death-threatning
dangers.

soberly, Tit. 2.14.
righteously, godly; he girds his loins, trims his lamp, sets his house in
order, that when death comes for him with an Habeas Corpus, he may have nothing
to do but to die. Behold here the man who makes Religion his business.

Use 3. Let me persuade all you whose consciences may smite you now set upon
the work, Exhortation
make Religion your business; contend tanquam pro aris and focis, bestir your
selves in this as in a matter of life and death. Quest. Answer, Rules for
making Religion our business.
I shall lay down several Rules for your help and direction herein.

1. If you would make Religion your business, possess your Pet. 4.11. That
God in all things may be glorified: Should the body only be tended and looked
after, this were to trim the scabbard instead of the blade; it were to invert
and frustrate the very end of our being.

2. If you would make Religion your business, get a change of heart (...).
Can the body move without a principle of life? Christian get thy heart
spiritualized by grace; an earthly heart will no more trade in Heaven, than a
millstone will ascend, or a Serpent fly in the air: the heart must be divinely
touched with the Spirit, as the needle with the loadstone, ere it can cleave to
God, and follow him fully; Numb. 14.24.
never expect the practice to be holy, till first there be an holy principle.

3. If you would make Religion your business, set your selves always Psalm.
16.8. Interest animis nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit. Seneca.
I have set the Lord always before me. If we leave off work, or loyter in our
work, God sees, he has a casement opens into our breasts; this (...) (as
Chrysostom calls it,) this eye of God that never sleeps, would make us active
in the sphaere of duty: if indeed Gods eye were at any time off us, we might
slacken our pace in Religion, but he is ever looking on; Psalm. 139.9.
if we take the wings of the morning we cannot fly from his presence; and he
who is now the spectatour, will be the Judge; O how would this consideration of
Gods omniciency, keep us from being truants in Religion, how would it infuse a
spirit of activity and gallantry into us, making us put forward with all our
might in the race to Heaven!

4. If you would make Religion your business, think often of the shortness of
time; Cito pede praterit aetas -- Ovid. Phocylides.
this life is but a vapor, Jam. 4.9. a shadow, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. it is (...) as
nothing, Psalm. 39.5. (...), we are wheeling apace out of the world, and there is
no work to be done for our souls in the grave: Eccles. 9.2. Whatsoever thy hand
finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work nor device in the
grave whether thou go. Now is the time of life, now is the day of grace, you
know not how soon these two Suns may set: The shorter our life, the swifter
should be our pace.

convenience, this is of necessity: if this work be not done, we are undone; if
we do not the work which believers are doing, we must do the work which Devils
are doing: and if God give us a serious heart, to lay out our selves in the
business of Religion, our income will be greater than our expense. Religion is
a good Trade if it be well followed; it will quit the cost; it is working in
silver, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your
souls. God will shortly take us from the working-house to the Throne, (...).
Chrysostom.
and will set upon our head a fresh Garland made of the flowers of Paradise.

Cant. 4. ult. Awake O North Wind, Cant. 6.12.
and come thou South blow upon my Garden, etc. If the Spirit join with our
Chariot, then we move to Heaven swiftly, as the Roe upon the mountains, or as
the Charets of Aminadab.

Now having laid down the Rules, let me for a conclusion, press all Christians
to this great duty of making Religion their business; and I will use but two
weighty considerations:

all her paths are pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. The way of Religion is strowed
with Roses, in regard of that inward peace God gives. Psalm. 19 11. In keeping
thy precepts there is great reward. This is such a labor as has delight in
it: as while the mother tends her child, and sometimes beyond her strength too,
yet finds a secret delight in it; so while a Christian is serving God, there is
that inward contentment and delight infused, and he meets with such
transfigurations of soul, that he thinks himself half in Heaven. 'Twas Christ's
meat and drink to do his Fathers will, Joh. 4.34. Religion was St Paul's
recreation, Romans 7.22. Though I should not speak of wages, the vails God gives
us in this life, is enough to make us in love with his service.

2. The second and last consideration is, That millions of persons bye; they
have served God by fits and starts, but have not made Religion their business,
therefore have miscarried to all eternity. If you could see a wickedmans
Tombstone in Hell, you might read this Inscription upon it; Here lies one in
the hellish flames, for not making Religion his business. How many Ships have
suffered shipwreck, notwithstanding all their glorious names of the Hope, the
Safeguard, the Triumph: so how many souls, notwithstanding their glorious
title of Saintship, have suffered shipwreck in Hell for ever, because they have
not made Religion their business.

Whether well composed Religious Vows do not exceedingly promote Religion?
PSALM. 116. ver. 12, and 14. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me?

I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people.


DAvid was no Popish votary, nor were the Vows he is now about to pay, like
the Vows of Popish and superstitious votaries, either in the Matter of them,
or in the Object of them, nor in the Manner or End of them; and I hope you who
read these lines, are, as the greatest part of my Auditors were far enough
from liking of such Vows in others, and from lying under the ensnaring tie of
any such Vow your selves. Since then there is such unlikenesse hoped from you,
justify the unlikenesse and disparity between my discourse and theirs, whose
business is either to state and maintain Monkish vows, or to state and
overthrow them; the one the work of Popish, the other the work of Protestant
writers. In the Words which I have chosen, we have a fit occasion to state our
own case by David 's, who was mindful of his debt to the Lord, and the more
careful to discharge it, because it was due by vow.

Two things noted will be a Key to open the words, so far as we at present
are concerned in them.

That the sum of all our Religion, is our rendering to the Lord. I might so
define Religion, and with these qualifications, that it be done in right and
due Manner, in Right and proper Matter, it would amount to a definition of the
True Religion: All the Religions which men have in the vanity and blindness of
their minds superstitiously and idolatrously adhaered to, have been nothing
else but their Rendering to their supposed Gods, according to their
apprehensions and erroneous thoughts; and the Rendering to the true God in a
true and right manner, is the sum of true Religion. This Notion is consonant
to the Scriptures: Thus Matthew. 22. v. 21. Mat. 22.21.
Give unto God the things that are God's: as true loyalty is a giving to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, so true Piety is the giving to God the things that
are God's. Matthew. 21.41.
And so in that Parable of the vineyard let out to husbandmen; All we owe to
God, is expressed by the rendering the fruit of the vineyard; particular Acts of
Religion are so expressed too in the Psalm. 56.12. Hos. 14.2. 2 Chro. 34.25.
Scriptures. Let this then be the import of David's (...) what shall I render
to the Lord? In what things? and by what means shall I promote Religion in the
exercise thereof? How shall I show my self duly Religious toward him who has
been constantly and abundantly munificent in his benefits toward me?

The second thing to be noted is this, that David so ordered his vows he could
pay them, and in paying them did so render to the Lord, as that Religion was
promoted and furthered; He had so engaged himself by vow, that he could say I
will pay; And his vows were such as were a fit Answer to that enquiry, What
shall I render to the Lord? David had very well composed his vow, it lay within
his compass, he could perform it, and in performing he paid Tribute and did
homage to the Lord; in keeping his vow he gave unto the Lord.

Now put these two notes together, and they are resolved into this Doctrinall
position,

Vows, so made as we can say we will pay them, and so made that in paying them
we render to the Lord, do much advance and promote Religion Or in the words of
that Case of Conscience now to be stated, W^ll composed vows do much promote
Religion.

Who so does engage himself by a well ordered vow, does set his Religion in the
whole, or in some particular part of it in very good forwardness. Religion is
a gainer by this bargain well made; the Bond is to God, but Religion receives
the interesse at least. Well composed vows are Religion's engines, able to
move the weightier burdens and loads, and fit to be only employed in them.

In handling farther this Case we must enquire 1. What a Vow is, that we may
know of what we speak? 2. Whether a Vow may lawfully be made by us? 3. When it
is well composed for Religion's advantage? 4. How much it furthereth Religion?
5. Whence this influence of a Vow upon Religious persons? 6. What proper use to
make of the Position?


A Vow is a voluntary and deliberate Promise made unto God in an extraordinary
case. Est promissio Religiosa sancte facta Deo, Szegedin. loc. com.
It is a Religious promise made unto God in a holy manner, so a Modern writer
defines it. It is a Est Sancta and Religiosa promissio Deo consulto and sponte
facta ad aliquid faciendum vel omittendum quod illi gratum and acceptum fore
constat. Bucan. loc. com. 45.
Holy and Religious promise advisedly and freely made unto God, either to do or
to omit somewhat which appears to be grateful and well pleasing unto him. So
Bucanus. I forbear Aquinas his definition of a Vow: If these I have given
satisfy not, then view it in the words of Peter Martyr, a man of repute and
well known to our own nation in the days of Edward the 6th of ever blessed
memory; Est sancta promissio qua nos obstringimus Deo aliquid oblaturos esse.
Pet. Mart. loc. com. de votis.
It is a Holy Promise, whereby we bind our selves to offer somewhat unto God.
There is one more who defines it, and he is a man whose judgment, Learning and
Holiness has persumed his Name, it is Learned Perkins in his Cases of
Conscience. A Vow (says he) is a Promise made unto God of Things Lawful and
Possible.

Of these five descriptions of a Vow, you may indifferently choose which you
will, for when you have chosen either of them, and looked upon it, you will
find it lay's an obligation upon the person vowing, and bind's him strictly,
and unalterably to perform his vows: for it is (1.) a promise Deuteronomy. 23.23.
, it is not a Purpose, not a single resolution, much less is it the
Deliberation of the mind concerning a matter not yet determined, but
determinable on either part. A Vow is a Promise which had it is beginning in a
serious, due, and thorough Deliberation, which from Deliberation passed into a
Rational, strong and fixed purpose of doing what had been so deliberated and
weighed: Nay further yet, a Vow passes into a formal, and express Promise,
and so makes the votary a debtor. This part of a Vow Solomon has long since
prepared to our hands, Eccles. 5. v. 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh
to sin, neither say thou before the Angel that it was an error. Note what
Solomon forbid's, viz. Ne committas temere vovendo. Mercer. in loc.
Offend not by rash vowing: Nor seek excuse by saying Neque dixeris te per
errorem and imprudentiam vovisse, nec advertisse quid faceres dum voveres.
Mercer. in loc.
it was an error, i. e. through mistake and imprudence thou have vowed, not
observing what thou did when thou vowedst. It must be a deliberate, and
advised act of a man if he will duly vow to God. (2.) It is said to be
voluntary; the thing speak's it self, a Vow must be free, it is injurious to
extort a Promise from a man; free choice should be the spring of every promise,
much more of every Vow. The old Law empowred some persons to disanull the vow
of an other, but no Law or reason can empowre any one to enforce a Vow upon
another, each one may forbear to vow, Deuteronomy. 23. v. 22. (3.) As it must be
voluntary and deliberate, so it must be to God alone; we read still, if thou will vow, thou shall vow to the Lord: Not to Angels with such as worship them,
not to Saints with superstitious Papists, not to any man; man may promise
solemnly unto man, but he may not vow; man may be the witness of thy vow, but
man may not be the object. For the dependence of man upon man, is not great
enough to warrant the one in vowing, or the other in expecting such a vow;
b^side that, we must not vow to one we must not pray to, nor can we expect help
from man in cases that are just ground for, and which do require a vow from us.
Which cases (4.) I say are extraordinary, and more than usual either from
received mercy or hoped and expected mercy; It is impossible he should well
compose his vows, or duly pay them, who makes ordinary, and daily cases
ground of his vows; we cannot but forget many an ordinary mercy receiv^d, but
we may not, must not forget any vow made: We must pray for every mercy we want,
but we may not bind our selves in the bonds of a vow for every mercy we pray
for, this would inevitably cast us upon the sin of falsehood and
unfaithfullnesse in our vows.

But I proceed to the second thing to be enquired into, that is, Whether it be
lawful in any case for us now under the New Testament to make a Vow? That it
was lawful for the Jew none have doubted, but some doubt is made, whether a
Christian may voluntarily bind The solution of this doubt is necessary to our
clearer determination of this case, for if vows were now unlawful to us, they
could neither be well composed, nor could they advantage Religion; and if it
may appear they may lawfully be made, then we may go on in the consideration of
the remaining particulars. To this second then very briefly we answer, That a
Christian may lawfully make a promise or Vow unto God, binding himself more
than ordinarily unto God for, and in expectation of mercy, in some or other
more than ordinary case or exigency. For a great mercy received already a
Christian may vow thankfulness, for a mercy not received but expected, he may
vow upon the receipt to tender to the Lord more than usual duty. Such vows at
this day may be used by us, Ejusmodi vota hodie quoque nobis in usu esse
possunt, quoties nos Dominus vel a clade aliqua, vel a morbo difficili, vel ab
alio quovis discrimine eripuit. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 13.
so often as the Lord has delivered us from any destruction, or dangerous
disease, or from any danger, says Calvin, speaking of Vows for mercy to be
received. And Mr Perkins in his Cases of conscience, both affirms what we now
do, and answers the Objections made to the contrary. But leave we men, and come
to Reason; why it is lawful for us to vow.

1. What is not evil in it self, nor evil by accident 1. Vows well-ordered not
sin in themselves, nor by accident.
(unless made evil by the undue ordering of it through our fault) may lawfully
be done by us. I know this well considered proves it self; yet I would confirm
it with this observation: What is not evil, may lawfully be done by us; now
things are evil either per se, or per accidens: If Vows be either way evil, it
is by accident, which accidental evil may be prevented, and indeed is by due
composing of Vows, and by diligent performing of them when composed. So that
if a Christian may order the making and performing his Vow, so as to prevent
the evil which attends a Vow ill-made; than such a Christian may surely make a
Vow very lawfully. But I presume no one will doubt, that he who makes Vows
seldom, consultedly, and sincerely, may duly keep them, and in so doing,
prevent any consequent evil.

2. Some Vows once lawful on moral grounds, Such lawful still.
2. Vows may be lawfully made now by us Christians, because what was lawful to
the Jew on Moral considerations, and not on any Ceremonial considerations,
that is also lawful now unto us Christians. Let it be noted; I do not say what
was once lawful to them, is now lawful unto us, for it was lawful for them
to sacrifice, it is not now lawful unto us: But I say, what was once on Moral
grounds lawful to them, is now lawful to us, because the morality of the
thing (which is supposed the ground of this Vow) is the same to them and us. It
was lawful for Jacob on Moral motives to engage himself more closely to God,
if God would indeed be with him: It is as lawful for any of us on the same
occasion, and for the like motive, to vow unto God. Jacob was moved to it, lest
he should be found less than ordinarily thankful, for a more than ordinary
providence and mercy to him: So may you or I; Neque enim a pii hominis officio,
tunc abhorret votivam oblationem, velut solenne recognitionis Symbolum
consecrare, ne ingratus erga benignitatem ejus videatur. Calvin. Instit. l. 4.
c. 13.
for it is not abhorrent to the duty of a pious man, at such time to consecrate
(as a solemn testimony of his acknowledgement) an offering by Vow, lest he
should seem unthankefull for his bounty. If there were then Vota moralia, Vows
that were moral in their matter, manner, motives, and ends; and (that such
there were) Job's covenant with his eyes, and David's swearing to keep Gods
Commandments, prove to us; either we must say they did what was unlawful, or
else we cannot make such moral Vows, (which is not rational to suppose) or
else yielding such Vows so made to be lawful to them, they are so to us. But
thirdly

Vows may lawfully be made by us Christians, 3. Vows by general consent of
Nations approved.
for it is a kind of thankfulness and acknowledgement made to God, with the
universal approbation and consent of men. It is such a chief Rent, that no
Nation in the world putting a value on Gods goodness, and putting a difference
between great and little dangers, between great and little blessings, Quid enim
nisi Vota supersunt. Ovid.
but did constantly approve this way of preventing great dangers, by great
Vows, and resenting great blessings, by like vowed praises. Thus addressing
themselves in a more than ordinary manner to their Gods, on more than ordinary
exigences: And if I must bring my witnesses to depose for the truth, one speaks
in English thus; Votum omnibus gentibus and populis in periculo constitutis
usitatum. Szegedin. loc. com. de Votis.
Vow was used frequently by all Nations and people beset with danger. Another
learned Pen at once intimates the universality of the custom, and censureth
the vanity and blind folly of the Heathens, in their Vows to their Idol-Gods.
Hence the Hinc illa Votorum ineptiae, imo prodigiosae absurditates apud
Ethnicos, quibus nimis insolenter cum diis suis luserunt. Calvin. Instit. l. 4.
c. 13.
follyes and monstrous absurdities of the Heathen in their Vows, wherewith
they did too insolently abuse their Gods. It were endless to attempt what
testimonies might be gathered up in this point; but by these it is apparent,
that thankfulness is a debt which all Nations apprehended might and ought to be
ensured to God by Vow. So that hence I would collect, that as gratitude is not
only lawful, but a duty imprinted on the soul of man; so this high degree of
gratitude is a Copy, or Transcript of that Original: It is lawful doubtless
to us, to be thankful in the highest degree. Now the return of more than
ordinary duty, for more than ordinary mercy, is the highest, and is the Vow we
speak of.

Fourthly, Unless such Vows may be accounted lawful to us, 4. Vows the only
Gospel free will offering extraordinary.
I cannot see how we have any way of making free, voluntary, and extraordinary
acknowledgements unto God. For since all duty is commanded, and so determined
as to matter and manner ordinarily, that the Law prescribes, and enjoins them,
and we may not superadde any thing to the Law; yet sometime more than ordinary
mercy gives us command to be more than ordinary in our acknowledgements, which
since it may not be by doing any thing not commanded, must be done by adding
our own promise and word, to have more than our ordinary care was, or otherwise
would have been, to do what is commanded; or else it must be left undone as
unlawful, which is in the issue to leave us without any way of binding our
selves to acknowledgements, suited to extraord nary providence. In a word,
Seeing the Law of God is the standing rule of our daily obedience, and is the
same unchanged rule of our daily duties; but withal the mercies and varieties
of providence are a Law likewise to us Christians, and when great, require
great and suitable deportment in us. We must have some way, and that lawful,
to measure out our resentments, which can be no other, but the laying bonds and
voluntary obligations on our selves unto God, which is the same with this Vow.
Either there must be some such lawful way, or else great providentiall mercies
which call for greater returns, and are a real Law to us, cannot be duly
observed and obeyed. Now I know riches of grace in the Gospel have not so
entrenched on, or done injury to providence. I know that as grace is no enemy
to the standing Law, nor patronizeth licentiousness; so neither is grace an
enemy to providence, nor warranteth any one to overlook the greatness, and
extraordinary mercy in any providence; or to be careless and slight in
answering them with unsuitable return of thankfulness. But

5. Vows best ensure duty, and ensnare not us.
Fifthly, That is lawful to us Christians, which does most certainly ensure our
duty to God, yet does not ensnare us in the ensuring of it. That you or I may
do lawfully, which will not ensnare us, but more strongly engage us to our
duty, none will doubt this. In dealing with a man, you, or I, or any reasonable
man would be ready to give any security that we might give, without ensnaring
our selves. Judge. 11.35.
Now Vows well composed do more ensure the duty, for we cannot go back, it is
a Vow; yet do not ensnare, for we can perform them, they are Vows well
composed. Jephthah's Vow bound him fast, for it was the bond of a Vow; but this
bond ensnared him, for it was rash, and ill composed; such was unlawful to
him, and is to us. David's Vow here was an ensuring him to God, and his duty,
it unalterably bound him; yet it was no snare to him, for he had so vowed, that
he could say, I will pay my Vows; such Vows were lawful to him, such are
lawful to us. Now all well composed Vows will be such; they will very firmly
bind us to duty, and they will never ensnare us in their binding us; which
thing will be more plainly seen, upon discovery of the next General, viz.

3. General. It must be 1. In extraordinary cases.
When Vows are well composed, and so consequently for the advantage of Religion?

First then, If you would duly and well compose your Vows, you must wait a
fit season, not vow on every occasion. Who is ready to vow on every occasion,
will break his Vow on every occasion. It is a necessary Rule, That we be as
sparing in making our Vows, as may be; there being many great inconveniences
attending frequent, and multiplied Vows. It is very observable, that the
Scripture mentions very few examples of Vows, compared with the many
Instances of very great and wonderful providence; as if it would give us some
Instances that we might know what we have to do, and yet would give us but few
that we might know we are not to do it often. You read Jacob lived sevenscore
and seven years, Genesis 47.28. but you rea^ (I think) but of one Vow that he
made: Our extraordinary exigences are not many, and I say our Vows should not
be more. Let this then be the first necessary ingredient of a well-ordered vow.
Let it be no oftener made, than the pressing greatness of an evil to be
removed, or the alluring excellency of a blessing ex^raordinary to be obtained,
will well warrant. Joph^hah's Vow was so far right; he had just occasion; there
was a great and pressing danger to be removed; ther^ was an excellent bl^ssi^g
to be obtained; the danger was lest Israel should be ensl^ved; the blessing was
victory over their enemies: This warranted his Vow, though his rashness marred
it. It was in David's troubles that David swear, and vowed a Vow to the most
High, Psalm. 132.1, 2. And Jacob forbear to vow, until his more than ordinary
case bade him vow, and warranted him in so doing, Genesis 28 20. Let us do as he
did, spare to vow, until such case puts us on it.

Secondly, 2. It must be deliberate.
When the extraordinary case warrants thee to this ex^raordinary obliging thy
self, then be sure to proceed deliberately, and with advice. Consider what thou
do; every one condemns rash Vow^s, and I am sure inconsiderate Vows are rash
ones. Ad votum tria de necessitate requtruntur. sc. deliberatio, etc. 2a. 2. q.
83. art. 1. Scriptura hoc ejus factum narrat tantum, sed non laudat. Pet. Mart.
loc. com. cl. 3. c. 6. Vt matu^e deliberemas. loc. com. de voti^.
Here Jephihah falled; he did not consider, and ponder with himself, what he
was about to do when he vowed: Aquinas reckons this among the three things
necessary to a Vow. And since this was wanting in Jephthah, the Scripture makes
a narration of his fact, but no where gives commendation to it. This is one of
the condition. Bucan prescribes, That we thoroughly weigh: But we have a
greater, than Aquinas, or the other two, here; Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, Eccl 5.2. Which
rule he does in the Context extend to this case of Vows Verse. 4, 5, 6. Be not
hasty, but d^liberate these four things in thy, Vow.

1. Whether lawful.
1. First, Whether that thou vow^st to do be lawful; sin can never be the
matter of a justifiable and well composed Vow. If that thou vowest be not
lawful, it is not so much a Vow, as a contriving and designing of wickedness.
It was a murth^rous conspiracy of those more than forty, Act 23.21. not a Vow,
to take away Paul's life. Whatever God has forbidden us in our ordinary course
of life, as he has forbidden every sin, that cannot be the matter of an
extraordinary promise unto God. The S hoolmen tell us it is to be de meliore
bono, Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 88. ar. 1. c.
in an excelling good; now what is not lawful, is not good. They tell us,
Debet fieri Deo, de iis quae Dei su^t: It must be made to God, in the things
that are of God; and we are sure no unlawful thing is of God.

2. Whether acceptable to God.
2. As it must be considered, whether the thing be lawful; so next we are to
consider, whether it will be acceptable unto the Lord. The Vow is made to him,
and the performance of it is to him: It is a Debt, and payment is to be made to
him. If it be a matter which thou find upon after-search, to be indeed
lawful, yet in reason to be thought, not acceptable for so great a mercy as
thou have received; thou will be enforced to confess thy mistake and error in
vowing: And this is to provoke God, Eccl. 5 6. Sit Deo acceptum, is the second
circumstance under deliberation, which will be seen

3. Whether proportioned.
3. By a third particular, i. e. Whether that thing thou vowest, bear a
proportion to that thou did expect and pray for when thou vowedst, or to that
thou had received, for which thou do now make thy Vow. B^ing it, with the
providence which occasioned it; set them together; and hear what thy own
reason; what other men's judgment; what the very things themselves; what thy
receipts and returns say of thy Vows, in the ma^ter of them; as in ordinary,
so in all extraordinary mercies. God requires and accepts only suitable and
well proportioned returns: If it be over proportioned, it will hazard thee; if
it be under-proportioned, it will shame thee; and neither will be so well
accepted. Though one meals meat when thou art hungry, is more, and a greater
mercy, than thou can equal by thy obedience; yet to vow thy self, and all
that is thine for that one mercy, is more than is expected, and may be called a
disproportioned Vow. So on the contrary, to pray for a prosperous voyage, and
an ample return of thousands, and to vow thereupon a few pence, or shillings is
d^sproportioned, will not be accepted. Thou must render to the Lord, according
to thy receipts from the Lord.

Fourthly, In a well-composed Vow, 4. Whether in thy power.
thy deliberation must be employed in considering thy power and ability;
Whether it be in thy power to do what thou vowest: No imp^ssible thing can be
the matter of a Vow. God has not made an impossibility the matter and
primitive object of our duty; nor does he expect we should; or would he accept
such a Vow: For a Vow of an impossible thing, is in effect to bind our selves
to falsify our Vow. Who engages to do what he cannot do, engages himself to
be worse than his word. You must consider then whether the thing be possible in
it self; and then next whether it be in your power, that you can say you will
do it, that you may truly affirm you can absolutely do it; which thing being
very uncertain, for what is to day in our power, to morrow may be out of our
power: It is therefore good to limit it so far, as it shall be in your power,
and so long as it continues in your power to perform your Vows. These two
things are requisite to a well composed Vow; an occasion or exigency more than
ordinary; and then a thing lawful, acceptable proportioned to the mercy, and
within our power. Now when these concur,

A third must be added, that is, Thou must vow cheerfully, and with a ready
mind; there must be much of the will in it. 3. Vows must be cheerfully made.
Some tell us the Latin word noting a Vow, comes from the word which signifies
the will: Indeed all that is in a Vow, so far as it is a Vow, is and must be
of our will, for it consists principally, if not solely, in the manner of our
obliging our selves; and this is voluntary. God has left it much at our
liberty to vow, or not to vow; only he requires us to do it cheerfully if we
vow, it is matter of our choice. Deuteronomy. 23.22. If thou forbear to vow, it shall
not be sin unto thee. Yet if we will vow, it is matter of duty to do it
cheerfully, for, so the Lord loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. and
therefore expects a speedy performance. Defer not to pay, Eccl. 5.3. (...)
Tempore respirationis festinatio.
Hence the Rabbinicall Proverb, Speed suits the time of deliverance. As a Vow
suits the time of dangers and straits; so have from a ready mind, fits the time
of deliverance and mercy. But

Fourthly, He that will compose his Vow well, must vow sincerely and uprightly,
that is, to the end he may most honor God, by

1. The Commemoration of his mercy, 4. Vow sincerely.
and goodness. Vows are mercyes Monuments, on which are written the praise of
the Lord.

2. The publishing the mercies of God, for the engaging others to admire the
Lord, and to trust him, and to seek unto him.

3. The setting grace on work in the heart and soul of him that Vows. It sets
grace on work, both in that part which eyes God to draw nearer, and to keep
closer to him, and in that part which keeps eye on sin to prevent, mortify,
and destroy it; So then when a Christian, (having received, or being in
expectation of some extraordinary mercy from God) does deliberately promise,
what is lawful in it self, acceptable to God, proportioned to the mercy, and,
within his power to perform; who so does this cheerfully, and sincerely, that
God may be honored in the continued remembrance of it, in the public
declaring it, and in the exciting of grace, in the person Vowing; Then has a
Christian well composed his Vow. And such a Vow does very much further
Religion: Which will appear by handling the next thing, How much, or in what
things it does further and promote Religion? 4. General. How well composed
Vows prom^te Religion.

The credit of Religion.


Now there are three grand concerns of Religion, than which it has none
greater; and all three are carried on, and promoted by such Vows as these.

First, Religion has its concernment in the credit and reputation which it
has in the world; Religion has a name to look after so well as you, or I; and
it loses, or gains as it is either honored, or reproached by the Professors
of it: Now when times of extraordinary danger drive us to our Prayers and Vows
to the true God, and we resolve to have mercy from him, or to choose to fall
into his hand, this f^ts the credit and honor of Religion, that it can have
recourse to God whom we know can deliver us. This is somewhat, but the making a
Vow does not so much honor Religion as the performing of it does, when it is
hereby declared to the world, that Religion is the thing makes men the same in
their mercies, which they were in their distresses; that the God they worship
is the true God, able to require their Vows if they should neglect to pay
them. A Heathen who in distress makes a Vow, and in his safety performs it
carefully, puts a very high honor upon his false God, upon his Idol. What
Christian soever makes and keeps his Vows duly, does likewise put an honor on
the true God.

It honors,

1. The power and providence of God, by acknowleding its Sovereignty over all
in the world, and its particular disposing and overruling of us and our
concerns, when thou Prayest and Vowest in a strait, thou seem to tell the
world thou believe that thy God rules the world by his power and providence.
But when thou payest thy Vows, thou really testifiest to the world that thou
believe, and ownest this power in thy particular case; so when Jephthah, when
David paid their Vows, they did give real testimony that their God delivered
them by his power and providence, and this is Religions honor that it is the
Worship of so mighty a God.

2. It honors God in his readiness to hear, and in his faithfulness to
answer the prayers of his suppliants; Prayers conceived speak a belief that he
is ready, Vows made speak our confidence that he is faithful, but now Vows
performed speak thus much, that we have found him so to us; when David said, I
will pay my vows, it is, that he may render to the Lord for the Lords
readiness and faithfulness to hear and deliver him. Now its Religious
honor, that it is the worship of a God of truth and faithfulness.

3. It honors God in his Omniscience and all-seeing eye, it declares to the
world that we worship and serve a God who takes notice of us in particular, and
who observes whether we keep our word with him or no; when thou have made a
Vow, and can perform it, yea do perform it, because thou know and
believe thy God remembers when thou did make it, and observes how thou will perform it, what is this but to give him the honor of his all-seeing and
all-observing eye?

4. It honors Religion in that it is a Demonstration that Religion teaches
men gratitude. It is a high charge which is laid on the Romans in their
Heathenisme, that they were unthankful, Romans 1.21. It is a very great reproach
to Religion, to have its professors branded with this; It is (though but one
single miscarriage) left on Hezekiah's name, like a spot in the Moon, to endure
while his name shall be in remembrance. That he remembered not to return to the
Lord, according to the benefit done unto him, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. But now thy care
to make thy Vows well, that they may be kept, and thy thankefullnesse in
keeping them, when so made, do clearly evidence, that thy Religion engages
thee to aim and attempt at the highest gratitude. Si ingratum dixeris
emni^dicis.
Now according to the old Rule, if you say a man is unthankefull, you say he is
all naught; so if you say he is thankful, and his Religion teaches him to be
so, you speak all good of the man and of his Religion. Indeed David does often
comprise all Religion in this, Be thankful unto him.

So Religion shines forth in the luster and brightness of a good name, when
they who profess it, dare neither be rash in making, nor remiss or false in
keeping their Vows.

Next Vows well composed, and faithfully performed, do much promote Religion,
and that frequently

Spreading Religion.
2. By setting forward the growth of Religion, in the midst of those who
profess it, (for I will only speak of this now, albeit I might speak of the
spreading of Religion amongst such, who before were strangers to it, by the
faithfulness of some zealous, prudent, and industrious votaries.) When
Christians of great exigencies are brought on their knees to pray, and plead,
and confess, and promise, if they may be heard, and when they come to praise,
acknowledge and pay their Vows to God in the presence of those are called his
people; it is very powerful to

By confirming.
1. Confirm them in the profession, and to establish them; For who would not
hold fast where he can observe such goodness, tenderness, and power in God he
worshipeth? Psalm. 107.
Men, religious men, some at least will praise the Lord, for such wonderful
works to the children of men; Psalm. 36.7.
when they see such excellent loving kindness showed to the distrssed, the
children of men will put their trust in God, None will leave the shadow of that
wing which so saves.

Reforming.
2. It is very like to make them enquire into the ways and doings which have
been theirs, but have not been good, and to look forward to the ways which
must be theirs, and must be amended; when a stander by shall observe the
distress a good man is in, and how he resents neglect of duty, prevalency of
corruption, necessity of reforming, and binds himself to more diligent
discharge of duty, to more vigorous oppsition of sin, to constant care of
reforming. He is ready to reflect on himself, and if he be what he professes,
will judge himself one who is as deep in the faults, as much needing to reform,
and as near to the like or greater distress. He may ere long be put to it, and
therefore it will be best to be on the amending hand.

3. Vows promote Religion in the Votaries heart and life.
But however thirdly, Vows well made, and kept well, very much improve and
promote Religion in the heart and life of him who so Voweth and keeps his
Vow; If none of those who are acquainted with thy religious making and keeping
thy Vows, should either honor it more, or set to the exercise of it more, yet
certainly it will produce such effects in thy life, as will very much conduce
to the increase of godliness and righteousness; which will appear by some few
particulars, which are undeniably the effects of a well composed Vow, and do as
undeniably promote and set forward Religion: As

1. Vows increase circumspection.
First, A well composed Vow will make thee more circumspect and wary in the
general course of thy life. Such an influence it has, as does more directly
work on one particular part, yet is not terminated to that particular only. It
is here as with a Debtor, who doubles his bond and security for his debt, upon
some extraordinary favor which his Creditor showed him. This double bond
directly looks to that particular debt, but it works on the debtor's ingenuity
and gratitude, to be more careful in the discharge of all his debts, so thy
Vow looks on a particular, but engages thee to better discharge of all thy
debts to God. Thus it was with David, Psalm. 56.12, 13. Thy Vows are upon me, O
God. Now these Vows were made when he was in danger of his life, as it seems
from the 13th Verse. For when God heard him, he delivered his soul from death;
for this he Vowed Praises in particular, and he will render them, but withal,
he takes himself to be hereby engaged to a more exact and circumspect walk
before God in all duties; so he expresses himself, Verse. 13. latter part,
Vows are too broad and general, which are not fixed more especially to some
one thing. And, They are too narrow which are so fixed to one, that they
exclude all other things which might conveniently be taken in. Jacob mentions
Tithes as the particular object of his Vow, but Jacob withal intended a more
exact and circumspect care over himself and Family in matters of Religion, as
appears by those passages, Genesis 35.2.3. Jacob said unto his household, and to
all that were with him, put away the strange Gods that are among you. Here is
the reforming of his household. And observe this was in consideration of Gods
answering his prayers, when he Vowed unto God, who answered him in his
distress, and was with him in the way which he went. So then like a stream it
rises from one springhead, and runs in one main current, but it disperseth it
self through many other smaller branches, and waters every part. But

Secondly, 2. Vows discover former defects.
Well composed Vows do very much promote Grace and Holiness in the heart of
the vower, in that it does bring the man to a serious view and survey of his
former defects and neglects; when he comes to look over his streits, what
likely brought them on him, and so put him on this extraordinary way of seeking
God, and suing for mercy, when he reads over the bond he has voluntarily
entered into, and observes what put him thus in debt to God; when he views
these, and such like particulars, he comes to knowledge of his former
aberrations, and defects. Now as a good and careful tradesman accounts he is
in a good forwardness to a thriving way when he has found out what did hinder
and endammage his trade, for removal of which he has set himself in a
hopeful and likely way; so when a Christian comes to cast up accounts, to make
even, he finds an unconstant and starting heart has in this or that particular
endammaged him, and if there be any way of dealing with it to keep it constant
and stable, it is by doubling its bonds, and this must be done by vow; this
course is like to repair former defects, and reparation I am sure is good and
effectual means to keep up the house. Some Interpreters tell us, that when
Jacob came to reform his house, it was occasioned by his defective observance
of his Vow; and that God in Genesis 35.1. puts him in mind of it in such words, Go
up to Beth-el and dwell there, and there build an Altar; if their conjecture
fail not, it is a pertinent instance to our case; Jacob had made a good Vow,
and well ordered, and doubtless had performed much of it, yet thirty years
after he is minded of it by God, and then he comes to consider and perform
what was yet wanting, to make up his defects; Thus when care to perform Vows
well made, discovers things ill carried to the prejudice of Religion, it makes
way for future furtherance of Religion.

Dub.
But it is like you will enquire, May a Christian vow the repairing of such
defects? are they not more than can be discerned? more than can be prevented?
should he vow this would he not ensnare himself and break his vows?

Sol.
To this I answer briefly, That no man in the world may engage himself by vow,
to live for future without any defects, such perfection is only in Heaven;
here it is not attainable. But a Christian may engage by vow to be careful,
and to do his best diligence to prevent as many as he can: He may vow, that so
far as Grace shall enable him, he will endeavor to live with fewer faults.
But a vow of full perfection can never be a well composed vow, nor ever be
performed.

3. Vows engage against a particular sin.
Thirdly, Well composed vows do promote Religion in the heart and life of a
Christian, in that it strongly and unalterably engages the Christian against
some one or other particular, sin which would more easily prevail, if the
reverence or care of so sacred an engagement did not set the Christian against
that sin. Sometime we should sin by taking too little notice of great
providence, or by setting them at too low rate, or by soon forgetting them, or
by waxing proud and insolent under them. Now such sins provoke God, weaken
Religions interesse in the heart, and diminish its fruit in the life. Now when
vows prevent such sins, they do as much promote Religion as preventing
Physic promotes the health of the body; of such a nature was Job's covenant
with his eyes, which shut the windows of his soul, and kept out sin by
preventing its entrance at the out doors, I have made a covenant with my eyes,
Job 31.1. Away then with all alluring beauties, I cannot gaze on them, for I
cannot be false to my vow and covenant. Every Vow is for more strict and exact
approbation of our selves, in either universal, or particular, either in a
perpetual or temporarary observance and serving the Lord: Now that promotes
Religion, which thus exactly and strictly binds the soul to approve it self to
God: Sin and Religion have two concernmen^s as contrary to each other as the
Rebel, and the Law of his Sovereign, and as he promotes the interesse of his
Sovereign who does strictly bind himself to oppose any Rebel, so he promotes
Religion who by vow binds himself strictly to oppose any one sin whatever. If
Noah vowed after his miscarrigge against drinking any considerable quantity of
w ne that he might prevent that sin, this vow strengthened the interesse of
his ho^y sobriety, and the in^er^sse of Religion too, so far as sobriety
promotes our fitness and greater aptness to Religious works.

But I shall be here asked, Dub.
May a man vow against any one particular sin, and bind himself by so great a
bond against the committing of it? The ground of the doubt is, because none so
stands but he may fall, and it is not in our power to keep our selves from any
sin.

To this then I answer, Sol.
That it would be rash and inconsiderate to vow absolutely and peremptorily,
that thou will never act such or such a sin. But thus thou may justifiably
vow;

1. That than wilt endeavor, and with thy best diligence labor to prevent
this or that sin; thou may vow to set a guard upon thy soul, but thou
may not vow the success of this guard; the endeavor is thy duty, and that
thou may vow; the success is Gods gift, and that thou must pray for. And
let weak Christians take notice o^ this, lest they ensnare themselv^s by vowing
what is not in their power.

2. If thou will vow so, thou must do it still with dependence on the Lord for
power to perform, through grace thou will not sin thus or thus, may be thy
vow.

3. If thou will so vow, then take my advice with thee, (1.) Let it be only
against great sins, and such as are committed with deliberation, these are seen
before committed and so are more easily resisted. (2.) Let it reach no farther
then sincere endeavor against them: And (3.) Be sure to do your utmost, and
then though the sin may be too strong for you, yet are you not false to your
vow. But next

4. Vows increase our care of particular duty.
Fourthly, Well composed vows do much promote Religion in the heart and life of
a Christian, insomuch as they engage the Christian to a more intent care of
some particular duty and Grace to be more than ordinarily attended and
exercised: A vow binds the votary to a more than ordinary care of duty, and to
a more than ordinary diligence in the exercise of grace; now where such a vow
is so well composed that the duty may be more than ordinarily well performed,
and the grace may be (more than usually has been) exercised, there such a vow
does as much promote Religion, as its care does exceed our ordinary care: Who
bestows most on a duty, or on the constant exercise of a grace, does do most to
the promoting of Religion; and I am sure, who so does advisedly and duly vow,
and does punctually and duly perform his vow, is the man whose care is
greatest in that duty and grace which his vow and the particular occasion of it
did commend to his thoughts.

Dub.
But may we vow to perform a duty or exercise a grace? Can we say it is in our
power?

Sol.
To this in one word; Vow so far as it is and shall be in your power, and you
may warrantably and acceptably do it before God; the performance of duty, and
exercise of grace are debts we owe to God, and we may bind our selves doubly to
pay them so far as our stock will reach, and without this limitation every
vow is rash and ill composed.

5. Vows, etc. by observing and improving providence.
Fifthly, Well composed Vows do much promote Religion, in that they engage us
to a more diligent observing of Providence, and to a due improving them to the
best advantage of grace: When thou have vowed thou have s^aled on thy part, if
God do answer thy hope by his providence, he performs the condition on his
part, and now it must be thy care to observe Gods providence, and to improve
it; so Jacob vowed, then observes how God will perform with him, and
afterward makes the improvement: Now providence answering the expectation of
one who voweth, has in it

1. Remarkable power and faithfulness to be the ground of faith; this was
seen in that Providence which gave Jephthah that victory which was his hope and
expectation when he vowed.

2. Eminent goodness and tenderness to be the loadstone and attractive of
love; so in that Providence which brought David to the possession of his hopes,
and David thought so when he professed he would love God dearly, Psalm. 18.1.
because he had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies.

3. Eminent readiness to hear prayer; when God does as to Jephthah speedily
hear, or as to Jacob, continue still to hear for many years together.

4. More than ordinary obliging considerations to draw forth our obedience too;
such Providence have tongues to call for our faith, our love, our prayers, our
obedience and our praises; What shall I render to the Lord? is the serious well
advised votaries enquiry.

5. A most undoubted evidence appropriating this to the Lord, that the
expecting Christian can truly say, it was the Lord's doing and his only, none
bore part in the work, none shall bear away share of his trust, love, prayer or
observant obedience due to him from me.

Now if these particulars be considered, it cannot sure be doubted longer,
whether well composed vows do promote Religion, when they do so engage, and
quicken those who vow to such Acts of Duty, to such exercise of Grace, to such
opposition of sin, to such improvement of providence, for the increase of
Grace: And what is Religion but all these in one word, and what is the
promoting of Religion, but the facilitating, continuing, and perfecting of all
these, which is not a little furthered by such Vows.

It yet remains to show, Whence these well composed Vows have To this I will
answer as briefly as I may; There is in such Vows a most notable awakening,
and quickeng power, which sets all a man's care, wisdom, truth, and strength on
work, to do the things whereby Religion is so much promoted.

1. A deep rooted natural reverence and awe of a serious Vow, which makes the
man who has so much sense of Religion as to make a Vow, to have as much care
of performing it: Man is readier to cast off the reverence he owes to Gods Law,
than to cast off the regard he has to his own Vow, so that many times it is
very expedient to engage by Vow to do what is our duty by the Law of God: The
bond of natural conscience is very strong, and Vows have much of their
strength from it, and thereby become great supporters of Religion.

2. To this the Christian has a superadded strict command and prescript of the
Law of God indispensably, requiring the performance of that Vow which is
lawful and possible; I have opened my mouth and I cannot go back, Judge. 11.35.
It is the unalterable Law, if you vow, you must pay, Psalm. 76.12. God did
indulge the Jews so far as to redeem some of their vows, but he allowed none
to break them. Read that Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord
thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely
require it of thee. And ver. 23. That which is gone out of thy lips thou shall
keep and perform. Now when so much of Religion lies in and depends on such
Vows, and these Vows are such inviolable ties that God will wink at none who
break them, they cannot but have such influence and strong operation on persons
to the advantage of Religion.

3. Gods severe judgments on contemners of their Vows, add much to their
influence: I will not mention examples of vengeance on Heathens for breach of
their vows, though the Idol deserved not better, yet God who is the true God,
would have men know such sacred bonds as Vows, should not be profaned by sleight performing, or contemned by a total neglect of them. The Jewish
Rabbis tell us, that God punished Jacob for neglecting his Vow, by Dinah's
miscarriage. However, it is enough God has threatened the falsifier of his
vows with no less than a destruction of the works of his hands, if not with
the ruin of his person: God will not let such one go unpunished, Ne sacrum ejus
nomen ludibrio exponeretur neve populus assaesceret ad impium ejus contemptum
si fraudator impune negaret quod Deo promiserat, Bucanus. loc. com. 45 de Vol.
lest his holy Name should be scorned, lest the people should be accustomed to
an impious contempt of him, if the falsifi^r of his Vow should deny what he had
promised to god and go unpunished. In one word, that which stands thus on the
unchangeable Law of Nature, and is written on the conscience; what is confirmed
and ratified by the peremptory positive Law of God, what is yet further armed
with the terrible threat of the God of Heaven, must needs have a mighty binding
strength in it obliging men: But now all these concur in Vows well composed,
and hence they have such influence on Religious persons. You may add the

4th, viz. The gracious acceptance that God gives to persons so vowing and
performing their Vows. With

5ly, The signal Blessings crowning Religious persons in due performance ^f
their Vows; All which make them careful to vow so, that they may say they
will pay their Vows, and in paying them, render to the Lord for all his
benefits.

6. Gener. viz. Use.
I am come now to the last thing I intended, the practical application of this
Practical Case: And here Reader I shall be briefer than I first purposed,
because I was enforced by the undiscerned speed of the time outrunning me in
preaching it, to contract much more than I was willing to have done.

The first Use then, 1 Use Informs.
if well composed Vows do indeed much promote Religion, it will teach us how
careful we should be in making our Vows to the greatest advantage of
Religion. If you look to the necessary requisites of such Vows, it will appear
to you that you need a great care and diligence in making them, if you look to
Religions loss in breach of Vows, or its gain in a faithful performance of
them, the care will appear double; if you look to your obligation under which
you are to perform them, it will appear yet further needful, that you be very
wary and circumspectly careful how you make them; the rash and inconsiderate
person who cares not how he makes, will not care whether he perform his Vows.
And what a reproach is this to his Religion? what a provocation is this to his
God to destroy either him or the works of his hand? And all these, bespeak your
care, and advise you to circumspection in this case. Do you not find it hard
enough to discern what is daily and ordinarily to be done under daily and
ordinary occurrences? are you not in great care to frame your selves fitly and
comely to every days business you have to do among men, especially when you
come within the tie of a promise to them? How solicitous are you, what, and
when, and on what terms you promise? How you shall perform, and so keep your
word and credit? Any competent measure of honesty, and regard to reputation
will make a man consider what he promises to a man, How much more care should
he use in promising unto God, where the promise is more than ordinary, where
the tie is so indissoluble, where the demand is so punctually and peremptorily
made, where the danger so great in making default. Let me commend unto thy more
than ordinary care these two things, if thou will make a Vow so well framed as
to set up Religion.

First, Be careful that thy Vow of obedience for, and in consideration of a
mercy hoped or received, hold weight with that mercy, keep a steady hand, and
get an even balance and weigh the mercy which commands thy obedience, (...)
Talentum Hebraeorum contine^ pondere 3000 siclos. B^erewood de ponderibus Heb.
and weigh thy Vow which promises it. It will be thy reproach and Religions
reproach to have thy Vow sound a shekel, when thy mercy weighs a talent; when
God gives a full harvest, thou must not Vow a handful or one sheaf. This were
to expose thy God to contempt, and it would be a practical denial of his
bounty to thee. Jacob observed this proportion, Genesis 28. v. 20, 21, 22. God
shall be his God, and then the tenth of all he has shall be his. David's, For
all his benefits, is as much as according to all his benefits, and that speaks
proportion and commensuratenesse. Take care to this, for others will observe,
and enquire into it. They will weigh these two, thy mercy, and thy gratitude,
do thou do it first, lest thou be shamed, lest God be provoked, and thou be
punished, for as good a man, and as great as thou who ere thou art, who read
this, met with all these, with shame, with the anger of his God, and with a
punishment too on him for want of this. See Hezekiah's fault and punishment, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Don't fall short of (...). Sordidum and tenuem sumtum hoc adagio
significabant. Erasm. Adagior. chil. 2. cent. 7. Ad. 3^.
Heathens, who knew this and observed it as their rule, and have branded such
who deviate from it, be careful thou put not off a mercy that lives many years
with thee with a days entertainment, or weeks, or months lodging with thee.

Secondly, Be careful that thou make thy Vow so, that they may be thy
witnesses whom God makes, be careful thou make them witnesses of thy
performing, whom God made witnesses of thy streits, and thou made witnesses
of thy Vows. A man that would have his credit in his truth to his word kept
up, would choose them witnesses of his performing, who were witnesses of his
promise; I think David took this heed in his rendering and paying his Vows, I
will do it (says he,) now in the presence of his people, Verse. 14. The people
were witnesses to his streights, Prayers and Vows, and he will honor Religion
by performing in their sight what he sealed, signed and delivered, what he
Vowed to the Lord. Seek not more than providence makes conscious to thy Vows,
lest this be interpreted ostentation, and vain, self-glorying, take so many,
lest the good example be lost, or thou suspected of falsifying thy Vow. Briefly
and plainly, do thou on a sick bed make thy Vow before thy Family? before the
Neighborhood! be careful to perform it before them, let them see thou art
what thou Vowedst to be. This care in thy Vow will be a means to make it most
to the advantage of Religion, whilst all that heard or knew thy Vow, bear thee
testimony that thou art thankful; and more thou seek not, lest thou be
suspected to be proud: thus Religions gratitude and humility are set forth;
thus thou give others occasion to glorify thy Father who is in Heaven.

Then look what Vows you are under, look how you have performed them. It is
time to view what you fairly promised for advancing of Religion, and what you
have faithfully performed for its real advantage. Christian consider with thy
self, wast thou ever in more than ordinary distress? did thou not then Vow
largely? tell me what were thy Vows? how have thou paid them? wast thou ever
in poor, needy condition? did thou not then Vow to honor God with thy
increase, to enrich the poor, to relieve thine indigent brethren, and Gods
poor Children? Now what have thou done? who are clothed out of thy flock? who
are fed at thy table? who are lodged at thy charge? where is thy paying thy Vow?
was it ever thy lot to be tossed at Sea? to be mounted up to the Heavens? to be
cast down again into the depths? to be at thy wits end? did thou not then
Vow, if ever God should command, and make it a calm, and bring thee to thy
desire^ Haven, thou would be more circumspect in all manner of conversation,
more vigilant to thy particular duty? more severe against thy particular sin?
Did thou not Vow that an Anniversary Sermon, with an allowance to the Poor,
or a constant Lecture, or an Almes-house, or some such great standing Monument,
should commemorate Gods goodness to thee, and persuade others to trust and
seek unto that goodness? or at least if thy Estate would not do so much, have
thou not Vowed to do according to thy power? where now is thy paying these
Vows? But I was never poor, never at Sea; may be so, yet art thou not under
some Vows for some other mercies? wast thou never in danger of losing thy
Estate, thy Relations, thy life? Did thou never lie dangerously and (men
thought) desperately sick? have thou no sickbed Vows upon thee? stay here who
ever thou art that read these lines, and read not a word more, until thou
have duly considered whether ever thou have been dangerously sick? and what
thou then Vowedst? and how thou have performed?

The proud contemner of Religion learns by his dangerous sickness to promise
to be religious, wast thou ever such? did thou ever so Vow? and art thou now
what thou did then promise? The profane swearer and blasphemer is brought
by a sickness to fear his Oath, and to Vow to learn to fear and abstain. Oh
then, if God will not destroy, and damn, but give life! he will, that he will
repent, and amend; he will bless, but not blaspheme his Name; he will never
more profanely swear, and curse, wast thou ever such a one? so sinful? so
engaged? what performance now? The Drunkard Vows sobriety when he is sick; the
Adulterer Vows chastity; the worldling Vows to mind Heaven; the Tradesman who
has so often sold his conscience at every price to gain six pence, by an
untruth and lie, then if this plunge be out lived, will keep a good conscience.
In a word, A sick bed makes a sinner sick of his sin, and seldom fails to
make him Vow against it. Now Reader what think thou? Vows or no Vows? art
thou under any or no? I am persuaded now thou can not deny it; methinks I
could believe I heard thee say, such a Fever, such an Ague, the small Pox, a
Surfeit, the Pestilence, or some such disease, made me Vow to be another man, to
destroy sin, to exercise grace, to love God, to hate lust, to be holy and
heavenly. Now thou see thy bond, where is thy payment of thy debt? Oh how few
do well keep any, how much fewer do well keep their sickbed Vows, as if these
Vows were as sickly as their makers, and doomed to as short a life as the sick
Votary thought he had been doomed to. Reader thy conscience tells thee what thou
can answer, or what thou must confess in this matter, and upon thy
consciences answer I have advice for thee if thou art conscious.

1. Of total neglect, go speedily on thy knees, bless infinite patience,
humble thy self before infinite grace, get out thy pardon, and whilst God says
by me, by these lines defer not to pay, be thou honest to thy word, thankful
to thy God, advantageous to Religion, and an example of reformation, lest next
sickness be thy death, and thy Vows be thy sin, which shut out thy hopes of
praying and speeding: God delights not to answer such fools, thou may find
Motives enough to hasten thee to this duty, from Eccl. 5.2, 4, 5, 6. which I
commend to thy thoughts with these Quaeries.

1. Is not God in Heaven and thou on earth?

2. And, Is not thy Vow made to this great God?

3. And, Is not this Vow thy voluntary debt? And

4. Does God require present payment? Or indeed

5. Will thou worse thy condition by Vowing? Or

6. Will thou provoke Gods anger and displeasure?

7. Dare thou venture on threatened destruction?

These are Solomon's Motives to a punctual and present payment of Vows; I
offer them to awake thee from neglect of thy Vows.

Or, Secondly, Have thou Vowed? and performed in part but not fully? have thou
done somewhat! but not all of that thou have promised, and Vowed? I advise,

1. See what hindered, wast thou rash in promising more than thou could do, is
this the reason thou did not all, because some of it was out of thy power;
thou must be humbled for thy rash Vow, and if ever it come within thy power do
it.

2. See whether thy sloth and negligence did not hinder when thou might have
performed, but now it is out of thy power and thou can not, this is a high
breach of thy Vows, and I know no way for thee but due and seasonable
repentance, and confessing that God may pardon thee, and be thou better in what
thou can, since thou can not be so good in this thou should.

3. See whether it continue yet in thy power to do, though as yet thou have not
done it, and if so, be affected with the sight of thy unthankfullnesse, but
remove this sin by performing thy Vows, for God will not release the
promise, nor cancel the Bond, until the debt be paid by him who has power in
his hand and may do it.

But, What if it were in my power when I Vowed, Dub.
but since that time providence has put it out of my power. I was rich when I
Vowed to relieve the poor, but when I was recovered, God suffered me to be
spoiled as Job was, what shall I do then?

1. Thy Vow well composed engaged thee so far as it was in thy power. Jacob, I
will give to God; now if the Lord exercise his bounty to Jacob, Jacob is
engaged, then he has power and can do it: if God make Jacob poor, the
limitation his Vow employed in it does quit him.

Secondly, So far as God puts it out of thy power, so far he releaseth When God
by his providence overruling all, does disable thee to the payment; then he
discharges thee from the bond, this is Gods real discharge and cancelling of
the Obligation.

Are well composed Vows such promoters of Religion? and are Then be sure to
wait until God give you just and fit seasons for Vowing, be not overhasty to
Vow, it is an inconsiderace and foolish haste of Christians to make more
occasions of Vowing than God does make for them; Make your Vows and spare not
so often as God bids you, but do not do it oftener; you would wonder I should
dissuade from Vowing often, when you have such constant mercies, and wonder
well you might, if God did expect your extraordinary bond and security for
every ordinary mercy; but he requires it not, he is content with ordinary
security of gratitude for ordinary mercies, when he calls for extraordinary
security and acknowledgment, by giving extraordinary mercies, then give it and
do it,

1. Cheerfully, enter such bonds willingly.

2. Pay the bond punctually at its time.

3. Pay it fully, in the whole of it, so do it, that you may say I will
cheerfully, and of choice, so do it, that you may call it a paying punctually
and fully. And this will be accounted a rendering to the Lord, and a real
promoting of Religion, by setting forth our debt and the Lords goodness to
which we are endebted; Fear not to give thy God double security when he
requires it. Fail not to pay readily and fully when pay day comes, for the Lord
does expect and command thee so to do, and if thou do wilfully make default,
he will lay folly to thy charge, and take the forfeiture of thy bond, and make
thee know it too, some way or other to thy grief and trouble; keep out so long,
or get out of such debts so soon as thou can. Pay the Lord thy Vows.

How are we complete in Christ.?
COL. 3. last clause of ver. 11. But Christ is all and in all.


THe great concernment of lost creatures is above all things to mind salvation,
this is the one thing needful, Luke 10.42. Act. 16.30.
this should be the great enquiry, and in the neglect of this all our other
endeavors are no better than laborious trifles. The great danger which even
they are in, who seriously mind salvation, is, least they build upon some sandy
foundation, seeking Heaven in those ways which lead not thither. The great
design of Satan is, either to detain poor undone creatures in a total neglect
of salvation, or to deceive them in the way and means thereof: it is therefore
the great care of the Apostle, as in other Scriptures so in this, not only to
undeceive the world as to those mistakes which prevailed then, but to point out
the right, the proper, the only sure way of salvation, viz. through Christ,
whom he here declares to be so complete a Savior, that as we have none other,
so we need none other, because Christ is all. Act. 4.^2.


In the former part of the verse, the Apostle shows the insufficiency of all
things on this side Christ to commend us unto God, or stand us in stead in the
matter of salvation, and this he does by removing four mistakes (at that time)
common.

1. The mistake of the Jews, who prided themselves in a genealogicall kind of
sanctity, as being the seed of Abraham, this they account so great a matter,
that they cannot be persuaded it could go otherwise than well with them: let
the Messengers of God tell them their sins, warn them of their dangers, yet
they shelter themselves under this privilege, as that which would be a
sufficient bullwark against all kind of threats and comminations: and though
John the Baptist in his time; Mat. 3.9. Joh. 8.39, 44.
our Savior is his time; and the Apostles in theirs, do all concur in taking
them off from leaning upon this broken feed; yet will they not be beaten out of
these strong holds. Time was indeed when salvation was of the Jews; but that
wall of partition being now taken down, and the pale of the Church so far
enlarged, as to take in both Jew and Gentile, Act. 10.34. no National
privilege can now commend us unto God; nor can a succession of Abraham
according to the flesh avail us, unless we succeed him in his faith.

2. The mistake of the circumcised, whether Jews or Proselytes; who because
they had this badge of Religion upon them, concluded themselves in a priority
for Heaven, before all the world besides. But however time was when
Circumcision was an Ordinance of that necessity, that the Lord threatens to
punish the neglect thereof, by cutting off that soul from among his people: yet
was it not the outward but spiritual part God accounted of. The Apostle in
excluding this, excludes all outward religious Observations, as Davenant in
loc. Genesis 17.14. Romans 2.29. Circumcisio erat in Judaica Religime ritus
praecipuus adhibetur, itaque ad designandam observationem omnium rituum
Legalium. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.


3. The mistake of the Grecians, who were at that time the Masters of all
learning; and all other Nations in contradistinction unto them, were styled
Barbarians; and of all Barbarians, the Scythians were esteemed the rudest. But
whatever worth and excellency may be in humane accomplishments, yet all these
in the business of salvation are but poor matters. It Is neither the having nor
wanting of these, that can considerably advantage or prejudice us in that high
concernment.

4. The common mistake of the world; who from their rank and quality in the
world, are ready to promise themselves a more easy acceptance with God. Act.
10.34. 1 Samuel 16.7.
But God is no respecter of persons: He looks upon the children of men with
another kind of eye, than man is used to do. Whether our outward condition be
high or mean, there is nothing of privilege or disadvantage from hence, in
respect of salvation.

And as in the former clause of the Verse, the Apostle shows the insufficiency
of all things besides Christ; so in this clause he shows the single sufficiency
of Christ alone. Whatever the Jews promised themselves from their stock and
lineage; the Proselytes from their Circumcision; the Grecians from their
wisdom and learning; the great ones of the world from their outward
preeminencies, all that, yea and much more, is Christ to Believers. Christ is
all.

This single sufficiency of Christ the Apostle proves by a double Argument.

1. The compleatnesse and perfection of Christ as a Savior, He is all. Take
salvation from first to last, Heb. 12.2.
in all the several parts of it, he is the Alpha and Omega, the beginner and
perfecter, the Author and finisher of all.

2. (...). Occ. in loc.

In omnibus, i. e. fidelibus hunc in modum sanctificatis, and Christo
copulatis. Daven. in loc.

Quod lex bona est, nostrum non est, quod autem male vivi^us, nostrum est, and
nihil utique prodest quod lex est bona, si vita and conversatio nostra non est
bona. Lex enim bona muneris est Christi, vita autem n^n bona criminis nostri,
imo hoc magis culpabiles sumus, si legem bonam colimus and mali cultores sumus.
Q^^n potius non c^^tores si mali, quia cultor dici non potest malus cultor,
etc. Salvian. de Gubern. Dei. l. 4.


The way and means whereby Christ imparts and communicates this salvation, it
is by being in all. Some read the words as an amplification of the fullness and
compleatnesse of Christ; Christ is all, and that in all things that concern
either our present comfort, or eternal happiness. Others refer these words in
all, to those diverse sorts of persons spoke of in the former part of this
Verse; to whom that Christ may be a Savior, he disdains not to take up his
dwelling in their souls, though lying under all the disadvantages which were
then accounted prejudicial. And thus the Apostl^ seems to explain himself,
Gal. 3.28. a parallel Scripture unto this. And according to this Exposition, as
the benefit of Christ's sufficiency is extended to all believers by virtue of
their union unto him, so is it restrained and locked up from all unbelievers.

The Case to be insisted on from this Scripture is, How Christians are complete
in Christ? For the resolving hereof, take this natural deduction from the
words;

Doct. That Christ is a Christians all. By Christian I mean, not them who have
nothing more to declare them such, than only their Baptismes and outward
professions, as the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.1. We account them Monsters in
nature who have the faces of men, but in their other limbs, the lineaments and
proportions of bruit beasts; and how can we account them better than Monsters
in Christianity, who have the faces of Christians indeed, but withal the
hearts and lives of Pagans. That All which is in Christ is nothing unto such,
except to increase their guilt, and heighten their condemnation. But by the
Christian, I mean him who is (...), an Israelite indeed, as Christ speaks
concerning Nathanael, Joh. 1.48. One who labors more to be than seem
religious; one whose great care is, that his heart may keep an even pace with
his tongue, in all his outward professions; now to such Christ is All. In
having an interest in him, they have enough for the supply of all wants; for
the prevention of all dangers; for the procuring all good: And therefore what
the Apostle speaks here in one word, Christ is all, he speaks at large, in an
enumeration of several weighty particulars, 1 Cor. 1.30. Who of God is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. We are foolish
creatures; Christ is wisdom: We are guilty; he is righteousness; We are
polluted; he is sanctification: We are lost and undone; but in him is
redemption: We are empty of all good; but he is a full fountain, from whom flow
all those blessings which concern either our present comfort, or future
happiness: We are necessitous and indigent; in him are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. Yea in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him, Col. 2.9, 10. Or as you have it,
(...).
Col. 1.19. In him dwells all fullness. The rich Merchant thought himself no
loser by the bargain, in parting with all he had to purchase an interest in
Christ, Mat. 13.45, 46. But when never so much is said, there cannot a greater
word be used than what the Apostle speaks here, Christ is all. The Greeks were
wont of old to account it an excellency to speak much in a few words; to give
their Auditors, (...), an Ocean of matter in a drop of words. Thus does the
Apostle here give us (as I may speak) gold in the wedge; which I shall
endeavor to beat out into the leaf, by showing how much is comprised in this
one word All. The two names by which the most ancient Philosophers were wont to
speak of God were, that he was, (...), the true being, and the universal good;
all the scattered excellencies which are dispersed among several ranks of
creatures, meeting in him, as the lines of the Circumference in the Center;
This does the Apostle speak here of Christ, He is All. Physicians speak of an
universal medicine, suited to all diseases, and helpful in all maladies; but
whether this can be found in nature or not; yet certainly Christ is a Panacea,
in him we have a plaster for all sores, a remedy against all distempers. There
are indeed thousands of cases wherein all other helps are but miserable
comforters; and Physicians of no value: but not one case wherein Christ is not
a full and proper help. When all that friends can do is only to pity us, he can
help us; because Christ is All.

For the further explaining and confirming of this great truth, three things
shall be spoke to, 1. Wherein Christ is All. 2. How Christ is All. 3. What
advantage it is to sincere Christians to have their All in Christ.


1. Wherein Christ is All. In general, He is All in All things; for so some of
no small account render the following words, and in All, as has already been
hinted. But more particularly

1. Christ is All to sincere Christians to free them from whatever might hinder
their salvation. Salvation is not a mere negative thing, nor does it consist in
a bare exemption from, hell and wrath, but a translation into heaven and glory;
but alas betwixt us and glory, there is (...), a great Gulf, many bars and
impediments; aye but Christ is All to deliver us from these; and though our
deliverance in this world is not complete or perfect, yet is it so for complete
as to render our salvation undoubtfull if we be in the number of them to whole
Christ is here said to be All.

1. The wrath of an offended God, which like that flaming sword that kept our
Apostate Parents from returning into Paradise (out of which because of their
Apostasy they had been ejected) would render our admission into heaven equally
impossible; but Christ by bearing the wrath of God in his own person has taken
it off from ours; and therefore he is said to deliver us from the wrath to
come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. he who was the Son of Gods love, became the subject of his
displeasure, as appears by comparing Matthew. 3.17. with Isa. 53.10. that we who
were children of wrath, might become the objects of his favor, and however
Christ has not deliver^d believers from the anger of God as a Father, yet from
the anger of God as a Judge. There is an anger that proceeds from love, as the
anger of a Parent toward that child whose good he desires; and there is a
vindictive anger: Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, etc.
the former believers are neither freed from, nor would it indeed be their
privilege; there is not a greater judgment can befall poor sinful creatures
here on earth, than for God not to discover himself angry with them for their
sins, Isa. 1.5. God then deals with men as a skiliull Physician with an unruly
Patient whom he gives up as desperate, Magna ira est quando peccantibus non
i^ascitur Deus, Hieron.
or as a tender Parent with a graceless child, whom he utterly rejects. In a
word, what ever kind of anger might tend to the prejudice of believers, that
they are delivered from, but what is for their advantage that they are subject
to. That Christ is All in delivering from the wrath of God may further be
evidenced by these Considerations:

1. The adequate of Gods wrath is sin; wrath upon us. Our meaness cannot, our
afflictions cannot; these may sometimes be the effects of Gods wrath, but never
the causes. No it is because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5 6. because of these things, ie. because of
these sins as appears from the Verses foregoing, What is it that has filled
every age and place of the world with so many dreadful tokens of Gods
displeasure, but only sin? What was it that cast the Angels out of heaven, and
degraded them from their first station, but only sin? What was it that drove
our first Parents out of Paradise, and subjected them, and all their Posterity
to so many miseries, but only sin? What was it that brought destruction upon
the old World, upon Sodom, Gemorrah, Admah, Zeboim? What was it that broke off
the natural branches, and has for so many hundreds of years continued them
under a divorce from God, but only sin? In a word, look over all those
miseries under which the whole Creation groans, Romans 8, 22. And though those
miseries in several creatures are diverse, yet do they all proceed from the same
fountain, viz. Sin.

2. Christ is All in making expiation for sin. He is that Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. He is our (...) and (...), 1 John
2.2. Romans 3.25. 'twas not thousands of Rams, not ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil, could have born any proportion in point of satisfaction for our sins.
'Twas not all the Legal Sacrifices of old could do any thing, nor can all our
duties now; but Christ is all in expiating for sin, Heb 10.5, 6, 7. compared
with Heb. 10.14. And such is the fullness of Christ's satisfaction, that he has
not only freed such as are united unto him from condemnation, Romans 8.1. but
purchased for them the Adoption of children, Romans 8.14, 15, 16. And thus Christ
is All in removing this bar, and opening this door to salvation which (had it
not been for his mediation) would for ever have remained shut against all the
children of men. The pollution and prevalency of corruption, how great an
impediment this is to salvation, and happiness, was typified by the Lepers and
unclean persons of old who were not admitted within the Camp. Lev. 13.46.
Heaven is no common receptacle for all persons, as Noah's Ark was for all sorts
of creatures, Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not? if you know any thing in Religion you cannot
but know thus much. In the Church of God on earth there is a mixture of Corn
with Chafe, of Wheat with Tares, of good Fish with bad, of Sheep with Goats;
but there shall be a separation of the precious from the vile, and God will
come with his Fan in his hand and thoroughly purge his floor, Luke 3, 17. Do but
consider and pause a while upon that mischief which sin has done poor
creatures by its pollution. How has it stained their glory? cast them down
from their excellency? turned Angels into Devils, and debased man who was once
almost the top of the whole Creation, in whom all the scattered Excellencies in
the Book of Nature were bound up together in one Volume, and met together in a
blessed union. How unlike has sin made us to what God at first made us? Those
souls of ours which were once as so many pure beams of Light, how is the beauty
of them now blotted and darkened? But Christ is that Fountain opened for sin and
uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. in his blood is virtue enough to fetch out scarlet
spots, and crimson stains, Isa. 1.18 and if any of the children of men perish
in their pollutions, it is not because he wants sufficiency, but because they
want faith. Christ is All in the business of cleansing and purifying. But alas,
Ioh. 3.16.
besides the pollution of sin, there is the prevalency of it. This was to St.
Paul so great an affliction, that he who could bear the greatest of outward
afflictions patiently, 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, etc. cannot but express something
of an holy impatience under this burden, Romans 7.24. he that could triumph over
Principalities, Powers, Life, Death, etc. Romans 8 38, 39. is yet more than a
little discouraged when he reflects upon the corruptions he found lodging in
his own heart. Corruption is the great Tyrant that has usurped over the whole
world, the bounds of its Dominion are almost as large as all mankind, there is
not a man in all the world (except the first man Adam made after Gods Image,
and the second Adam who was God as well as man, but he is born a slave, a
vassal to this Usurper. The four great successive Monarchies, Chaldean,
Persian, Grecian, Roman, though the extent of them were great and the
circumference vast, yet were all these limited and bounded, some parts of the
world there were which knew nothing of their yoke. But alas the Empire of
Corruption reaches every corner of the earth, every person born into the world.
We may therefore not unfitly compare it to Nebuchadnezzars Tree, Dan. 4 11. the
top whereof reaches Heaven, from thence it threw the Angels, and the boughs
thereof spreading themselves to the ends of the earth; yea this vassallage unto
Corruption, as it is the largest and universalest, so also the miserablest, and
most dreadful. All other slaveries compared with this, are but like Rehoboams
Government compared to his Father Solomon's, the least finger, of whose Dominion
he threatens should be heavier than his Fathers loins, 1 King. 12.10. We read
in Scripture of an Egyptian slavery; in History of the Spartan slavery, and of
the Turkish, all these sad and lamentable; but yet all these reached but the
body, and that for a time only, whereas the slavery of Corruption reaches the
soul, and that for ever, unless Christ become our Jesus in saving us from our
sins, Matthew 1.21. He has purchased our freedom, and that with a great sum,
as the Centurion speaks of his Roman freedom, Act 22 26, 27, 28. There are
none can say with St. Paul, they are born free, except they who are born again,
and they are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Christ is All in removing this impediment
also, in setting our poor captive souls at liberty, from the bonds and fetters
of our corruption, Romans 6.6, 7, 8, etc. Rom 7.25. It Is he alone can conquer
these great Goliahs, these untamed affections; but yet even this deliverance is
also incomplete in this world, he delivers his people from corruption as to the
reign and dominion of it, though not as to the presence and disturbance of it,
ut non regnet sed nondum ut non sit.

3. The oppositions of Satan, his wiles and subtilties, these are another
impediment, and that no small one neither; for if our first parents in whom
there was nothing of ignorance, but a sufficiency of knowledge, there was
indeed a nescience of many things, so is there also in the Angels, Matthew 24 36.
but yet their knowledge was both full and clear in things necessary and
pertinent, Col. 3.10. This was no small advantage against the methods of Satan,
because his usual way of mischieving poor creatures has not been so much by
force as fraud, not as a Lion, but as a Serpent, not so much by conquering, as
cheating; acting all his enmity under a pretense of friendship, and tempting us
to no evil, but under the pretense of some good. The advantage of our first
Parents was in this respect great in respect of their knowledge. Besides in
them was nothing of weakness, but a sufficiency of strength, in them was
nothing of corruption, but an universal rectitude and uprightness. The ways by
which Satan ordinarily prevails, is either by our ignorance, or by our
weakness, or else by making a party within us against our selves. The
advantages of our first Parents were in all these respects far greater than any
have against Satan now, yet Satan prevailed against them. What cause therefore
have we to fear, 2 Cor. 11.3. But Christ is all to free us from these dangers,
to carry us through these oppositions, who has led captivity captive, Ephesians.
4.8. who has spoiled Principalities and powers, and triumphed over them, Col.
2.15. but yet even this deliverance is at present incomplete; for though Christ
has delivered believers from Satan as a destroyer, yet not from Satan as a
tempter, he may disquiet such but he cannot ruin them.

4. The disturbances and interruptions of a profane world, its allurements,
discouragements, promises, threats, smiles, frowns; our difficulties and
dangers from hence cannot be little, since the people of God in all ages have
found them so great: the great advantage which all these outward things have
against us, is their suitableness to our senses; for though believers are said
to live by faith, Heb. 10.38. (...).
yet the best of men have had something to witness they were but men of like
passions; as 'twas said of Elias, James 5.17. but Christ is all to free us from
these dangers. Joh. 16.33. Be of good cheer I have overcome the world: He has
overcome it for us, and in some measure in us.

2. Christ is All, to fill the souls of believers with all that good which may
capacitate and qualify them for happiness: it is the decree of Heaven, that
none be admitted into glory, but those o^ whom God has wrought the truth of
grace; Heaven must first be brought down into our souls, before our souls are
capable of ascending up thither: we must first be made meet, before we can
partake of that inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. with Ephesians. 5.5.
we are by nature unmeet, because we are carnal and earthly; and should God
dispense with his own decree, and open so wide a door unto Heaven and
happiness, as to let in carnal and sensual persons, Heaven would be no
Heaven unto such, carnal hearts can never relish the sweetness of spiritual
enjoyments. Romans 8.6, 7.
Philosophers observe, that all delight arises from a suitableness betwixt the
person and the object. What is the reason of that diversity of delights which
is among the children of men, that which is one man's joy is another man's grief,
and that which is one man's pleasure is another man's pain? the only reason is,
because of the diversity of tempers and dispositions: Some there be of such a
brutish and swinish temper, that nothing is so pleasing unto them as wallowing
in the mire of their sensualities: others again of so refined a temper, that
they esteem these sensual pleasures very low and much beneath them, but still
every man's delight is according to his temper and disposition, and therefore
Heaven would be so far from being a Heaven unto such, that it would be a kind
of hell to them; for as delight arises from an harmony betwixt the person and
the object, so all kind of torment from an unsuitablenesse and contrariety:
hence is it, that although God vouchsafes us something of Heaven here on earth,
viz. in his Ordinances, yet to unheavenly hearts every thing of this nature is
a taedium a burden: When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell Corn? and
the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat, etc. Amos 8.5. Aelian reports of one
Nicostratus, who being a skillful Artificer and finding a curious piece of Art,
was so much taken therewith, that a spectator beholding him so intent in
viewing the workmanship, asked him what pleasure he could take in gazing so
long upon such an object? he answers, had thou my eyes thou would be as
much ravished as I am. So may we say of carnal persons, had they the hearts
and dispositions of believers, they would be as much delighted with all means
of communion with God as they are, and account that their privilege which now
they esteem their vexation: the Greeks tell us, that (...) good, is derived
(...), from calling, because all good is of an attractive and magnetic nature,
to draw forth and call our affections after it; but yet it is not the
intrinsecall excellency of any object that renders it taking with us, but our
affections are accordingly exercised upon all kind of objects, as
representations are of those objects from the understanding, for it is the
understanding which sits at the stern of the soul, that is the primum mobile,
the master-wheel that puts the affections as so many lesser wheels upon
motion; therefore unless our judgments be both enlightened and sanctified, we
can never approve the things that are excellent. Naturalists observe, that
though the Loadstone has an attractive virtue to draw Iron to it, yet it
cannot exercise that virtue upon Iron that is rusty. Ignorance is the rust of
the soul, that blunts the edge of our affections to whatsoever is spiritually
good: there must be therefore some kind of suitableness and harmony betwixt
our souls and heavenly mercies, before we are capable of tasting the sweetness
of them. Now Christ is all to believers in this respect also, it is from his
fulness they receive and grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. That we have any thing
of grace it is from him, and that we have such a degree or measure of grace it
is from him: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it
more abundantly, Joh. 10.10. the essence and the abundance are both from him.
All those miracles which Christ wrought in the days of his flesh upon the
bodies of poor creatures, Ephesians. 5.8. Ephesians. 2.5, 1^.
in restoring sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, life to the dead, all
these does Christ work over again upon the souls of them whom he prepares for
Heaven.

3. Christ is All to fill all Ordinances with power and efficacy; these are the
means of salvation, and through his concurrence effectual means, as they are
his institutions, we are under an obligation of using them; and as they have
the promise of his presence, Matthew. 28 20. Matthew. 18.20.
we are warranted in our expectations of benefit from them: but yet Ordinances
are but empty pipes, but dry breasts, unless Christ be pleased to fill them,
who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. That there should be such a might and
efficacy in things so weak, such miraculous and strange effects by means so
inconsiderable, that the foolishness of preaching should be powerful to
salvation, it is because it is not man but God that speaks. Joh. 5.25. The hour
is coming and now is when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live. Look upon Ordinances in themselves, and so they are
(...), things that are not; but as they are accompanied with the power of
Christ, so so they bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1.28. It Is he who in
Baptism baptises with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Matthew. 3.11. It Is he in
preaching the Word, speaks not only to the ear but to the heart. Luke 24.32.
Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and while
he opened to us the Scriptures? In a word, Christ is all in every Ordinance in
respect of efficacy; while the Disciples fished alone they caught nothing, but
when Christ is with them, the draught of fishes is so great they are scarce
able to draw it, Joh. 21.3, 6.

4. Christ is All to sill every condition with comfort, the best of conditions
is not good without him, nor is the worst bad with him. Vbi been sine te, aut
ubi ma^e cum te. Bern.
Alexander accounted himself to live so many days as he obtained victories:
but David accounts himself to live more in one days communion with God, than
in a thousand days enjoyment of all earthly comforts, Psalm 84.10. yea in the
midst of all his earthly confluences, he looks upon all as nothing in
comparison of communion with God. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Non dicit ni^il habeo sed nihil conc^pisce. Musc. in loc.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. Though he had a
Kingdom he values not that; and well might David be of this mind, for could we
add Kingdom to Kingdom, and world to world, yet all these in comparison of the
least smile or love-token from God are no better than nothing, for thy loving
kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63.3. The ancient Philosophers
distinguished betwixt bona (...) and bona (...), some things good in their own
nature, thus only God. Matthew. 19.17. There is none good but one, that is God:
others good by way of opinion or estimation, and thus all the comforts of this
life; whence that maxim of the Stoics, (...), life is but opinion and phancie,
and whatever good is in these things, is but like those pictures of most
deformed and monstrous creatures, which the Poet tells us had no other beauty
than what they owed to the Painters courtesy, viz. the offspring of our own
phancies: Those who were virtuous, were only by the Philosophers accounted to
live, others might degere but not vivere, they might be, but they could not
live. The only true comfort of life consists in living in communion with God,
it is his presence fills Heaven with all its glory, and it is his presence that
fills every condition with all its sweetness: But alas how can two walk
together except they be agreed? Amos 3.3.
and what agreement can there be betwixt light and darkness, the glorious
majesty of Heaven and sinful dust, but only through a Mediator? 1 Timothy 2.5.
and the only Mediator is Jesus Christ. What was it that enabled the blessed
Martyrs, to account the scorching flames to be beds of Roses? What was it that
enabled St Paul to triumph over all kind of adversaries? Romans 8.38, 39.
but only the love of God in Christ Jesus: herein alone consists our comfort,
our happiness. Now Christ is All in this respect also.

5. Christ is All in furnishing us with strength and assistance to persevere:
the way to Heaven is no smooth or easy way, but beset with many difficulties,
(...), Matthew 7.14. and through many tribulations must we enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, Acts 14.22. yea though the calmnesse of our passage through this
world should be in a perfect serenity from all outward enemies, yet can we not
expect a total freedom from the worst of enemies, our own hearts, our
corruptions. All the prejudices and mischiefs we either do or can suffer from
others, are nothing to what we suffer from our selves, it is not homo homini
lupus, but homo sibi lupus, men are to none such wolves as to their own souls.
Now in as much as the Crown of happiness is reserved for the head of
perseverance, Rev. 2.10.
and in as much as perseverance in conflicting with such kind of adversaries,
as though we conquer them, yet they are in us, and though we vanquish them yet
still we carry them about us, Romans 8.24.
must needs require a greater strength than our own: it cannot but be esteemed
an eminent privilege, to be under the continual supplies of Christ by his
Spirit, Luke 9.62. Gal. 3.3.
that after we have put our hand to Gods plough we may not look back, and after
we have begun in the spirit, we may not end in the flesh. I speak not this as
doubting the perseverance of them who are sincere, but as declaring the true
foundation on which their perseverance is bottomed, viz. not any inhaerent
strength they have in themselves, but those supplies of grace and strength they
continually derive from Christ: Non dicit, parum petestis facere, vel
difficulter potesti^ facere, vel nihil potestis persicere, sed nihil facere.
Aug. in loc. Col. 2, 10.
there is a vast difference 'twixt the best of Christians considered singly in
themselves, and considered relatively in respect of their union unto Christ: in
themselves so weak and impotent that they can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. not
sufficient of themselves to think any thing as of themselves, 2 Cor. 3.5. and
yet what can be less than to think? but in Christ mighty and powerful, able
to do and bear whatever God would have them: I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. and thus is Christ the Christians All, thus
are they complete in him.

2. How Christ is all? The resolution of this Quaere is therefore necessary,
because many there are who instead of sucking milk from this Doctrine are ready
to suc^ poison; but for prevention of all dangerous and unsafe inferences from
this great truth, consider

1. Negatively, how Christ is not All; not so as to excuse us from all
endeavors in the use of means for working out our own salvation. Christ's
sufficiency does not excuse but engage our industry: for thus the Apostle
argues, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
because it is God which works in you both to will and to do, q. d. it is God
does all, therefore do you what you can.

2. Positively or affirmatively, and that in these two respects especially;

1. Christ is All by way of Impetration, in as much as our salvation was his
purchase; we may say of our hopes, our helps, our advantages, as the Chief
Priest said of the moneys which Judas had received for the hire of his
persidiousnesse: It is the price of blood, Matthew. 27.6. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Acts
20.28. John 15.13.
Whence is it that they who have brought themselves under the deserts of Hell,
may have hopes of Heaven? enjoy the means of Heaven? taste the first fruits of
Heaven? all are the price of Christ's blood: 'twas by his own blood that he
entered into Heaven himself, and has opened the door to Heaven for all that are
incorporated into him, Heb. 9.12. Heb. 10.19, 20.

2. Christ is all by way of Application, in as much as he brings home the
blessings he has purchased unto the souls of his; he has not only purchased
salvation for them, but them for it; not only the possibility of Heaven, but a
real propriety in it: and certainly propriety is absolutely necessary unto the
refreshment of every comfort: What are all the treasures of either or both the
Indies, to him who only hears of them? but mere stories. What all the glory of
Heaven to him who is thrust from the enjoyment of them? but mere torments.
There must be a propriety in all spiritual blessings before they can be
refreshing; Ioh 10.28. Ioh. 14.3. Col. 2.7. Ioh. 15.1, 5. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
and this alone from Christ. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish. I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you unto my self, that where I am ye may be there also. And what is clearly
asserted in these Scriptures, is strongly intimated in those emblems by which
Christ is described. What the root is to the Tree, the Vine to the branches,
the head to the body, all this is Christ to believers, viz. not only a treasury
of all good, but a fountain continually streaming down all kind of spiritual
blessings into their souls: and though faith be both the eye that discerns, and
the hand that receives all from Christ's fulness, yet it is he that by his
Spirit works this grace in us. Faith is our act, Gal. 5.22. Ephesians. 2 8. Phil.
1.29.
but it is his gift; it is we that believe, but it is Christ enables us to
believe: so that both in purchasing and applying salvation Christ is All.

3. What advantage is it to believers to have their All in Christ?

1. Because our salvation could have been in no hand so safe so sure as in the
hand of Christ: had it been in our hand by any inhaerent righteousness, Psalm.
89.19. Isa. 63.1. Heb. 4.15. Heb. 7.25.
our sad experience we have had of our own unfaithfullnesse, in sinning away
that happiness wherein we were created, may cause us for ever to be jealous of
our selves; but to have it in the hand of him who is mighty to save even to the
utmost, who is so faithful that in all our distresses he is touched with our
infirmities; we cannot be so sensible of our own miseries, but Christ is much
more: Acts 4.12.
and hence it is that as we have no other Savior besides him, so is it
impossible we should have any like unto him.

2. Because our salvation could have been in no way so comfortable, because as
God has the glory of every attribute, so have Christians the comfort of every
attribute in this way of salvation; for as God has the glory of his Justice
from them (in their Head and surety) to whom in this way he shows mercy; mercy
and truth are met together, Psalm 85.10.
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Justice it self that
dreadful attribute to guilty creatures, is in this way of salvation so far
from being their enemy, that it becomes their friend, and speaks nothing but
what is to their encouragement. And hence it is that sincere believers have
from the very justice of God, answered all manner of discouragements arising
from their sins. Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died? Romans 8.34.
i. e. since God has already received satisfaction from Christ, he cannot in
justice require it from the members of Christ, Romans 3.26. Prove. 28.13. With 1
Ioh. 1.9.
but is just in the justifying him that believes in Jesus; and if we confess
and fors^ke our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness: Thus has the justice of God been their
great support in the time of their outward dangers also, Psalm. 89.14.
Justice and judgment are the habitation of his Throne. In a word, this way of
salvation (which was the contrivance of infinite wisdom, and is in it self so
mysterious, that the Angels delight to look into it) does so fully correspond
with the condition of poor weak sinful mutable creatures, that it lays a
double obligation of praise upon us, that salvation is possible, and that the
way of salvation is so complete and full.

The Doctrinall part of this Observation being thus cleared, one word by way of
Application.

Use 1. If Christ be All, then is there no ground of despondency either from
your own defectivenesse, or the defectivenesse of all creature helps. Your
duties are defective; Phil. 3.9.
your endeavors defective; your very righteousness unsafe to confide in: But
though you have nothing in your selves, yet if you have an interest in Christ,
you need nothing more, because in Christ you have All.

1. You have the sum of All. Though you have not estates, friends, worldly
comforts; yet in Christ you have what does more than make up the want of all
these. We may be as impatiently desirous of this and that earthly comfort, as
Rachel was of children, Genesis 30.1. 1 Samuel 1.8.
whom we find quarrelling with Jacob, Give me children or else I die. But what
Elkanah said to Hannah in the like condition, Am I not better unto thee than
te^ sons; the same may we say much more to persons interested in Christ, Is not
Christ better to you than all? The absence of the Cistern may well be dispensed
with, by him who lives at the fountain, and the light of a Candle by him who
enjoyes the Sun. All those seeming contradictions which so frequently occur
in Scripture, can no other ways be reconciled, but by the acknowledgement of
this, E. gr. A father of the fatherl^sse: Psalm. 68.5. Iam. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.10.
How can they be fatherless who have a father? Thus we read of them who were
rich in the midst of poverty, who having nothing poss^ssed All things; joyful
in the mid^t of sorrows, i. e. though they had not these comforts, yet they had
an interest in him who is infinitely more, and better than all those comforts.
Nay as to inhaerent righteousness, though you cannot attain a perfection, yet
in Christ is perfection, He is All.

2. You have in him the pledge of All; according to the Apostles argumentation,
Romans 8.32. How shall be not with him also freely give us All things. The
Inference is strong: Had there been any one mercy that God had thought too
great, too much for worthless creatures, it would certainly have been this;
but since God has not stuck at giving his Son. This instance of Gods bounty is
so high, that it removes all grounds of questioning his bounty in any thing
else. The Apostle from this mercy, might very well infer a certain subsequence
of all other mercies, that might be profitable or beneficial: no ground of
despondency therefore unto such as are interested in Christ.

Use 2. What cause have we to be thankful for Christ? We have cause to be
thankful for the meanest of mercies, Genesis 32.10.
inasmuch as we are less than the least of all; much more for this which is
the highest of mercies: The mercies of our Creation, preservation, etc. though
never so many and great, are little in comparison of this. It Is mentioned as an
astonishing act of love, that God should so love the world, as to give his only
son, etc. Joh. 3.16. [so] beyond all comparison: [so] beyond all expression. If
God has given you his Son, it is more than if he had given you a whole world,
Ephesians. 1.3.
because it is in him that God has blessed you with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places.

Use 3. How great is their folly and misery who keep at a distance from Christ?
Ioh. 5.40.
Our Savior mentions it as the highest folly in the Jews, You will not come
unto me that you might have life. There is in Christ the life of justification,
to free us from that eternal death to which the Law sentences us: The life of
sanctification, to free us from that spiritual death under which our apostasy
has brought us: There is in him an Alsufficient fullness, for the repairing of
all our losses: And are these mercies not worthy the coming for? The Apostle
puts the very Emphasis of the Heathens misery in this, Ephesians. 2.12.
that they are without Christ, and therefore without hope: And what is their
misery, Shall any of us make our choice?

Use 1. Of Exhortation. Let it be your care that Christ may be All to you: it is
no small, nor is it any common privilege. Many there are who live without
Christ: Ephesians. 2.12.
Others to whom All that is in Christ is so far from being to their salvation,
that it only aggravates their destruction. He that is to some the chief corner
stone, 1 Pet. 2.6, 8.
is to others no better than a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense. This
was prophesied of Christ, This child shall be for the fall and rising again of
many in Israel. There Is no mercy so eminently good, Luke 2.34.
but through our corruptions it may become an occasion of evil. Christ himself,
the greatest of mercies that ever God vouchsafed to creatures, is yet so far
from saving some from their sins, that he only increases their sin. Ioh. 15.22.
If I had not come and spoke unto them they had not had sin, but now they have
no cloak for their sin. Those who enjoyed the Ministry of Christ in his own
person, and were not wrought upon thereby, all their sins would comparatively
have been a kind of innocence, had they not discovered such an height of
obstinacy: it is therefore no common privilege. But what should we do that it
may be ours? Take these few Directions.

1. Labor to get your judgments settled in the belief of this great truth:
That all things in the world are a very nothing without Christ: That you are
poor in the midst of worldly riches, and miserable in the midst of all earthly
happiness, while you remain in your estrangements from Christ: And that of all
kind of poverty and misery this is the worst, because it is in those spiritual
blessings wherein consists both our present and future happiness. It Is but
little those persons understand of their great concernments, that can with that
Gospel-fool, think themselves sufficiently provided for in the things of this
world, and say to their souls as he to his, Soul, Luke 12.19.
thou have goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and be merry. Do thou
know thou live in this world upon the very brink of eternity? And do thou
know whether there be more than one step between thee and another world? 1 Samuel
20.2.
And can thou take up with any thing on this side Christ? it is an argument
you know but little of your own concernments. Some of the grosser Platonists
thought the world to be a great. Animal, and the soul which acted it was God;
now if the soul be departed from the body, what is it but a mere carcass
without life. Christ is the very life and soul of all our comforts, and without
him all our creature-enjoyments are but as so many ciphers without a figure,
which have no significancy in them, but are as so many nothings. Nothing in
respect of true comfort here; nothing in respect of your preparations for
another world. Labor therefore through the glass both of Scripture and
experience, to behold all the excellencies of this world as so many bladders
filled with wind, and at best to be like Hagars Bottle which was soon empty,
Genesis 21.15.
or as broken Cisterns, Cisterns, and therefore cannot hold much, broken
Cisterns, and therefore cannot hold what they have long. Ier. 2.13.
And withal let it be your wisdom to look upon Christ as that everlasting
Fountain of all good which can never be drawn dry, as that never failing Spring
of all those blessings which will not only sweeten every condition here, but
go with us beyond death, and the grave. Such fixed apprehensions of these
things will be singularly useful to engage our souls in an earnest pursuit
after Christ, Psalm. 63.8.
or in the Psalmists words, to follow hard after him, and it is his promise,
that they that come to him he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37.

2. Be speedy in casting out those inmates, which because they are unmeet
companions for Christ, 1 Samuel 5.4. Amos 3.3.
may hinder his taking possession of your souls. The Ark and Dagon could not
stand together in the same room, but if the Ark stands, Dagon falls. Can two
walk together except they be agreed. Christ and our corruptions are at no
agreement, these two cannot dwell together under the same roof. If you would
have Christ to take up his abode in your hearts, you must prepare a place for
him; Psalm. 132.4, 5.
It was said of David, he would neither give sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to
his eyelids, till he had found out an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
The souls of most men are so crowded with other guests, that the best
entertainment they can afford Christ, is but such as he found in his first
entrance into the world, an out-room, a stable, a manger: But let it be your
care to renounce communion with all things that might hinder your communion
with him, Psalm, 45.10, 11.
to forget thy own people, and thy Fathers house, so shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty; so, not otherwise, he will have no rivals, no competitors,
not a part of our heart, but all.

3. Be willing to accept of Christ upon his own terms, there can be no terms
hard on which we may gain an interest in him. Matthew. 16.24.
The great and main condition is Self-denial together with a full resignation
of our selves to him, and self-denial, if duly considered, is the greatest
self-advantage. 1. Because he calls us not to deny our selves in any thing that
is truly for our spiritual good, or at least so far as it is for our good. 2.
Though he calls us to deny our selves in many outward good things, yet it is not
so much to part with them as to exchange them for what is better. 3. The main
objects of self-denial are those things which it is our privilege to be freed
from; no reason therefore to be offended at such terms as these, to resign up
our mistaken judgments to the guidance of infinite Wisdom, our corrupt wills
to his most holy and gracious will, 1 John 5.3. Psalm. 119.151, 172.
to be in all things at the command of him, whose commands are in nothing
grievous, but in all things truth and righteousness. Be therefore as willing to
be his, as you are desirous he should be yours; the consent must be mutual, or
else the match can never be made up 'twixt Christ, and your souls,

4. Measure all things by their reference unto Christ, of all good things
account them the best which may promote your endeavors after that good which
is the highest; as Ordinances, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1, 2. Isa.
59.2.
the means of Grace, which at how high a rate they are valued by David, may
appear from his pathetical, and most affectionate desires of waiting upon God
in them; of all evil things account them the worst which estrange you from
Christ the truest good, and therefore let your only impatience be of sin, as
that which only separates between you and your God. The observation of this
rule will very much secure you from all diversions, and quicken you in your
endeavors after an interest in Christ.

2. Use. Be serious in resolving this great Question, whether Christ who is All
to sincere Christians be All to you; it is a question of that importance, that
all your comfort depends upon the resolution of it, yea all your hopes. Take
these two Characters.

1. Are you conformable unto Christ? Is the same mind in you that was in him?
Are you holy and humble, and self-denying, and in all things followers of that
pattern which he has set before you in his own example? He that is joined to
the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Old things are passed away, behold all
things are bicome new, Philip. 2.5. Romans 8.9.
2 Cor. 5.17. Causes are best known by their effects, Trees by their fruits,
Fountains by their streams. So is our interest in Christ by this effect
thereof, our conformity unto Christ.

2. Are you All to him: It Is but a just retaliation in Christians to be so, and
it is withal an evidence that Christ is All to them.

1. Are you all to him in your affections, in prizing him above all, can you
with the Spouse esteem the love of Christ better than wine, with David better
than life, can you in the midst of all your creature comforts, account all as
nothing in comparison of him, and say with Asaph, Whom have I in heaven but
God, and there is none on earth I desire in comparison of him. So high were
Moses affections, Cant. 1.2. Psalm. 63.3. Psalm. 73.25. Heb. 11.26.
that he esteems the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt. And indeed if Christ be but an underling in our affections, it is an
argument we have no part in him. He that loves Father or Mother more than me
is not worthy of me; Matthew. 10.37.
he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. The
affections are the truest pulse of the soul, the most genuine and natural
symptoms of its frame and temper. It Is these that speak the proper idiom and
language of the heart. Make use of this rule therefore, is Christ uppermost in
thy heart, thy affection to him is an evidence of his to thee.

2. Are you all to him in your acknowledgements in ascribing all to him. Thus
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God I am what I am. That my condition
is not better it is from my self, that it is so good it is from him, so Ephesians. 5,
20.

3. Are you all to him in your contentment and satisfaction, accounting you
have all in him though you have nothing besides him, Although the fig tree
shall not blossom, neither fruits be in the Vine, the labor of the Olive
shall fail, Hab. 3.17, 18.
etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

4. Are you all to him in your dependances and expectations in seeking all from
him, the highest condition of grace, needs further grace, but in Christ are all
supplies; it is an argument of our interest in him when in all distresses we
make him our refuge, in all weaknesses our strength.

5. Are you all to him in your designs and aims, in seeking his glory beyond
your private advantages; this was St. Paul's design in life and death that
Christ might be magnified, Philip. 1.20. and if you be thus all to Christ, it is
an evidence Christ is All to you. And how well are they provided for, who have
him who is All for their Portion.

How shall those Merchants keep up the life of Religion, who while at home
enjoyed all Gospel Ordinances, and when abroad are not only destitute of them,
but exposed to persecution?
PSALM 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech; that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar.


THis Psalm is the first of those fifteen which are called Songs of Degrees,
concerning which the conjectures of Interpreters are various and uncertain;
either because they were sung by the Jews at their several stages, in their
return from the Babylonish captivity; or by the Levites on the fifteen steps or
stairs whereby they went up to the house of the Lord; or because they raised up
their voices to an high strain in singing them; or because they are Psalms of
greatest use and excellency.

The Psalm is generally thought to be composed upon occasion of David's flying
from Saul, and Doegs false accusation of him; 1 Samuel 22.23.
and it consists of three general parts;

1. David's carriage toward God in the time of his distress, ver. 1, 2. In my
distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me: Deliver my soul, etc.

2. David's denouncing of judgment against his slanderous false-tongued enemy,
ver. 3, 4. What shall be given? intimating that he expected some great reward
for his malice against David; but says the Psalmist, he shall have sharp
arrows of the Almighty, with coals of juniper, q. d. whatever reward he have
from men, this shall be his reward from God.

3. David's bewailing his present condition, ver. 5, 6, 7. The words of the Text
are a branch of the third general part of the Psalm; wherein we have David
sadly breathing forth the sorrow of his heart for his absence from the
Tabernacle and the company of good men, and his dwelling among and converse
with evil and wicked men, Woe is me, etc.

By sojourning I suppose is implied his absence from some desired habitation,
viz. Jerusalem and the Tabernacle, for no man is said to sojourn at home, Psalm.
39.12.105.23. Heb. 11.9. (...) est trahere, Isa. 13.22. (...) dies ejus non
trahentur, i. e. non prorogabuntur. Bocharti. Geog. Sacr. par. 1. l. 3. c. 12.
p. 209.
and when he is where he would be.

The word Mesech is taken by Expositors, either 1. For a place, as our
translation carries it from the Chaldee paraphase, which is the first of the
ancient versions that so understand it: or 2. For an expression of the
prolonging of his sojourning; for so the word (...) signifies to draw forth or
to prolong; and thus the Septuagint renders this place, (...); whom the
Arabic, Syriack and vulgar Latin versions follow, with some others: and the
next verse seems to favor this sense, ver. 6. My soul has long dwelt, etc.
but either way gives us the same ground of complaint, only the first sense
doubles the ground of the Psalmists trouble, and the other suggests the
circumstance of the long continuance of his sojourning.

By Kedar is understood part of Arabia, the inhabitants whereof are called
(...), Bochart. ut sup.
or dwellers in tents, because they had no fixed and settled habitation, but
were robbers and lived upon the prey.

Now we are not to suppose that David did really sojourn and dwell among these
barbarous people; but he speaks this of his wandering about from place to place
without any settled habitation; and to set forth the cruelty and inhumanity of
those among whom he dwelt, he does express it thus, Woe is me that I dwell,
etc. as if one living among professed Christians, who deal with him more like
savages than Christians, should say, Woe is me that I sojourn among Turks and
Saracens. And thus you see David's present condition which he bewails, is his
absence from Jerusalem and the Tabernacle, or place of Gods solemn worship, and
his converse with wicked and ungodly men: and then these two truths lie plain
before us in the words,

It is oftentimes the lot and portion of good men to be deprived of the

It is a real ground of trouble and sorrow to a good man to be thus deprived,
'Twas that which here made David proclaim himself in a state of woe and misery;
'Twas that which the Apostle tells us did vex the righteous soul of Lot, 2
Pet. 2.7. and which made the holy Prophet Elijah even weary of his life, 1
King. 19.4. You may easily imagine what a sad heart a poor lamb might well
have, if it be driven from the green pastures, and still waters, and forced to
lodge among Wolves and Foxes, where it must feed upon Carrion or starve, and be
continually in danger of being lodged in the bellies of its cruel and bloody
companions, unless lome secret overruling hand do restrain their rage, and
feed it with wholesome food; and truly such is the condition of those that
follow the Lamb of God in holy Lamb-like qualities, when deprived of green
pastures, and still waters of Gospel Ordinances, and forced to converse with
wicked and ungodly men.

In handling of this Point I shall first lay before you the grounds of it, and
then adjoyn such practical application, as may be useful and profitable.

The grounds of this Truth do partly refer to God, partly to wicked men, and
partly to the godly themselves; if in such a condition a believing soul either
look upwards, or outward, or inwards, he will see much cause of grief and
trouble.

1. With reference unto God, and that upon a double account:

1. It is a real ground of sorrow to a believing soul to be deprived of
occasions of solemn blessing and praising God; the soul that is full of the
sense of the goodness of God, that knows how many thousand ways the Lord is
continually obliging it to love and bless him, cannot but be afflicted in
spirit, to be kept from making its public acknowledgements of divine goodness.
The Psalmist tell us, Psalm 65 1. that Praise waits for God in Sion, that is,
in the public Assemblies of the Church; and truly it is a grief to a believing
soul, not to wait there with his thank-offerings, not to pay his vows unto the
Lord in the presence of all his people, Psalm. 116.17. Psalm. 66.18.
in the Courts of the Lords house, etc. not to declare to all that fear God
what he has done for their souls.

2. It is a real ground of sorrow to live among those that are continually
reproaching and blaspeming the Name of God: to see sinners despise the goodness
of God, and trample upon his grace and mercy, and scorn his love and kindness,
and kick at his bowels, and spit in his face, and stab at his heart, who is our
God, our Father, our Friend, our good and gracious Lord and King: This must
needs make the believing soul cry out, Woe is me that I live among such.

Let us suppose a person that has been hugely obliged by a Prince to love him,
and that indeed loves him as his life, if this Prince should be driven from his
Throne, and an usurper get into his place, would it not be great affliction,
and sadning to the spirit of such a person, to live among those who every day
revile, reproach, scorn and abuse his gracious Prince? Why Sirs, if you and I
be true believers, we know that the Lord is our Sovereign King and Prince, such
a one who has infinitely more obliged us to love him, than it is possible for
any Prince to oblige a subject; and we do love the Lord as our lives, nay
better than our lives, or else we love him not at all; and must it not then be
matter of grief, to hear ungodly sinners, who have driven God away from their
hearts and souls, where his Throne should be set up, and who have let that
grand usurper the Devil set up his throne within them, and among them, and who
daily say unto God, as those wicked ones, Job 21.14. Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, to hear such curse and swear and
blaspheme God, and in their lives by wicked ungodly courses do him all the
despite and dishonor that they can, bring his Name to the Tavern, to the
Stews, upon the stage, and there foot and defile the great and glorious Name of
God with the worst of polutions; Certainly Sirs, he cannot account God his
Friend, his Father, his good and gracious Prince, whose eye does not run down
with Rivers of tears to see men so far from keeping Gods Law.

2. It is a trouble to good men to sojourn, etc. with reference to those wicked
ungodly persons among whom they live, it grieves their souls to see sinners run
into all excess of riot, eagerly pursuing hell and damnation, greedily guzling
down full draughts of the venom of Asps, and the poison of Dragons; it pities
them to see sinners stab themselves to the heart, and laughing at their own
plague sores, jeasting away God, and heaven, and eternal happiness. If any of
us should see a company of men so far besotted and distracted, as that one
should rend and burn the Evidences of a great Inheritance which others labor
to deprive him of, another should cast inestimable pearls and jewels into the
Sea, another eagerly drinking down that which you knew to be the juice of Toads
and Spiders, or hugging a Viper, and Scorpion in his bosom, anothe stabbing
himself in the breast, another laughing at, and licking his own plague sores,
and all of them reviling, cursing, striking, spitting in the face, and stabbing
at the heart of those that any ways endeavor to hinder them from destroying
themselves, or that will not do as they do, and be as mad as themselves, should
we not pity them, and with grief of heart say, Woe is me that I live among such?

Why Sirs, He that has had any serious thoughts of Eternity, that has soberly
considered the worth of an immortal soul, that believes the Holiness, Justice,
and Power of God, that understands the evil of sin, what a plague, what a
venom, what a dagger at the sinners own heart, sin is, he cannot but see and
know that every ungodly profane sinner is much more an object of highest
compassion than any I have now mentioned, and therefore cannot but cry out, Woe
is me, etc.

3. It is a trouble to good men to sojourn, etc. with reference to themselves,
and their own concernments, because they are sensible that such a condition
lays them open to a great deal of danger; and that

1. In regard of their graces; for the want of the society of good men, and the
Ordinances of the Gospel, is like the want of dew and rain to the grass, or
food to the body; and therefore those who have tasted of the sweetness and
fatness, Psalm. 36.8.65.4.
and know what a blessedness it is to be satisfied with the goodness of Gods
house, cannot but mourn over the want of Gospel Ordinances; as the presence of
the Sun beams make the flowers to be fresh and beautiful, and yield a fragrant
smell; whereas the want thereof makes them look pale and wan, and hang the
head; even so the enjoyment of good society and Gospel Ordinances, makes the
graces of a believer amiable and lovely, and give forth their pleasant smell,
the want of which makes them very much to droop and languish.

And then on the other side, the society of wicked men, the venom and poison
of an evil example, the alluring flatteries of the world on one hand, and its
frowns and threatenings on the other hand, are of great force to nip and blast,
to dead and dull the graces of good men.

And therefore he who knows the worth and value of true grace, that accounts it
his riches, his treasure, his jewel, his life, Luke 12.21.
and is sensible how much depends upon the life and vigor of Grace and
Religion in his soul, and understands how destructive the want of
Gospe-Ordinances, and the company of evil men are to his graces, may well cry
out, Woe is me that I sojourn, etc.

2. In regard of their persons, and the concernments of this life; the enmity
that is in the seed of the Serpent, against the seed of the Woman, does not
only put forth it self in endeavors to ruin or weaken their graces, but also
to destroy their persons: wicked men's malice against that spiritual life of
grace in good men, which themselves do not partake of, does soon improve into
malice also against that natural humane life which themselves are also
partakers of; their desires to suck the blood, as I may so say, of good men's
souls and graces makes them delight to suck the blood of their bodies; witness
Cain, 1 John 3.12.
the first that learnt this bloody trade, by killing his brother for no other
cause, but because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous; witness
also Ahab and Jezabel, Manasseh, etc. but the foul-mouthed, witness to this
black and sad rruth, is the scarlet bloody Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17.6.
who is drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs
of Jesus, and therefore in Gods due time she shall have blood to drink; those
therefore who understand what an hellish fire of rage is in the hearts of
wicked men, how great their malice is against goodness and good men, and what
combustible matter our life, and the comforts of this life be, so far as they
value these mercies, have reason with David to cry out, Woe is me that I sojourn
in Mesech etc.

And now the woeful condition of those that are deprived of Gospel Ordinances,
and sojourn where heavenly M^nna does not fall, and who dwell among, and
converse with wicked and ungodly men, as it calls upon us to bless God when it
is not so with us, and to pity and pray for those who have reason to take up
such a complaint, as David here does; so also to bethink our selves what we
ought to do if the case were ours; for you know the life of a Christian is very
often, and very fitly in Scripture compared to a warfare; and surely he is but a
mean soldier, and never like to come off with victory and triumph, who does
not prepare himself for all kind of assaults, and does not labor to fortify
every passage, whereat he may be stormed; and therefore it is good for us to
make the condition of others our own; so that this question, or practical case
of conscience will offer it self to our consideration.

but being abroad, are not only deprived of them, but liable to the
Inquisition, and other ways of persecution for their Religion?

Before I answer the Case I shall a little open it, and lay down some
preparatory propositions for the right understanding of it, and then direct our
practice.

By Religion we do not understand any outward way or form, any pomp and
gayeties in worshipping God; but such a due sense of our dependence upon a good
and gracious, almighty holy God, for our being and well-being both in time and
to eternity, as does powerfully engage the soul heartily to love God, and
sincerely to serve him, in obeying his good and holy commands made known to us.

By the life of Religion we may understand, either 1. The truth and reality of
it in the soul, in opposition to a soul dead in sin; or 2. The vigor, activity
and liveliness of Religion, in opposition to a dead, dull languid principle;
and both may be well included in the Question, for as we are all concerned to
endeavor, by all fit and lawful means, not only to have our bodies kept from
rotting and putrefying by the salt of a living soul, but to have them active
and vigorous, sit for the employments of a natural life, Salillum animae.
Plaut.
and not stupefied with lethargies and benumming palsies; even so we ought to
endeavor, not only that our souls may be quickened with a true principle of
Religion, but that we may have such a lively, vigorous and influencing sense of
divine goodness upon them, that our Religion may not be a dull, languid,
lethargick principle, but may render us fit and prompt for all the actions of a
spiritual life. And now, this life of Religion, the case supposes the person
to have, who needs advice; and then you will quickly perceive that there be two
things in danger,

1. The life of Religion in a religious person.

2. The life of a religious person; and so the case does resolve it self into
these two Queries,

1. What should believing Christians do to support the life and vigor of
Religion in their souls when they want the ordinary means of public
Ordinances, and are endangered by the leavening society of wicked men?

2. How should they preserve their lives among persecuting enemies without
hazarding the life of their Religion?

For the clearing of and directing in this case I shall now premise some
Propositions fit to be taken notice of,

Prop. 1.
It cannot be expected, that any Rule should be given, according to Scripture,
whereby both the one, and the other life may be certainly secured; for many
times Gods providence brings us into such circumstances, that if we are
resolved, that come what will, we will keep our Religion, we must lose our lives:
and if we are resolved to keep our lives, though with the hazard, or shipwreck
of our Religion, we must then part with our Religion, and perhaps our lives too.

2. There can be no certain and infallible course propounded whereby the life
of the body may be secured with the loss of Religion; though Devil and world
bid fair, and promise we shall live and do well if we will part with our
Religion, yet they are not able, if willing to make good their promise, so long
as there be so many thousand ways to death besides Martyrdom; and this is the
purport of that threatening expression, Mat. 16.25. Whosoever will save his life
shall lose it, not only that eternal life which is the only true life, but
even this temporal life; as many relations tell us.

3. The life of Religion in the soul, is that which by Gods blessing and our
spiritual care and industry may be infallibly secured in any place, among any
persons, in any condition; I do not say the outward exercise of Religion, but
that which is the life and principle of Religion in the soul may be preserved.
Force and violence may deprive those that are religious, of opportunities to
meet together, and pour forth their Common prayers and supplications to God,
and publicly sing forth the praises of God, and hear the great truths of the
Gospel preached unto them; nay they may be hindered from speaking with their
mouths, either to God, or for God; as many of the Martyrs have been gagged:
but all the force and violence in the world, cannot take away that which is the
principle and life of Religion (unless we our selves betray and cast it from
us) nor can they hinder the prime, and principal acts and exercises of
Religion. All the world cannot hinder you or me, from having good thoughts of
God, from sanctifying the Lord God in our hearts, from trusting in, hoping in,
rejoicing in, the goodness and mercy of God through Jesus Christ; from making
holy melody in our hearts, and such music as shall be heard beyond the
spears, though he that stands at our elbow knows not a word we speak; so that
true Religion both in the principle and prime exercises of it may be infallibly
secured, insomuch that he who can rend the heart out of the body, cannot tear
Religion out of the soul.

4. His soul cannot be quickened with the life of the Religion of the Gospel,
who is not in heart persuaded, that the securing the life of Religion in his
soul, is hugely more his concernment, than the preserving of the life of the
body. Yea his Religion is built on a sandy foundation, who has not seriously
considered, that for ought he knows, his Religion may cost him his life, and
has not brought his soul to an humble resolution to lay down his life, rather
than let go his Religion: thus much is clearly imported in that passage Luke
14.27, 28, etc. Which of you intending to build a tower, sits not down first
and counts the cost, etc?

5. The society of good men, and enjoyment of Gospel Ordinances, is of
special use to preserve, quicken and enliven the principle of Religion in the
soul; they are to Religion in the soul, what food is to the natural life of
the body: and therefore the Ordinances in the Church, are compared to breasts
of consolation, Isa. 66.11. The great design of God in appointing
Gospell-Ordinances is, that by the help and assistance of those gifts and
graces which he bestows upon his Ministers, the souls of those who are
estranged from him, should be brought home to the owning and acknowledging of
the truth; and that those who have returned to the Lord, should be more and
more affected with a sense of divine goodness, and their dependence on the
Lord, for all they have and hope for; and indeed if preaching, and reading, and
praying, and every other Ordinance, both in public and in private, do not aim
at and intend this great end, the begetting or actuating and stirring up the
life of Religion in our souls, then are they, what some would fain persuade us,
vain, useless, troublesome things. If thy coming to Church to hear a prayer,
or a Sermon, be not by thee designed, and do not in the even tend to make thee
better, to love God more, loath sin more, and value the world less, and
resolve more heartily to obey the Gospel, thou had as good have been in thy
bed or shop as in the Church; and if in preaching and praying, we that are Gods
mouth to you, and your mouth to God, have any other design than to stir up in
your souls good thoughts of God, affectionate workings of heart toward a
loving tenderhearted father, zealous and hungring desires, to do the will of
God, and express our love by obeying his commandments, I seriously profess I
should think my self much better employed to be working in a Cobblers stall, or
raking in the kennell, or filling a dung cart, than preaching or praying in a
pulpit; and let those who do not intend these great ends, know, that ere long
they will find, they had bettter have been employed in the most debasing
drudgery, than in the outward work of God with sinister and unworthy ends.

These things premised, the case resolves it self into these particular
questions,

1. What should believing Christians do to support the life of Religion in
their souls, when they want the ordinary food of public Gospel Ordinances?

2. What should such do to preserve their outward concernments among
persecuting enemies without hazarding their Religion?

In answer to the first question take these Directions:

1. Let such humbly reflect upon their former sleighting, despising and abusing
the means of grace which now they want; it is the usual method of God, to teach
us the worth of mercies either temporal or spiritual by the want of them, and
to bring us to want those mercies which we abuse; if the child play with, or
throw about his meat, he may well think a wise and loving Father will make him
feel the want of it, and thereby know the worth of it; and certainly we have as
much reason to fear the fulfilling of those threatenings which the Ministers of
the Gospel have for many years sounded in our ears, for our abuse of the means
of grace; and certainly if Gods providence should call the most of us into
Spain, or some other Popish Country where we should have a famine of hearing
the word of the Lord, might we not sadly reflect upon our despising, yea and
loathing the heavenly Manna of Gods Word? I speak not of the profane ungodly
wretches, who scarce ever had any serious thoughts of Eternity, nor ever
soberly considered whether they were at all beholden unto God or no, that never
knew how to value a Bible above a Play-book, or the Sacrament above a drunken
meeting whose Religion is to scoff and mock at godliness and godly men, and
who scarce ever knew any other end in coming to Church, but to mock or carp at
the Preacher, who may with trembling read their doom, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But I
speak of the Professors of Religion, how have they either by reason of new
fangled opinions, slighted and despised Gospel Ordinances? or else by reason
of fullness of spiritual food, have loathed and trampled upon the means of
grace, to whom the Lord seems to speak, as to those Ezekiel 34 18, 19. Seems it
a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture but you must tread
down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep
waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? And as for my flock they
eat that which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
have fouled with your feet; or else having enjoyed them, and made use of them,
have been little the better by them? have not lived and practiced the Sermons
they have heard, and the prayers they have made? Oh let such be sure in the
first place to give glory to God, when he deprives them of such means, by
acknowledging his justice in taking away what has been so much abused, or at
best so little improved; then let them with broken and bleeding hearts reflect
upon those full Banquets of spiritual dainties, the fragments of which in a
time of want they would be glad of.

2. Heartily resolve, if ever the Lord bring you again to enjoy
Gospel Ordinances, you will more value, prize, and improve them; and indeed
that alone which can make our repentings and sad reflections upon former
miscarriages not to be mockings of God, and cousening our selves, must be an
hearty resolution against what we profess to be sorry for; and therefore that
our resolution in such a case may be the more fixed, it would be good to record
it in our Note-books, that so it may be a continual Monitor on all occasions
minding us of our duty, and checking us, if afterward we prove like the
Israelites, who soon forgot the Lord. Psalm. 106.13.
And the truth is, a Christians Note-book is usually a more faithful register
than his heart, and it is easier for the Devil to blot a good resolution out of
our minds, than out of our books.

3. Labor to know and understand well, and often remember, wherein consists
the life of true and real Religion; there be so many things in the world that
pretend to be Religion, and less deserve that name, than the picture of a man
deserves the name of a man, that it is an easy mistake, to nourish an enemy to
Religion instead of Religion, unless we be serious and wary, and more apt to
regard the characters which the Scriptures give, of real Religion, than hasty
to take up the forms and fancies of men instead of Religion. I have read of a
young French Lady, who observing the glorious pomp and splendor of a Popish
Procession, cried out, How fine a Religion is ours in comparison of the
Hugonots? a speech suiting her age and quality; but indeed if Religion did
consist in such things, the question I have in hand would fall to the ground,
for there could then be no exercise of Religion among those who would not admit
of such pompous solemnities. Let us therefore be often remembering, that the
Religion of the Gospel consists in righteousness, Romans 14.17.
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; in denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.12, 13,
and so looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great
God, Jam. 1.27.
and our Savior Jesus Christ; in visiting the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and keeping our selves unspotted from the world. He that has a
precious Jewel which he would secure, must be able to distinguish it well from
a counterfeit stone; lest he neglect his Jewel and spend, his care and pains
upon a glittering glass foysted into the room of it.

4. In all your actions be often fixing your eye upon your great end; be often
asking your selves what is the work and business for which God sent me into
the world? which lies in three words: 1. Honor God. 2. Save your souls. 3. Do
good to others. Be often minding your selves that you have a better Trade to
drive than for the corruptible riches of this world, even for the pearl of
great price, the eternal happiness of your souls. Religion is the way to
Heaven, and he that does not often eye his journeys end, and consider, whether
the way he takes, do lead unto his end, is never like to keep long in the right
way; but now he that often with seriousness considers with himself that the
God who made him expects to be honored by him; that the securing his souls
welfare is his grand concernment; and that to save the soul of one sinner is a
greater good than to save a Country from drowning, or a City from burning, and
therefore on all occasions asks himself, how may I manage such a business so
as to honor God and promote the good of mine own and other men's souls? How may
I prosecute such an affair without prejudicing the grand design of my life?
This man is like to secure Religion in his soul.

5. Live up to the professed principles of your Religion; and believe it to be
a greater glory to God, honor to your Religion, and security to your own souls
to live according to, than to argue and dispute for your Religion; for most
certain it is that self-love, worldly interest, pride, passion, etc. may urge
men to argue eagerly for the Christian or Protestant Religion, whereas nothing
but love to God, and care of our own souls, and charity to the souls of others,
can make a man live according to the principles of that Religion; and as it is
with the principle of natural life, it is not made more lively, active and
vigorous by arguing and disputing wherein it does consist, and what are the
proper acts of it, but by putting it forth in the due acts and exercises of
that life; even so the principle of spiritual life in the soul, gets no
strength by zealous and hot disputing, what and which is the true Religion, and
which be true and proper acts of Religion, but by humble practice of what we
know to be Religion; not but that it is both lawful and commendable to be able
to understand and defend the grounds and principles of our Religion, and all
the holy exercises of it, but I only caution against letting that sap run out
in unfruitful suckers, which should nourish the fruit-bearing branches.

6. Be the more careful to observe and close with the inward stirrings of Gods
Spirit in your hearts, moving you to prayer, meditation, etc. When you are in a
valley of vision, you will have many calls and motions from without to hear the
Word, and pray, and receive the Sacrament, but when you are abroad in a land of
darkness, God must not only be your best, but your only friend, by his Spirit
to jog and stir you up to holy duties; and therefore it does more than
ordinarily concern us, at a such time, not to send away Gods Spirit grieved
with our backwardness to that which is our own concernment.

7. Observe and keep a register or diary of Gods mercies and your own sins;
that you may be often minded what God has been to you, and what you have been
to him; with how many thousand kindnesses he has obliged you, and with how
many thousand sins you have disobliged him; When we enjoy public Ordinances we
may there be often minded both of Gods goodness to us and our sinfulness
against him; and so may have our hearts stirred up to have very good thoughts
of God, and very low thoughts of our selves: but when we want public
Ordinances we should labor to supply that want, by a more strict observation
and recording, both the one and the other; that by reviewing our register we
may be enabled to affect our souls sutably, either to praise the Lord, or abase
our selves.

8. Lay a charge upon your selves to sleep and awake with the thoughts of God,
and eternity upon your souls; and indeed though this is exceeding useful for
all men, yet most of all for those who are deprived of Ordinances. It Is sure
that the same truths which at first work upon the soul to the begetting grace,
are of force afterward to quicken grace, and make it lively and vigorous in
the soul; and certainly the belief of what God is in himself and to us, and the
thoughts of eternity, have a great force to persuade careless sinners to sober
and serious consideration, the necessary instrument by which grace and a spirit
of true and real Religion is begot in the soul; and therefore when we want
those public Ordinances which might be often presenting these great truths to
our souls, it will be of great use to charge our selves more severely with the
daily serious thoughts of them.

9. Take heed (as for your life) of indulging any secret sin; for that will
keep down the life of Religion in the midst of all Ordinances, and therefore
much more in the want of them; a secret disease in the body which spends upon
the stock of the radical moisture, will keep a man from being lively and
vigorous, though he have plenty of very good nourishing food, much more will it
endanger one in a famine; even so a secret sin lodged within, and indulged,
will weaken and enervate the principle of Religion in the soul amidst the
fullest provision of Gospel Ordinances, much more when there is a famine or
scarcity of the bread of life. A Tradesman that has some secret vent, where
his estate runs wast, may prove a beggar in the midst of daily incomes by a
good Trade, much more if he spends upon a dead stock; and so a man who spends
the strength of his soul in some close and secret sin, may prove a spiritual
beggar in the fullest Trade of Gospel Ordinances, and though he have daily
incomes of convictions, informations, reproofs, counsels, solicitations, etc.
from public Ordinances; much more in the want of them; and therefore they who
value the life of Religion, or the life of their souls, must take heed of
indulging secret sins.

10. Be the more careful often to feel the pulse of thine own soul; we use to
say, every man at a competent age is either a fool or a Physician, and though
he be a fool indeed, who when he needs and may have wiser Physicians will trust
to himself, yet when we cannot have others, a man should the more study
himself, and the oftener try his own pulse; and truly he is but a babe in
spiritual things that is not something of a Physician to himself; and though
we should not trust our own skill or experience, where we need and may have the
help of others, yet when we are deprived of them, we should the more diligently
converse with our own souls, and be the oftener trying how our pulse beats
toward God, and Heaven, and the things of another life.

11. Be so much the more in private secret prayer, reading, and meditation;
when we want the showrs of public Ordinances, we should the more diligently
use the watring pot, and water our souls with our foot (as the phrase is
concerning Egypt) Deuteronomy. 11.10. If our lot should be cast where there be no
public Markets where Corn might be bought, every one would plow and sow, reap
and thrash in his own grounds: Even so, if we should live where there be no
public Gospel Ordinances, where the Truths of the Gospel are not publicly to
be had, where we cannot partake of the labors of the Gospel Ministry than it
would concern us to be the more diligent in plowing, and sowing, in reaping and
thrashing by our own private endeavors; and I think it would be fit for us in
such a condition, to spend that time at least in private duties, which others
spend in superstitious or Idolatrous services; let not us think much to give
God and our souls that time, which others give to their own superstitious
fancies.

12. In the use of all private helps, act faith in God, as being able to supply
the want of outward means by the gracious influence of his good and holy
Spirit. When there was no rain from heaven, God could cause a mist to arise and
water the earth, Genesis 2.6. even so if the Lord should bring us whore there be
no showers of public Ordinances, he can stir up in our souls those holy and
heavenly meditations, which shall again drop down like an heavenly dew upon the
face of our souls, and keep up an holy verdure and freshness upon the face of
our souls. Egypt is said to have no rain, Terra non indiga Jovis.
but God makes it fruitful by the oveflowing of its own River Nilus; and truly
if God bring any true believer into a spiritual Egypt, where the rain of
public Ordinances does not fall, he can cause such a flow of holy and heavenly
thoughts and meditations as shall make the soul very fruitful in a good and an
holy life; and therefore we should often in such a condition believingly
remember, that if we do our endeavor, by private prayer, meditation, reading,
and such like, God is able and will, in the want of public Ordinances,
preserve the life of Religion in our souls, by private helps.

We proceed now to the second Question contained in the general case. viz.

Qu. What should believing Christians do to preserve their outward concernments
among persecuting enemies, without hazarding their Religion?

Now this question will resolve it self into two particular Queries,

1. What should such do to secure themselves from suffering?

2. What should they do to encourage themselves against and support in
sufferings. The sum of what may be said to the first Query, I suppose to be
comprised in that counsel of our Lord Jesus, who was Wisdom it self, and
Innocence it self, Matthew. 10 16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst
of Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves; the
Serpents wisdom joined with the Doves innocence are the true Christians best
security; to each of which I shall speak something.

1. Get spiritual Prudence and Wisdom to secure from suffering where we have
not a clear and sufficient call. The Heathens hinted wisdom as well as
strength to be needful for a Soldier, when they appointed the Warlike Goddess
Pallas to be the Patroness of Wisdom; a Soldier may and ought to guard
himself, and by winding and turning his body avoid the enemies blow, so long as
he does not turn his back, forsake the field, or betray his trust; in like
manner may a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, by any lawful means guard himself
from suffering; and by any just compliance, or stepping aside, or giving back,
avoid a blow or make a fair retreat, so long as he keeps the Field, and does
not turn his back upon, nor give up a good, and a just cause for fear of
suffering. Hence the Apostle advises, Col. 4.5. Walk in wisdom toward them
that are without, that is, walk as those that have wisely fixed upon a good end,
and do use the most proper and likely means to attain that end. Now this
general direction will branch it self forth into these particulars:

1. Do not rashly and unnecessarily provoke those that have power to do you a
mischief; it is not wisdom to stir in a wasps nest, nor by bloody colors to
provoke a wild Bull; and certainly our life; and the comforts and relations in
this world, are such real and great blessings, that they are not to be
sacrificed to an humor, nor cast away, but upon the most serious
consideration, and real necessity; and certainly when our Lord Jesus directed
his Disciples, if persecuted in one City, to fly to another, he never intended
they should throw themselves into the jaws of roaring Lions, nor provoke Bears
and Tigers to tear them in pieces, nor leave the quiet habitation of Sion to
seek persecution, and court a Martyrdom among Pagans and Infidels. The holy
Apostle Paul, who was as willing to dye for the Name of Christ as any, Act.
21.13.
and was therefore by his love and zeal urged to go into the Theater at
Ephesus, yet he took the prudent counsel and advice of his Friends, not to
venture himself, nor by his presence provoke the enraged multitude, Act. 19.31.
and afterward he made use of his Kinsmans help to secure his life from those
who had bound themselves with an oath to kill him, Act. 23.16. and at last
appeals to Caesar to avoid the mischief designed against him by the Jews, Act.
25.10. This piece of spiritual prudence caused the primitive Christians to
abstain from profaning the Temples of the heathen, and reviling their gods;
and therefore they chose to discover to them the vanity of their Idolatries
from the Writings and Records of their own Prophets, and with the greatest love
and sweetness that could be; yea this was so evident in Paul himself, that the
Town-clark of Ephesus was able to be his, and his fellow-Christian Compurgator
in this matter, Act. 19 37. Ye have brought hither those men which are neither
robbers of Churches (or as the original, (...) sacrilegious persons) nor yet
blasphemers of your goddess; and therefore that which Josephus accounts one of
Moses Laws, that none should blaspheme the Religion of another, though it be
not a general duty (as appears by Elijahs mocking and scoffing at the God and
religion of Baals Priests, 1 King. 18.27.) yet it holds good here as a rule of
prudence, to avoid needless provoking of those that are without. And in this
case I take this to be a sure rule, whatever act of ours has rationally a
greater likelihood to provoke, harden and enrage the hearts of men, rather than
to convince and convert, is a fruit of indiscretion, not of Christian prudence;
a piece of folly, not a part of our duty. It was certainly a favor from God
when he inclined the heart of Trajane to order his Proconsul Plinius Secundus,
Plin. Sec. Ep. l. 10. Conquirendi non sunt, sideferantur and arguantur,
puniendi sunt.
desiring to know his pleasure in the case, that when any were brought before
him, and accused to be Christians, he should punish them according to Law, but
should not industriously search them out; if now any should have rushed into
the Judges presence, and taken the Devils work out of his hands (who is the
accuser of the Brethren) it would surely have been a sinful undervaluing the
favor of God in that relaxation of their persecution. But now this advice must
be bounded with a word of caution, for as we should take heed lest our zeal
degenerate into ambition, and foolish vainglory in suffering; so on the other
side, lest our prudence and Christian wisdom turn to sinful craft and policy,
while to avoid the stroke of persecution, we take up the Devils buckler of
unlawful practices. The Apostle Peter was not bound to go into the high
Priests hall, and proclaim himself a Disciple of Jesus, but he was obliged not
to deny and forswear it when challenged with it; and so though I am not always
bound to proclaim my faith and Religion, yet am I engaged never to disown it,
and therefore we must take heed of that which Elihu charged Job with, Job
36.21. the choosing iniquity rather than affliction; and therefore when fear or
covetousness would urge us to sin, rather than suffer, let us remember, against
our fears, that it is a more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, than dying men, Isa. 51.12. and against our earthly desires, let us
remember, that if we gain the whole world, and lose our own souls, we shall be
incomparable losers by the bargain, Matthew. 16.26. On the other side, when
ambition, vainglory or humor would urge us to unnecessary sufferings, let us
remember, that God who is Wisdom it self, has no pleasure in fools, Eccl. 5
4. nor delights in those sacrifices which are not presented to him by prudent
consideration and sober resolution, but by the folly of a precipitate zeal; and
however where the heart is right and full of love, God may accept of the love,
and pardon the weakness, yet he no way delights in the sufferings which men
bring upon themselves unnecessarily, by rash, imprudent carriage, whereby they
betray their lives and liberties to the lusts and rage of men, and draw on
their enemies to blood and cruelty, and upbraid the wisdom of those who are
not so rash, as being less real to God and Christ, and make others have hard
thoughts of that Religion which cannot consist with prudence and wisdom.

2. Be much in the exercise of those acts of true Religion which are beautiful
in the eyes of all, even the worst of men; the Apostle Peter intimates the
security of an evidently good and holy life, 1 Pet. 3.13. And who is he that
will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? the chief pieces of
Christian Religion are such as Papists, Turks and Infidels must needs
acknowledge to be good; To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction; To wrong no man; To do to others whatever we would that others
should do to us: Now when we cannot without danger exercise some other (perhaps
more questionable) parts of Christian Religion, then it is good to be so much
the more in the practice of these undoubted pieces of a Christian life, and
zeal in these things will force those without to approve, whereas zeal in
arguing for, or in practicing other things may cause them to hate and persecute
us; zeal in arguing and disputing brings on evil words and evil actions, but
zeal in the practice of unquestionable duties, produces good deeds in our
selves, and forces good thoughts and good words, if not good deeds from
others. In a word, hot disputing, and cold living, or zeal in smaller, and
luke-warmness in greater matters, is the ruin of grace in our selves, the
confirming of sin in others, and the needless hazarding our outward
concernments and betraying them rashly to the violence of wicked and ungodly
men.

3. In your converse with those who are without, choose mostly to insist upon
common, and acknowledged principles, rather than controverted points; if I were
to live among, and converse with Papists, I would choose much rather to urge
them to abstain from lying, drunkenness, malice, etc. and to have good thoughts
of God, to have a continual sense of their dependence upon him, and therefore
continually to recommend themselves unto him by holy prayer, to be meek and
patient, and charitable, rather than to dispute how many Sacraments there be,
or how the bread and the wine is the body and blood of Christ; for good
counsel, and sober exhortations speak love to men's souls, whereas disputes and
arguings are usually thought to proceed only from love to our own notions, and
a desire to oppose others; and indeed if men did not place too much of their
Religion in opposing others, they might much more safely, and much more
profitably converse with those of different opinions, yea of different
Religions.

4. When you do touch upon controverted points, rather enquire and propound,
than positively assert, and violently oppose; though I judge the Mass of Rome,
as by them used, to be a piece of as gross Idolatry, as the world can show,
yet were I to converse among Papists I would not fall foul upon them as the
grossest Idolaters; but as more desiring truth should be honored, than they
reproached, I would calmly and meekly propound my reasons as grounds of
doubting, rather than clear demonstrations; for sure it is, that a sudden and
violent assault, will cause an adversary to gather up his strength, as
violently to oppose, whereas a calm propounding of reasons, or doubts may work
him to a serious consideration, which is the first step to the discovery of
error and acknowledging of truth; for the one kindles a desire of knowing, the
other, a desire of opposing, yea of persecuting.

5. When you think your selves bound to reprove the sins of others, let it be
done with a due consideration of the circumstances of time, place and persons;
and indeed there is scarce any part of a Christians converse with others, that
more requires prudence and wisdom, than that of reproving others; and great
care is to be had that a reproof may at the least be well taken, if not
hearkened to, and that it may do the reproover no hurt, if it do the reprooved
no good.

6. On all occasions express a willingness to do for the best; to believe as
others believe, and to do as others do, if you could see sufficient ground and
reason for it: and indeed this may be a great help and security; for obstinacy
is usually made one essential part of an Heretic, and then, he that is
heartily willing to close with every revealed truth, may be in an error, but
cannot be an Heretic; and therefore every expression of a mind not obstinately
bent upon its taken up notions, nor doting upon its own conceptions, but
inricht with an ingenuous freedom to acknowledge its mistakes, and own truth
when once clearly discovered, though formerly disowned, is like so much water
upon the fire of rage kindled in the hearts of persecuting enemies to quench or
abate it: for to the reason of any that will but consider, it cannot but appear
most unreasonable, to urge a person to believe what he cannot see any ground
for, or to do what he would be willing to do, if it were not sin, that is, a
provoking God, and hazarding his own eternal welfare.

7. Be sure to use no means to secure from persecution or procure the enjoyment
of public Ordinances, but such as are well-pleasing to a good, and a holy God;
it is not long since it was the peculiar honor of the Popish Faction, to depose
or murder Kings, blow up Parliaments, subvert States and Kingdoms, to procure
their liberty, or secure themselves from suffering; and if any others have
ventured upon such practices, I hope God has taught them by his providence,
what they would not learn from his word, that affliction is rather to be chos^n
than sin, and that it is better to wait upon him in the way of his Judgments
(that is, in a way of duty) than to outrun God, and think to secure our selves
by sinful and unjustifiable courses. Let those therefore who prosess to
believe that their God is a God hearing prayer, and that bottles up the tears
of his people, and is able to do what he pleases, let them account prayers and
tears their best arms, seeing they call in that God whose power extends as far
as his will.

8. Arm your selves with a severe patience and a steady resolution to bear
lesser affronts and injuries; those Christians were in such a condition as we
are now speaking of, whom the Apostle minds, that they had need of patience,
Heb. 10 36. Let it be our wisdom therefore to get a stock of that which will
be so needful for us, patience is always a part of our duty, but in this case
it is also an instance of our prudence; for he is a fool that will hazard the
beating out of his brains, rather than bear a fillip.

9. Be much in prayer to that God who alone can secure from suffering, sit for
suffering, strengthen under, and infinitely reward after we have suffered.

2. Let the Serpents wisdom be seconded with the Doves harmlesness and
innocence; walk so honestly and inoffensively that wicked men may be put hard
to it, to find an occasion to quarrel or wrong you; this was remarkable in
Daniel, as you may see Chap 6.4. this was the Apostles direction, 1 Thessalonians 4.12.
Walk honestly toward those that are without; and it was according to his
practice, Act. 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. Now this Christian
innocence or simplicity ought to be like a thread to run through the whole
course of our converse with others; we should neither injure the person, good
name, estate, friend, or any thing which an other may call his; if the Lamb
among Wolves and Foxes begin to butt, and contend, no wonder if these soon bite
and devour; we should be so honest and plain-hearted in our Promises,
Contracts, Covenants, and dealings with others, that they may reverence our
Religion as teaching us to do the best things, and suffer the worst, and not
hate our Religion, as being only a design to make us the better able to
deceive and injure others. 'Twould be no small part of our security if our
carriage toward others might speak for us that which the Poet makes Achilles
speak concerning himself, and his Tutor Chiron, Jesus Christ is my Teacher, and
he has learnt me to use simplicity and honesty in all my manners. But now if
neither of these two will secure us from suffering, but Gods providence does
call us to a public owning of him, and the Religion of the Gospel, we must
then join the Lions courage to the wisdom of the Serpent, and the innocence of
the Dove, that we may be imboldned to look the greatest danger in the face,
rather than turn our back upon God and Christ, and the Religion of the Gospel.
And this brings me to the second branch of the latter part of the Case, How
should believers encourage themselves against sufferings?

In answer to which take these brief D^rections:

1. Be often remembering how infinitely more worth the soul is than the body;
Luke 16.26. Phil. 3.21.
be often weighing in the scales of sober and serious consideration, a precious
soul against a vile body; and then mind thy self, that the worst which
persecuting enemies can do, is to destroy a corruptible body, but the worst
which God can do is to destroy thine immortal soul. Christ arms his Disciples
against fear of suffering by this consideration, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

2. Think how inconsiderable time is compared with Eternity; spend your
thoughts upon the difference, vast and inconceiveable, between those two; the
Apostle tells us, That the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to
be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. The
Apostle compares himself to one that has been casting up an account, where on
one side he meets with nothing but ciphers, or small petty sums; but on the
other side finds thousands and millions, and then cries out alas, the one is
not to be compared with the other! Thus the Apostle finds light and momentary
afflictions, on the one side, and a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory on the other side, as we find him expressing himself, 2 Cor 4.17.

3. Remember that the welfare of the body does depend upon the welfare of the
soul; not indeed in this world, for here his body may be well, and in good
plight, fat and flourishing, well fed and clothed, whose soul is poor and
naked, sick and wounded, in a sad and deplorable condition; and on the other
side, a poor beggarly sick Lazarus, may have a soul fed with Royal and heavenly
Dainties, and clothed with better Robes than Purple and Ermine; but then the
eternal welfare of the body depends upon the eternal welfare of the soul; it is
bound up in the life and welfare of the soul, as Jacobs life is said to be
bound up in Benjamins, Gen 44 30. and therefore you cannot secure the welfare
of the outward man, by betraying and casting away that which is the life and
welfare of the inward man.

4. Remember that you can suffer nothing in this world, but Jesus Christ has
suffered the same, or worse; The Lord Jesus arms his Disciples against
sufferings by this consideration, Joh. 15.20. and the Apostle Paul having
experienced it himself, advises the believing Hebrews to it, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
Looking unto Jesus, etc. Now this consideration will suggest to us,

1. That the worst sufferings are no dishonor to us, seeing Christ Jesus the
King of Kings has born them.

2. That the greatest sufferings do not speak us the greatest sinners; Christ's
sufferings assure us, that the purest and whitest innocence, may be dyed red in
its own blood.

3. That the greatest sufferings make us never the less amiable in the eyes of
God, for then Christ Jesus the only begotten Son of God, in whom he was always
well-pleased, would not have suffered.

5. We can suffer nothing but what our God, our Friend, our Father, knows we
suffer, and knows that a suffering condition is the best for us. When poor
Christians are kept by the bloody Inquisition in dark Holes and Caves from the
eyes of all the world, they cannot be kept from the eye of God, Rev. 2.13. I
know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; this was
the encouragement which Christ gave his persecuted Church of Pergamos; thy
condition is known to that God whose heart is as tender, as his eye piercing;
and whose arm can reach as far as his eye, and whose wisdom knows how to
direct the sufferings of every believer for his own, his Churches, and that
believers real good.

6. Be often comparing God and creatures together, that great God who suffers
in, and with his suffering people, and those little small things called devils
and men that bring sufferings upon them; make thy soul to know and understand
the difference between the little trifling bubble promises of the world, and
the great precious, solid and massy promises of God; and let faith tell thee,
that the threatenings of a raging Devil, a storming Nebuchadnezzar, or a furious
multitude, are but the noise of a Pot-gun, if compared with the thunder of Gods
dreadful Threatenings. Remember what God says to his afflicted Church, Isa.
51.12. Who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and
of the son of man which shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker, etc? In a word, think thus with thy self, man cannot do all that he
seems able to do, nor all that he resolves and boasts that he will do, but God
can do all that he has said he will do, and he will do for his suffering
servants more than they can hope or think. Let us heartily believe that God can
easily recompense us for whatever we may lose for him; but all the creatures in
the world are not able to make amends for that, which Apostasy from God will
deprive us of; Oh Sirs, could we but heartily believe this, what a sorry
temptation would persecution be? If this faith were strong, persecution would
be exceeding weak; if faith could see, men and devils able to do nothing, and
God able to do all things, then persecution would be able to do nothing, and
such a faith would be able to do, and to suffer all things.

And thus I have spoken to both the parts of this practical Case of Conscience,
and shall now close up all with a word of Exhortation, That if it be such a
real ground of trouble, etc. then let us make it our earnest prayer to God,
that our Land may still be a Goshen, and a Valley of Vision, and not an Egypt,
or the vale of the shadow of death, that we may still enjoy the Ordinances of
the Gospel, and the company and society of good men; that our lot may never
fall among Ezekiels Scorpions or pricking briars, and grieving thorns, Ezekiel.
2.6. and 28.24. Let us heartily pray for that blessedness mentioned Psalm. 65.4.
That the Lord may choose us, and cause us to approach unto him, that we may
dwell in his Courts, and be satisfied with the goodness of his house.

How is Hypocrisy discoverable and cureable?
LUKE 12.1. First of all, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.


WHen our Lord and Savior had finished his heavenly soul-searching Sermon in
the Chapter foregoing, he came so close in the application to the Scribes and
Pharisees, a proud hypocritical people, that they (not able to endure their
pride and hypocrisy should be so soundly convinced and openly detected)
combined and contrived, (by urging, Luke 11.53, 54
and watching, and catching words) to accuse him and stop his mouth at least,
Joh. ^1 17.
if not his breath These con^rivances and practices of theirs, were not unknown
to him that knew all things, and what effect it wrought in Christ, you find in
this verse of the Text; he preaches the same things, and in the same manner
and sharpness of style at the next oppor^unity.

In the mean time, (...), says the greek: in those, or in which times that
they were thus plotting and contriving, Christ is boldly preaching the same
Doctrine that they were persecuting; was as bold for the truth as they were
politic against it.

And in those very days, and in the midst of these contrivements aganst his
preaching; the people as much loved the Doctrine that the Pharisees persecuted:
an innumerable multitude were gathered together to see and to hear him. A
myriade, too many thousands to be easily numbered, flocked and thronged so to
him, that they even trod one upon another: and then he began to say to his
Disciples (they were nearest to him, but so as the people heard it,) and he
taught them; and that was his intent, as you may see ver. 40, 42.

First of all, Beware of, for the adverb is not to be joined to the verb
taught, but to the word beware, i. e. (...), first of all is not used
distributively, but eminently; as much as to say chiefly, especially beware,
etc. so it is used by the Apostle: first I thank my God for you all, Romans 1.8.
(that is chiefly) that your faith is spoken of through the world.

Beware and avoid this leaven of hypocrisy wherewith the Pharisees doctrine
and conversation is so leavened; take heed, beware especially, chiefly of
hypocrisy.

In the Text is represented a precious Sermon in its preaching, with the
circustances of it.

Wherein is observable,

1. The time, it was in that juncture of time when they had councelled and
determined, but had not yet executed their councels.

2. The Preacher, Christ himself the great Prophet of the Church, in the
exercise of his Prophetical office.

3. The auditors, his Disciples and an innumerable multitude of people.

4. His first Doctrine is, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. And this
Doctrine is confirmed by Reason, ver. 2. and improved by inference, ver. 3.

Many useful lessons might be commended from the other particulars, but my
meditations are confined to the last, the Doctrine, the caution, Beware of the
leaven, etc. and only spend as much time in opening the Text and Doctrine, as
will let me in to give direction, how to discern, and how to be delivered from
this dangerous leaven of hypocrisy: which is according to your desires unto me
for your instruction in this particular.

The words naturally yield you this Doctrine:

Matthew. 23.
Hypocrisy is a dangerous leaven, which Ministers and people are chiefly and
especially to beware of, and acquit themselves from. Hence you have a Chapter
of woes against it.

Esa. 1.11, 12. Esa. 66.3.
And it is represented, as that which renders odious to the Lord, and defiles
his choicest Ordinances, and our best duties if it cleave to them.

And puts God to sad complaints and exprobations of such a people: Hos. 6.4.
What shall I do unto thee O Judah? what shall I do unto thee O Ephraim? for
your righteousness is as a morning cloud: all show, no truth, no showers.

And has been the ruin of many forward and glorious professors, as Baalam,
Jehu, Saul, and many other persons of great parts, and many great performances,
and one would conceive of great hopes too: but they, and their works, and their
hopes all are perished, Job 8.13.
the hypocrites hope shall perish.

The explication of this Doctrine would lie in the speaking to these
particulars: 1. What hypocrisy is. 2. How it is resembled by leaven. 3. Why
called the leaven of the Pharisees. 4. Wherein is it so dangerous.


1. What hypocrisy is: Much of the nature of a thing is many times discovered
in its name; the name is a brief description.

The word hypocrite properly signifies an actor or stagepl^yer, a personater of
other men in their speech, habit, and action. The Hebrew word signifies both a
wicked man and a deceiver. And it is observed, that those whom David the
devoutest man called wicked, Solomon the wisest man calls fools, and Job the
most upright man calls hypocrites: all is but one and the same thing under
diverse names.

Hypocrisy then is but a feigning virtue and piety it seems to put on, and
vice and impiety it conceals and would seem to put off. It is indeed vice in a
vizor: the face is vice, but virtue is the vizor. The form and nature of it is
imitation: the ends are vain glory, to be seen of men, or some gain or carnal
respects.

There is a gross hypocrisy whereby men pretend to the good they know they
have not: and there is a formal close hypocrisy, whereby men deceive others
and themselves too; are hypocrites and do not know it: In this case it is
probable the Pharisee was, Luke 18. Mat. 25.
and those signified by the five foolish Virgins, and all formal Christians
that are not regenerated by the spirit, nor put into Christ by faith.

This is a subtle evil, a secret poison, a close contagion; and here it is
infinite mercy and grace that we do not all split and perish: and if we can
escape this, if we are indeed sincere, we are out of the greatest danger of all
the leaven of hypocrisy. To direct you to find out, and to purge out this,
shall be my especial endeavor at this time.

2. How is hypocrisy resembled by leaven? Briefly thus:

1. Leaven is hardly discerned from good dough by the sight, and as hardly is
hypocrisy distinguished from piety: You outwardly appear righteous unto men,
Mat. 23.18. 1 Cor. 5.6.
but within you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

2. Leaven is very spreading, a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: and so
it is a great deal of mischief hypocrisy does, it spreads over all the man,
and all his duties, parts, performances, leavens all, as we may observe, Esa.
1.12, 13, 14, 15. Esa. 66.3.

3. Leaven is of a sour taste, and ungrateful smell; so is hypocrisy to God
and man: I will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn
assemblies: Mal. 2.3.
all were leavened with hypocrisy, and were accounted and savoured but as dung
in the nostrils of the Lord. How odious and loathsome was that service of
Annanias and Saphira, Act. 5.
both to the holy Ghost and to the Church, because it was leavened with
hypocrisy.

4. Leaven is of a swelling nature, it extends and puffs up the dough: and so
does hypocrisy; it is all for the praise of men: the Scribes and Pharisees
were all for pre-eminence, chief places, chief seats, chief appellations, to be
called Rabbi, Rabbi: and if others will not admire and over value them, they
will admire and advance themselves: Mat. 18. Luke 16.14, 15.
I am not as this Publicane. You are they that justify your selves, but God
knows your heart, for that which is highly esteemed among men, is an
abomination to the Lord. They highly esteemed of themselves, they justified
themselves: they derided Christ for not having the same thoughts of them: Pride
and vainglory is the inseparable companion, if not the mother of hypocrisy.

3. Why is it called the leaven of the Pharisees? Because they were leavened
with it to purpose, they were exact and supereminent in this divelish art of
personating and counterfeiting to the life. The devil indeed is the
arch-hypocrite of the world, transforming himself into an Angel of light: his
firstborn in this generation are the Scribes and Pharisees; his next born the
Jesuits, so like their predecessors the Pharisees, that a man may believe that
Christ looked so far as to them in Matthew 23. and struck at them through the
Pharisees sides, that they were indeed the types, but the Pope, Cardinals,
Prelates, and Jesuits, the antitype. Their Doctrines are alike leavened, they
both set up traditions, superstitious customs and forms, against and above the
Word of God, when once they come in competition: they both would ordinarily
suspend and dispense with Gods commands, but most rigorously impose their own,
and that under severe paenalties; and both upon the account of extraordinary
holiness, and high actings of devotion. And so for their conversation, there
was gross hypocrisy in all to be seen; prayed in corners of the streets, gave
alms openly, Mat. 6.4, 5, 6.
disfigured themselves that they might appear to fast. So the Jesuits (if we
may believe some of themselves being converted) and many of the Saeculars that
know them well enough, affect the name, but hate the reallity of true piety and
devotion. They would be accounted as Henry the 4th of France said of them,
Timothies at home in the College, Chrysostomes in the pulpit, and Augustines
in disputation, this they would be accounted, though it be nomen inane and
crimen immane, they would have the name though not the thing; for that is the
nature of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.

4. Wherein is this leaven of hypocrisy so dangerous, that Ministers and
people, ought firstly, chiefly to beware of it? A very little and briefly of
that:

There is great danger of it, and great danger by it.

There is great danger of it: 1. For we have the ground of the matter in our
selves, hearts deceitful above all things, Ier. 17.9.
and desperately wicked; who can know thy wickedness? I the Lord search the
heart, and try the reins, etc. As if none besides the Lord knew the
bottomless depths and deceits of the heart. In the heart are those lusts and
affections, that feed and foment all the hypocrisy in the world: pride,
vainglory, concupiscence, carnal wisdom; were it not for these, there would
not be an hypocrite living.

2. The Devil watches night and day to set fire to this towe, he is fitted to
the purpose, and filled with raging desire, to comply with a filthy heart, and
to engender this spurious offspring of hypocrisy. He has in a readiness his
wiles, and his depths, his baits and his snares; and for a false heart, has
false ways, false Doctrines, false faiths, false seasons, false ends and aims,
vix caret effectu, when two such be agreed to such a purpose, hardly will they
be frustrated.

3. And that we may not be secure, there are before our eyes and in our view
dreadful examples: Baalam a great Prophet, Judas an Apostle familiar with
Christ: Saul, Jehu, Herod, and Agrippa, famous Kings: Five Virgins conspicuous
and most confident: Ananias and Saphyra eminent converts: Alexander, and Demas
confessors, and in some degree Martyrs: it may grieve and make a tender heart
tremble, to think, what they became, and what is become of them. To teach him
that stands to take heed least he fall, and all of us to our dying day, to
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy.

2. And there is great danger by it: 1. The loss of all that is done: Mat. 19.
Christ will say as to that young man, yet want thou one thing, sincerity:
would thou have Heaven too? why then did thou all things for the praise of
men? thou have thy reward, and art over-paid: Mat. 7.23.
depart from me you that work iniquity.

2. Frustrating of hopes, great hopes, hopes of glory and Heaven, and escaping
eternal misery: oIb 8.13.
all these hopes must perish to the hypocrite: perish like a ship at the very
mouth of the haven, perish whiles they are crying Lord, Lord: perish into
everlasting horror, and eternal despair.

3. Full detection, and manifesting of them in the sight and face of all the
world, Luke 12.2.
for there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall
not be known: the vizor will be then taken off which was feigned sanctity; and
the face will appear which was indeed double iniquity, and for going about to
cousin God, and the world, and his own soul, the miserable hypocrite will be
left to eternal, intolerable confusion. To be detested, and derided by God,
Angels and Saints; to be insulted on by the devils and damned to all eternity.

4. And in Hell the hypocrite shall be beaten with many stripes; for he knew
his Masters will, Luke 12.47.
and pretended he was doing of it, and yet did it not. Shall he that judged
others to Hell lie lower in Hell, and have more of Hell than those condemned by
him? shall it be worse with a proud Pharisee than with a Publicane, nay a
damned Publicane? Mat. 24.51.
is Hell the portion of Hypocrites? are they the freeholders, and all others
but tennants and inmates with them? or else if there be a worse place in Hell,
must it be theirs? it must be so, for the nearer Heaven the more of Hell, and
that will be the Hell of Hell to all aeternity. Surely then hypocrisy is a
dangerous thing, there is exceeding danger of, and danger by this leaven of the
Phasees, which is hypocrisy.

beware in the Text.

To stir and provoke you to put forth your utmost care, diligence and
circumspection, to beware of this leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

Here I could show you how much you are concerned to beware of the Pharisees
leaven in doctrinals, to beware of Doctrines advancing any thing in man, or of
man: doctrines that are derived from any other fountain, than the pure Word of
God, as traditions, Enthusiasmes, impulses, besides or against the Word:
doctrines of will worship, superstition, voluntary humility, etc. doctrines
ascribing too much to, and laying too much stresse on, externals in worship not
instituted by Christ: doctrines of rigid imposition of things indifferent:
doctrines that have a tendency to blind obedience and implicit faith. Whoever
reads the New Testament, may soon discern such were their doctrines, and this
is the leaven of the Pharisees in doctrinals; and truly you had need to take
care of this, for doctrines and principles have no small influence on
conversation and practice.

But I shall choose rather to prosecute this Use, by endeavoring to give an
Answer and resolution to two Questions, which together constitute a great and
weighty Case of Conscience.

Quest. How may we discover and find out this subtle close evil of hypocrisy,
and convince our own and others souls that we are guilty of it, and under the
danger of it?

I must here first premise some general Cautions, and then produce some
particular evidences and discoveries of it. I shall not meddle at all with
gross hypocrisy, which is usually known both to the Hypocrite himself, and
frequently apparent to others too. Some men's sins are open beforehand, going
before to judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24.
and some men they follow after: But I shall labor to trace out and unkennel
that latent, close, and deep Hypocrisy, formally self-deceiving Hypocrisy,
whereby the Hypocrite may cousin others, and himself too.

Here 1. I must premise these Cautions and Negations;

1. That hic labor, hoc opus, my task is very hard, my work difficult, heart of
man is deceitful above all things. Ier. 17 9.
And hence the most serious, inquisitive, jealous, and heart-searching
Christians have used to call God in to their help in this work, Search me O God
and know my heart, try me and know my reins, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
etc. Search my heart and try my reins, examine whether there be any way of
wickedness in me.

2. That as difficult as it is, yet it is possible and feasible: for we search
and try our ways and turn unto the Lord: Lam. 3.40. 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 Ioh. 3.19.
to examine our hearts and to prove our selves whether we be in the faith:
whether our own hearts condemn us not. David, Hezekiah, Job and Paul, 2 Cor.
1.12. these all examined their own hearts, and attained thereby to a knowledge
and sense of their own sincerity. And we are not directed to absurdities, when
we are cautioned to beware of men, to take heed of those that come in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves. And we are not herein bid to make
Brick without straw, for the spirit of a man which is in him knows the things
of a man, 1 Cor. 2.11.
and as face answers to face in a glass, Prove. 27.19.
so does the heart of man to man. Nay we have a far greater help, viz. the
Spirit of God which searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. One of
the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit in the primitive Church, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
and very necessary for those times (in which Satan was very busy, and the
Canon of Scripture not completed) was the gift of discerning of spirits: 1
Cor. 12.10.
some think that by virtue of this gift, Peter discerned Ananias and Saphira
their hypocrisy, Acts 5.
and afterward Simon Magus his too, which Philip could not do, as not having
that gift, or such a measure of it; but indeed there was no need of any
extraordinary gift to discern Simon Magus by; Acts 8.
to any man that had reason and but common illumination, Simon Magus his
hypocrisy might easily and clearly appear in that motion of his [Sell me this
gift] Who but an hypocrite could have thought it had been to be sold? and who
but an hypocrite would have offered money for it? It was easy to conclude him
in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity.

And the Ministers of the Gospel have authority, calling, and commission (and
therefore gifts) to detect and bewray the guiles and wiles, the depths and
deceits and snares of Satan, much more the workings and turnings of men's
deceitful hearts; and the Word of God (which is the main and principal weapon
of their warfare) is quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12.
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: and it casts down
imaginations, and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. Therefore while we have this Word and Spirit, 2 Cor. 10.5.
it is possible (though difficult) to discover the hypocrisy of our own
spirits, and to direct others to find out theirs.

It is not a poor souls fearing and doubting his hypocrisy, accusing David in
Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12. charging himself so; and the Church accusing her self of
erring from Gods ways, and having their hearts hardened from his fear; Isa.
63.17.
and yet their own expressions in the Verses before, Verse. 15, 16.
manifest the frame of their spirits to be exceeding tender and humble. Holy Mr
Bradford would many times subscribe himself in his Letters, John the hypocrite,
and a very painted Sepulcher. Fox his Acts and Alon.
Agur one of the wisest men living, condemns himself for being more brutish
than any man, and not having the understanding of a man. Prove. 30.2.
And David one of the holiest and devoutest men living, upon an ordinary
temptation, viz. the prosperity of the wicked, was very apt to charge the ways
of God with unprofitablenesse; Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence; Psalm. 73.13.
but afterward seeing his error, he charge it so upon himself, that he
upbraids and condemns himself for foolish and ignorant, Verse. 22.
and a very beast before God. It is usual with the best men to have the worst
thoughts of themselves:

1. Partly, because as God will give most grace to the humble;

2. Partly, because where there is true grace, there is an insatiable
communnion with God, nor of conformity to him: they seldom look back and say,
this thou have; but still press forward to this thou have not, and this thou
may, and this thou must have. Phil. 3.12, 13.


3. And partly, because as there is much difference between direct and its
reflected act, between knowing God, and knowing that we know him; between
believing, and knowing that we believe: so there is between having sincerity,
and finding a feeling of it constantly; between not being hypocrites, and a
constant confidence of it; which would amount to no less than full assurance.
This is not granted to all, and seldom to any at all times, that so there may
be a season for the exercise of other graces, humility, fear and trembling,
fear of solicitude, Phil. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.
and diligence in making our calling and election sure. And this is to be
remembered and observed, viz. That God likes us never the worse that Satan is so
much our enemy; but much the better, that by humility, lowliness of mind, and
self-denial, we seem to be our own enemies.

4. Nor are they foul failings, nor dangerous fallings into gross The falls of
Gods people may be Horrendae tempestates, and flenda naufragia. The grievous
falls of Gods people do evidence there is hypocrisy in them; but not that they
are hypocrites. David was guilty of adultery and murder, and puffed up with
exceeding pride and vainglory, in the multitude of his Subjects, and strength
of his Kingdom: but David's repenting and rising again, cleared him from being
an hypocrite, so that the spirit of God testifies from his own mouth, that he
was upright, and kept himself from his iniquity, Psalm. 18.
i. e. from the reign and continuance of it; and after his fall he was called a
man after Gods own heart: Thou have not been as my servant David, who kept all
my Commandments, and followed me with all his heart, to do that only which was
right in my sight. 1 King. 14.8.
The Lord overlookt his adultery and murder; for indeed he had put away his
sin (or made it pass over, as it is in the Original) that is to Christ.
Hezekiahs heart was lifted up, and he renderd not according to the benefit done
unto him; 2 Chronicles. 32.25, 26. 2 Chronicles. 29.2.
but Hezekiah was humbled, and the wrath of God came not upon him all his
days; he was not an hypocrite, no he did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, according to all that his father David had done. So Peter denied and
forswore his Master, after many warnings, and many promises to the contrary;
yet he repented and wept bitterly: his fall showed him to be a weak frail man;
but proved him not a hypocrite. Job confessed himself a sinner, Job 13.23.
and that many were his iniquities and transgressions; but Job would never
confess himself an hypocrite: Job 27.5, 6.
no, he would keep his integrity till he died; for it is not the falling into
sin, or the being guilty of it; Psalm. 66.18.
but regarding iniquity in the heart, that denominates an hypocrite; otherwise
all men were hypocrites, for certainly all men are sinners, Romans 3.
all shut up under sin.

David had gotten into a way of lying to save his life: viz. 1 Samuel 21. in the
2d verse he told one lie, in the end of the verse another, and in the 8th verse
another. He prays that God would take from him the way of lying. And the
promise of mercy and pardon is not only to sins, but backslidings; I will
heal their backslidings. Hos. 14.4. Ier. 3.22.
And such are invited to return to God: Return thou backsliding Israel, and I
will heal your backslidings. Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord
our God. Indeed to be bent to backsliding is a dangerous sign of prevailing
hypocrisy, and yet some in this case shall turn and walk after the Lord. Hos.
11.2, 8, 9.10,
We do not read of the people of God, that they did revolt and backslide into
the same gross sins after repentance; nor David into adultery, nor Peter to
faintheartednesse, nor Paul to persecution. But yet this may be so, and
provision is made in that case, by the promise of healing backslidings. Though
it cost them dear to recover their peace, after revolting into gross sins;
after pardon and peace spoken; and it will lie upon their consciences as an
heavy aggravation of their sin and ^olly. 1 King. 11.9. Psalm. 85.8.
But yet it does not conclude that all was done in hypocrisy before, and that
they were but mere hypocrites; no more than Solomon's falling and Idolatry
(which he repented of, witness the book of Ecclesiastes) does conclude him an
hypocrite when he built the Temple, and was the Jedidiah, the beloved of the
Lord.

6. Nor is it every degree of tendency to hypocrisy, that denominates Ier.
17.9.
and the holy Prophet Jeremy cries out, the heart is deceitful, etc. he meant
his own heart as well as others; and Solomon the wisest man gives this advice.
keep thy heart. Proverbs were experiments, his own, and David the devoutest,
says, all men are liars, all deceitful; and there are the remains of
hypocrisy in the best, the reign of it is only in hypocrites; hypocrisy may
have its presence, but not predominance in the sincerest children of God. Thus
you see what does not conclude an hypocrite, though it come very near.

2. Now I shall show what cannot clear and acquit a man from an hypocrite,
though it proceed very fairly, and very far, which makes it so difficult to
discover this leaven of the Pharisees, hypocrisy.

1. It does not acquit and discharge a man from this charge of hypocrisy: That
they hear the Word with some delight; that they believe with some faith, so did
the stony ground. Matthew. 13.
That they take some pains for it, so did they Joh. 6. That they perform some
duties in obedience to it, so did Herod, Mark 6. That they are moral and
without blame in some things outwardly, Matthew. 19.
so was the young man. That they are zealous against some public corruptions,
so was Jehu. That they have illumination and excellent knowledge, by a common
work of the spirit; so have the Devils, Judas, and those apostates, Heb. 6.
That they had some sweet tastes and relishes from the Word embraced, so had they
in Heb. 6. and no doubt Ananias and Saphira had. Nor does this acquit them and
set them out of danger, that they have some serious cares and fears about their
salvation: so had Felix, so had the sinners in Zion, they were afraid, Isa.
33.14.
fearfullnesse has surprised the hypocrites: they were afraid of dwelling with
devouring fire, and everlasting burnings. Judas and Spira had fears to purpose:
Romans 8.15.
and the spirit of bondage is but a common work of the spirit, if it rest
there; in Pharaoh there was fear but no sincerity: in the Devils fear but no
penitency: nor is it some reluctance against sin by an awakened conscience;
Herod had so, and Pilate had so, Baalam so: nor many desires of good, Baalam
desired to die the death of the righteous. The five Virgins desired Oil: there
be the desires of the sloathfull, that even kill them; desires like the turning
of a door upon hinges, Pro. 26.14.
never the farther off: Desires of the wavering man, Iam. 1.6, 7.
the double-minded man, when a man has some mind to grace, Aug. in Confess.
but more to lust: as Augustine that prayed for grace and chastity, but his
heart secretly prayed the while, not yet Lord. There may be pouring out of
prayers as the Ninevites, Jonah 3.8.
they cried mightily; they powered forth a prayer when thy chastening was upon
them, Esa. 26.16.17.
and yet they brought forth but wind: When he slew them then they sought him,
Psa. 68.34, 36.
and they returned and enquired early after God; nevertheless they did but
flatter him with their mouth, and lied to him with their tongues, etc. Nor is
it some hopes, Matthew. 25. Job 8.13. Luke 18. If all this cannot save a man from
the guilt of hypocrisy, and portion of hypocrites, what shall? If these come
short of Heaven, where shall they appear that come far short of them? Oh then
who can be saved, Straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to
life, Luke 13.24. Phil. 2.12.
and few find it. Salvation work is to be wrought out with fear and trembling.
Beware then of the leaven, etc.

How then may we know how it is with our souls; whether we are in the number of
hypocrites, and tending to their portion? whether this deluding, destroying,
predominating, damning leaven of hypocrisy be in us?

the lust of the flesh, 1 Ioh. 2.15, 16.
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life: this is a fearful evidence of
hypocrisy, for it is inconsistent with, and destructive of, the love of God;
Matthew. 22.37.
and the loving God above all things, is the very essence, the summa totalis of
sincerity, and whatsoever contraries this, is the very essence of hypocrisy. I
know there be many subterfugies and evasions, and it is an hard matter to
convince men, that they love the world in St John's sense. But if a man make
these lusts of the eye, of the flesh, and pride of life; honors, riches,
carnal and sensual pleasures, his aim, his interest, his chief delight. If
the heart and affections be let out to these things immoderately: If the
sweetest, freest thoughts of the soul, be let out to them; either about the
getting, enjoying, or desiring, or admiring, or advancing them. If the activity
and endeavors of the soul bend and are employed chiefly this way; though there
may be many excellent performances, expressions, affections, yet the leaven of
the Pharisee is there, and sours all, and all the rest is but in hypocrisy.
This leavened all Baalams pretenses, divinations; all his goodly expressions,
and professions, both to God, the Angel, and men; that he would do nothing,
speak nothing, but what God would have him; (as much as to say, he would be
upright, and sincere, Jude 11.
) yet still he looked after the reward, ( Balacs promotion,) this was the
error of Baalam, he followed the wages of unrighteousness: and this leavened
all Judas his hearing and conversing with Christ, his over-officiousnesse Some
conceive from Judas his kissing Christ in the garden, etc. that he was more
than ordinarily familiar and officious about him, and made more pretenses of
love and service to him, but he appeared a painted sepulcher, an hypocrite; he
loved the wages of iniquity, it was the world and hypocrisy were predominant
in him; and now he is gone to his own place, the place and portion of
hypocrites: he was as it were out of his place, or in an others place all the
while before: and this leavened all the Pharisees alms, fastings, prayers,
professions, and pretenses; Luke 16.14.
they were covetous says one Evangelist: and they loved the praise of men more
than the praise of God, Ioh. 12.43.
says another: and that is in effect, they loved the favor of men, more than
the favor of God: in short, they loved the world, 1 Ioh. 2.16. Mat. 6.24. 1
Cor. 7.27, 30.
and the love of the Father was not in them. There can be no serving God and
Mammon, if we cannot moderate and temperate affections, both in the desires, in
the affections, in the use, in the enjoyments, and moderate our cares and
griefs in the loss and want of worldly things; to have them as if we had them
not, to rejoice in and for them as if we rejoiced not: to grieve for the want
of them as if we grieved not: seeing they are to us as if they were not; they
are a scheame, a representation that passes away. Gal. 6.15.
Nay if the world be not crucified to us, and we to the world, we are still in
danger of this gall of bitterness, this leaven of hypocrisy. This is
exemplified in the Jews in Babylon, they would come to the Prophet, and sit
before him as Gods people (with much seeming reverence, and appearance of
devotion and affection) they hear thy words but they will not do them, for
with their mouth they show much love, Ezech. 33.31.
but their heart goes after their covetousness. Therefore as you love your
souls, beware of the love of the world, and set not your affections on things
below, but on things above, else you will not be able to avoid the guilt and
danger of hypocrisy.

A not loving the Word of God, a not receiving it as the Word of It is the
property of the Word of God to be quick and powerful, 1 Thessalonians 1.5.
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the dividing of soul and spirit,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12. 2 Cor.
10.5.
to cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. This is the Word of God, and this it does as the Word of
God, these are the properties of it. Such a Word of God an hypocrite can not
love, because he loves this carnal sinful self, he loves his lusts which this
Word opposes. He flattereth himself in his own eyes until his iniquities be
found to be hateful. The Word in power will show him that all is ill, Psalm.
36.2.
when he flattereth himself that all is very well. Have thou found me, O mine
enemy, says Ahab? An hypocrite thinks he has no greater enemy than a
faithful Minister, because hypocrisy has no greater enemy than the Word of
Truth, which will detect and make it odious. 1 King. 21.20. 1 King. 22.8.
So Ahab hated Micaiah and his Ministry, because he prophesied evil to him, in
his evil ways, he spoke the Word of God, the truth to him, which Ahabs corrupt
life, Mark 6 17, 18, 20.
and hypocritical heart could not bear. Herod heard John Baptist gladly in
other things, but when he preached against his having his brothers wife, when
he came home to his conscience, to his very darling fin, then Herod stopped his
mouth, shut him up inprison. Felix trembles, and dismisseth Paul when he came
so close; Act. 24.25.
an hypocrite may love to hear the same Minister on another subject. The very
notion of Religion is amiable and acceptable to ingenuous persons, nay he may
love the Word, may come to others, but to himself (during the predominancy of
hypocrisy) that the powerful Word neither read, nor preached can be welcome,
because it applies it self to the cutting off of his right hand, Mat. 5.
and plucking out his right eye.

Judas? What convictions and reprehensions had Ahab and Herod? and yet as to
those things which the word opposed they were still the same men. If men that
hear much mind nothing, if there be no change, no alteration, but they are
still where and what they were, where they are still as carnal; as earthly, as
they were ten, twenty years ago, though they hear much, and are as earth that
drinks in the rain; nay though they have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if yet they bring not forth meet fruit for him
that dresseth it, that ground is rejected, that heart is near to cursing and
burning, Heb. 6.7, 8.
there is some guile and hypocrisy there, there would be some growing else.
When the word is precept upon precept, line upon line (i. e. 1 Pet. 2.2.
very plentiful) and yet no amendment, there is hypocrisy, they will fall
backward, Hos. 6.4, 5.
be broken, and snared and taken. Oh it is no small matter to be dead,
unprofitable, unaltered hearers. It is a fearful sign of hypocrisy and that
there are many hypocrites in the bosom of the Church.

4. The principles and ends of men's actions and performances are a principles
be no higher than good education, Act. 26.5. Phil. 3.5, 6.
and being conversant with good or strict men; which seems to be Paul's case, or
no higher than good nature and moral qualifications, Mark 10.
this seems to be the young man's case; they are no farther than those were at
that time, in an ignorant and insincere condition. He that is really and
sincerely a good Christian does all as from God and Christ, he is all, and in
all, Christ is wisdom and sanctification to him. Col. 2.11. 1 Cor. 1.30.
He acts and performs duties not only from strength of parts, and acquired
qualifications, but from strength of grace, and infused habits, from God, and
for God, from a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.25. Romans 11.24. ^er. 21.33. Romans 3.5. 2
Cor. 5.19. 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 3.17. 2 Cor. 13.5. Ier. 32.40.
from the Law written in the heart, from the love of God shed abroad in the
heart, and constraining to love; from the Divine nature communicated to the
heart; from Christ by his Spirit dwelling in the heart; from the fear of God
possessing and establishing the heart. These be the springs and principles of a
sincere Christians spiritual life and actions; and where they act and bear
rule, it is no wonder if such motions and performances be produced, as the
world may admire, hut not imitate. Saul's life (after his Conversion) was a
kind of constant miracle, so much he did, and so much he suffered, and so much
denied himself, that if he lived in these days his life would be a miracle;
but yet if we consider the principles that he was acted by, the great wonder
will be, not that he did so much, but that he did no more, for says he, Christ
lives in me, and the life that I live I live by the faith of the Son of God,
etc. Gal. 2.20.
And so the ends of a man's actions are a great discovery of sincerity or
hypocrisy. If a man's ends be lower than God himself, and obeying, glorifying,
walking with, and enjoying God, if either praise, gain, reputation, nay
acceptance with good people; nay if a man's end be to stop the mouth of natural
conscience only, or only to avoid danger, and wrath to come. These may be the
works of a Saint, but yet the ends of an hypocrite. And omnis actio nisi
modificata a fine suas quas avertere amittit lauds. Balaam spoke religiously,
multiplied Altars and Sacrifices, but his end was not God, but the wages of
iniquity. Jehu destroyed Ahabs house, executed vengeance, Gods judgments
against that wicked Family resolutely and thoroughly destroyed Baal, etc. but
his ends were carnal, the establishment of the Kingdom to him, and his Family:
Ahab and the Ninivites fasted in sackcloath, but it was merely to avoid the
judgment threatened. Hos. 7.14.
The Israelites cried and prayed, but they did but howl for corn and wine. The
Jews in Captivity fasted, but did you at all fast to me, even to to me, says
the Lord. It seems men may pray, Zach. 7.5.
and yet not cry to the Lord, fast, and yet not to the Lord. It is the end
dignifies, or debaseth the action, rectifies or adulterates it. Look to your
ends if you would not be hypocrites. If your end be less than God, his glory
and pleasing of him. You are but empty Vines, and bring forth fruit to your
selves. Simplicity in ones ends accompany sincerity in the actions; Hos. 10.1.
2 Cor. 1.12.
when not fleshly wisdom, but the grace of God carries and governs the action,
then we may have rejoicing, else all may be in hypocrisy.

suffer for the Name of Christ, when thou have a good Cause, and a good Call,
and amongst the good people of God, though thou hear the word, and receivest it
with joy, Mat. 13.21.
for a time, yet when perscoution arises because of the Word, by and by thou
art offended; if there be no more deep rooting of it in thee, Luke 8.13.
but in temptation thou fall away, it is apparent thy heart is but stony
ground, and thou art leavened with hypocrisy. If your faith cannot bear the
trial, if it be not furnace faith, tried faith, it is not precious faith, it is
but common faith, counterfeit faith; it will not be found to praise honor and
glory at the appearance of Jesus Christ: 1 Pet. 1.7.
nay if thou can not (in some cases) choose to suffer afflicton with the
people of God, rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteem
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; Heb. 11.25,
26, 27.
It is apparent thy faith, and thy heart is not right, thou have not a thorough
respect to the recompense of reward, thou do not see him that is invisible.
Mat. 16.24.
That man that cannot, will not deny himself, take up his cross, and follow
Christ, he is not a true Disciple of Christ, and in the end will find, that in
saving his life he has lost it. Satan and Antichrist must be overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.11.
and by the word of the testimony, and by not loving our lives to the death,
etc. and he that will not suffer with Christ, shall not reign with Christ; and
if tribulation occasion men to go out from us, Romans 8.17.
it is because they were not of us, for if they had been of us, 1 John 2.19.
they would no doubt have continued with us. Tribulation is the touchstone, it
will distinguish sincerity from hypocrisy: 1 Cor. 13.
and though it is true a hypocrite may sometime suffer, yet he that will never
suffer, must be an hypocrite; Romans 8.17.
if we suffer not with him, we shall not reign with him.

6. If thou imbracest and favourest any iniquity in thy heart; if there Psalm.
66.18.
that thou can not, wilt not be divorced from, but huggest it in thy bosom,
hidest it, pleadest for it, though it seem never so harmless and tolerable, yet
if it be against Gods Law, though thou make many prayers with the Jews, and
performest many services, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18
and do many things with Herod, and have many glorious and gracious
expressions with Baalam, yet thou art in the gall of bitterness, Mark. 6.
and bond of iniquity. Thy heart is a divided heart, Hos. 10.2. Jam. 1.6.7.
thou art a double unstable person, thy prayers will not be regarded, and all
thy services will be rejected by the All-seeing jealous God, before whom all
things are open and naked, and with whom thou have to do, Heb. 4.13.
because if thou regardest iniquity in thy heart, the rise and root of all thy
duties and performances, is but the leaven of the Pharisees which is
hypocrisy. Me thinks beloved this should startle us, and I wish it may, if any
of you should be pricked at the heart, and tremble at this word of God, and ask
me what shall we do that we may acquit our selves from this leaven of
hypocrisy, and be saved from the wrath it exposes us to? I should answer,

1. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many will seek, Luke 13.24.
but shall not be able; that is, be very serious, and thoroughly resolved, and
industrious in a case of this weight and concernment, Be diligent that you may
be found of him in peace. 2 Pet. 3.14. Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47
Set your heart to these things for it is not a vain thing for you, because it
is your life, etc. It is so weighty a business, that it is work enough for all
your life, and it will be your life of consolation from which will flow, peace,
and joy, and assurance. Make but this out clearly that thou art no hypocrite,
that hypocrisy is not predominant in thee; but that in simplicity and
sincerity of heart thou have thy conversation (not with carnal wisdom) thou
have then occasion of much rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12.
but if thou art negligent in this, thy doubts and fears will hang upon and
keep thee low to thy dying day; nay it were well if that were all, for to be
negligent in this business, is as good as to do nothing, for it is to do
nothing to purpose, and that is to have all thy work undone, and to be undone
thy self for ever. Most hypocrites did seek to enter in; Baalam, Herod, the
five foolish Virgins, had they strove they had entered in at the strait Gate.
Wishings and wouldings, and sloathfull desires to heaven will not place you out
of danger of hypocrisy, for very hypocrites have done as much; but striving
indeed, setting your whole heart to it, being very diligent to purge out this
leaven, Phil. 2.12.
working out your salvation with fear and trembling, giving all diligence to
make your calling and election sure; this will place you out of danger, 2 Pet.
1.10, 11
and give you an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord. If ever that
of the English Proverb be true, it is here. As good never a whit, as never the
better. Indeed there is so much work on our hands, such commands, such promises
to believe, such corruptions to subdue, such temptations to resist, the
careless of carnal failing in any of which will charge us with hypocrisy. So
many such subtle and powerful adversaries to conflict withal, such a world,
such a flesh, such principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
high places, such deceitful hearts, deceitful above all things, to search,
and sift, and purge from this leaven, that it is impossible to be free of it
without mighty striving, contending, and giving much diligence.

2. If you would take heed of hypocrisy, take heed of security. There are no
greater flatterers, and no greater deceivers of themselves and others than
hypocrites, they flatter themselves in their own eyes; Ps. 36.2.
all flattery is dangerous, but self flattery of all other most dangerous, and
of all others in the business of salvation most pernicious. It is the advice of
the Devil, and thy own hypocrisy, to favor thy self, flatter thy self, hope
well, etc. The advice of God is, Lam. 3.40. Phil. 2.12. Ps. 130.23.
Search and try your ways, examine your selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling. Yea call upon God to search you. It is a
fear of carefulness, and solicitude, a trembling of jealousy and suspicion,
as to our own hearts, not of diffidence, or despair as to God, that we are
directed to. Had the foolish Virgins had but this care, this fear, they had had
^yl in their vessels, as well as Lamps. Had those glorious professors in
Matthew. 7.22. had but this jealousy and suspicion, they might have escaped that
dismal sentence, Depart from me you workers of iniquity. Perhaps your faith may
be but a fancy, Job 8.13.
your hopes but presumptuous, a spiders web, Hos. 10.1. Hos. 7.14. Zach. 7.5.
Psalm. 72.6.
perhaps your fruit may be but that of an empty vine to your self; perhaps your
prayers may be but howlings for corn and wine; perhaps your fasting may not be
to God, Commune much with your own heart, and let your spirit make diligent
search, keep you heart with all keeping; be jealous of every thing your heart
has to do with; your affairs, friends, comforts, recreations, thoughts,
sollitudes, graces. Prove. 28.14. Prove. 23.17. Prove. 1. Eccles. 12. Job 28.
Oh blessed or happy is the man that thus fears always, he shall never do
amiss, this is to be in the fear of God all the day long; and this fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, the end of wisdom, and wisdom it self, for
this will make a man wise to escape the wiles of Satan, and the hypocrisy of
his own heart, and so make him wise to salvation.

3. Keep God always in your minds, if we have all from him, Romans 11. ult.
we should be all to him; If we live and move in him, our hearts and minds
should be always on him. This is the cause of all the wickedness and
hypocrisy in the world, men will not seek after God, God is not in all their
thoughts. Psalm. 10.4.
And this the ground of all the glorious performances of the Saints, they saw
him that was invisible, as Micaiah saw the Lord in his Throne, Heb. 11.26, 27
and therefore feared not to deal plainly and sincerely with Ahab, though on
his Throne. 1 King. 22.19.
When the Psalmist had convinced and reproved the wickedness, and formal
hypocrisy of ungodly presumptuous men, he concludes, Now consider this you
that forget God, etc. Intimating this to be the reason of all ungodly
hypocritical conversation, a forgetting God. Psalm. 50.22.
The remedy must be contrary to the disease: if we would be no hypocrites, we
must much remember, think of, and observe, and eye God by faith. Acquaint thy
self with God, and so good shall come to thee. If men were acquained with God,
and did not forget him, Job 22.21.
acquainted with his Omnisciency, Psalm. 139.1, 2. with his All Sufficiency,
Genesis 17.1. with the power of his anger, Ps. 90.11. Mic. 7.18, 19.
the infiniteness of his goodness, Isa, 55.7, 8. they would conclude, and live
under the awe and power of such conclusions. Oh then he is too great to be
tempted and provoked, too excellent to be slighted and undervalued, too good
to be lost, too wise to be deceived, and this would suppress and supplant the
leaven of the Pharisees hypocrisy.

4. Be much and daily in the renewing faith and repentance. If there be such
danger of hypocrisy, there is necessity of renewing faith and repentance for
fear hypocrisy may be in them. Rise and return as soon as thou art convinced
of thy sin, so did Paul, so did Peter as soon as the Lord turned and looked
upon him. Gal. 1.16. Luke 22.61.
If repentance were hastened after sin, and thou would take care and pains to
break thy heart constantly for sin, this would break it from sin. A man should
find that it were an evil and a bitter thing to forsake the Lord, Jer. 2.19.
and that his fear was not in thee, and a broken heart God would not despise,
because it is apparent that is no hypocritical heart. And though former faith
and repentance may be counterfeit and hypocritical, Psalm. 51.
yet ensuing and renewed faith may be sound and sincere, and we have much
ground to renew those acts, whose soundness and validity we have much ground to
suspect, if all have been false or fained, or partial formerly, we have the
more cause in a new act to give up and bind our souls sincerely to it, and
this will free you from hypocrisy.

5. Put forth your greatest strength and care to mortify those lusts and
corruptions that are the fuel to hypocrisy, pride, vainglory,
worldly-mindedness, self-love. These are the fuel of hypocrisy, they beget
it, and they nourish it. If the love of the world, and worldly favor did not
prevail much over men, there would be no hypocrisy in the world; and cherish
and strengthen the graces which cannot consist with it, but will be always
fighting against, and opposing it, as love to God, humility, self-denial,
heavenly-mindedness, mortifying the flesh, much commnion with God, if these be
in you and abound, you shall not be barren nor unfruitful, but shall make your
calling and election sure, and so be out of the peril, yea and much out of the
fear of hypocrisy.

6. Press the Lord much, and urge him close with the promises of a new heart,
Eze. 36.25.26. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ier. 32.40.
of circumcising your hearts, and causing you to love the Lord with all your
heart, of putting his fear into your heart. If he urge and press you (in his
word) with his precepts, and your duty, do you urge and press him as much (in
your prayers) with his promises, spread his own handwriting and seals before
him; as Augustine relates his Mother did in her prayers for his Conversion;
say, Aug. Conf. Chirographa tua ingerebat tibi.
Lord these promises were made to be made good to some, and why not to me? I
hunger, I need, I thirst, I wait; here is thy handwriting in thy Word, and in
the last Sacrament, I had thy Seal affixed to it, I am resolved to be as
importunate till I have obtained, and as thankful afterward, as by Grace I
shall be enabled, being convinced I am utterly lost and undone, if thou hear
not the desires of the humble in this particular, Psalm. 10.17.
and if thou do hear and grant, I am so well acquainted with my self, and
mine own heart, that I have nothing to glory in, but I shall wholly glory in
the Lord; and I do resolve and believe I shall, to eternity celebrate and
magnify the riches of the glory of thy Grace. Thy promises are the discovery
of thy purposes, and vouchsafed as materials for our prayers; and in my
supplications I am resolved every day to present and tender them back to thee
every day, and if thou will have regard to them there, and appear to be a God
of truth to my soul, a poor creature that has long feared to burn in hell for
hypocrisy, will be made, secured, and made happy for ever. I am resolved to
wait upon thee, and to cast my soul upon thee in this way, and thou have
assured me thou art a God of judgment; thou did promise in judgment, thou
knew what thou did in making such promises, and thou will be a God of
judgment, thou know when and where to make them good, and thou have
pronounced, Blessed are all they that wait for thee; Isa. 30.18. Aug. Confess.
Impossible a filium tantarum lacrimarum perire.
and on thee I will wait, and for this blessing I will hope and look. Oh
beloved, if there be but such an heart in us, and such wrestlings, as Ambrose
told Monica, a soul of such prayers and tears should not perish.

I could have added much more, but if these Characters and Directions be
carefully observed, you will beware of, and shall escape the leaven of
hypocrisy. And that you may be careful to observe them,

Consider 1. That the purging out this leaven, is the great care and business
of a Christians life, this will afford him fear and trembling work to his dying
day; this till it be done, makes the gate so straight, and the way so narrow to
life, that few find it, Matthew. 7.13.
and if it be done, renders all the service of Christ ever after an easy yoke,
and a light burden. Matthew. 11.30.


2. This if it be done gives us actual possession of the Kingdom of God in
grace, which consists of righteousness and peace, Romans 14.17.
and joy in the Holy Ghost, and administers an assured and abundant entrance
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in glory. 2 Pet 1.11.


3. This will prevent the Devils everlasting insulting over us; is this the end
of all thy praying and hearing, etc. and defying me? nay upbrayding Christ, as
a learned and holy man feared; I have him, I have gotten him from thee, for all
thy blood, thy Miracles, Basil.
thy Gospel, thy wooings, thy beseechings, thy knockings and strivings of thy
Spirit; for all thy illuminating them, and making them taste of the powers of
the world to come: I have cousened thee of them at thy very gates of heaven,
and by my devices shipwrackt them in the very mouth of the haven. Oh I would
not give the Devil occasion to upbraid and insult thus against Christ at the
last day for the world. Basil.
And this would prevent consciences gnawing and galling to eternity. What are
all my desires, my seekings and knockings, prayers, fasts, Sacraments, hearing
in season, and out of season, waiting at the posts of Gods house early and
late. Have I forsaken so many sins, denied my self so many contents and
pleasures, subdued so many lusts, born so many scoffs, suffered so much in my
body and estate, and all for hell at last. This would be the hell of hell; and
all this may be prevented, if we would beware of the leaven of hypocrisy, and
seriously observe those Characters, and carefully practice those Directions.

4. Consider the means you have long had, and yet do enjoy, Gods admirable
forbearance and patience, a powerful Ministries incessant labors and pains,
an awakened consciences clamour^, and warnings; a danger, and evils (if you be
negligent) intolerable; a reward (if you observe the beware in the Text)
eternal and inconceiveable; your life short and uncertain, your death appointed
most certain, and you know not how near; the world and the lusts thereof (even
those that feed and foment hypocrisy) passing away, 1 Ioh. 2.17.
and that now is the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the day of salvation: And if you were ever serious in your lives now be
so; and if ever God spoke to your hearts and consciences, the Lord in mercy
speak this, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees.

What must Christians do, that the influence of the Ordinances may abide upon
them?
1 CHRONICLES. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Fathers: keep
this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people,
and prepare their heart unto thee.


IN the preceding Chapter we have David's Oration, or if you will his Sermon,
the design of which was, to excite the people to a contribution for the
erecting of a Temple, and promoting the public worship of God. It begins ver.
2. of that Chapter, and is continued to the 6th verse of this Chapter.

This Sermon was effectual upon the auditory; David had the happiness (which
the best Orators, and most powerful Preachers often want (not only (...), but
(...): he not only spoke what was in it self persuasive, but did actually
persuade his hearers to comply with his design. The effect thereof is expressed
ver. 6, 7, 8. they offered, and (which was the marrow and fatness of their
offering) they offered willingly. Though will worship be the worst service of
all other, yet those that serve God willingly are the best worshippers: and
therefore David in this Sermon commends such service to his son, chap. 28. ver.
9. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with
a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. None serve God with a perfect heart,
but those who serve him with a willing mind; to such a temper were the people
wrought by this powerful exhortation, ver. 9. with a perfect heart they
offered willingly to the Lord. Hereupon David much affected with his success
in this affair (David the King also rejoiced with great joy) his soul being now
upon the wing, he flies to God by prayer, and therewith concludes his Sermon.
The prayer consists of petition and thanksgiving, both of them, not conformed
to any common model; but suiting the particular occasion now before him. He
blesses God for making such an impression upon the hearts of the people, as
moved them to offer, and after this sort to offer, so cheerfully, so
generously, from ver. 10, to 18. and beseeches God still to keep their hearts
in such a temper, to make this holy impression durable and abiding, ver. 18. O
Lord God of Abraham, etc. keep this for ever in the imaginations, etc. Where we
have the inforcement of the petition and the matter of it. It is enforced from
the Covenant of God, by virtue of which, he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, and had laid an obligement on himself, to have a gracious respect to
their posterity; hence this expression is frequently used, being no small
encouragement to the faithful, to pray for Covenant-mercies, and to pray in
faith.

The matter of the Petition, that which he prays for is, that the effect which
his words had upon the people might be durable and continuing, that the
efficacy thereof might abide upon their souls, and every part thereof: that it
might sink into the depths of their hearts, and stick fast there: that it might
pierce through their fancies and imaginations into their mind and thoughts, and
through their thoughts into their hearts and affections; that the Lord would
continue it there, and continue it long there, even for ever.

David was apprehensive what a slippery and inconstant thing the heart of man
is, how like a deceitful bow, to which he elsewhere compares it, how apt to
slacken on a sudden, when it has been bended to any good inclinations or
resolutions, by the power of the Word, or any other Ordinance. What an unhappy
womb it is, how ordinarily holy motions miscarry before the heart has gone out
its full time with them. What danger there was, least their righteousness,
which now made such a flourishing appearance, might prove like the morning
cloud, or the early dew. And therefore having raised their hearts to so good a
posture, he takes the best course to fix them there. His words having had a
powerful influence upon their souls, he uses the best means to render it
durable and abiding. Hence Observe,

The people of God should endeavor to keep the influence of the Ordinances
abiding upon their souls.

I must not prosecute this Doctrine in the usual method, but mention it only,
as leading us to the Practical Case at this time to be resolved. A
conscientious hearer observing what his duty is, will be presently inquisitive
how he may perform it, the duty is made known in the Observation, the inquiry
is in the Case before us.

What must be done that the influences of the Ordinances may abide upon us? By
the Ordinances we understand those principally which are public the Word,
Sacraments, and Prayer. The Text and this exercise leads us to have a more
special respect to the Word, which we shall a little observe, but so as not to
exclude the rest. By the influence of the Ordinances, is meant the effect they
have upon us, while we are employed in them; their gracious or comforting
efficacy, that which tends to make our hearts and lives more holy or more
comfortable; that whereby our souls are quickened, strengthened, restored or
refreshed. By its abiding on us, understand the continuance of this effect
after the duty is done, that so the Ordinances of God be not like those humane
Ordinances (the Apostle speaks of) which perish in the using, Col. 2.20, 22. If
you would have it stated clearly and more at large, take it thus; What course
must we take that the gracious and comforting efficacy of public Ordinances
may not only reach us while we are employed in them, but may continue on us
afterward; so as we may walk under the sense and power thereof all along?

To resolve this without further preamble, the course you must take for this
purpose, lies in the practice of some things; and the avoiding of others. The
things to be practiced take notice of in these severals:

1. Get new hearts, and get them daily more and more renewed; an old heart is a
heart, of stone, Ezekiel. 11.19. and the hardness of it is not removed but by
degrees. Now that which will sink deep into a tender heart, a heart of flesh, (
Ezekiel. 36.26.) will glide off from an old heart as water from a stone, without
leaving any impression: and where none is left none can continue. The good seed
which fell on stony ground, it sprang up indeed, but it continued not, it
withered away as soon as it sprang up, Luke 8.6. but they which with an honest
and good heart heard the word, they kept it, and brought forth fruit with
patience ( i. e. with persevarence,) ver. 15. the fruitful influences of the
word abode upon them: A good and honest heart not only hears the word, but
kesps it; not only brings forth fruit, but persists so doing. The more tender,
humble, and spiritual the heart is, the more spiritual fruit and advantage
does it reap from the Ordinances, and the longer does it continue in possession
of those advantages; the less the soul is renewed, the more resistance does it
offer to the Ordinances; and the more they are resisted, the weaker is their
efficacy; and the less their efficacy is, the less while does it continue. A
heart thoroughly sanctified, is to the Ordinances like tinder, which soon takes
fire, and is apt to keep it till it be forced out: whereas a carnal
unmortified heart, is like green wood, whose moistness giving check to the
activity of the fire, is not soon kindled, and will soon go out, if it be not
well looked too. Naturalists observe, that transmutation is easy in symbolicall
elements, such as agree in some prime qualities: water is more easily turned
into air than into fire. A holy and spiritual heart will be easily wrought on,
by holy and spiritual Ordinances; for here is an agreement in qualities; and
the more agreement the less opposition, and the less the opposition is, the
more easily will it be mastered; the power of the Ordinances will more easily
both take place and keep possession. Holiness makes the soul both receptive
and retentive of holy impressions. Make it but your great business to grow
every day more holy; and it will not be so hard a matter, to have the
Ordinances work effectually on you, or to have their efficacy continue with you.

2. Labor to be much affected with the Ordinances while you are employed in
them. Slight impressions will be soon worn out: and weak influences will
quickly spend themselves and vanish. If the Ordinances have but little effect
upon you, while you are under them, it is not like to last long: for that which
is little is near to nothing, and that which is so near to it, may soon come to
nothing. It is not enough that your hearts be a little warmed, but they must
burn within you, ( Luke 24.32.) while Christ is speaking to you, or you are
speaking to him; if you would have that heavenly heat to be lasting. The good
seed miscarried upon one sort of ground in the parable, because it had no
de^pnesse of earth, Mat. 13.5, 6. it quickly withered because it took no deep
root. If the Ordinances pierce no further than the surface of the soul, if the
work of them be but superficial, if they do not penetrate into the depths of
the heart: the efficacy of them is not like to continue. Therefore prepare your
hearts before you draw near to God, get them so disposed as they may be capable
of lasting influences. The Text directs us to this, O Lord keep this for ever
in the imagination, etc. and prepare their heart unto thee. Then is the heart
prepared to the Lord when it is made tender, and sensible, and open. Bring
tender hearts to the Ordinances, get them broken up beforehand, break up your
fallow ground and sow not among thorns, Jer. 4.3. Hos. 10.12. A tender heart
drinks in divine influences, they insinuate themselves more easily into the
intimate recesses of it. That which can make no impression at all upon a Flint,
will sink deep into softened wax.

Come with sensible hearts, apprehensive of your spiritual wants and
necessities; burdened with your lusts, and corruptions; pained with your inward
distempers and soul-grievances. I cannot commend to you any thing more
effectual, to make you capable of great and lasting advantages. Such a quick
sense of your spiritual condition will open your hearts, and make them ready to
receive so much from the Ordinances, as will not be soon spent. Open thy mouth
wide and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. Now it is desire that opens the heart,
and the stronger the desire is, the wider is it opened: then is the soul wide
open, when it pants and breaths after God, when it hungers and thirsts after
holiness as appears by equivalent promises, Psalm. 107.9. Mat. 5.6. Blessed are
they who hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they shall be filled. That
which we get by holy duties, is soon spent because it is so little: and we get
so little, because we desire no more. We come to the Ordinances tanquam cani^
ad Nilum, too like the Egyptian dog, which laps a little as he runs by the
side of Nilus, but stays not to drink: we take but a taste of them as in
transitu, too little, and too cursorily; whenas Christ invites us to eat and
drink abundantly, Cant. 5.1. Such cursory tastes may cheer you a little, but
they will not furnish you with strength for continual service: you must feed
and feed hungrily, and come with a strong appetite, that you may be capacious
of much; a little will not serve you long.

3. Mind the Ordinances after your use of them, be much in meditation if you
would have the efficacy of Ordinances to continue long. Be often considering
what you have heard, what you have prayed for, what you have received and are
obliged to by the Sacraments. Much of Heaven and holiness, is engraved on
these Ordinances, and the seal is as it were set upon the heart, while you are
under them: but after-consideration lays more weight on it, and impresseth it
deeper, and so makes the characters both more plain and more durable; for the
deeper they are the longer will it be, ere they be defaced.

Most men lose their souls, and the best men lose great advantages for their
souls; for want of consideration. There is a quickening, a healing a comforting,
a strengthening virtue, in the Ordinances; and this virtue may fall upon your
souls, while you are employed in them: but you cannot expect it will stay with
you, unless you fix it there, and no better way to fix it, than consideration.
This will rouse it up when it lies dormant and unactive; this will put spirits
into it, when it grows weak and languid; this will both diffuse and fasten it,
yea it will heighten and improve it. My heart was hot within me (says David,
Psalm. 39.3.) while I was musing the fire burned. The heart takes fire at the
mind, and it is musing or consideration that kindles it, and keeps it in, and
blows it up: those sparks which fall from heaven upon your hearts, while you
are hearing, or praying, etc. they will die, they will go out, and come to nothing
unless you do (...), 2 Timothy 1.6. unless you blow them up by meditation. He
sent forth his Word and healed them, Psalm. 107.20. The Word has a salve for
every soul-distemper, but that it may be effectual, the plaster must be laid
on, and kept on too, till the cure be wrought: the Preacher may apply it, and
lay it upon the distempered part, but it will not be kept on without
meditation. How sweet are thy words unto my taste, says David, Psalm. 119.103.
How came they to be still so sweet? why, they were his meditation day and
night, the delicious relish of them still continued, because he kept them still
upon his palate, by ruminating and musing on them.

The Word of God in Scripture is as honey in the comb, there is that which is
incomparably sweeter: now by meditation you squeeze out this sweetness, and it
will be still dropping comfort and sweet refreshment upon your souls, while you
are pressing it by consideration. 1 John 2.14. I write unto you young men,
because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you. If you would be
strong and continue so, the Word of God must abide in you; now how can it abide
in you, if it have not leave to stay in that, which is but the portal of the
soul, if it abide not in your minds? You lose all for want of consideration,
both the gracious and comforting influences of the Ordinances, slide from you
through this neglect. And no wonder it is so great a damage to you, since it
is so great a sin: you cast the Word behind your backs, and throw the
Ordinances at your heels, when you do not mind them after you have done with
them; and will the Lord encourage any with a durable blessing, under such
guilt? will not this provoke him rather to curse your blessings, and blast them
in the bud,? Meditation is a known duty, and commonly insisted on, and
therefore you may be tempted to slight it; whereas indeed upon this account,
you should the more regard it; for since it is a known duty, the neglect of it
is a known sin; now to say nothing how inconsistent it is either with grace or
comfort, to live in a known sin, how can you expect the efficacy of Ordinances
should be continued, while you neglect the means, which the Lord has
appointed, and commended to you, as most effectual for the continuance thereof?
The blessing of the Ordinances will not abide upon him, who continues in sin,
especially when his sin, is the neglect of that medium, which should fix the
blessing upon him.

4. Let the efficacy of the Ordinances be pursued presently into act, if they
convince you of any neglected duty, fall immediately upon the practice of it.
If they make you more resolute, against any carnal or worldly lust, betake your
selves presently to the mortifying of it. If they kindle any holy affection to
Christ or his people, give some real expression thereof without delay. If they
revive any languishing grace, let it be forthwith exercised. This was David's
practice, Psalm. 119 60. you will find this one of the best expedients, for the
fixing and securing of those good motions, which are raised in your minds and
hearts by the Ordinances. When the blossoms of a fruit-tree are once knit,
though the flourish thereof be gone, and you see nothing but the bare rudiment
of the expected fruit; yet you think it more secured from the injury of frosts
and winds, than if it were still in the flower; good motions when they are once
reduced into act, are thereby as it were knit, and brought to more consistency.
They are then well past one of their critical periods, where most miscarry, and
so are more like to live, and continue with you. Besides the act strengthens
that good motion and disposition which leads to it, and so makes you more ready
for another act and that disposes to more acts, and those to better, and
repeated acts beget a habit, and this (as the Philosopher tells us) is (...),
something that will stay by you. The hearts of the people being raised by
Hezekiahs zealous speech, 2 Chronicles. 29. they were kept up in that posture, till
the work designed by him was finished (till Religion was restored and reformed)
and how came this to pass? Why, the thing was done suddenly, verse. 36. he
pursued the peoples good inclinations, and brought them into act suddenly, he
struck while the iron was hot. When your hearts are heated by the Ordinances,
set immediately upon your work; the primus impetus affords a great advantage if
it be improved, possibly in the vigor of it, you may overcome those great
dfficulties and oppositions, which have been too hard for you formerly, and may
otherwise give you impediment hereafter, and this being mastered, your progress
will be easier, you may go on toward heaven under the power of the Ordinances,
with less interruption and fewer intercisions of these divine influences, Jam.
1.22.23. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
selves, for if any be a hearer of the word and not a doer, i. e. if he do it
not presently, (as appears by what follows) he is like to a man beholding his
natural face in a glass; for he beholds himself, and goes his way, and
straight way forgets what manner of man he was. The glass discovers what
spots and sullages are in his face, that he may wash them off, or what is
disordered about him, that he may correct and compose it; but if he do not this
presently, if he put it off till some occurence, divert him from the thoughts
and remembrance of it, his looking in the mirror, will prove but a loss of
time, a vain curiosity. Your use of the Ordinances is like to prove no better,
if you practice not what they lead you to without delay, its like to be no
other, than such a viewing of your selves in a glass, a mere fruitless
speculation.

5. You must take much pains with your hearts, if you would have them retain
the virtue and efficacy of the Ordinances. The effect of them should be as a
nail fastened in a sure place, but the heart is so hard and knotty a piece that
you cannot drive it in without many blows; it will require all your strength to
force it in far enough, and all your care and watchfulness to keep it in when
it is there. They grossly mistake Christianity, who take it to be consistent
with our carnal ease and slothfulness, who place it in notions or opinions, in
fair shows, and a specious profession, in forms, gestures, or external
observances, in conforming to this or that mode of Worship or Discipline. It
were well for the World if one could be a Christian at such an easy rate; but
they that please themselves with such conceits, they err not knowing the
Scriptures. The action of a Christian is all along in the New Testament,
expressed by striving, wrestling, running and combating, exercises, wherein he
that will not be worsted, must intend all his spirits, stretch all his sinews,
put forth all his strength; he that is a Christian indeed, he must (...), Ephesians.
6.12. (...), Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. Heb. 12.14. (...), Luke 13.24. his daily
course must be a combating as for victory, a running as for a Crown, a striving
as for life. The power and life of holiness can neither be attained, nor
upheld, without an effectual use of the Ordinances; the Ordinances will never
be effectual to purpose, unless the virtue of them abide upon the heart; now it
meets with such reluctance and opposition from the heart (so far as it is
unrenewed) that it can never be fastened there, without striving and struggling
and earnest contending, it must be done in despite of our own ease, and carnal
humors and natural inclination, and all the resistance of the body of death.
If you think this too much you think much to be Christians indeed, however you
pretend to the name. Those that are acquainted with their own hearts find it
very hard to get them raised to a spiritual and heavenly temper, very difficult
to get them pullied up (though they have the advantage of the most powerful
Ordinances) to any good posture; and when with much ado they are got up,
exceeding difficult to keep them there. Alas we seem to be forcing a weighty
stone up a steep hill, when with much toil we have got it near the top, take
but our hands off a little, leave it but to it self; and down it runs further
in a moment, than we can get it up again in some hours. Our way to heaven lies
up the hill, that which is spiritual and heavenly is above us, the natural bent
and tendency of our hearts is downwards; as there is no getting them up without
toil and pains, so when we have raised them a little, leave them but to
themselves, grow but a little remiss and negligent, and down they run on a
sudden, we shall quickly find them at the bottom of the hill, in a carnal,
lukewarm earthly temper. When our hearts are effectually touched and raised,
and moved in the use of Ordinances, there is no keeping them in a quick and
lively motion, without striving and struggling, and as it were forcing them on
with might and main. The influence of the Ordinances falling upon a sloathfull
soul is quite lost, and merely thrown away upon it, Prove. 12.27. The sloathful
man roasteth not that which he took in hunting. So he loses all his former
labor because he will not take a little more pains; a sloathfull soul loses
all the advantages he gets by following the Ordinances, for want of care and
industry to retain and improve what he has gotten.

6. Comply with the Spirit of God. These influences both as to the rise and
continuance of them are from him. When you comply not with him, you grieve the
Spirit, and provoke him to withdraw; and when he withdraws, these influences
will be discontinued. If you detain the truth in unrighteousness, if you
confine it to your minds, so as the power thereof descends not upon your
hearts and affections, comes not forth in your lives and actions, you do (...),
imprison the truth, and that is a great affront to the Spirit of Truth. If when
the Spirit of God calls you to take up the Cross, to leave all to follow Christ
contentedly and cheerfully in a low reproached afflicted condition; or if when
he calls you up to a higher degree of self-denial, mortification and holiness;
you hang back, or turn aside, and refuse to follow his conduct, this grieves
the Spirit of holiness. If you decline his institutions for other devices,
shrink back from the work you are engaged to, when it grows hazardous; strain
your consciences to secure your outward enjoyments, will not be influenced by
him, further than is consistent with your ease, credit, safety and worldly
interest, you dishonor the Spirit of wisdom. This provokes the blessed Spirit
to withdraw, and when the fire is gone, the heat will not long continue. If you
refuse to continue under the influences of the Spirit in some things, its
righteous with him not to continue them upon you in others. If you fear the
displeasure of man more than the grieving of him, if you lean more to the hopes
of this life, than his supports, and consult with flesh and blood instead of
being directed by the wisdom which is from above; it will be no wonder if he
give you over to your own conduct, and intermitting his own, leave you under
the influences of your carnal fears, and worldly hopes.

7. Be frequent in the use of Ordinances, good impressions do most usually wear
off in the intervals of holy duties, and the longer these are, the more danger
there is, therefore make these interims as short as may be by quick returns to
the Ordinances. It is observed that places under the line are not so hot, as
some climates at a further distance from it; and this reason is given for it,
those under the equinoctial, though they have the Sun more vertical, and the
beams falling perpendicularly, cause a more intense heat; yet the nights being
of equal length with the days, the coolness of those long nights does more
allay the heat than where the nights are shorter. Long intermissions of holy
duties are like long nights, you may find them by experience to be great
coolers; if you live under more powerful Ordinances, than some others, yet if
they be more frequent and diligent in the use of what they have, they are like
to have more spiritual warmth than you, and that with less allay and
intermission. Besides when the advantage you have got by one Ordinance is
declining and wearing off; the use of the same, or of some other, may revive
and recover it, if you take it speedily before it be too far gone. Further, a
slieght impression, such as is not like to last long, may be re enforced for a
longer continuance, if you lay your selves quickly under the instrument that
first made it. When Elijah had once tasted of the provision the Lord made for
him in the Wilderness he laid him down says the Text, as having enough; but
the Angel calls him to it again, for says he, The journey is too great for
thee, 1 King. 19.6, 7. Hereupon he arose once more, and did eat and drink, and
went in the strength of that meat forty days, and forty nights, verse. 8. Once
tasting will not serve your turn, a little will not be enough, so long a
journey as yours is will spend much; nothing but a frequent, an often repeated
use of the Ordinances will furnish you with such strength as will last you many
days.

8. Finally, Look up to God for the continuance of this influence, pray, and
pray in faith. Seek him and depend on him for it, He will be found of those
that seek him, Matthew. 7.7. You have his promise for it and dependence on him,
obliegeth him too, the expectation of the poor shall not perish, Psalm. 9.18. it
is not for his honor to fail those, whom he has encouraged to rely on him; an
ingenuous man will not do it, much less the faithful God. This course David
t^kes in the Text, he prays and encourages his faith while he is praying by
that interest, which the faithful have in the Lord by virtue of the Covenant,
O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever, yea
the Lord himself leads us to this, Deuteronomy. 5.24, 27, 29. the people were much
affected, in that they had heard the Lords voice, verse. 24. this brought them
up to a noble resolution, verse. 27. Speak thou unto us, all that the Lord our
God shall speak unto them, and we will hear it and do it. Hereupon the Lord
thus expresses himself, verse. 29. O that there were such a heart in them, that
they would fear me and keep my Commandments always, etc. What greater
encouragement can we have to desire this of God, than that he expresses
himself desirous we should have it? Faith is the main strength of prayer, and
the great supports of faith are these two, that he is able, and that he is
willing. These are to faith like the two pillars of the Temple, 1 Kings 7.21.
and the names of them (there expressed) are very apposite. He set up the right
pillar, and called the name thereof Jachin, i. e. he will establish, he is
willing; and he set up the last pillar, and called the name thereof Boaz, i. e.
in him is strength, he is able. Now faith has both these pillars to support it
in this business, that the Lord is able to continue his influences, you will
not question I hope, He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all we ask or
think, according to the power which works in us, Ephesians. 3.20. and that he is
willing, he puts it out of question, when he uses such an expression, as
amongst men, signifies, a passionate desire. O that there were such a heart in
them, etc. now (says the Philosopher) (...), etc. that which one is both able
and willing to do, shall be done. Both reason and faith see ground enough to
conclude this. Pray then, and pray believing, for as the Lord is able to do it,
so it is according to his will, and whatsoever you ask according to his will,
believing, it shall be done, Matthew. 21.22.

Thus much for what you are to practice, there are some things to be avoided,
if you would have the influence of the Ordinances to be lasting, these we shall
comprize in four particulars.

First, Take heed you perform not holy duties negligently, a heartlesse,
formal, negligent attendance on the Ordinances, will be so far from procuring
a durable blessing, that it will fix a curse upon you, Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he
that does the work of tht Lord negligently, see Mal. 1.8, 14. If you invert the
Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 7. and deal with the things of God, as you should do,
with those of the world. If you pray as though you prayed not, and hear as
though you heard not, and use the Ordinances as though you did not use them:
they will be no otherwise effectual, than if there were no efficacy in them, it
will continue on you as though it continued not; like that of the Sun in a
Winter day, which thaws the earth a little at noon, but so as it is harder
frozen up the next night. Therefore let your hearts be engaged in every holy
duty, Jer. 30.21. Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me. You
must hear as for life, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Set your hearts unto all the words
which I testify among you this day, etc. For it is not a vain thing for you,
because it is your life, etc. you must wrestle in prayer, your hearts in this
duty should be as it were in a conflict, in an agony, (...) is the Apostles
word, Romans 15.13. Now I beseech you brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake,
and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers
to God for me. Your prayers should be such as the other Apostle describes,
James 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, the
word rendered effectual fervent, is (...). Now (...) is one possessed with a
spirit, and acted by it. If the word here used look that way, then suitable to
the matter to which it is applied, it imports a possession in a good sense. And
(...) will be a prayer full of the holy Ghost, wherein that blessed Spirit is
operative, exerting its force and energy. Such a prayer as shows the soul to be
possessed of the holy Spirit and acted by it, so as all the powers of that soul
are set a work, and put upon motion toward God effectually. Such a prayer
availes much, procures great advantages, and of long continuance.

Generally in all holy Ordinances your souls should stretch out themselves to
reach the Lord, they should spring up to him in acts of love and desire, and
claspe about him with delight and complacence, and lay hold on him with a
humble and filial confidence, and stir up themselves to lay hold on him. We do
all fade as a leaf says the Church, Isa. 64.6. (both their persons and their
righteousness did so) and the reason thereof follows ver. 7. There is none
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee.

Secondly, Beware of the world, meddle not with it more than needs must; and
when it is needful engage not therein, but with fear, caution and vigilance.
Carry your selves amongst worldly objects and employments, as though you were
amongst cheats and thieves: they have the art to pick your heart slily, and to
rob them of that which is more precious than Gold, when you little think of it.

Let not your minds and hearts plunge themselves in the world: nothing sooner,
nothing oftener, extinguisheth divine influences than this puddle. The cares,
and delights, and employments of the world, when they are immoderate or
unseasonable, they choke the Word, Matthew. 13.22. they stifle the issue of holy
Ordinances, so as it becomes like the untimely birth of a woman.

When your hearts are warmed in holy duties, you should be as cautious and wary
how you venture into the world; as you are of going into the frosty air, when
you are all in a sweat. What is kindled by the Word or Prayer, etc. how quickly
is it puffed out by the world, when you rush into it unwarily? it requires as
much care to keep it in, as to keep a Candle in, when you would carry it
through the open air in a rainy blustering night. The further you are above the
world, the longer may you retain any spiritual impressions. Geographers write
of some Mountains whose tops are above the middle Region of the Air; and there
lines and figures being drawn in the dust, have been found (say they) in the
same form and order, untouched, undefaced a long time after: and the reason is,
because they are above those winds, and showers, and storms, which soon wear
out, and efface any such draughts in this lower Region. The lower your minds
and hearts and conversations are, the more in the hurry of this boisterous
world, the less will any thing that is heavenly and spiritual abide upon them.
Let the soul be brought into never so good order, by the help of holy duties:
yet a little unwary engaging in earthly business will ruffle, disturb and
quite discompose it.

When your souls are by the power of the Ordinance set on motion toward Christ
and Heaven; if you would hold on in a continued course, you must beware of
worldliness, and keep free as much as may be from earthly encumbrances and
intanglements, Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,
Heb. 12.1. Let us persevere and hold out in that gracious and heavenly course,
which the Gospel has put us on: but that this may be done, one great
impediment must be removed, The sin that does so easily beset us must be shaken
off. Now that sin as some Expositors conceive, is worldliness, and it is
probable for (...) being a circumstance (...), if we render it literally, is
the sin that has goodly circumstances. And no sin sets off it self with more
goodly circumstances than worldliness, no sin has more specious pleas and
pretenses to excuse, vindicate and justify it self. No sin has more fig
leaves to cover its nakedness, and to shroud it from discovery and conviction
than worldliness. This must be shaken off, it is the great defacer of heavenly
impressions, the chief interrupter of holy motions: if you would hold on, when
the impetus which is impressed on you by any Ordinance, has set you a going;
beware of the world, beware of worldliness.

Thirdly, Take heed of any inordinacy in affection, inclination or design. Such
inordinacies give the heart a strong bias, holy duties check it but a little,
give it but as it were a small rub: when this is once past over, it will hold
on, in that course to which it is most sweyed. The Mnistery of John Baptist had
some influence upon Herod, He heard John gladly, and did many things, Mark
6.20. but sensuality being predominant, those better inclinations were quite
overpowred. The word had some effect upon Simon Magus, He believed, Act. 8.13.
and being taken for a believer was baptized, and afterward continued with
Philip, etc. but a strong affectation of vainglory suppressed those better
motions, and the worst got upmost. Take heed of any inordinacy as to lawful
things, your relations, studies, ordinary callings, etc. this will not not
suffer you to come so often to holy duties, to stay so long in them, or to be
so intent upon them, as is requisite for the deep impressing of their efficacy:
and after they are done, this will hurry your souls from under those thoughts
and exercises, which should fix and settle their virtue and influence upon your
minds and hearts. Natural bodies follow the tendency of that element which is
predominant in them, a stone moves downwards, it would be at the center; that
which stops it, offers it violence, and when the force is removed, down it falls
freely. Just thus does the heart follow the tendency of these inOrdinacies, if
it meet with a stop in an Ordinance, that is but an ungrateful violence to it;
it will struggle to break through it, will be restless till the force be
removed, till the power of the Ordinance be shaken off, which checks an
inclination natural and acceptable to it, and what hopes in this case, that the
efficacy of any holy duty will long continue?

Fourthly, Rest not in the best performance of any duty, nor in any assistances
you find therein, though they be special and more than ordinary. If this
satisfy and exalt you, you will be apt to grow secure and careless, not
looking to the improvement of Ordinances when once they are over, and that is
the way to lose all. We are apt to take the most dangerous colds, when we are
in the greatest heats. And its observed that some professors have had the
fowlest falls, after they have been most elevated, in holy employments. The
resting upon the opus operatum the mere outward performance of a duty, when the
heart is not engaged therein, is an open pit, which none fall into, save those
that are blind: but the resting upon the opus operantis a duty affectionately
performed, is a more secret, and so a more dangerous snare. He that makes
account he has done enough, because he has done well; may be apt to think he
is not obliged to look further after it: and so the continued influence of the
duty upon his heart and life, which is indeed the principal advantage of it,
may be neglected, and consequently lost for want of looking to.

To conclude, Make not the Ordinances your end, but use them as the means to
attain it. They are not enjoined us for themselves, but in order to something
more desirable, their end is something further than their use. Take heed you
place not all your Religion, in hearing, praying, communicating, etc. neither
count your selves religious enough, because you are much and often in these
duties. This is to make them your end, and then you will rest therein, without
proceeding further (for the motion of the Agent is terminated in his end:) and
so you will stay short of that, for which they were principally intended, viz.
the keeping of your hearts and minds in a settled posture of holiness and
righteousness: and neglect that, by which this main end of the Ordinances is
only to be attained, viz. the continuing of their influence upon you.

So much for the case propounded, which I have endeavored to resolve (as the
nature of it requires) practically: and therefore as there is no time for, so
there will be less need of Application. But that I may not dismiss you
without something of this nature, having laid your duty before you in the
Observation, and showed you how it may be performed in satisfying the case: Let
me now press you to the performance of it by one Consideration, which will
have the force of a Motive, where there is any sense of soul-concernments.

If the efficacy of the Ordinances abide not on you, you cannot be fruitful
under them, at least you cannot bring forth fruit unto perfection, (as the
expression is Luke 8.14.) you may bring forth buds, or leaves, or blossoms,
etc. but if their influence continue not, that which you bring forth will never
come to ripeness and perfection; it will be crude and sour at best, and sour
Grapes are as bad as no fruit in the Lords account: and unfruitfullnesse will
provoke the Lord to deprive you of the Gospel and Ordinances, Isaiah 5.2, 5, 6.
Ye looked that it should bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes.
-- And now go to, I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. I will take
away the hedge thereof. -- I will lay it waste that it shall not be pruned nor
dug. -- I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. The
meaning of this parable (so far as concerns our purpose) is expressed by
another threatening, denounced for the same sin, Matthew. 21.43. The kingdom of
God (i. e. the Gospel of the kingdom) shall be taken from you, and given to a
people bringing forth the fruits thereof. And Christ's threatening of Ephesus
amounts to as much, Rev. 2.4, 5. Nevertheless I have something against thee,
because thou have left thy first love. The first impressions of the Gospel were
worn off and vanished. And what follows, I will come against thee quickly, and
remove thy Candlestick out of its place, unless thou repent. So that this sin
will pull up your hedge, and break down your wall, level all your securities;
and so lay you open to the boar of the wood, and the wild beasts of the field:
such as instead of digging and pruning you, will devour and lay you wast, and
Sharon will become a desert. This sin will provoke Christ to let the Stars fall
out of his right hand: so as you will be left to perish for want of vision.
This sin will provoke the Lord to take the Gospel of the Kingdom from you: and
leave you under the hellish influences of the Prince of darkness. This sin
will overturn your Candlesticks, and extinguish your lights, and leave you
nothing but the snuffs. This sin will deliver your strength into captivity, and
your glory into the enemies hand. This sin will smite the shepherds and
scatter the flocks, and lay the heritage of God desolate. This sin will cause
your Sun to set at noon, and turn the day of your gracious visitation, into a
sad and dismal night. This sin will turn the place which has been a valley of
vision, into a seat of darkness, and a valley of the shadow of death.

If then you would avoid a judgment, which strikes not only at your estates
and lives, but at your souls: if you would prevent that dreadful stroke, which
may not only r^ach your selve^, but ^our posterity, your children and childrens
children; (...) ^^ld ^ot have them and your selves, and thousand and (...) ^^u,
bereaved of the Gospel, and the means of g^^ and li^e (...) ^ll care and pains
that the influences of the Ordinances do not slide from you, that they be not
as water spilt upon the ground. Be faithful and diligent in the use of the
forementioned directions, and all other means which may be effectual to fix
them. And if hereby your hearts are wrought up to such a resolution, The Lord
God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of your hearts.

FINIS.
Places of Scripture, Occasionally Explained or Illustrated.
chapter ver. page Job 22. 21. 416 Psalm. 19. 13. 308 25. 4, 5. 14 63. 8. 87 66.
18. 335 73. 25. 621 112. 9. 302 139. 1, 2, 3, etc. 20 Prove. 3. 27. 281 11. 17.
303 18. 20. 429 19. 17. 302 24. 510 Eccle. 1. 2. 445 5. 6. 588 2, 3, 4 etc. 608
Isa. 44. 2. 436 Jerem. 11. 9. 310 Hosea. 10. 11. 570 Matthew. 5. 22. 402 6. 3.
278 33. 574 7. 12. 295 14 9 18. 22 404 Luke 6. 30 292 35 285, 286 11. 41 275
12. 33 289 50 514 18. 22 290 19. 13 28 Act. 2. 37, 38 34 Romans 1. 28 10 6. 19 33
8. 35, etc. 312 9. 20 489 12. 11, 12 502 15. 19 506 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17 86 2 Cor.
8. 14 295 13. 5 309 Gal. 6. 10 280 Ephesians. 1. 13, 14 313 4. 26 402 5. 20 494
Phil. 4. 18 300 1 These. 5. 22 57 1 Timothy 4. 2 10 Heb. 6. 9 310 11. 1 307 12. 1
690 13. 2 287, 288 3 279 5 435 James 1. 14 564 27 300 5. 16 689 1 Pet. 4. 14
491 2 Pet. 1. 4 507 10 314.

An Alphabetical Table of the chief heads, Contained in these Sermons.
A
ACcount with God daily. 374. 581 Activity in Duty, what it is. 501. 502
Admonition. 207. Admiration of Christ. 227. Adversity a season, to exercise
trust in God. 450. Affection to the world, to be mortified. 375. Afflictions.
Their benefit. 458. Their necessity and design. 376. We must thank God for
them. 486. Why they are good and thank-worthy. 487. etc. Angels how readily
they serve God. 512.
Anger. How to be moderated. 402. To be avoided in reproving. 200. 209 And in
correction. 204.
Alms. To be given with Justice. 275. Who may not give them. 276. To be given
Cheerfully. 277. With simplicity. 278. With compassion. 279. Seasonably. 280.
Speedily. 281. Liberally. 283. Prudently. 290. Motives to Alms-doing. 299, etc.
Apostasy. It is possible. 67. 74. Danger of the least Degree. 78. Means to
prevent it. 80. The miserable end of Apostates. 510.
Assurance. It may be attained. 308, etc. It may be lost. 306 Seven
Directions for attaining it. 316 Further direction. 373 Not to be expected by
revelation. 305

B
Beggars which to be relieved. 291. Buying and Selling. Rules for the
management of them. 260, etc. Part of Rel^gious business to observe those
Rules. 579. Believer. Whether he can fall totally, and finally. 311, etc.

C
Calling. Diligence to be used in it. 296. Sins of our callings. 48.
Carelessness in Prayer the way to Atheism. 463, etc. Catechizing necessary. 196.
Caution necessary in the best. 75. Certainty threefold. 307.
Charity. Several acts of it propounded. 284. The necessity of this Grace. 293.
The profit of it. 301, etc. Something to be set apart for it. 297.
Christ. How are we complete in him 615. etc. He is all to believers. 613. How
he is all. 623. How we may know he is so to us. 629. His Condiscention. 228.
To be loved in his offices 230. To be eyed in Prayer, 342. Our happiness, in
knowing him. 624. All strength from him. 622. All acceptance. 21. Civility in
Conversation. 256. 40^.
Company. The Concernment of it. 171. 199. 589 If good it quickens much. 508.
Comfort. The falseness of that which man^ give themselves. 357. Christ fills
every Condition with it. 621. It arises much from performing our duty. 348.
Compassion. Toward the Poor. 279. In reproving. 185. Community of Goods not
necessary. 289. Compliance with sin. 164 Connivance at it. 165. Conquest of it
how great a benefit. 108. Correction of faulty Persons, how to be managed. 204.
Conflict. To be maintained with sin. 325. Difference between natural and
spiritual, in seven Particulars. 327.
Conscience. What it is. 3. The Object of it. 4. Offices and acts of it. 4.
356. The sleepy Conscience, its Causes and Cure. 78. 9. The seared Conscience,
etc. 9. 10. The erring, etc. 11. The doubting, etc. 15. The scrupulus, etc. 17.
18. The trembling, etc. 18. How to be acted. 48. The good to be got and kept.
19, etc. Motives to get it. 22. Peaceable Conscience. 19. How to get it. 19
etc. 358 371. Conscience will one day be awakened. 353. When that will be.
365. Benefits of tender Conscience. 92. 578. It will discover beloved sins. 51.
When Commonly terrors of it fall upon men, 365, etc. Confess especially
beloved sins. 56. Christian Confidence. 430. Contentment. 454. Conviction of
sin and misery. 225.
Contracts and Comerce. What Justice required in them. 259. etc. Contests. How
to be moderate in them. 399. Conversion. Four Conclusions, Concerning the
nature of it. 26, etc. What a man Can do toward it. 31, etc. This Question
more particularly resolved. 34, etc. Beloved sins, the greatest enemies of it.
61.
Covetousness. Deadens the Heart. 505.
D
Debts. Must sometimes be forgiven. 286. Desire. When immoderate. 390. 564.
Delays. They are most dangerous. 97. 501.
Distraction. In Prayer threefold. 468. Causes of it. 469, etc Remedies against
it. 473. It Discovers beloved sins. 50.
Diligence. Must be great in a Christian. 21. 502. 684, etc. 689. Dominion of
sin. 51.
Doubts. Counsels to Doubting Christians. 319. Afflictions must not breed
Doubts. 453.
Duty. It must not be forsaken for want of Comfort. 320. To be regarded, not
events. 23.

E
Ease. It accompanies sensuality. 571. Education of Children. 193, etc. Ill
Education dangerous. 49. Elocation of them, 207.
Equity. Wherein it does consist. 249. Rules of dealing with men, as we would
be dealt withal. 252.
Equal. In many things we are all Equal. 253. Examination. Of our selves, how
necessary. 20. Example. It has great power. 32. 168. 169. Does much quicken
us. 508. Therefore give that which is good. 213 Exercise of grace. 93.
Experience. It should deterr us from the least sin. 100. It should encourage
us in good. 437.
Eye. What meant by right Eye. 40. 41. The Excellency of the Eye. 43.

F
Faith. Necessity of it. 103. Power of it 60 Degrees of it. 307. It Is Maxims.
455, etc. We may know that we have it. 308. Faithfulness of God. 436. Fear,
Of it is inordinacy. 394. Falls. Four degrees of Gods peoples Falls 67, etc. How
Far they may Fall. 75, 76. Whether totally and Finally. 311. 312. etc. Falls of
the wicked. 70. Mixed Falls. 71. Difference between the Falls of Godly and
Wicked. 79. Family sins. 177. Family Instructions. 195. Family Duties. 202.
Faults. How to bear with others Faults. 401. How to correct them. 204.
Fight. Against sin, how to be managed. 331. Flesh. What meant by Flesh and
Spirit. 84.
G
God. Always justified by Good men. 455. Why he does not hinder sin. 167. How
he is manifested to us. 417. 418 We must not limit him. 452. He can do no
wrong. 455. His Goodness. 21. 340. 421. 435. His justice in punishing. 174. His
power. 434. Good. Moral Good and evil, eternally, distinguished. 89. Grace all
from Christ. 679. Growth in it. 318. Truth of it, not d^^rees to be examined.
p. 319.
Gentleness. To be observed in Reproofs. 208.
H.
Hand. What meant by right Hand. 40, 41. Excellency of it. 43.
Heart. Must be narrowly watched. 58, 93. 165. And much labored withal. 684.
Health the proper time for working out Salvation. 119. Holiness is
communicative. 214. Christ the pattern of it. 24.
Hope. Nature of that Christian Grace. 430. From Creatures vain. 565.
Hospitality. 287. Humility the souls ballast. 454. Makes us thrive. 21. Makes
good men have the worst thoughts of themselves. 663. Hypocrisy what it is.
657. Why compared to leaven. ibid. Danger of it. 659. Six signs of it. 666,
etc. How to cure it. 671, 672, etc. Motives to use those means. 675.

I.
Impatience. 452. Inconstancy in all things. 255. Endeavors not vain before
Conversion. 28, 29. Inequality between men inconsiderable. 254. Intercession of
Christ, its power. 311. Justice. An exact and easy Rule of it. 249. Rules for
it in Trade. 260, etc Advantage must not be taken of men's ignorance. 263. It
must be mixed with Charity. 275. Gods Justice in punishing. 174.
Injury. How it must be prosecuted. 4^4.
L.
Law. It is six fold. 324. When Lawful things undo us. 562. How we may know
that we abuse them. 564, etc. Do not all that is Lawful. 264. Liberty. What
Liberty Gods Spirit gives. 518, etc. How to deal with others in matters of
Liberty. 258. Love. It will put Life into us. 506. The best preservative
against the least sin. 88. In the Will, and in the Appetite. 221. To God and
Christ how distinguished. 222. What is it to Love Christ. 222. Twelve
Characters of it. 224. Do all out of Love to God. 22. False Love. 237. Want of
Love to him the greatest sin. 238, etc. Brings the greatest punishment. 240.
Motives to Love him. 241, etc. How to inflame our Love to him. 244, etc. How to
increase the flame. 247.

M.
Marriage. 579. Misery. Of a sinner. 360, etc. Of those that love not Christ.
240, 368 Ministry. Difficulty of that Employment. 118. Meditation. Two benefits
of it. 477 Makes the Efficacy of Ordinances continue. 682.
Morning. Morning thoughts to be observed. 54. Mortification. A continued Act.
63. Mourn. For the sins of others. 179. Moderation. What it is. 382. The Rule
of it. 384. In what things to be used. 388. How toward good things of this
life. 389. How toward the evil. 394. Toward persons. 397. In Civil matters
Actively. 397. Passively. 401.
In Religious Negatively. 405, Positively, 408.
Reasons to enforce this duty, 412, etc.

N.
Neighbor. Duties toward him much to be regarded. 266.
O.
Obedience. It must be complete. 59, 62, 63. Occasions. Of sin to be avoided.
56, 95. Omniscience. Of God to be believed in prayer. 338, etc. His Omnipotence
also. 340 434.
Opinions. Moderately to be contended for. 408, 409. Original sin. 84. 104.
Ordinances. To be frequented. 203, 686. Their virtue from Christ. 621. What
we must do to make their Efficacy abide. 679. What we must avoid for that end.
688.

P.
Parents. Must instruct their children. 195. They must command them to obey it.
197. Persons. Must not be respected, 184.
Pleasure. Pleasant things dangerous. 57. Power of God. 434. No Power to
convert our selves. 27. Threefold Power. 26. Men can do more than they do. 28.
Poor. A stock to be made for them. 298. Prayer, Necessity of it. 102. For our
Relations. 213, 214, For Charity. 296. Why God hears wicked men sometimes. 336.
Wicked men are bound to pray. 336. Why God will not give without prayer. 341.
To pray in Faith, what. 335, 337, etc. How for temporal things. 345, etc. How
for spiritual. 346, etc. To be made with an eye to Christ. 435, 343.
Distraction in Prayer. 468. Danger of careless thoughts in Prayer. 463, etc.
Answer of Prayer makes a mercy sweeter. 493. Do nothing but what you can pray
God to bless. 24. Praise Incourages to do well. 205.
Prosperity. A time for Trust in God. 439. How it must be done. 440, etc.
Propriety. In Goods and Lands lawful. 289. Promises. To be believed in Prayer.
342. A ground of our trust. 435. They quicken the soul. 507. Providence of God.
339, 437. Prudence in avoiding sufferings. 640.

Q.
Quickening. What it is to Quicken, 500. Means of spiritual Quickening. 504. Ten
Quickening Considerations. 509, etc.

R.
Rashness. In making vows to be avoided. 591. Reason It must always govern.
98. Rational Arguments to be used. 212. Recreation, to be moderate. 579.
Regenerate. Not without conflicts. 325. Relation. Study to save our Relations.
190. Gods Relation to us a ground of trust. 435.
Religion. A Christians business. 573. Wherein it does consist ib. and seq.
When it is our business. 577. How to make it so. 583, etc. Sweetness of it.
584. When promoted by vows. 592, etc. And how. 596. To be secured above all
things. 638 How to preserve it among enemies to it. 640. It binds the duties
of the second Table upon us. 267. How to converse with men of a different
Religion. 646, 647, etc. Repentance, when it is true. 81. Madness to defer it.
19. Reproof. Sin to be Reproved. 179. Discovers beloved sins. 52. How to manage
it. 2^0, 201, 208. 398. Qualifications of a Reprover. 180. Of a Reproof. 182,
183, etc. 649. What must be Reproved. 181. Win the affections of those you
Reprove. 212. Season of Reproof is to be marked. 182, etc. 280. Resolution
against beloved sins. 55. Revenge not to be taken. 265. Rewards great
encouragements. 206. Riches not to be confided in. 272.

S.
Scruples not to be cherished. 17. Self-Knowledge. How excellent 91, 244. To be
got in Solitude. 54. And in Sufferings. 55. Self-denial of great advantage. 628.
Salvation. Of our friends should be labored. 190. Strife al ou^ it. 37 38,
504, 505. Sensual ty. 569. Security. 571.
Sick. Instruction to Sick persons of great advantage. 112. How to be dealt
withal. 113. The same method improper for all 115 Errors which they are
subject to. 116, 117. Sin to be killed, 42. Never to live again. ibid. It is
from ou^ selves. 44. Ugliness of it. 91. Why expressed by the parts of our
body. 45. Of Bel^v d Sins. 46. Whence they proceed. 47. 12 Marks to discover
them. 50, etc. Nine Helps to subdue them. 55. Smallest Sins to be avoided. 73,
328. 331. Means against its first rising. 88, etc Take heed of beginning of Sin
107. In our children as well as selves. 198. Eight ways of becoming guilty of
other men's Sins. 163. Five devilish sins. 164. Sin how to be cured by
Revulsion. 101 Sloth, threefold. 500. Ten Remedies against Spiritual Sloth.
504, etc. Eight Questions to Slothful Christians. 314. Spirit, the witness of
it. 318, 521. We may know that we have Gods Spirit. 313. What to walk in it.
85. When activity is from Gods Spirit. 416, etc. Superiors must uphold their
authority. 193. How to be reproved. 210. Superfluities to be cut off. 297.
Sufferings, how prudently to be avoided. 646, etc. Or courageously to be
endured. 631. etc.

T.
Temper of body may incline to sin. 46, 47. Temptations, how to be resisted.
94, 96. Thanksgiving due to God continually. 480. Specially from his children.
481, etc. The grounds of it. 482, etc. For every thing. 484 etc. For
afflictions. 486. The reasons of that. 487, etc. How to obtain this frame of
Spirit. 491, 492, etc. Thoughts, a conscience to be made of them. 463. Time,
care to be had of it. 575. Trouble, inward and outward meet sometimes together.
364. Whence it arises. 365, etc. To live among the ungodly a great Trouble.
633, etc. Truth not all equal. 408. Trust, what it is to Trust in God. 428,
Effects of it. 431. Ob^ect of Trust. 432. Grounds of Trust in God. 439, 450.
V.
Verbs. Active Verbs how sometimes used. 26. Unthankfulness, several sorts of
Unthankful men. 495, 496. The evil of this sin. 497. Vows, the nature of them.
588. Whether lawful to make them. 589. When they are useful in Religion. 592,
etc. How they promote it. 596, etc. Danger of breaking them. 604. They must
bear some proportion to mercies. 605.
W.
Way, A fourfold Way. 503. Weakness, very great in us unto good. 27. Word of
God the best weapon. 85, 99. Worldly-mindedness hinders its operation. 689.
Moderation in our words. 397. Watchfulness, necessary in doing our duty. 504.
Against our enemies. 33, 580. Worship, how to conceive of God in it. 416, etc.
He is tender of it. 462. We must worship him in Christ. 423.
Zeal. Consistant with Moderation. 407.
FINIS.

