AN HELP TO BETTER HEARTS, FOR BETTER TIMES: Endeavored in several Sermons.

WHEREIN, The zeal and fervency required in Gods service is declared, several
hindrances discovered, and suitable helps provided: all out of Gods treasury,
brought forth at this time, with earnest desire, and in hope to revive the
memory, and reinforce the p^actice of the people to whom they were presented,
and for more public use, if the Lord please.

By John Angier, Pastor at Denton-Chappel in Lancashire.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy

PSALM. 11^.2 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Psalm. 40.8. I
delight to do thy will O my God. Isa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices,
and works righteousness. Ioh 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work. Act 20 24. Neither count I my life dear to my
self, so that I might finish my course with joy. Ioh. 2.17. The zeal of thine
house has eaten me up. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Christopher Meredith, at
the Sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

TO MY BELOVED PEOPLE, THE Inhabitants of Denton, and Haughton, and the places
adjacent.
Beloved,
THere wanted not strength of discouragement to stifle this weak birth, but the
thoughts of my heart, through divine assistance, gave strength of encouragement
to bring forth; My heart told me, how much the Saints have blessed God, for the
pious, and plain books of the godly, which were more hearty, and less
specious, breathing Christ crucified, and hearts crucified, and what a power my
soul has found, in that plainness and simplicity, wherein they have sent
abroad their pious, practical discourses, as in their native dress. An
over-bearing flood of thoughts followed, speaking out the cause I have to set
up, some such pillar of thankfulness to my God, who carried the work of my
Ministry, through inhibitions, suspension, excommunications, in time of the
height of the power, and persecution of the Bishops; Though I might not run
the race of one year at Ringly-Chappel, whether I was first called: and in that
imperfect year was twice inhibited: though in nine or ten years at Denton
Chapel, I preached not above two separated years, (to my best remembrance)
without interruption, and in that time was twice excommunicated; Though
Sabbath-Assemblies were sundry times distractedly, and sorrowfully broken up,
and my departure f^^m habitation and people, often forced, no means left in
sight of return, yet through the fervent prayers of the Church, (whereto these
hard afflictions were apparently serviceable,) God was graciously and
effectually moved, continually to renew liberty, as they continually
interrupted it, they shut, and God opened, they shut, and God opened, till God
would no more be troubled with them, but took the keys of power, out of the
hands of upstart proud Shebna, to give them to outed, despised, faithful
El^akim. And no less cause have I to set a star of observation (to advantage
Gods pra se,) upon divine providence, preserving to admiration my The like
mercy God shevved me, when the Parle of Derbey lay about Manchester almost a
vve^k, though the plundering Soldiers went as f^rre some other ways, yet God
turned them from us, and gave us leave to keep the National ^ast in ^^blique,
t^^ very w^^.
house, study, and papers, when some of Prince Ruperts plundering forces passed
nigh the door, in the year of our heavy visitation, when his whole Army entered
Stockport, within three miles of us, and no opportunity left for removing any
thing, nor any durst stay in the house; to him we committed all by prayer, and
at our return we found nothing wanting, not a door opened, not a window
broken; Though in times past, scarce a year passed but I was driven from home,
yet in these troubles I have rested at home, through the multitude of his
mercies all the time, save one Month, when the Princes forces ranged and
reigned in our Country; My soul shall make her boast in the Lord, the humble
shall hear thereof, and be glad. O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt
his name together, Psalm. 34.2, 3. For your sakes also, having found help from
God, to labor so long and suffer so much, I was willing to combat with mine
own discouragements unto victory. God has kept you hitherto, blessed, blessed
be his name, in truth, piety, love and peace, to my great comfort and
encouragement, in all my troubles and straightness, in outward, and earthly
respects: but I am afraid, out of the abundance of my love to you, and care for
you, in these dangerous times, (wherein many evil spirits are let loose, for I
lo^k upon the diste^pers of these times, as a sharp correction to godly
Ministers, for their humiliation, and better preparation for some other work,
as an effectual temptation to the people, to discover those corruptions: that
being covered with the cloak of prof^ssion, have lived and grown under
powerful O^di^^nces, and as a sign and means of the removing of the Gospel,
at le^st by such instruments to desolate places, the work of his servants
fa^^^^g, God will provide new, and when wanton people are we^r ed with their
own ways, the ways of God will be the more precious.
affliction to godly painful Preachers, and for temptation to their hearers)
lest you being led away by the error of the wicked, should fall from your own
stedfastnes; and do therefore pray, and endeavor, that you may grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If the quickening
spirit shall quicken your affections and graces, unto duties of communion with
Christ, the fountain of life (the matter labored in preaching and printing
these Sermons,) he will quicken those duties to be condu^^-pip s of life:
whereas, in ordinary experience, dead hearts are suited with dead and
unfru^tfull Ordinances, the sad and dangerous experience of the present times.
I have sadly observed, after the beginning of these unexpested, glorious,
joyful times of liberty, after some more lively springings, and workings, both
of hearts and Ordinances, when the light brake out of darkness, and liberty
out of bondage, great deadness has fallen, continu^d, and increased, upon
both hearts and Ordinances; A main reason I take to be this, the sharpning, and
whetting afflictions of the Church, which forced their graces, unto frequent
and fervent exercise, in holy duties, being removed, they have remitted their
fervency, not improving their liberties, to that end, that God improved their
afflictions, and God has remitted his Spirit in Ordinances, they have not
stirred up their h^arts to take hold of God, they have not rejoiced to work
righteousness, as sometimes: and God has not offered himself in Ordinances,
sent his Spirit to meet them, nor given them his loves, as sometimes. To pass
by the evidence of this sad r^p^rt, found in the unhumblednesse, and
unaffectednesse of the godly, in midst of so many pressing causes, and under so
great helps, and the general ineffica y of the Ordinances for conversion, stay
your selves, and wonder, fear and tremble, at the evidence given in, by the
abounding of errors, desertion of Gods public w^rship, contempt of that
Ministry God has so highly honored, and so richly blessed, even by those that
have been ingrafted into Christ, and nourished up in him thereby, with much
tenderness, pains, and patience, the exchange of duties of piety, expressing
and increasing the power of godliness, for hot and wrangling d^sputes about
strange doctrines and governments, and the bitter fruits of these disputes and
differences, the separation of hearts, and communion amongst the truly godly:
the fearful out-breakings of wrath, envy, evil speakings, the uncharitable,
unchristian provoking censures of estates and actions, the almost incredible
propensity to fall out with, and fall upon our loving and faithful brethren of
Scotland, together with deceitful, dangerous, overweening, and bold
confidences of excelling light, grace, spirit, inlargements, comforts, etc.
Here is room enough for a large heart to power out bitter soul-breaking
expostulations. O where is the spirit of the Lord, that was wont to possess
the hearts of the godly, to strengthen grace there, to keep good order in the
soul, to keep in and under, these masters of mis-rule? O where is that spirit
that was wont to fill the Ordinances, and in them clearly to discover to the
godly, the distempers of their hearts, and disorders of their ways, and
powerfully to break their hearts for sin, and from it? Is it possible the
spirit should be in the hearts of Gods people, and in his own Ordinances, in as
plentiful a measure as sometimes, and so much of the flesh, and so little of
the spirit appear in these times of so many, and great, unlooked for, unthought
of, amazing, astonishing, National mercies, Gospel-inlargement, wonders of
providence, Humiliations, Thankesgivings, Covenants, and endeavors for through
Reformation? Sure it cannot be. O where is the wisdom, love, humility,
meekness, tenderness of conscience, compassion, patience, forbearance, long
suffering, that was wont to triumph in the godly, and to be the glory of
Religion, even in the eyes of the irreligious? My dearly beloved sadly think of
these things, and let such sad considerations work unto serious search, whether
some of you also, have not lost your first love, that you may remember from
whence you are fall^n, repent, and do your first work: or, unto an wholesome
preserving fear, least you should depart by degrees from God, in the lively
expressions of love, and he should by the same degrees, depart from you in the
life of Ordinances: you were never in so much danger since your profession
began as now: That of our Savior is abundantly verified: Matthew 12.43. The
unclean spirits that were gone out of men, finding the rooms empty, swept and
garnished, are returned with seven spirits more wicked then themselves, and
they dwelt there: And that of Paul, Acts 20.30. In many parts of the Kingdom
is acted over again: Of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them. Therefore watch and remember (...)
have formerly preac^ (...), not without tempta^ (...) d tears, and what I (...)
now written to you, that ye lose not those things that ye have wrought, but
that ye may receive a full reward. It is in the desire of my heart, that I may
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things: yea, I
think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my
Tabernacle: And in this work I have endeavored, that you may be able after my
decease, to have these things always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15.
If the Lord shall keep you from despising (...) Ordinances, which I ta^^ (...)
very beginning of (...) ^pers of the times, and (...) ^eep up in you an
honorable esteem of Gods Ordinances, (and particularly of those Orthodox,
godly, painful Ministers, that have brought home your own souls, or the souls
of others, and led on the people of God toward perfection for many years,
bearing the burden and heat of the day, and not be bewitched, as the foolish
Galathians and Corinthians, with flourishing high-flown, flashing men, whose
piety lies in parts, whose power lies in novelties, and whose baits lie in
gilded words, and dissembled carriages, who vapor for a little while, and then
extinguish for want of substance) that will keep you in a prepared, attentive,
profitable attendance upon them, in which way God will converse familiarly with
you, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. All that I now desire
in recompense of my renewed pains for your good, in a time when my body was not
very fit for it, is your purposed fervent prayers, to him that has the seven
spirits of God, that he would pour out his spirit upon his people, that they
may discover how woefully their own hearts, and Satan have deceived them,
clearly discern Gods bitter anger in their strange affections, expressions, and
carriages one to another, that with Joseph and his brethren, they may meet and
weep one in another bosom, humble their souls before God together, seek of
God together the ways of communion, being troubled at, and weary of the ways
of separation, from their approved beloved brethren, and not rest till they
have recovered their love to God, and reunited their affections and societies,
that their humiliations and supplications, recovering their former vigor, they
may prevail mightily with God, to pour out his spirit upon his Ordinances in
greater measure then ever, to the inlightning of the ignorant, converting of
the profane, clearing of doubts, reconciling of differences, increasing of the
power of godliness, perfecting of Reformation, and edification of the body of
Christ. In joyful expectation of your ready, and unanimous concurrence in this
desire: I do heartily take leave and remain, whilst the chief shepard shall
continue my commission, and work amongst you,

Your loving Pastor, covetous to preserve the heat, and strength of your love
to the Lord Jesus, that I may present you a chaste Virgin, and may rejoice in
that day, that I have not run in vain. JOHN ANGIER.

TO THE Christian Reader.
READER,
WE will not, we need not, say much of this book: only this we dare promise
thee, that if the title like thee, the Treatise is, like the man that made it,
no whit less then it speaks. And truly it is such a theme that we have need to
study; For in vain do we expect better times, unless we get better hearts:
alas what should impure hearts do with pure Ordinances? we tremble to hear so
many cry Reformation, Reformation: and yet see so few reforming themselves or
their families. We are bold to say, that unless our hearts and lives were
b^tter, Episcopacy were too good for us. The truth is, God is mocked to his very
face: and one of these two evils we may expect, either that we shall die in the
wilderness, and never go over Jordane to see the good land of Reformation, or
(which is worse) that Reformation it self should undo us. For of Christ's
coming in a way of Reformation, it is asked. Mal. 3.2.
But who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears?

A sad effect it had surely on the Scribes and Pharisees in the days of his
flesh, whilst his doctrine and miracles ripened their sins, and blasted their
Souls in stead of their Lusts. For the preventing of such an incomparable
mischief, in this great expectation of his coming amongst us, as a Refiners
fire, and fullers soap; Let us commend the reading of this book to thee, and
do thou seriously commend it to God for his blessing, wherein thou shall have
the best wishes of

Thine in Christ, to serve thee. Tho. Case. Edm. Calamy.


Errata.
PAge 1. l. 10. for guide, read gird, p. 6. l. 9 for words, r. word. l. 15. for
these, r. they. p. 13. l. 23. for where, r. when. p 14. l. 11. for nor, r. not
p. 36. for Isa. 36. r. 56. p. 42. l. 22. for fear, r. care. p 43. l. 6. for
weal, r. wealth. p. 45. l. 9. for raising, r. raging. p. 51. l. 12. for Lord,
r. head. p. 53. l. 3. for Prophets, r. worship. p. 54. for their, r. Gods. p.
55. l 23. for your, r. their. p. 58. l. 23. dele A p. 59. l. 1. for lawful, r.
careful, p. 64. l. 5. r. Eccles. 5. p. 69. l. 4. r. Psalm. 84. p. 70. l 22. for
regarded, r. worshipped. p. 85. l. 9. for our, r or. p. 89. l. 10. r. Isa. 58.
p. 101. l. 2. r. 1 These. 5. p 103. l. ^ r. Ps. 5. l. 9. r. Isa. 66. p. 110. l.
15. for use, r. thee. p. 123. l. 24. for stirred, r. stirring. p. 1^8. l. 17.
r. Mat. 25. p. 150. l. 19. for immediately, r. in mediately, p. 151. l. 9. for
snared, r. snares. p. 154. l. 9. add in. p. 163. l. ^0. r. Mat. 5. p. 166. l.
19. r. Psalm. 139.1, 2, 23. p. 1^0. l. 4. for furthest, r. further. p. 211. l
11. for fastened, r. softened. p. 212. l. 1^. r. 1 Cor. 11. p. 220 l. 8. dele
more. p. 208. l. 15. add day, after marriage. p. 229 l 13. r. Job 42 5, 6. p.
235. l. 20. r. Exodus 12. p. 239. l. 1. for one, r no. p. 240. l. 4. for orb, r.
oil. p. 245. l. 86. for perfect, r. present p. 289. l. 1. for unpreparednes, r.
preparednes. p. 290. l. 5 for his, r. her. p. 304. r. Luk 5. p. 317. l. 8. for
him, r. thine. p. 327. l. 5. r. Amos 8. p. 329. l. 21. for the latter and, r.
as. p. 357. l. 9. for hand, r. handle. p. 363. l. 14 for faulse, r. false p.
364. l. 10. for know, r. knowledge p. 372. l. 4. for man, r. men. p 380. l. 19
God can command but, r. God can command nothing but. p. 451 l. 16. for when, r.
where. p. 455. l 6. for seems, r. serves. p. 47^. l. 7. for our, r. one. l.
8. for soul, r. soil. p. 489. l. 7. for cheer, r. clear. p. 499. for prevent.
r. pervert. l. 24. for sullen, r. fallen. p. 532. l. 2^. for sleep, r. asleep.
p. 53^. l. 24. for warring. r routing. p. 534 l. 19. for curse, r. course. p.
541. l 2^. for rest, r. ^est. p. 545. l. 15. dele If p. 593. l. 22. for free,
r. feel. p. 598. l. 19. for one, r. our. p. 603. l. 2. for heart, r. heat. p.
612. for sin, r. him.

AN HELP TO BETTER HEARTS for Better Times.
CHAP. I. Of instant worshipping of God.
[ACTS 26. part of the 7. Instantly serving God.]


THe word here translated [instantly] properly signifies to extend, and
stretch out, and is frequently used for stretching out, and putting forth the
hand, John. 21.18. When thou art old thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and
another shall guide thee. The word stretch forth in the translation, is the
same in the original with this that here is translated, instantly. When this
word is referred to Gods worship, or to the affections of the soul, or the
graces thereof, it does, by similitude taken from the body, signify the
stretching out of them, the measure of them, the earnestnes and fervencie of
them, and so is translated either, instantly, as in this place, or fervently,
as 1 Pet. 1.22. earnestly, as Luke. 22.44. He prayed more earnestly, without
ceasing, Act. 12.5.


Some interpret this word in this place, perpetually, but you see it is
translated here, instantly, and in other places of Scripture, when it is
applied to Gods worship: and they that translate it, perpetually, do imply this
fervencie of affection, for whence comes perpetuity, length and continuance in
any action, but from length of inward affection, the stretching out of that: as
the length of the motion of a stone thrown with the hand, depends upon the
strength of the hand throwing the same. I take it, hereby is meant that
gracious affection of zeal so much called for, and commended in Scripture,
which is not a mixed affection of love, and anger but the intention and measure
of all the affections, for there is zeal in grief, Psalm. 119.139. My zeal has
consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. The term being
thus explained, the truth to be handled is.

Gods worship is to be performed with intention of affection, not only the
truth, but the strength of affection is to be looked after and labored for in
Gods service. The twelve tribes are here said to serve the Lord instantly or
earnestly.

I will show more particularly, what is meant by, instantly, and then produce
proof.

By instantly, is meant the measure and degree of the affections we express in
Gods service, whether love, or desire, or fear, or grief, or joy, or anger,
or care, that there be much thereof. So what graces we express, faith, or
repentance, or humility, we take care that there be measure as well as truth,
called Luke 10.27. all the mind, and all the soul, all the heart, all, has
special respect unto the measure and degree of the faculties of the soul; as
all the might of the body does mean all degrees, and measures of strength, the
utmost strength, so in like manner, all the mind, all the heart, all the soul,
means all degrees and measures of understanding, will and affections the
utmost, and furthest of them, else our Saviors compendium of the first table
should not comprehend the third Commandment.

I will for cleerer evidence sake, show it by instances in the several parts
of Gods worship. 1. Hearing the word, Luke 4.20.21. when our Savior had read
his text, the eyes of all were fastened upon him, asigne of an earnest desire to
hear him, they they did not look about them one at another, or at them that
came in, but their eyes were fastened upon him, and they wondered at the gracious
words that proceeded out of his mouth, a sign they were much affected and
moved, and did not sit as stones senseless. The men of Berea, Act. 17.1^. did
receive the word with all readiness of mind, they did in the greatest measure
put forth their hearts unto the words of the Apostle, to meet with it in the
way, and to take it up so soon as it was let fall by him, Luke 24.32. Did not
our hearts burn within us when he opened to us the Scripture? burn these did
and were in a flame, with indignation against themselves for their ignorance,
with desire of, and joy in, the good and glad tidings of Christ's death and
resurrection. 2. Receiving the Sacraments the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 35.18. There
was no Passover like to that kept in Israel since the days of Samuel the
Prophet. They exceeded in this Passover, all the Passeovers of a long time, a
sign they kept it with a great measure of affection, for would God only have
commended the outward action? Luke 22.15. With desire I have desired to eat
this Passover with you before I suffer,.i. with earnest and vehement desire,
earnest desire to the ordinance does imply earnest desire in the ordinances.
The duty of examination required of the communicant, 1 Cor. 11.28. does carry
as much; examination is the bellows of affection. The like we find in the
Eunuch in regard of baptism, Act. 8.36. See, here is water, what does hinder
me to be baptized? He had a forward desire, the Evangelist should have stirred
up and provoked him, but he prevents him, is more forward to receive it then he
to offer it. 3. Prayer, Psalm. 119.145. I cried with my whole heart, he employed
all the affections of his heart in prayer, and that with earnestnes, he cries,
Psalm. 142.2. I poured out my complaint before him, David empties his soul in
prayer, leaves nothing behind, a sign of earnestnes, Psalm. 143.6. I stretch
forth my hands unto thee, the instancy here spoken of, he fears lest his
prayers should fall short of God, therefore sends them forth with as great
earnestnes as may be. 4. Singing of psalms, Ps. 149.5, 6. Let them sing aloud,
let the high praises of God be in their mouths, in singing psalms our hearts
must be extended and stretched out, as the extending of the voice implies, our
hearts must be wide open and filled with gracious affections. When God would
express great Joy, he bids the mountains break forth into singing, Esai.
49.13. Ephesians. 5.18.19. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess, but be
filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, etc. we should
labor to drink deep of the spirit, and express it in singing and making
melody in our hearts to the Lord, there must be a sweet and loud sounding joy
in our hearts when we sing psalms.

For proof of this truth may be brought in, the testimony of Scripture,
examples commended, and reproofs of the contrary.

The Scripture calls for this affection, Romans 12.11. Fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord: if we should be cold in our own occasions, which we are not, yet
when we come to serve God our spirits should burn within us, with desire and
delight, Gal. 4.18. It is good to be Zealously affected always in a good
thing, good, because agreeable to Gods will, to Gods nature, to the nature of
the good we are zealous about, zealous affection in good, is allwaies good,
other good things have their proper season, this is allwaies in season in every
good action.

2. The servants of God have thus practiced, Nehemiah was zealous for the
service and worship of God, so that he had his conscience on his side to
embolden him, to desire mercy of God according to his forward affection that
way, Nehem. 13.14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my
good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and the offices thereof.
David, Psalm. 69.9. The Zeal of thy house has eaten me up. Such was his
affection to Gods Worship and Service, that partly out of desire thereafter,
and partly out of grief for the neglect, contempt and reproach thereof, he was
even a devoured consumed man, so great was his affection that way, that he
seemed careless every other way. And herein he was a type of the best of
paterns, the Lord Jesus Christ, who being a Priest, though not after the order
of Aaron, did express an ardent affection in purging the Temple from the
corruption of those times, in so much that his Disciples thought he was an
apparent accomplisher of that place of prophetical Scripture, The Zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. John. 2.17. Who but a man in the power, and possession
of zeal to Gods house would have made a whip, and therewith driven out the
polluters of the Temple, and have overthrown their Tables and Seats, and that
with Scripture-chiding, Math. 21.13. Another remarkable instance concerning our
Savior we have, John. 4.32.33.34. Whilst his Disciples were gone into the City
to buy meat, he falls into parley with a woman of Samaria about her soul; when
his Disciples come again, they pray him to eat; he tells them he is provided,
he had meat to eat they knew not of; his Disciples say one to another, Has any
man brought him meat to eat? our Savior answers, My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me, and to finish his work. No meat could be more sweet unto
him, or refreshing, then the doing of Gods will, a sign he was dearly affected
thereto, that he could make food of it. The like we read of Apollos, Acts
18.25. being fervent in Spirit he spoke and taught diligently the things of the
Lord; he did not only preach the things of the Lord, but with fervencie of
spirit, with a burning heart. Thus unless we will be irregular in our serving
of God, and unlike the approved Saints and servants of God in Scripture, yea,
unlike Christ our pattern, who was sent from Heaven to set us a copy, we must
perform Gods service with earnestness of affection.

3. God has reproved the want of this fervency of affection in his service, a
sign it is a transgression. Where the Apostle says, Gal. 4.18. It is good to
be Zealous always in a good matter; he does conveigh a secret reproof of them
who were dearly affected to the false Apostles, who were but counterfeit
Ordinances of God, but were abated in their love to him a true Apostle, and so
a true Ordinance of God, If it be good to be zealous in a good thing, then it
is evil nor to be zealous. The lukewarm temper of Laodicca, the Lord reckons to
be worse then key cold. I would thou were hot or cold, downright, and sensibly
good or evil; no temper so evil as lukewarm, he threatens to spue them out of
his mouth; showing, that the lord will have no communion ^^^h, but does detest,
and will (...) love far from him, the p^^^ons and services that are luke^a^^
God tells the Church (...) ^p^es^^, he had somewhat against her, because she
had left her first love; her love was not utterly gone, but her first love and
her first works, she neither did so much, nor so well for God as sometimes, and
this God has against them, a fault it is in them, and makes against them. Thus
where God finds this fervency of spirit wanting, he speaks ill of it; a figne
his service cannot well be performed without it, for he cannot be pleased with
it without this fervency.

For further proof.

I will make use of the Lords own reasons laid down, Commandment third, to
which command this duty does belong, and so I shall open that command, so far
as concerns my purpose. What better, more weighty, more persuading argument
then Gods own; God is all truth, and all understanding, he knows us better then
we know our selves, and he is all wisdom, that knows what arguments will best
take with us upon several occasions. The first Commandment takes care that we
make choice of the true God, and no other; the second, that we embrace his
commanded worship, and reject all others; the third, that we use his Name, all
that whereby God is made known to us, reverently and respectively as becomes
the same. The Commandment is this, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in
vain; every word of the command is as well a reason as a command. The thing
forbidden, is the taking of Gods name in vain. Before I speak of the grounds of
this prohibition, I must show how this truth (of performing Gods worship with
earnestness of affection) is implied in this Commandment, and the contrary sin
forbidden; that will appear if we consider two things: 1. Part of the meaning
of Gods name is the worship of God, Word, Sacraments, prayer, 1 Timothy 6.1. That
the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of, where the name of God
and his doctrine are all one. Mal. 1.6. the name of God is put for his worship.
2. Part of the meaning of taking Gods name in vain, is this want of fervent
performance of Gods worship: are not light and empty things, vain things? and
is not dead cold service of God, light service and empty service, that wants
that weight and substance it should have? Are not unusefull and unprofitable
things vain things? and is not careless service of God, unusef^ll and
unprofitable service? it does neither honor God, nor please God, nor profit
us. Mal. 1.8. If ye offer the blind for s^crifice, is it not evil? and if ye
off^r the lame and the sick, is it no evi? o^^^r it now to thy Governor, will
he be pleased with thee? As if God had said, If ye offer you care not what, so
it be a sacrifice, it will serve the turn, can it be well? Would an earthly
Governor accept you care not what? much less will I. In like manner, if men
hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, pray they care not how, so the duties be
done, can God be pleased herewith? and if he be not pleased he is not honored,
for were he honored he would be pleased, and if God be not honored, the doers
cannot beprofited, for our good is wrapped up in Gods glory, and that service
which does neither honor God nor profit the performers is vain service.

Having thus made it clear, that ardent service of God is implied, and
careless serving of God prohibited in this third Commandment; Let us now
consider the reasons why we must not rest in careless performance of worship,
but on the contrary, must earnestly worship him; they are 5. in number.

1. Gods worship is his name.

2. The name of the Lord.

3. The name of thy God.

4. His Name is taken in vain by careless worship.

5. He will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

1. Gods worship is his Name; that whereby God is made known to us, that
whereby he is distinguished from others, and whereby he is made glorious: to be
careless of Gods worship, is to obscure the knowledge of the Lord, to confound
him with Idols, to hinder his glory, to be careless whether God be known to us
or others, be distinguished from others, be famous and glorious: and to be
earnest in the worship of God, is to make the Lord better known to us and
others, to difference him from other Gods, and to make him glorious. And shall
not our best affections be busied about Gods worship, which is his Name? God
has betrusted us with his Name, that it lies in our power in ordinary course
and for a time, to make him less or more known, less or more glorious; and
shall we betray this trust? Man's name is precious, and the name of one man
committed to the keeping of another, to bear false witness is a sin, much
more is Gods name precious, which is the chief Governor, and much more
committed to our trust, and bearing false witness to that is much more a
sin, which we shall do, if we be careless of his worship. Is not the
knowledge of God the ground of our faith, hope, comfort? If God be not good,
wise, powerful, true, what ground have we to believe or hope for any good in
this or another world? and if we know not the goodness, wisdom and power of
God, what ground of comfort can we have? To slight Gods worship, is to slight
the knowledge of God, and so the ground of our faith, and hope, and comfort
therein: and to take care of Gods worship, is to take care of the knowledge of
God, and so the ground of our faith, hope and comfort. Is not care of Gods
glory the way unto, and evidence of our glory? To be earnest in Gods worship,
is to take care of Gods glory, therefore the way unto, and evidence of our
glory.

2. Gods worship is the name of the Lord, the name of Jehovah, therefore
carefully and fervently to be performed. His name it is who is the fountain of
being, therefore the first being, and so of due the first and best service
belongs to him, because none is before him, therefore none is to be served
before him; our Savior when he duly ranketh and orders the Commandments,
says, Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, this is the first and great
Commandment, and the second, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; Why is
the love of God, and so the service of God, the first and great Commandment,
before and greater then the love of our selves? but because he is the first and
greatest before our selves, and greater then our selves; It had been sin in
Moses and Paul, to wish themselves out of Heaven for his glory, and in hell,
had not this been true, that God is before us, and so above us, of due to be
honored by us, though by our utter dishonor? None should go to hell, were not
this true, that there is an honor due to God from the creature, above the
salvation of the creature; and could men be willing to go to hell that God
might have glory, hell should be no hell unto them; that which makes the
torment of hell, is this, that God takes his glory, because men will not give
it him. All the godly, though they do not think so, do seek Gods glory above
their own salvation, as they should do, for they desire their salvation as a
way unto Gods glory; now the way that serves unto the end is less desired,
then the end whereto it serves. The worship we perform is the worship of
Jehovah, the fountain of being, therefore the author of our being, from him we
have all, unto him therefore we must give all; all is his, we have nothing of
our own, our most lively affections are his own, he is not beholding to us
for them, we cannot without injustice and robbery withold them; will we
withold that which is Gods? will we dispose of that which is Gods? Not only
does David acknowledge the outward wealth, liberally given to the Temple, to be
Gods own, but the willingness, and joy of their hearts, whereby and wherewith
they gave so liberally, to come from God, also 1 Chronicles. 29.18. in that he
prays God to keep this frame in them, and to prepare their hearts toward
him: he that must keep that willing and cheerful frame of heart in him, has
surely made the same, and he that must prepare their hearts at other times,
has prepared them now.

The worship we perform is the worship of Jehovah, his name who has promised
this fervency unto his people, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power,.i. in the day of the powerful preaching of the Gospel, these
shall with earnest affection attend upon Gods ordinances, God having promised
fervent affections in his service, by laboring after the same, and expressing
the same, we shall confirm and establish the truth of God, and on the
contrary, as the Apostle says, 1 John. 5.10. He that believes not makes God
a liar,, so he that does not fervently worship God, does what lies in him to
falsify the word of God, to make him a liar, for God has said, his people
shallbe fervent.

3. Gods worship is the worship of the Lord thy God, therefore to be performed
with earnestnes. His name it is, who is not only the Lord, but our God, a God
in Covenant with us, he has promised to be wholly ours, all that he is, or can
do, shall be for us, and we have promised to be wholly his, to be all that we
are, or can do for him. If we bestow the utmost of our affection upon him in
his service, we do no more then he has done for us: and what can we give to
him, if we give all we have, in comparison of what he gives to us? Not only
does he give to us that strength of affection, in comparison of which all ours
is nothing, but he begins to us, he gives first, he gives not only more then we
can give, but before us, we may well follow him with less: what though others
serve God they know not how? they have less reason to show strength of
affection to God then we; though they have reason enough, for God has not
bestowed himself wholly upon them as upon us. Beside, being our God, the
service that is done to him, redounds upon us, be it well or ill done, because
the Covenant does not only imply relation, but union, it is a
marriage-Covenant, God becomes ours, and we become his. A man loves his wife,
not because she is a friend, and loves him, but because she is himself, they
are no more twain, but one, in loving her he loves himself, and so much as he
does not love her, (though she do not deserve) he does not love himself, for
she is one with himself. A man does not love himself, because of desert, but
because he is nearest to himself, he is his own: so a m^n loves his wife
because his own, nearest unto him. So God is our own, he is by the humane
nature of Christ, one with us, and we with him; did not God therefore deserve
our best affections (which he infinitely does) yet we were bound to bestow the
same upon him in his service, because he is our own, we have made him as our
own souls, by entering into a marriage-Covenant with him; so much as we fall
short in affection to him, we fall short in affection to our selves.

Furthermore having promised the best of our affections unto him in his
service, truth does bind us, do we not hate to be liars? false,
Covenant-breakers? men and women of no truth? do we not glory in our truth,
that if we have said it, we will do it, our word shall be as good as our band?
then must we bestow our best affections upon God in his service, for so we have
promised.

4. Careless worship is a taking of Gods Name in vain, vain worship. What an
evil it is to take Gods Name in vain, it will appear if we consider,

1. It is an holy Name, Psalm. 111.9. Holy is his Name. Holiness is so lively an
image of God, that it commands respect from the light of nature, and holy
things are carefully handled. Gods worship is an holy worship, free from all
impurity and pollution, take we heed that we do not profane it by careless
use of it.

2. A great Name, Psalm. 76.1. His Name is great in Israel. A Name above all
names, no worship like Gods worship, because no person like him, no laws of
worship like his, no subject like the subject of Gods worship, the whole man,
soul and body the str^^g^h of both, the whole earth and heaven, none too great
to worship God; to take in vain a small name, a poor^ mean worship, is an evil,
but to take in vain agreat Name, a powerful worship, is more evil.

3. A Glorious Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. a worship of eminent worth, breaking out and
manifesting it self to all that have seeing eyes, for man to pray to the God of
heaven to open all his heart to him, for man to deliver the mind and counsel
of God, for man to seal a Covenant with the God of heaven, these are glorious
things, of great worth even at first sight. Here, by the way, in a word, and
under correction, I must needs acknowledge, that since I had any glimps of
light to discern the glorious worship of God, I could never get over that
unsutablenesse that is between these obscure additaments to Gods worship
amongst us, and his glorious worship. What is the vestment to prayer? what the
Crossing of the fingers to baptism. Indeed sprinkling of water in baptism, or
dipping the child therein, bread and wine in the supper, are but small things
in appearance, but when we consider the glorious God has commanded and
appointed these, and does produce glorious effects by them, that puts a
glorious luster and brightness upon them; but when nothing can be showed, but
man's command, obscure and dark man in Divine things, his command cannot put
glory upon Divine Ordinances, wherefrom he borrows light, but can add none
thereto, nor can he put any glorious effect into such his commanded means,
that they shall bear weight with the Judgment, or help the affections, and
so they remain obscure and dark, as man himself is in heavenly things, and so
unsuitable to Gods glorious worship. To be careless in obscure, dark, hidden
good, is a small matter; but to be careless about eminent good, as Gods
worship, is eminent and apparent sin.

4. A reverent or fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Psalm. 111.9. Gods Name is such a
name, as considered of, does strike with reverence and fear, the holiness of
it, the greatness of it: things holy and great have a Majesty in them. Gods
worship is a holy worship and a great worship, therefore a fearful worship.
Now to take in vain, light and trivial matters, is a small thing but to take
in vain a reverent and fearful worship, argues senselessnes.

5. God will not hold him guiltless that does take his Name in vain, as a man
does his worship by carelessnes. 1. How ever men performing Gods worship only
outwardly with the outward man, may go for innocent with men, none will say
that they have sinned, yet God will not count them innocent, unless they have
performed the same carefully: which is a weighty consideration. When men have
been at the Sacrament, or word, or prayer, they think all now is well, but God
accounts them sinners, if they have not performed the same with their best
affections, he holds them guilty, they are sinners in his account, and if
sinners, he will so de^le with them, and so he profes^^^^, M^l. 1.14. Cursed b^
the deceiver, that has a male in his flock, etc. He is a deceiver, there is
his sin; his guiltines, cursed be the deceiver, there is Gods dealing with
him as guilty. A deceiv^r, as if God should say, I observe such men, all the
week about their own occasions, they are up early and down late, they sweat
hard, but when they come to serve me on my day, they are heavy and careless,
they are deceivers, they have better affections to bestow, then they do bestow
upon me. Cursed be the deceiver, what is that? evil shall befall him, evil of
punnishment.

Loss of good. Presence of evil.
Loss of good: what? Gods acceptance. Gods recompense.


Gods acceptance promised, Ezekiel. 20, 41. I will accept you with your sweet
savor.

Gods recompense promised, Isai. 36.7. I will make you joyful in my house of
prayer. Isai. 58.14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord..i. increase
their delight, more and more delight: enlargement of heart in duty is an
evidence of Gods acceptance, what God prepares he will accept, joy in duty,
fitnes for, and forwardnes unto duty is Gods recompense, when the more we pray,
read, hear, or receive, the more we joy therein, and are forward thereunto.
They that are careless in Gods worship, shall neither find Gods assistance,
nor joy therein, nor willingness thereunto, but shall be bound up and backward
unto the same. Positive evil shall befall careless worshippers, Jer. 17.5, 6.
Cursed be the man whose heart departs from God, and pitcheth elsewhere: why?
he shall inhabit the parched places of the wilderness, the sun of Gods wrath
shall light upon him, and parch soul, and body and estate, dry up graces and
affections, and if body and estate prosper, yet the soul and the good thereof
shall be much more parched: so experience shows, Careless worshipers of God
are barren of spiritual good.

Use. Information. 1. The perfection of the law of God, it reaches to the
inward and spiritual part of man, yea to the utmost of that. As it is said of
the sun, Psalm. 19.6. Nothing is hid from the heat thereof, the beams pierce
into the bowels of the earth: so not the heart, not the extent of the heart,
which is most spiritual, and comes nearest God, is hid from the command of the
law; a sign the author thereof is above man, in knowledge in power.

2. The dignity of Gods worship, the best part of man, yea the best of the
soul, the utmost of it is but meet for it: if any thing in the soul be better
then other, it must be drawn forth. This was shadowed out in the sacrifices of
the law, Gods sacrifices were to be without blemish, and the fat, the best of
the beast was specially his. If civil worship have the body, the outward man,
it is sufficient, because it is done unto men that can look no further, are
capable to receive no more; this is as much as will be honor to them before
men: but religious worship requires the soul, and the best of the soul, because
it is done to that God that searches the hearts and tries the raines, is
capable of the best, and most honored thereby.

3. All performance of worship is ^^t equally good, and equally pleasing unto
God, he requires fervencie; God is life, and the more lively worship, the more
suitable, and delightful unto him.

2. To reprove, 1. Neglect of Gods worship: this is a contrary extreme unto
instant worshipping of God, when men pray not at all, go not to the assembly on
the Lords day, sanctify no Sabbath, but their whole soul, and body, and
strength of both, are taken up about the world, or about their lusts, this is
fervencie, and strength, either of ignorance, or of disobedience. Do not men
know that God is to be worshipped? that some time is appointed for his worship?
that is gross ignorance: what? God have no worship who is your King? your
maker? works of creation and providence do cry aloud against this ignorance,
Act. 17.26, 27, 28. And if we know God is to be worshipped, and time is
sanctified for that end, and yet neglect, do we not manifest strength of
disobedience, great frowardnes of heart?

2. Our inconstancy and partiality in the worship and service of God, our
inconstancy: sometimes we take it up, at other times we lay it down; some will
pray, and be very reli^ious in affliction, or on the Sabbath Day, or at least
against they go to the Sacrament, but not ordinarily; others will ordinarily
worship God for a time, but they have their interruptions and breakings off,
one while they will pray, and another while they will be unpraied, these have
their cold fits, the fire of love (were that in their hearts,) would consume
these interruptious. Others are partial in Gods worship, they will come to the
word, not to the Sacraments, some will come to both, these, yet do not strive
to join with the Congregation in prayer, these have but half hearts to Gods
worship, the rule of their worshipping of God, is not love to God, for then
they would be found in all his worship, and express their love in all.

3. Our constant carelesnes in Gods ordinary worship, though we observe part,
and are observant of appointed times with Gods people, yet we make it not
matter of fear, we do not stir up our affections thereunto, or therein: we are
not of David's spirit, who would not offer that which cost him nothing. The
worship of God should cost us something in careful preparation and serious
observation, the weal of our minds and affections should be laid out
thereabouts. Our carelessness ^oth either cha ge God with ignorance, th (...)
knows not what we offer ^or with neglect of his own glory, that he regards not
how we worship him.

3. To persuade us unto this instant worshipping of God, to press forward unto
a further degree of affection, a greater measure of life and fervency in every
holy performance; I will use the Lords own arguments to press hereunto, they
are two, Rev. 3.19, 20.

Drawn from, 1. The danger. 2. The benefit.


1. The danger, as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, be Zealous therefore.
However God deal with others, if he find his beloved lukewarm, he will make
them smart, he will correct them, as a father does his son, and the rather,
if his words of conviction will do no good. God will first rebuke, and then
chasten; first correct by words, and then by deeds. Better any chide then God,
his words have in the^ more wisdom and power then any other, and therefore
carry a greater strength of love, or anger: one word of love will lift the
heart to heaven, though never so heavy, and one word of anger will make it
sink to hell. What is the effect of Gods chiding words, see, Hab. 3.16. they
will make the body tremble, yea rottennes to seize upon it. And what mean
those burning fevers that are abroad, that are excessive in heat, but to check
our coldness in Gods service? What those fiery darts of Satan thrown against the
godly, fears of hell, and feeling of Gods wrath in some, and raising lusts of
anger and uncleannes in others, but cold service of God? What means the
plague, that raging hand of God, that zealous messenger, that makes quick
dispatch of persons and families, but our careless worshipping of God? What
rumors of wars, threatenings of the sword, the instrument of Gods zeal and
fury, but our coldness? If we would escape these feirce fiery afflictions, take
we heed of cold service, get we burning, flaming hearts, God will fire out this
coldness, by one (...) o^ other.

2. The benefit, 1. Christ's presence. 2. Communion with Christ.


1. Christ's presence, If any man open the door, if the heart be enlarged with
love, desire, Christ will come in, he will come in as a King of glory,
gloriously manifest himself. What is the reason that Christ is so far from
the soul in holy duties? but because our hearts are shut, there is no room for
him, no desire after him, no delight in him. We should have more sense of
Christ with us, were our hearts more lively. Though Christ hid himself whilst
he reproved the ignorance and unbeleife of the two Disciples, yet when their
hearts burnt within them at his Doctrine, he made himself known unto them,
Luke 24.16, 25, 31.

2. Communion with Christ, 1. In comforts. 2. In glory.


1. In comforts. 1. He will sup with us. 2. We shall sup with him.


1. He will sup with us, the affections, and graces we express in holy duties,
shall be as food unto the Lord, refreshing and comfortable, contentfull and
satisfying: we then feast God, as it were, when our hearts are enlarged in
love, when our hearts are opened in holy performances to entertain him. When
the warmth of our hearts is in our duties, God will readily accept them, take
great delight in them, we make him a supper of savoury meat, such as his soul
loves. How should God accept our duties, take any contentment in them, when we
have better affections in our recreations, businesses? If a servant should
mind his own occasions more then ours, would we accept such service?

2. We shall sup with him. No dainties can be wanting where God is the
feast-maker. He makes a feast of fat things, the best things that heaven can
afford, yea that the God of heaven can afford, Isai. 25.6. Sense of his love,
peace that passes all understanding, joy unspeakable and glorious, Psalm. 16.3.
The Lord is the portion of mine in^^r^^^nce, and of my cup, not only is God
ours in the general, to live upon as an inheritance, but he is the portion of
our cup, he is in every particular mercy, that is measured out to us, he is the
comfort, and strength of it. They that feast with God, shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatnes of his house, and drink of the river of his
pleasures, for with him is a fountain, Psalm. 36.8, 9. And that we may not miss
of these benefits, the Lord does urge them upon us, from consideration of his
patience and pains to make us fit. I stand at the door and knock. He uses
the force of ordinances, and afflictions, with the rod of his mouth and hand he
strikes to get the door of the heart open, that he might feast with us, and we
with him.

2. Communion in glory. Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my throne. Such as conquer their coldness, their remissnes, and
carelessnes in Gods worship, shall partake of Christ's Kingly office, to subdue
corruptions, to overcome Temptations. Why are corruptions so lively, but
because we are cold in ordinances the means of deading them? Why are
corruptions, and Temptations strong and above us, but to keep us lively in
Gods worship? Ease breeds security: troubles do provoke, and stir up graces.
The overcoming soul shall find a mighty power in ordinances, and providence.
The power of a King, is a commanding, conquering power. And that we might be
assured of this fellowship with Christ in his throne, he adds, as I overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his throne, which does imply, 1. That it is
matter of striving, warring, will not be had with ease, will cost somewhat. 2.
When we have met with most difficulty, then shall we most partake in Christ's
glory, so Christ first overcame, and then sat down. 3. This is Gods way, and
wonted course his servants must win the crown, ere they wear it: so God
has dealt with Christ the Lord, and so will he deal with his members.

CHAP. II. The first hinderance of instant worshipping of God, Despising of his
worship.
[MAL. 1. part of the 6. Despise my Name.]


HAving lately handled the point of instant worshipping of God, and considering
the great need of it in these careless days, I purposed with my self not to
leave it thus, but to show you the hindrances of Gods servent worship, and the
helps thereto, and both together, the contrary to any hinderance being an
help.

The first I will pitch upon is in this text, despising of Gods prophets, a
fault here expressly charged upon the priests, but implicitly, and inclusively
upon the people: as our Savior in his letter to the Church does address
himself, in the beginning, to the Angel of the Church, but in the conclusion
shows that he intended the whole Church; He that has cares, let him hear
wh^t the spirit says unto the Church, not to the Angel only, but also to the
Church. I shall make way to this text, and then open the same. God being abo^t
to reprove the sins of his people, does lay a contrary foundation of his
love, to manifest that there was no cause of such their injury in him, but all
in themselves. I have loved you, says the Lord. verse. 2. They believe no such
matter, saying will not serve them, they put God to proof. He proves it by the
equal condition of Jacob and Esau by nature, but unequal condition, by their
love. Jacob was Esaus brother, neither of them better then other, yet I loved
Jacob, and hated Esau, and laid his habitation waste and desolate; and though
Esau may think to be rebuilt as Jacob, and to have his captivity returned, yet
it shall not be so, if they build, God will pull down; and whereas he was angry
with Jacob, but for a moment, he will be angry with them for ever, and that
Jacobs posterity shall see, and speak of to Gods glory, as magnifying himself
in the midst of, and for the sake of Jacobs posterity. But because it is the
nature of sin to dim the eyes of the soul, and the more sin the more dimnes,
and according to the measure of dimnes must be the measure of the palpablenes
and plainnes of the thing seen, therefore God does u^^ a most palpable sensible
argument to convince them of their sin, despising, and contemning of his
worship. A son honors his father, etc. The argument is this, Fathers and
Masters are to be honored.

I am your Father and Master.

Ergo, I am to be honored.

This argument common sense will yield to. That a father and Master are to be
honored, they cannot deny, they themselves daily expect it, and receive it, in
that relation. That God is your Father and Master, they cannot deny, he chose
them out of all the world to be his adopted children, and brought them out of
the house of servants, brake the yoke of the oppressing Master. The conclusion,
for greater force sake, is put interrogatively, where is my honor? where is my
fear? you cannot deny but I am your Master and Father, and am therefore to be
honored: but where is that honor you confess to be due to me? let me see it,
I cannot find it; O ye priests, yea and people too, (for ye are included) that
despise my Name. Nay, I have dishonor from you, in that ye slight my worship,
the way and means of my honor. The argument, they cannot deny, but that God
being a Father and Master is to be honored, and consequently they that despise
his worship do sin, but they deny the applicaon of the argument, they are not
the persons; for let that be proved. Wherein have we despised thy Name? ye have
offered polluted bread upon mine Altar. Polluted is here opposed to such as God
had appointed to be holy, to be set apart, i. e. of the best they offered
polluted bread, i. e. the worst, and basest sacrifices, as verse. 8. If ye offer
the blind, and lame, and sick. But grant they do not offer so good as God
requires, yet they will not yield that they have polluted Gods worship, for it
may be they offered such as they had ordinarily, they had no better. It
appears they have polluted the Lords worship in such offerings, for they say,
The Table of the Lord is contemptible, if they say it not in words, yet in
deeds they do, i. e. the mean and base offerings they brought, were not so much
out of poverty, and want of better (for, verse. 14. they had a male in their
flock, and brought the Lord a corrupt thing:) but their base offerings did
spring from a base opinion of the worship of God, they thought any thing was
good enough, they said, The Table of the Lord was contemptible, if not in their
words, yet in their thoughts, manifested in their doings. The thing faulted
here, is despising, contemning of the Name of Gods worship, offering polluted
bread upon his Altar, saying, His Table is contemptible, and that by his
children and servants, which ca^sed them to bring base sacrifices.

A Despising of Gods worship, is an hinderance to the earnest and lawful
performance of it.

God complains of unworthy sacrifices, such as an earthly governor would not
accept, and declares the cause to be, despising of his worship.

Ezekiel. 22.8. despising of holy things is attended with profanation of them:
the holy using of holy things cease, when despising begins.

1 These. 5.19, 20. to despise prophecyings is the way to quench the spirit,
which makes us fervent in spirit in Gods worship.

Qu. What is it to despise the worship of God?

Ans. Despising is an act of the judgment, passing a mean and low account of a
thing, as having little or no worth to commend it.

Scripture-expressions do manifest what this despising is, Ps. 119.141. I am
small, and despised, Psalm. 22.6. I am a worm, and no man, despised of the
people, 1 Cor. 4.10. ye are honorable, we are despised. The language of
despising does lay open the nature of it. Genesis 25.32. What profit shall this
birthright do to me? He did not apprehend the worth that was in his birthright,
not worth enough in it, not profitable enough unto earthly provision, he
speaks of it as worth nothing, 2 Samuel 6.20. with 1 Chr. 15.29. How glorious
was the King of Israel to day, who uncovered himself, as one of the vain
fellows shamefully uncovereth himself?

To despise Gods worship is to have low thoughts of the same, as of small, or no
worth, no worth in prayer, in sermons, in the sacraments. Expressions hereof
are sound in scripture, Job. 21.14, 1^. Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what
profit should we have if we pray unto him? Mal. 3.14. It is vain to serve God,
and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts? there is no profit at all, they may serve
him that will, but they shall make no profit of it.

Qu. What are the causes of despising the worship of God?

Ans. Not, because there is a want of worth in it, but from a threefold cause
of despising found in the subject, when yet the object is precious, and
honorable. 1. Ignorance of the worth and excellency, when a man descernes no
worth, how should he esteem? 2. Want of attending to known worth, when men
either forget what they know, or do not consider it. 3. Want of affection to
the thing despised: let a man be never so precious, yet if love be wanting,
some cause will be found of obscuring all his worth, to spread a cloud upon his
shining glory.

These are the causes of despising Gods worship.

1. They are ignorant of the worth of it: the worship of God is spiritual, the
worth of it spiritual, the knowledge of the worth spiritual, therefore above
the reach of nature, 1 Cor. 2.14.15 spiritual things are spiritually
discerned, therefore only by spiritual men, John 4.23. The true worshippers.
There are different apprehensions of Gods worship, because different
worshippers, some true, some false, some in true light, others in darkness, some
left in the darkness of nature, others called into light, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24. The
preaching of the Gospel, to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks
foolishnes, but to them that are called, the wisdom of God, and the power of
God, to them that are called out of darkness into mavelous light, such as have
a manifesting, differencing, discerning knowledge: the godly know thus but in
measure, therefore esteem but in measure.

2. Where there is some knowledge of the worth of Gods worship, yet there wants
attendance to that light, 2 Pet. 1.19. Ye do well to take heed as to a light
that shines in a dark place, it is one thing to have light, another thing to
attend to it, to heed it, men forget, they consider not the weight, and worth
of Gods worship, Eccles. 3.1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of
God, be more ready to hear; there is an inconsideratenes in us in Gods worship,
we do not deliberate about it, because we are too thoughtfull about other
things.

3. The worship of God is contrary to nature, because holy, spiritual,
self-humbling, and emptying, this includes a defect of love to it; and where
love is wanting, something will be imagined to work disrespect.

That despising of Gods worship is an hinderance of fervencie, and how it is an
hinderance, appears. 1. From consideration of the dependence of affections,
and endeavors upon the judgment, if the thoughts be but low, the affections
and endeavors will be but low, and on the contrary, if the thoughts be high,
they will carry up affection, and endeavors 2. It is against the nature of
wisdom, and therefore folly to bestow much affection and endeavor about
things of small worth, wisdom does proportion affection, and endeavors to the
worth of things. 3. The motive of the will is good, the more or less good is
apprehended, the more or less the will is moved, and so less, or more
fervencie of desire and endeavor. If Gods worship be despised, little good is
apprehended, and so little to move the will and affections, if it be of little,
or no benefit, as despisers apprehend, why should we earnestly choose it, desire
it, take pains about it, it will yield small delight, and satisfaction.

Desp si^g somet^^^s prev^^^^^ to a total neglect of duty, much more to
measure of neglect.
Use 1. To convince of sin the body of our people. 1. Such as neglect Gods
private worship, reading and prayer in their families, catechizing and calling
over the word which they have heard: the fountain of this neglect is
d^spising: they think it more honorable to be unpraid, unread, to leave
children untaught, the word unrepeated, they think meanly of good duties, that
the practice of them comes out of simplicity, and weakness of judgment. The
greatness of their sin in the effect and cause, will the better appear, if we
consider Gods opinion of them, and dealing with them. 1. God thinks no better
of them then of dogs, and swine, Mat. 7.6. who trample under foot pearls,
brutish unreasonable creatures, they are not base that pray, but they that
despise prayer: God makes account none will despise prayer but dogs and swine,
such as are deprived of reason, as far below themselves, as their thoughts
are below Gods worship, as if he should say, Never take them for men and women
again, that tread under foot holy things, that speak ill of reading,
conference, prayer; God calls them dogs and swine, so must we, who can skill
of nothing but the bones, and akorns of the world. 2. God will reject them,
when they would be most esteemed, Heb. 12.16, 17. Esau was rejected, his suit
was not regarded, he despised the birthright, and was himself despised, when he
would have had the blessing, and though men prevail by earnest desires and
tears, to change the minds of men, yet he could not move the mind of God,
though he sought diligently with tears; So men that despise prayer or other
parts of Gods worship, when afterward they would pray themselves, or have
others pray for them, when they greatly need, and earnestly desire the benefit
of that worship they have despised, they shall be rejected, Prove. 1.24, 25, 28.
Zech. 7.13.

2. Such as come to the public worship of Gods Word, Sacraments, Prayer, but
care not with what affections they come, have no desire, no delight there to be
busied, they bring their bodies, but leave their hearts behind them, they trim
and adorn their bodies, but not their hearts. They are far from David,
spirit, Psalm. 83.10. who esteemed one day in Gods house better then a thousand:
and again, Psalm. 26.6. I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I
compass thine altar: he will not come carelessly, but with painful
preparation, such as washing in the laver of repentance is: clean hands become
clean work: these had rather be any where else, then at Gods Ordinances, any
trivial occasion, or idle company will keep them away: they say, Such as o^^
(...) desp^sing do neg^^ct private, may d^spis^n ly perform public worship.
they can spend the time as well at home, in reading some good book, or in
discoursing about some profitable subject, as in the ordinances used in public
Assemblies. Did not authority command, and general example forcibly persuade,
and desire to avoid shame constrain, they would not afford their company at
all; and when they do come, they bring the same affections where with they go
about other occasions; And why so? They see no good in preaching, prayer,
sacraments, What profit is in them? What good comes by them? these have too low
thoughts of Gods worship, as if it were only outward, and did only deserve the
worst part, the presence of the body, which is their sin. And how should they
do otherwise, who make their own blindenes the judge of the worth of Gods
ordinances, not the word of command, not the person regarded, not the promise
annexed to the worship, not the the presence therein manifested? Judge you, is
it not a despising of Gods worship, to think that any affections are good
enough? if a man do but get out of his bed, and have but so much time as to get
him ready, he is fit to go to the Assembly, though he have no spiritual
thoughts, no sense of his unfitnes, by reason of the sins of the week past,
no prayer to God for preparednes of heart? does not such a man think meanly of
God? he would set his thoughts and affections more in order, were he to go into
the presence of a King, or to do some public action: these sinful low
thoughts, are fruitful in low affections and actions, these weak expressions
do manifest such men to be weak mindeed men in reference to Gods service.

3. Sundry carriages about, and in the public worship of God that do express
despising of it.

1. Coming too late, and going away too soon: some come not till the worship
of God is begun, till the Word be read, and Psalms be sung, yea, some not till
prayer be ended, and some go away before Sermon, or prayer, or at least the
blessing be finished: I would know of these, whether they do not think, that
that which is past when they come, and behind when they go away, is part of
Gods worship as well as that whereat they are present? and whether their
presence at that part, does not manifest their respect? they cannot deny but
what they neglect in the beginning or ending of public Assemblies, coming too
late, or going away too soon, is Gods worship, and their presence would show
their respect, therefore their absence does express disrespect, despising, if
it be not necessary, and so is sin. And I do not call that necessary absence
from the beginning, which is caused by men's oversleeping themselves, or not
minding how the morning passes, or having more business to do on the
Sabbath Day morning, then can well be done in due time, or spending that time
in private duties, which should be spent in public. N^r do I call that
necessary absence from the ending, which is caused, not by ordinary infirmity
of body, or unusual faintnes, and weakness, but from spiritual fulness, (the
usual cause) the a^fection is cloied, why should they tarry any longer, they
have preaching enough, and prayer enough? or from vanity of mind that cannot
endure to be fixed long in any way, be it never so good, they must have change,
though they change from the better to the worse, from Gods house to the
alehouse, from the assembly of Saints, to the society of sinners, from the
special presence of God, to the special presence of Satan, for in the
ordinances God is specially present, and to go from them is specially to
transgress, therefore specially to go into Satan's presence, for he has most
to do where God has least. When men therefore are walking and talking in the
Church, or Chappell-yard, or lying along in the grass, or going homeward, when
the Word of God is in hand, they sin in despising the worship of God, and
little know that they go into the midst of the Devils Kingdom and power.

2. Kneeling down, or putting the hat and hand before the face to pray, when
the Word is in reading, or Psalms are in singing, or the Word in preaching, a
thing much used in some places, and held to be a point of great devotion. This
private praying is a sin, for it is a despising of the worship of God in hand.
That such private praying is a despising of Gods public worship in hand, is
evident from the open and manifest neglect of it, not only is the mind
withdrawn in the sight of God, but the body also in the sight of men,
disrespect is cast upon the worship of God in the sight of men.

It will be answered, that we do indeed not attend unto the worship in present
use for a time, but it is not out of purpose or desire to neglect Gods worship,
but out of respect to, and desire of better preparation for the same hereby.

To this I say, of the intention alone I will not speak, (which I conceive to
be very good in many that use it) unless that good intention could make a good
action; but that the action performed with this good intention is a despising
of Gods worship I prove, for it does thrust public worship out of its season,
and puts private in the room, when public and private worship stand in choice,
it takes to private, it puts more virtue and efficacy into private for heart
preparation, then into p^blike.

It is an error, and too much sleighting of Gods public worship, to think
that singing with the Congregation (if they be singing when we come in) will
not fit us to sing, and reading the Word with them, will not fit us to read,
and hearing the Word preache^, will not fit us to hear, better then private
prayer, for shall they be judged to be instruments of all other spiritual
good, and not of preparing the h^^^t, if unprepared?

3. Sitting, elected and chosen without any necessity, in ti^e of public
prayer: we have examples of kneeling, and standing in publike^ prayer, but not
of sitting, Nehem. 9.2. They stood and confessed their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers, and ver. 5. the Levites bid the people stand up.

Standing is the reverence that a servant expresses to his Master, kneeling
the reverence and worship that a subject expresses to his Prince, but sitting
is a gesture of familiarity and honor. I remember not that any of the godly in
solemn private prayer did sit, but they kneeled, or lay along, or stood. That
of David, 2 Samuel 7.18. Divines interpret continuing before the Lord. See
Tremel. upon the place, and Piscator.

Indeed our Savior and his company being set down on the grass to eat meat,
did crave a blessing sitting, which does warrant the like custom in this
Country, where they usually sit down to meat, before they crave a blessing:
but 1. That was no solemn prayer, as that in Gods public worship i^, but a
short blessing of the creatures, (which yet our Savior did reverently perform,
for he lift up his eyes to Heaven.) 2. It is one thing to pray shortly, being
s^t, without change of the gesture, and another thing to make choice of that as
a praier-gesture in Gods solemn worship, i. e. when others do choose to kneel or
stand, for a man to choose to sit, in this case it shows a sleighting of Gods
worship, because a man chooses a gesture of familiarity in prayer, wherein a
man comes nearer God then in any ordinance, and in public prayer, wherein for
examples sake we should be more reverent. Lest any should take advantage, or be
unsatisfied about sitting at the Sacrament, becau e I say, sitting is a gesture
that does not express that reverence, let me answer in a word and by the way.

1. Had we not the example of Christ and his Apostles in the first institution,
for some kind of sitting, it were more considerable.

2. It suffices that it is a gesture of freedom and honor, such as parents
admit their children unto, and friends their friends, though far under them.
It is meet we should go to God humbly; he may with his honor, allow us more
freedom when he comes to us.

3. Though sitting in it self be not a gesture of reverence, yet they that sit,
may sit reverently. And it is an ordinary phrase to our children sitting before
their betters, that they should sit reverently, that is fitly composing all the
parts of their bodies, as those that had an awe of their betters, and would
express their respect of them. If sitting therefore does express the freedom
and honor which God allows us, as children and friends, we may express our
reverence otherwise, by uncovering the head, by gravity of countenance, and
behavior in all the actions thereto appertaining.

4. Neglect of singing Psalms wit^ the Congregation: a fa^lt in many: indeed
some through age, or weakness of body, or want of voi^e, cannot, and are to be
excused, for will, when power is wanting, is accepted of God. But not to sing,
where we have no such impediment, the case of very many, is to despise that
ordinance of God, and so to sin: for what does hinder them, but a mean and low
esteem of this ordinance? they want not strength or body nor voice. What then?
Nothing but respect, and esteem of the duty. Indeed they are to be blamed, who
give occasion of this disrespect, by altering the tune, or singing, before or
after others, but it does not excuse them who are drawn hereby to disrespect
Gods ordinance, they should rather increase their esteem.

5. Whispering one to another in time of prayer, singing, reading, or
preaching. Needles whispering in civil societies, is a disrespect thereto, for
so the company and occasions in hand, are neglected; much more needlessly to
whisper in holy Assemblies (though no public action be in hand) is
disrespective of them, because more reverence is due thereto. When we meet for
public ends, private actions are unsuitable, some to be talking in one place,
and some in another, a public expectation of public exercises were more meet,
and a general composing of our affections and behavior fit for the same. We
should come into such places with a respect of those holy ends we come for, and
all our carriage, till we depart thence, should express to much. Most of all
does it express disrespect to whisper to one another, whilst the service of
God is in hand; when we are speaking to him, or of him, or he speaking unto us,
to turn aside, and speak one to another, does not suit with that reverence we
owe to God. Nay if we speak one to another of that which is in hand (which is
the fairest excuse that can be made) yet if it take away our ear, and affection
from that which follows, it does show a disesteem of Gods ordinance, and so is
sin. Nay, whatsoever does but weaken our affection, and attention to Gods
worship, (as this must needs do at the least) does therein weaken our esteem,
and so make us sin.

6. Smiling and laughing in time of Gods worship. Judge you what Assembly more
grave, then an Assembly met at Gods command to worship him. And would not
smiling or laughing of some particular persons in a most grave Assembly, argue
a disrespect of the same? does it not argue a lightness, or inconsideratenes of
the person, or the lightness of the matter? both which do carry a disesteem of
Gods worship: God has promised, Zech, 8.4. that the streets of Jerusalem shall
be full of boys and girls playing therein, but for men and women, our boys
and girls, to be toying, laughing and smiling when they are worshipping, is a
sleighty carriage, arguing sleighty thoughts of Gods worship. God may send such
a sudden, full and forcible joy into the heart, that it may change the sadness
of the countenance into smiling; but to laugh and smile, though the ordinance
gives no such occasion, b^t from some vain thought that comes to the min^e, or
some ^olly a man sees in others, is a despisi^g of Gods holy things, and so
sin. The presence of betters might command more respect, much more of Saints
and Angels, and most of all the presence of God himself.

7. Standing up to gaze about. We read that all the people stood up when Ezra
opened the book of the law in the sight of them all, Nehemiah 8.5. and when our
Savior had read his text, the eyes of the people were fastened on him, Luke
4.20. but to stand up to gaze about us, to see whom of our friends we can espy,
or who comes in, or what apparel others wear, and that in time of singing of
Psalms, or reading the word, or preaching the word, does show a disesteeme of
Gods Ordinances. Can we find something more to be attended to then Gods
worship? a sign we think but meanly of that.

8. Sleeping in time of Gods worship, a thing which our neighbors equal to
us, would count a sleighting of them, much more may God. Suppose a man should
be speaking to his neighbor, or speaking some good of him in his presence, or
harkening to his speech, and he should fall asleep, would he not look at it as
a sleighty carriage? how much more if a man should thus behave himself before
his betters, and especially before his Prince, and chief govenrour? so is the
case in public worship, either we are speaking unto God, as in prayer, or
speaking of God, as in reading the word, and singing of Psalms, or hearing God
speak to us, as in the preaching of the word: if we sleep in all, or any of
these, do we not show that we lightly esteem them? that we do but little
respect what we say unto God, or of God, or what he says unto us? which how
great a sin it is I leave to you to judge. Not but that some by reason of
age, or weakness of body, or want sometimes of convenient rest, or constitution
of body, may be subject to heavines, who yet do highly esteem Gods worship:
but where there is a giving way unto this, and it is not borne as a burden,
which for the present a man would shake off, and after is humbled for, it
shows a great disesteeme and disrespect of Gods worship.

2. To humble Gods people in regard of the guiltines of this sin, mean and
low thoughts of Gods worship. In this sense we need Peter's exhortation, 1 Pet.
1.13. to gird up the loins of our minds, our thoughts of Gods worship hang
too loose, and low, and had need be girt up closer, and higher. We should call
the sabbath, the honorable of the Lord, Isai. 38.13. Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O city of God, Ps. 87.3. of the Church and Ordinances. We
should look to our foot when we go into the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. but
our late coming, our heavines, our whisperings, do show that our thoughts are
too low; for were our thoughts higher, our carriages would be more reverent.
This is our sin, and should be our shame. And to humble us the more,
consider, either there is much ignorance in us of the worth of Gods worship, or
much carelessenes of that worth we know, or much corruption, and but little
grace, much of the old man, and but little of the new.

3. To fortify them that respect Gods worship, against the speeches and
carriages of them that disrespect them. Many have a good esteem of reading and
prayer, of private and Church ordinances; but when they see and hear others
slight the same, they pray not, they read not, they come not to the assembly,
but they speak ill of others that use them; hereupon they draw in, and are
afraid to show their respect. But let such consider what they do. They that
think meanly of good duties, do sin, and will thou be beaten from thy duty
by the sin of others? because others do ill, will thou do ill also? The
sins of others should warn us from sin, not draw or drive us unto sin:
because others despise Gods ordinances, will thou despise them also? there is
most need now to honor them, to recover that esteem which they lose by
others, for that is one reason why Gods people are called his portion, because
he makes up, by means of them, the losses of glory, that he sustaines from the
world, Isai. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my praise: though other people are for themselves and their own praise,
yet his people shall be for his ends, and his praise: though prayer was cried
down in Babylon for thirty days, to make a snare for Daniel, yet the
disrespective law against it could not make Daniel neglect his course of
praying. Though David was mocked by his own wife for dancing before the Arc,
he answered, it was before the Lord, and if that were to be vile, he would be
more vile; so say thou, if to read and pray be to be vile, thou will make thy
self more vile.

4. To provoke us to take heed of despising Gods holy things. Two arguments are
at hand to dissuade us. 1. It is sin, a sin that is obvious to every eye,
an unnatural sin. Will not all judge it a sin for a child to despise his
father, or a servant to despise his Master? Is it not an unnatural sin?
Nature binds them to the contrary. Is not God our Father, our Master, the best
Father, the best Master, like whom is none, and is it not much more a sin, an
unnatural sin, a sin cried down by all to despise God? yet so we do when
we despise his worship, which is his name. What is worse then sin? who would
not avoid sin, specially manifest, and unnatural sin, such is this
despising of Gods worship, for we return disrespect for respect. The Psalmist
admires at Gods respect to man, Psalm. 8.4. What is man? Though there be no
worth in man, yet God shows that respect to man, that men are wont to do to
them that have great place, and worth; to disrespect him therefore is great
sin. 2. Despising of Gods worship will hinder our earnest worshipping of God,
does not God deserve our best affections in his worship: and do we not desire
to bestow our best affections upon God in his worship? God will return them to
us better again. This we cannot do if we despise Gods worship. Will we bestow
much affection upon that which we think is not worthy much? Let me add one
more argument to dissuade us from despising Gods worship, drawn from the ill
consequence hereof, and this argument has three several branches, I pray take
notice of them.

1. Our despising of Gods worship will redound to our dishonor: if we expose
them to sleighting, by our slightly use of them, God will cause us to be
despised. To despise Gods worship is to sin against Gods honor, therefore
Gods punishment shall be directed against our honor, Mal 2.9. Therefore have I
also made you base and contemptible before all the people. God made the priests
generally and of all hands base and contemptible, and he did it also, i. e. in
relation and with respect unto that reproach and dishonor they had put upon
him, as it follows in the verse, According as ye have not kept my ways, but
have been partial in the law: they dishonor God by obeying but where they
listed, and God poured contempt upon them. Ever observe it, ministers that have
but low thoughts of Gods worship, and mean behavior in the same, God makes
them contemptible. Not only is it so with ministers, who being public persons,
do put more dishonor upon God, but also with private persons, whose dishonor
of God is less. Esau despised his birthright, and therein the Covenant of God,
and God cast such dishonor upon him as can never be wiped away. An instance
whereof is, Heb. 12.16. when the spirit of God had occasion to speak of him,
and that act, he calls him by way of reproach, profane Esau, and that
thousands of years after the action, when one would have thought it had been
forgotten, but God does not so easily forget dishonor done to him. Michal she
despises David worshipping of God, and what was her punishment.? Not only that
which was an affliction, but that which was over and besides a special
reproach, 2 Samuel 6.23. Therefore she had no child to the day of her death. A
woman whose name should be buried with her self, but her reproach should live,
she had no child, because she despised David worshipping of God. If therefore
we have any respect to our honor, as we have, if we be not destitute of the
spirit of men and women: for what is a man's life without respect, but a living
in the grave, a being buried whilst a man lives? let us take heed of despising
Gods worship.

2. Our despising of Gods Ordinances does not rest, or is limited in them, but
passes through them unto God, does not stay till it comes unto him, Luke
10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me,
and he that despises me despises him that sent me. The Apostles were but
ignorant and unlearned men, fishermen, in themselves considered, but when they
became vessels to carry the word of God unto the world, then what respect was
showed to them, was done to God, and what disrespect was done to them, did not
rest till it came to the highest Majesty: for they are the Ordinances of his
command and of his glory. His Name is called upon them, his commission is with
them, nay his presence is with them, Math. 18.20. Where two or three are met in
my Name, I am in the midst of them. A notable proof hereof we find in Elisha,
2 Kings 2.23, 24. when little children mocked him, he cursed them in the Name
of the Lord, i. e. in the Lords authority, command and commission. Had not
their mocking of Elisha been Gods cause, he had sinfully used Gods Name and
authority. If a Master send his servant about some errand, and give him power
to use his Name in it, may he also use his Name about his own business? Nor had
his curse been effectual, for he could not have sent the bears to have
destroyed them, which is one of Gods sore judgments, Ezekiel. 14.21. and God
would not have sent them had not the cause been his own. Let us now consider.
Men that despise the word and prayer, yet do not think God is to be despised,
but rather think him not worthy to live that does despise God, for God is of
infinite worth and goodness, yet in despising these they do depise God, for it
is prayer unto God, and reading Gods word, the means are his means, under his
authority, and for his glory, you cannot separate God and them: when men speak
ill of professors for praying, reading, they think they speak ill of men,
and that not for goodness, but nicenes and overstrictnes: but they speak ill of
God in men, they speak ill of godly men, who do read and pray, not because it
is their own mind, but Gods mind: and shall we run into such horrible
profannes to speak ill of God?

3. Despising of Gods worship is the way to quench the spirit in our hearts,
and in the ordinances. These two are put together, as depending one upon
another, 1 These. 3.19, 20. Quench not the spirit: Despise not prophesying,
implying, that to despise prophesying, is the way to quench the spirit. It is
observable, when the Apostle speaks of other sins, Ephesians. 4.2^. as lying,
sinful anger, stealing, corrupt communication, he says, Grieve not the holy
spirit: but when he comes to speak of despising prophesying, he says, Quen^h
not the holy spirit, showing us, that any sin, if it be but corrupt speech,
will grieve the spirit, make it sad in our hearts, withdraw its lively and
comfortable working, but despising or prophesying does quench the spirit, it
does take a course quite to put out the fire of the spirit, for it takes away
the sewel of the spirit, that which should nourish and increase its slame. If a
man despise Gods ordinances, either he will not make use of them at all, or
never the better, and then the nourishment of the fire of the spirit is taken
away, and so it is quenched. As therefore we would have the spirit slame in our
hearts, and in the ordinances, let us take heed of despising the ordinances. Do
we not find a damp of Gods spirit in our hearts, and in the ordinances, the
cause is here, we have taken away the fuel, by sleighting the ordinances.

It may be said, How may we be helped against this despising of Gods worship?
Answer. By the contrary reverence, a f^ame of mind called much for in the book
of God: Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, rejoice with trembling. Psalm.
3.7. In thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple. Prove. 13.13. Fear is
opposed to dispising, who so despises the Word shall be destroyed: but he that
fears the commandment shall be rewarded, the way not to despise the Word is
to fear it, Psalm. 66.2. To him will I look that trembles at my word: tremblin^
i^ (...) ^^^t of the bo^y, spring^^^ f^o^ ^^^^^rence or (...), ^n act of the
mind, apprehending an excellency and worth an excelling, overpow^^ng worth and
excellency.

How shall we get this reverence?

Answ. For obtaining the truth and beginning of reverence, there is no way but
one, chan^e of heart, for that brings both ^ight and love: which two make
reverence: light, to discern worth, and love, to affect it, to be willing it
should be there, and to acknowledge it to be there. If a man receive light from
the spirit to see an excellency in Gods worship, in preaching, in prayer, yet
if there be not love, a man will at one time or other shut out that light, and
so despise the ordinances, notwithstanding them. No wonder if unregenerate men
be careless of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, yea after many years preaching it
will not be helped, nor can it be expected otherwise, till the heart be changed.

For the help of the measure, and increase of our reverence, and so our earnest
worshipping of God, it will be useful. 1. To labor to increase our knowledge
of the worth of Gods ordinances, which we shall do two ways. 1. By considering
that Gods ordinances are means of conveighing glory to God, yea the greatest
glory and good to us, yea the greatest good. They are means of conveighing
honor to God, therefore they are called Gods worship, because they do defer
and carry worship and honor to God, yea the greatest honor, more then the
works of God, for they do declare Gods worth more then his works, more clearly,
m^re abundantly, and they do work more deep and constant expressions of Gods
honor in our thoughts, affections, words and actions, then the works of God.
That which conveighs honor to God as appointed means is honorable, that which
conveys most honor to God is most honorable, so do the ordinances of God,
therefore they are most honorable. As the ordinances do convey the greatest
honor to God, so they convey the greatest good to us. In Gods providence we
have many sweet mercies which we could not want, as health, estate, friends,
guidance, protection, but in the ordinances we find God, and Christ, and
eternal life, Prove. 8.34.35. They that wait at the gates of wisdom, and
attend at the posts of her doors, are blessed, for they find Christ, and with
him life and savor at Gods hands. Is not that of great worth and greatly to be
respected, that brings unto us the greatest good, good incomparable, and
invaluable? so do Gods Ordinances. And that we may have the knowledge of this
worth ready at hand for use, we are to call it often to mind, and to consider
of it, for what a man has forgotten, it is all one to him as if he had never
known it, and especially when we are to come to them, let us consider of their
worth, make present our knowledge by meditation. 2. To increase our knowledge
of the worth of Gods Ordinances, let us observe and remember the effects and
workings of Gods Ordinances, sometimes in one, sometim s in another, our hearts
are humbled, quickened, comforted, satisfied, yea sometimes when our hearts have
been at a low ^bb, when we have despaired of help and thought all ^^ans in
vain, when much hearing and use of private means would do no good, these are
sensible arguments of the worth of Gods Ordinances, we know they have done us
good when no other means could.

2. Consider the examples of the servants of God. This is their description,
and hereby they differ from others, they tremble at Gods Word, Ezra 9.4. David
will worship God with fear, Psalm. 3.7. Josiahs heart melted at the hearing of
the word, 2 King. 22.11. Habakkuk trembled, Hab. 3.16. these were deep
expressions, a sign they had deep thoughts. Wilt not thou be like Gods
people? what? and call God father? Wilt not thou express the image of his
children?

3. Consider this frame of mind has the promise of special favor, Isai.
66.2. God will have an eye to them that tremble at his word. Josiah should not
see the evil God would bring. Habakkuk should rest in the evil day.

4. Endeavor after a reverent carriage of body, there is that nearnes between
soul and body, that they are helps, or hindrances one to another. An
irreverent behavior will, 1. Increase the irreverence of the mind, provoke
and procure sleighty thoughts. 2. Beget the like irreverent behavior in
others, which will reflect upon our hurt. 3. Give advantage to satan to suggest
and move unto vanity, when he sees us that way disposed. 4. Greive the spirit
of God, to see his Temple in that guise and dress. On the contrary, a reverent
behavior of body that will. 1. Beget respective thoughts in our minds. 2.
Effect the like reverent carriage in others, which will be helpefull to us. 3.
Take advantage from Satan when he sees no opportunity. 4. Content the spirit
of God, when he sees his Temple in a comely habit, and he will delight to be
more there.

5. Look up to the Lord Jesus to make these considerations useful, and to
effect more of this reverence in use. He showed the greatest respect that ever
was showed to Gods Ordinances, when he whipped out the profaners of the Temple,
and he, as head of the Church has full^es to bestow.

Ob. The Ordinances ^^eme to be weak and foolish ^hin^* and not to deserve
such reverence, for men to speak to God, and God to speak his mind unto us,
by men, a poor thing.

Ans. The Apostle has answered this to my hand, 1 Cor. 1.^5. The foolishnes of
God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then men. What though
they may seem foolishnes, and weakness? grant them so to be, yet they are Gods
foolishnes, and weakness; God can make that a strong way which is in it self
weak, and that a wise way which is in it self foolish: that which has the
wisdom of God and the strength of God with it, cannot be foolish, cann^t be
weak, however it may seem abstracted therefrom. Gods wisdom is an infinite
and hidden wisd^^e, all of God is not there^o (...) ^ke and foolish, because we
see not the strength and wisdom of it. Let us conclude our blindness, folly and
weakness, rather then charge Gods means of folly and weakness.

CHAP. III. Of the second hinderance of instant worshipping of God, wandering
thoughts.
ISA. 29.13. Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and do
honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from me.


HAving finished the first hindrance of our instant worshipping of God,
despising of Gods worship, we come to a second, seated in the same faculty of
the soul, the mind, and it is, wandering or roving thoughts in Gods worship.
For the handling whereof, I have made choice of this text: wherein the Lord
does blame it in the Israelitish worshipers of him. By heart, here, we are to
understand the whole inward man, the mind, will, affections, for i^ stands
opposed to the whole o^t^ard man, included in a part expressed, the mouth, and
lips. In the like sense, heart, put alone is taken, Mat. 15.^9. out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, i. e. out of the whole
inward man, part whereof is the heart, proceeds evil thoughts, the work of the
mind, and murders, adult^ri^s, the work of the will and a^^ ^tions,
manifested in the outward man. I am particularly to speak of the absence of one
power of the mind from God, the thoughts.

N. The absence of our thoughts in Gods worship does weaken our worshipping of
God. Wandering thoughts in Gods worship, do hinder our earnest worshipping of
God. God complains here, that his people drew near him with their mouths, but
their hearts were gone from him: if the absence of the heart, and particularly
of the mind, and more particularly of the thoughts of the mind did not weaken
and hinder their worship, why should the Lord complain of the absence? Nay, why
should he punish the abs^nce so admirably as here he threatens to do? Mat.
15.7. our Savior calls them that worship God with their bodies, and their
heart far from him, hypocrites: such worship therefore has hypocrisy in it,
and the more wandering of mind, the more hypocrisy, and if so, it is but weak
worship. The Lord by the Prophet does particularly discommend the hearing of
the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.31. that so far as concerned the outward man, they did
hear as well as a people could, they came duly, and sat respectively: and
attended, and were somewhat affected with the Word, as men are with pleasant
music, but their hearts walked after their covetousnes, their bodies were in
one place, but their thoughts and affections in another; their bodies were
sixed, but their souls were roving, and this made their hearing to become
sin, and God to threaten, that the day should come when they should know, by
lamentable experience, that they had a Prophet, and the Word amongst them, and
were hearers of it, but sinned by the wandering of their hearts. When David,
Psalm. 103.1. calls upon his soul to be exercised in the duty of praise, he
explaineth in the later end of the verse what he means by, soul, all that is
within me praise his holy Name. If the duty of praise (and so other duties)
have not all that within us, and consequently our thoughts, it has not its
due, and so Gods praise is short. To this agrees that of our Savior, summing
up all Commandments of the first Table in this one, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. One
branch of this love of God is the manner of worshipping God, which must be with
all the mind, as well as all the heart and soul, and if with all the mind,
then with all the thoughts of the mind, and so much as the thoughts are absent
in Gods worship, so much love to God is absent, therefore the worship of God is
hindered.

Two things we must consider of for our understanding of this point.

1. What wandering thoughts in Gods worship are. 2. How wandering thoughts do
hinder our earnest worshipping of God.
1. What are wandering thoughts in Gods worship?

Ans. We may know the nature of them by the description of the holy ghost in
this place, and in Ezekiel, Isaiah describes them by their place, they are
far from God, there is a distance betwixt God and them, and that in opposition
to the nearnes of the body to him: those thoughts that are further from God in
his worship, then the body, that are not busied about the same action that the
body is, are wandering thoughts, and do hinder Gods worship. Ezekiel describes
them by their motion and wandering, their heart goes, or walks after their
coveteousnes; when the body is set, and sixed, the (...) in (...) and thoughts,
are up and walking, not about the service in hand, but about other things.
These wandering thoughts, according to the objects they are conversant about,
may be reduced to two heads. Thoughts about evil things, and thoughts about
good things.

1. Wandering thoughts about things evil in themselves, thoughts simply and
materially evil, Amos 8.5, 6. Thus the Jews are brought in, Saying, When will
the new moon be gone, and the sabbath? why? that they may sell corn, and set
forth wheat. Is that all? No there is a worse matter beside, making the Ephah
small, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit: That we may
buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes, and sell the
refuse of the wheat. It was not likely that they were so profane as to say so,
but they said so in their thoughts, which whispering the Lord heard, and so
reports them, these were wandering thoughts, evil in themselves, thoughts of
deceit, of falsehood, of oppression, of injustice, and that in the Sabbaths.
Thus wicked Jezebel, 1 King. 21.8, 9, 10. calls upon the Elders of Iesreel to
proclaim a fast, and in it to busy their thoughts about false witness, and
murder, two men must come in and witness that Naboth blasphemed God and the
King, and then he must be carried out and stoned, these things their thoughts
must be busied about as the maine end of their fasting. Our Savior charge
the Pharisees that they did devour widows houses, and for a pretense, or
cloak, to hide it, make long prayers, in their prayers their thoughts did busy
themselves about hiding their oppression and cruelty, the main end of their
praying. Thoughts in themselves evil, in time of Gods worship, are most evil.
1. Because they argue deep hypocrisy, for they are directly contrary to God,
and yet covered over with show of love to God. To color over great hatred of
God with show of love, is great hypocrisy. 2. Great injury is done to God, for
in the very time that we should do service to him in a special manner, we do
special service to the devil. 3. Deep dishonor is put upon holy duties, as
if they had fellowship with sin, and could complie with it, which does
indeed destroy their nature, why else are these thoughts, evil in themselves,
admitted when holy duties are in hand? 4. Our spirits are specially poisoned
hereby, more then if we had them at another time, because a greater curse goes
with them in that they abuse a time of blessing. The devil is therefore the
worst creature, being corrupted, because he was the best creature in creation;
and times of greatest blessing perverted, are times of greatest curse. Let a
man abuse the sabbath, time of prayer, time of hearing, with unclean, drunken,
oppressing thoughts, he shall be more accursed from God then if he had the same
unclean, drunken, oppressing thoughts at another time, and in other occasions,
for the sin is aggravated from the time and occasion, and so the curse
increased, which well considered of, would make us take heed how we spend the
sabbath, how we carry our selves in holy duties, lest suffering sin to be
stirred we become deeply accursed.

2. A second sort of wandering thoughts in Gods worship, are taken up about
things lawful and good in themselves, and they are either.

Earthly good things. Or spiritual good things.
1. Wandering thoughts about earthly good things in Gods worship, are such
thoughts as are employed about our particular callings, or provision for our
selves and children, or about our pleasures and recreations, thoughts
warrantable and lawful, yea necessary at other times, but now wandering
thoughts, because the mind is in other employment. God peremptorily says,
that on the sabbath day we shall do no manner of work, Exodus 20.10. If our
hands rest and our thoughts be working, is that no work? Thoughts are as
properly the labor and work of the mind, as actions and doings are the work
of the body, Isa. 58.13. God forbids us to find our own pleasure on his holy
day: and do we not find our pleasure by our thoughts? Thoughts will frame the
acting and enjoying of any pleasure, or recreation. If thoughts about earthly
good things holden in time, set apart for God, are wandering, and so sinful,
then in like manner such thoughts had in duties set apart for God, are
wandering, and therefore sinful. When God complains of the Jews by the Prophet,
that their hearts went after their covetousnes in time of hearing the Word,
what does he mean, b^t that they were busy in thoughts and affections about
worldly things, which they so much desired, though their bodies were absent
from them.

2. Wandering thoughts in Gods worship about spiritual good things, are either
such spiritual things as are impertinent, and of a diverse kind from the
duties in hand, or such spiritual things as are pertinent, of the same kind,
and agreeable to the duty in hand.

Wandering thoughts in duty impertinent, and of diverse kind, are such as these.
When a man in time of hearing the Word, has thoughts of prayer, or of some
Sermon that he heard at such a time, in such a place, how good it was, and
useful unto him, when a man in prayer has thoughts of preparation unto
prayer, thoughts of meditation, thoughts of hearing the Word.

Spiritual thoughts pertinent, and of the same kind with the worship in hand,
are not always to be accounted wandering and sinful thoughts: As for example,
a man is hearing the Word of God, and some thoughts come into his mind
suitable to what is spoken, some place of Scripture to the purpose, or some
place of Scripture enlightened to a man, beyond what light the Minister gives
to it, or something come to mind a man has heard before to the same purpose.

A man also joins in prayer with others, and besides the thoughts of what is
prayed, he has other like thoughts of his own; if these like thoughts do clear
the duty in hand to the understanding do increase attention, and affection to
what is in doing, they are not wandering thoughts, but they are conserving
thoughts, thoughts that keep up and keep close the attention and affection to
Gods worship, and do prevent the weakening and wasting of the same, and they are
the work of the enlarging and establishing spirit, which can at the same time
suggest new thoughts, and make them helpful to us. But if these pertinent and
like thoughts do carry away the attention, and take it wholly up, that what is
in hand, is neglected, and the thoughts love the present duty, and are long
before they can recall themselves, and find the duty, then ordinarily they are
the work of Satan and corruption, working as an Angel of light, doing evil, but
in such a way as may not be discovered, for who would suspect good thoughts in
duty of the very same kind, to come from Satan and corruption? I say, if these
like thoughts do carry away the attention, they are ordinarily evil, for God
may, and sometimes does, (as experience proves) so take up the thoughts and
affections with something in the Word and prayer, that is suitable to the
necessity of the soul, that it can mind nothing else for the present, but as
the soul has dwelt upon some matter of sorrow, and been deeply humbled
thereby, so God will have a man dwell upon some matter of comfort, till the
heart be greatly refreshed thereby: but this is more then ordinary, we may not
neglect any part of worship, but God may employ us about some part if he will,
this act is not voluntary or deliberate, but the soul is carried thereto by the
power of the spirit of God. These wandering thoughts in Gods worship, employed
about things good in themselves, earthly good, or spiritual good things, are
therefore sinful, because wandering, and therefore:

1. Impertinent, and so a part of disorder and confusion, which God is not the
author of, they are out of their place and rank, they should not come in when
other occasions and duties take place, they have no due place now, they do but
usurp.

2. Being wandering, they are unseasonable, out of their time, and therefore
undecent, uncomely, for time does give a beauty to things.

3. Being wandering they are distracting, they go from the duty in hand, take
away part of the souls strength, and thereby weaken the performance of duty:
and thus pertinent thoughts sometimes gain the name of wandering thoughts, from
the effect, because they make the soul to wander.

Having seen the nature and kinds of wandering thoughts in Gods worship; Let us
now consider how they do hinder our earnest worshipping of God.

Ans. Two ways, 1. As they weaken the inward power of the soul to worship God.
2. As they weaken the assisting power of the spirit of God.


1. Wandering thoughts do weaken the inward power of the soul to worship God,
and so hinder our fervent and affectionate worshipping of God.

First, As they take up part of the mind, so that Gods worship has not the
whole mind, as it should have. Thou shall love the Lord with all thy mind. A
man does not pray with all his mind, nor hear with all his mind, part is
bestowed elsewhere: let a river be parted into two streams, and it cannot run
so full in both, as it would in one. No finite mind can be so strong about
many objects at same time, as about one. Wandering thoughts make God to be
worshipped with a divided, parted mind, with a piece of the mind, therefore
weakly.

2. Wandering thoughts in worship do not only take up part of the mind, and so
weaken the power of the soul to worship God, but they do take off the mind
from the worship in hand, so God says, the heart is removed far from me, and
their hearts goes after their covetousnes: that is, the mind is much nearer
such thoughts, and more taken up with them, then with the Word or prayer, the
mind is wholly with them, or at least chiefly with them. As it is often seen
when dogs are following an hare, if a new one be started, they follow that,
and leave the other: so when we are praying, reading, hearing, if new thoughts
arise in our hearts, we let go our thoughts of the duty, and follow them, and
so God has scarce a part of our mind in his worship, if any, it is the least
part.

3. Wandering thoughts do weaken the power of the soul to worship God, not only
because they take up part of the mind, and take off the mind from Gods
worship, but also because in so doing, they take up and take off the affections
and endeavors, the desires and delights of the soul, and the actions of the
body. What a man does not think of, he cannot desire or delight in, and what he
does but little think of, he will but little desire and delight in, and
consequently will take little pains about. Thus wandering thoughts carrying away
the mind from Gods worship, do also carry away the affections and outward man:
and if God has neither mind, nor affections, nor body, or but little of them,
then he has but weak service.

2. Wandering thoughts do hinder our through worshipping of God, as they do
weaken the power of the assisting spirit in our hearts; and that they do three
ways.

1. As they draw us from present spiritual thoughts about the worship in hand,
which are the work of Gods spirit, concurring with grace in the heart. We
cannot think a good thought in a duty, without the assistance of Gods spirit,
All our sufficiency (says Paul, 2 Cor. 3.5.) is of God, and he instanceth in
the smallest power of the soul, thoughts; we cannot think any thing of our
selves: when therefore wandering thoughts do take us from such thoughts, as the
assisting spirit has wrought in us, does it not weaken the power of the
assisting spirit?

2. Wandering thoughts being evil, and sinful do grieve the spirit of God, and
so weaken the assisting power of the spirit: when a man is grieved he will have
no mind to show his love and power, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not (says the
Apostle) the holy spirit of God, unholines is contrary to the nature of the
spirit, therefore does grieve it, and wandering thoughts in holy duties are
unholines, because they separate the soul from God, when the body comes near
him, they are therefore contrary and grievous to Gods spirit, and makes it
unwilling to show it self.

3. Wandering thoughts do weaken the power of the assisting spirit of God.
Because they hinder us in the way of the spirit, the Word, Prayer, Sacraments,
wherein the spirit is wont to conveigh himself more unto us. Wandering thoughts
do prevent our careful use of the ordinances, and so a greater measure of the
spirits assistance, which we should have in those Ordinances, were wandering
thoughts absent. If wandering thoughts do weaken the power of Gods assisting
spirit in our hearts, they must needs hinder our fervent worshipping of God,
for the exercise of the strength of our souls depends upon the assistance of
the spirit.

But it may be demanded further, what are the causes of these wandering
thoughts? and how comes it to pass that the godly are troubled with them in
good duties, that do so hinder them in the due worshipping of God?

Ans. There is a threefold cause of them. 1. Our selves. 2. Satan. 3. God.


1. We our selves are the causes of wandering thoughts in Gods worship. How?
Surely many ways.

1. As we have a remnant of original corruption, a root and stock, yet living
and fruit bearing, and one fruit is evil thoughts, Matthew. 13.19. out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, i. e. the heart being an evil tree. It is the
happiness of a good tree to bring forth fruit in season, Psalm. 1.3. good, and
seasonable good, and it is the curse of corruption, a bad tree, to bring forth
fruit out of season, good thoughts, but out of season. More particularly, sin
has brought a vanity upon our minds, Ephesians. 4.17. and there is yet a remnant
of it in us, i. e. the more worth, and weight, and excellency is in a^y thing,
the less we in our minds suit with it, and the more light and empty any thing
is, the more our minds agree thereto: now thoughts on the by, have not that
worth and excellency in holy duties, that pertinent thoughts enlarging our
affections. Besides, the more any thing requires the fixing, settling, and
holding close of the thoughts, as good duties do, the less do our minds suit
therewith, our minds are vain, and inconstancy, variety, change, and
alteration of thoughts, do best please them. Experience tells us, that it is
painful to keep our minds close to a duty, and to let them rove and wander,
is an ease to us, a sign of their vanity.

2. Want of inuring and accustoming our selves unto good thoughts in ordinary
course, and to setlednes therein, and accustoming our minds to rove and
wander, to take their lawless, and boundless liberty, whereby their aversenes
unto good thoughts is not weakened, but their forwardnes unto vanity, and
wandering of thoughts strengthened: custom is a second nature, what we use our
selves to, will be ready and easy to us. If we ordinarily disuse good thoughts,
we do not raise up our minds to heaven in our callings, upon sight of the
creatures, we do not parley, and commune with our hearts, in some holy
spiritual conference, when we lie down, and when we rise up, when we sit in
our houses, and when we walk by the way, we shall find that when we come to
holy duties, holy thoughts will be tedious and painful, for we strive against
two natures: one that sin has brought, and another that custom has brought.
And suppose we have a new nature, a little grace, yet what will a little grace
do against two natures? on the other side, if we use our selves to sinful
thoughts, or to roving and wandering of mind; we shall come to an art and trade
of sinful and vain thoughts, they will easily come into our minds in holy
duties, without any pains, any study or devising, there will be swarms and
treasures there, the mind by continual use, will have gotten a more perfect
faculty and ability in such thoughts.

3. An overfullnesse of earthly occasions, or a fulness of thoughts, desires
and cares about a few occasions hindering, or instead of dependence upon God.
When a man's hands are so full of occasions, that his mind has hardly room
enough for the thoughts thereof, at least in due time, or when all a man's
thoughts, morning, evening, all the day long, are taken up about that business
he has in hand, that no spiritual thoughts can get place in the mind, they
will not be shut out in good duties, those thoughts that have all place at
other times, will have some place in Gods worship. Beside, too much to do with
the world, or too much thought about the world, will make all the faculties of
the soul more ready and observant that way. Some occasion amongst many will be
neglected, or an occasion might have been dispatched some other way, and the
memory will not be wanting to suggest it, no not in midst of good duties.
Multitude of occasions or solicitude about them, have a power to pull the
mind apeeces, to divide it into parts, that if the worship of God have any of
the mind, it shall have but a part. When Martha was so sollicitous about
providing for our Saviors entertainment, he chides her, Martha, Martha, thou
carest, and he uses a word that signifies to cut into parts, her soul was all
apeeces with it, and therefore unfit to hear till that care should be gone, and
her soul return unto it self. Immoderacie of affection will breed immoderacie
of thoughts, if there be not a greater dependence. If a man be sollicitous
about good duties, how he shall perform them, how he shall pray, how he shall
hear, and do not look up to God as able and willing to help him, those
thoughts will not rest, nor lie still, when the duty is in hand, for a man
sees nothing to quiet his thoughts.

In like manner, if a man's thoughts be taken up with his earthly occasions, and
he do not think, and that much, that God takes care for him, if he does not
often call to mind the promises of God, the providence of God, his preventing
and succeeding providence, what experiences he has had of the same, his
careful thoughts will not be quiet in holy duties, for only two things can
give any quiet to the mind. 1. A man's own employment about them. 2. Assurance
and remembrance of Gods care. If a man's thoughts be full of his occasions, he
will forget Gods care, therefore his thoughts will be ranging in duties, for he
has nothing to quiet him, but employment about them; his body cannot be
employed, for that is about good duties, he must let his mind therefore be
casting, and thinking about them in holy duties, or else he will have no quiet
of mind.

4. Want of reverence: did we look upon Gods worship respectively as a matter
of that worth and weight that indeed it has, we would take heed that our
thoughts be weighty.

5. Want of preparation: When we come with earthly thoughts, with wandering
minds, do not wind them up, nor set them in tune by some spiritual thoughts,
by prayer, how should they but work after their natural frames, when we do
not stir up the spiritualnesse of our minds? We must not think that we have
good thoughts at command, and always ready, unless our minds were perfectly
regenerate: what we get now must be by the lusting of the spirit against the
flesh, Gal. 5.17. by struggling and striving.

6. Want of watchfullnesse in duties. 1. We do not watch our minds that they
do not wander, but keep close to the duty. 2. We do not watch our affections,
that they be affected and moved with the duty: if they were affected, they
would keep the thoughts close. 3. We do not watch our eyes, that they do not
rove from one object to another, for then they will minister matter of wandering
to the mind.

And on the Lords day we do not watch our tongues, that they speak not of the
world, and our ears that they hear not others speak of the world; for if our
tongue may have liberty to speak of the world, and our ears to hear matters of
the world spoken of, (save in case of some spiritual ends or use made thereof)
our minds will be thinking of them.

2. Satan has his hand in wandering thoughts. He comes to Church with us, Zech.
3.1. He stood at Iosuas right hand to resist him, he watches the best
opportunity to hinder us. The highway side ground hearers have the word taken
from them by the Devil. How? they understand it not: when the Word is
delivering, the Devil fills their minds with other thoughts, that they do not
attend to the Word, nor know what is spoken: some wandering thoughts he
immediately casts in without any help of our corruption: he is a spiritual
wickedness, therefore can conveigh himself into our spirits, have communion and
converse with them. Such as come immediately from Satan, discover themselves
thus.

1. By their suddainnes, they are with us ere we are aware, we cannot discern
the rise of them, other thoughts, wherein our corruption has an hand, do come
more leasurely and by degrees, upon occasion of some object, or some thing
remembered, or some thing represented to the mind, we see their rise.

2. By their sinfulnes ordinarily, for coming immediately from Satan, and
being his children only, they must needs more lively express his nature and
image (save when he does transform himself into an Angel of light, as sometimes
he does) and Satan is worse, more sinful then our hearts, therefore the
thoughts that come from him, will ordinarily be more sinful, like their p^^^^^
then those in which our hearts have an hand.

2. By the measure of the opposition of the gracious heart, it does more
forcibly repel them with greater strength of detestation, for grace not being
weakened by them, having no hand in them, does more easily discern them, and is
more able to detest them, whereas when the so^l is a party in them, they being
his own, having affection to them, and having given some countenance to them in
their rising, cannot so easily see their sinfulnes, nor so ably resist the same.

Some wandering thoughts he casts immediately, by means of the corruption of our
hearts.

1. By occasion of some object to our eye or ear.

2. Joining with our memories, to remember somewhat forgotten.

3. Representing some fancy to our minds.

3. God so disposes that his people shall have wandering thoughts, by
withdrawing his preventing spirit, by leaving them in the hands of Satan and
corruption, by casting in occasions to be snared and distractions unto them:
and that he does for many wise ends.

1. To chastise them for a double sin. First neglect of good motions: they that
have sl^ighted good thoughts, and the comfort of them, it is just they should
feel the sorrow of evil thoughts. Secondly, too much favoring of wandering
thoughts: what has been the sin, God often makes the rod of his; wandering
thoughts have been their sin, therefore shall be their rod.

2. To keep their hearts under and humble: the ground of pride is some good
thing, some worth, some excellency real, or imagined: what greater good then
communion with God in holy duties, the exercise of graces, the pouring out of
the spirit upon us? nothing therefore so fit to be matter of pride: but when
the godly look into their hearts, and see such wandering thoughts, they are kept
from exalting themselves.

3. Still to convince them thoroughly, and to put them in mind what need they
have of a Savior: they see matter of damnation, desert of hell in their best
duties. If their prayers, hearings, receivings of the Sacrament will not save
them, what will? Nothing in themselves: they must have a Jesus, a daies-man
betwixt God and them, one that has perfect holiness, that has perfectly obeyed
God.

4. To quicken and increase their care of preparation before they come, and of
watchfulnes in duty; for they see in experience, what need they have, they dare
not come without meditation, without prayer for the spirits assistance; when
they are there, they dare not sleep, or give way to drousines, as others, nor
look about them, lest thus they set their minds a wandering.

Use 1. Hence we may take notice. 1. Of the evil nature of sin, it stands in
direct opposition to the good God, to his service and glory, for this doctrine
does manifest, that though sin be never so secret, never so small if but in
thought, yet it does weaken the worship of God, and therefore hinder his glory.
Men may, to the eye of men, worship and honor God as much as any, the outward
carriage of their bodies may be such, but if sin be but within the thought, it
will divide the soul from the body, carry away the best part of man from the
worship of God.

2. The exactnes and strictnes of the worship of God. It requires the whole
man, and every part thereof, even to the least thought of the mind. It will
not abate a thought, it will not suffer one thought to wander, but will
complain that its due is wanting, that it is weakened and wronged.

3. The mistake of the world, who being very loose themselves, do condemn the
godly of too much strictnes and precisenes, but they know not what they say:
can they be more strict then God requires? No not possible. Nay they cannot
possibly be so strict, as they should be, therefore it is less possible that
they should be too strict, too precise. The worship of God requires that all
our thoughts should be kept close unto it, that not one should wander. This is
not possible, nor will it be possible when the godly have attained the greatest
measure of grace that is attainable in this world, so long as corruption
remains, there will be ^^andring thoughts: if then (...) ^^dly cannot be so
str^ct^^^ (...) should be, though they (...) and endeavor it, much (...) can
they be too strict. That which makes men think the godly too strict, is pa^tly
ignorance of that strictn^^ God requires, partly love (...) ^o^enes, they
neither prac^^^^, nor love strictnes in themselves, therefore they condemn it
in others, that they might justify themselves.

4. God has much bad service done him, that the world knows not of, no body
is privy thereto but God, and the consciences of men, wandering thoughts,
worldly thoughts, sinful thoughts, impertinent good thoughts do hinder Gods
worship; yet how full are all men's minds of these? some let their minds go
loose all Sermon while, all Prayer while, they think not at all of what is in
hand; and they that do keep their mind in measure, have no fast hold of them,
but soon let them go. Oh what strange hearing and praying will be discovered,
and brought into judgment at the last day for Eccles. 12.14. God will bring
jnto judgment every secret thing, and Romans 2.16. God will judge the secrets of
men! some shall be brought in hearing and praying with their bodies, but
thinking of their whoring, gaming, drinking, and the like; others busy about
their recreations: others buying and selling, and making bargains; others
plowing, and sowing and reaping. Herein shall be discovered the meeting of
prophanenes, hypocrisy and idolatry in the hearts of men. Prophanenes, in that
they have suffered unholy, common thoughts to come into their minds in holy
time and holy worship, a thing that the soul, if perfectly sanctified, would
not do. Hypocrisy, in that they make show of what they do not, they make show
of true and earnest worshipping of God, by the presence of their bodies, but
they do nothing less. Idolatry, in that they give leave to their souls,
because their operations are hidden and secret, to do that which they will not
give leave to their bodies to do in the eye of man. What is this but to make an
Idol of God, as if he did not see the souls actions, as well as men see the
actions of the body: and if he does see them, why do men give more liberty to
their thoughts, which are in Gods eye, then to their actionsi which are in man's
eye?

2. To reprove. 1. An opinion planted by Satan in the minds of men, contrary
to this truth I have in hand; That thoughts are not to be mattered, thoughts
are free, we need not be troubled at them: If thoughts be free, then they are
not to be regarded in the worship of God.

But they are to be regarded in Gods worship, for they make it better or worse;
therefore they are not free.

And do we think the law of God does take hold of thoughts only in Gods
worship? No, it is not so partial, it is more complete and perfect then so.
What should make men think thoughts are not to be regarded? Surely such
grounds as will not hold.

1. The secrecy of them, they are unknown, hidden, secret in the soul. To whom
are thoughts unknown? to men. And is man's knowledge the only or chief rule of
our care about our thoughts, that if he know them not, we need not regard them?
Has man given us a command? Or must man be our judge? Our thoughts are
sufficiently known to God, and our consciences do know them, and if these could
be ignorant, it were better, though all the world did know them; and though
they be hid from men for a time, yet they shall know them at the day of
judgment: if therefore the knowledge of men would make us regard them, we must
regard them, for though they do not know them at present, yet they shall know
them.

2. The multitude of them, they are numberless, who can count or tell them:
Therefore they are not to be regarded? The more our thoughts are, the less
free they are, the more to be regarded, for were all our thoughts good, as in
innocence they were, and in heaven they shall be, what a world of good were
there? And if they be evil, the more they are the more evil.

3. The impossibility of ruling them: would a man put to all his care, the
mind will not be kept in compass: passions are unruly, but not so unruly as
thoughts: the most passionate man in the world does not offend so much in
passion, as in thoughts: If passions at any time break out, if we look back, we
shall see many passionate thoughts have gone before, those passions that have
broken out, have been acted over in our thoughts, our thoughts have been very
angry, when our tongues have been silent. There is indeed an impossibility of
ruling our thoughts altogether, but was this planted in us by God? Then indeed
it would be an excuse, did not sin bring it upon us? And shall we think to make
that want an excuse, which we have brought upon our selves? And because we
cannot perfectly govern our thoughts, shall we let loose the raines unto them?
because we cannot do all we should do, shall we do nothing at all? Not go to
the furthest we can? That thoughts are to be regarded will appear, if we
consider,

1. There are abominations in the thoughts, we think that lying, swearing,
drunkenness, uncleanness, are abominations, and so they are, but there are
abominations in the thoughts, though we think not so, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. he
understands the abominations of the th^ughts; there are then abominations in
our thoughts, Matthew. 15.28. Our Savior says, that he who looks upon a woman
to ^ust after, has committed adultery with her already in his heart, adultery
may be committed in the heart, and so any other gross sin. The betraying of
our Savior was first in Judas thoughts, before it was in his tongue or
actions, John 13.2. Simons simony, his desire to buy the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, was first in his thoughts, Act. 8.20, 22. Thou have thought that the
gifts of God may be purchased with money, pray God, if perhaps the thought of
thy heart may be forgiven thee. And this thought is called wickedness.

2. God as well knows our thoughts as our actions: this is one of Gods
peculiar abilities, Amos 4.13. He declares unto man what is his thought. An
instance whereof we have in Nebuchadnezzars dr^am, he dreamed, and forgot his
dream, the Devil could not tell it, for then the Magicians, and Soothsayers,
and Astrologers should have known it, but God discovered it to Daniel, when he
and his companions joined in prayer unto Heaven in this regard, Dan. 2.17, 18.
In this respect Daniel says, ver. 22. That God reveals deep and secret
things, he knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him, i.
e. he is as well acquainted with the night and the actions thereof, as with the
day. If our thoughts be secret and hidden, yet God searches all hearts, Jer.
17.10. The heart is deceitful above all things, who can know it? I the Lord.
How should God know it, and it be dece^tfull above all things? He does search
the hearts and try the reins. By how much the heart is more deceitful then
other things, by so much the Lord does more narrowly look into it, then into
other things. This is made the reason, why the Word of ^od is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12, 13. because all things are
naked and opened before him, with whom we have to do: what though the heart
have many coverings and garments to hide it from the eye of man? yet when God
comes to look upon it, they are taken away, the heart is naked. What though
there be many curious inworks in the heart, one ^hought wrapped within another:
as in the body of man is a curious unknown workmanship, and one part more
inward and hidden then another, yet when God comes to look upon it, it is a
body anatomized, all the most inward inwrapt thoughts, may be seen distinctly
and fully, Psalm. 13.9.

2. God knows our thoughts a far off, what we will think before we think it,
his infinite eye will see all things at the same time, much more therefore does
he know our thoughts, when we our selves know them.

3. According to our thoughts, so will conscience, Gods vicegerent, acquit and
condemn us; our thoughts are evidence sufficient, whether we shall go to heaven
or to hell therefore they are to be regarded, Romans 2.1^. their thoughts
accusing or excusing one another. If some thoughts be evil, other thoughts will
accuse them, and if some thoughts be good, other thoughts will excuse them, and
as our consciences enlightened do accuse or excuse, so will God do, 1 Ioh. 3.20,
2. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things: our hearts know but somethings to condemn us for, but God knows all
things amiss in us, but if our hearts condemn us not, then have we boldness
toward God. It is so far from being a truth, that thoughts are not to be
regarded, that if we seriously consider it, they are in the first place, and
chiefly to be regarded.

1. Because they are the first step and beginning of our communion with God, in
any ordinance public or private, for they are the very first expressions of
the first and leading faculty of the soul, the mind. They that would have any
thing furthered, must especially have an eye to the beginning, for a little
help in the beginning will help much, and a little hinderance in the beginning
will hinder much: if therefore we would have that which is good, go forward,
and would have our communion with God in holy duties furthered, we must look to
our thoughts, for they are the beginning.

2. Our thoughts are the rise and wellspring of all evil. No evil is at any
time in tongue or life, but was first in thought. Such breakings out in tongue,
as men are ashamed of, did first make a gap in the thoughts. Actual sins in
Scripture are called inventions, Eccles. 7.9. God made man upright, but he has
found out many inventions: the first apostasy and fall of our parents, was a
finding out of many inventions, Psalm. 99.8. He took vengeance of their
inventions. Actual sins, the sins of the outward man, are therefore called
inventions, because f you follow any sin to the fountain and spring, you shall
find it was an invention, it began in a device, an imagination. Art thou aware
that the furthest sin goes, the worse, and would thou stop it in the
beginning? then look to thy thoughts, regard them, if any anger, swearing,
lying, come into thy tongue, they will be first in thy thoughts, and if thou
would keep them out of thy tongue, thou must regard thy thoughts.

3. Little do thou, or any man know, to what one thought may grow, be it good
or evil: behold, says the Apostle, Iam. 3.5. how much a little fire kindles,
a thought is but a spark, yet a spark of fire that will kindle wonderful much,
if not quenched there. To see the stream and spring of some river, a man would
hardly believe that so great a stream came from so small a fountain. The
greatest good and evil that ever was in the world, was at first but a little
thought. Thoughts therefore are to be regarded, yea chiefly to be regarded. If
a good thought come into thy heart, and thou cherish it, and the spirit of God
move upon it, thou can not tell what may proceed from it. If an evil motion
come into thy heart, and thou let it go without control, and the Devil be
suffered to hatch it, it will grow to a monster of sin.

4. Thou may sin in thought, and not sin in word or deed, but thou can not
sin in word or deed, but thou must first sin in thought. Sin in thought is more
easily and suddenly committed, and more independently then in word or deed,
therefore thoughts are chiefly to be looked unto. Many will bless themselves
from such and such sins in life, which others run into, and they look
carefully to their steps, not considering they may commit the same sin in their
thoughts, (which they give liberty unto) though not in life, and therefore they
should look first to their thoughts.

2. General and common carelesnes of thoughts in Gods worship is to be
reproved. Is it not a fault for men to be careless how they worship God? who is
so great and so good, so great that none is like him, so good that he gives us
rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and
gladness, yea gives us his statutes and ordinances? he has not so dealt with
all his people. Is it not carelessness in Gods worship to be careless what we
think therein, whether good or evil, whether impertinent good, or pertinent?
Thus they rob God of a part of their soul, who has made all, requires all, and
deserves all, That there is a common carelessness in men of thoughts, appears
in that they do not set their thoughts in order when they come to Gods worship,
but rather bring that with them, which may distract them, viz. thoughts of
meeting with such and such, and speaking with them about some worldly business:
and when they are there, suffer their eyes to wander and rove, and to delight
themselves with variety of objects. They that take no care of their eyes, take
no care of their thoughts, for the eyes do feed the thoughts, the thoughts
depend upon the eyes. God out of his care of his glory and our good,
spiritual, temporal and eternal, has appointed his worship: is it not our
great sin to be careless of it? Our own thoughts will in time accuse us, and
pass this reproof upon us, when it shall be an evil day of affliction with us,
or when the word shall be a light in our minds, and a terror in our hearts.
Time of sickness is a time of thoughts, then our hands and feet are bound, only
our thoughts are at liberty, which will then toil and busy themselves about our
wandering in good duties, and thereby vex and torment us. The more careless we
have been of our thoughts in Gods worship, the more careful will our thoughts
be to disquiet us, for conscience must, and shall do its office, and there is
more matter of disquiet.

3. The particular carelessenes of Gods people, of their thoughts in Gods
worship, is particularly to be reproved, their minds are in part sanctified,
they know the weight of Gods worship, the worth of good thoughts, the evil of
wandering thoughts, how comfortable the one leaves the heart, and how sad the
other, yet they take but little care to keep their mind close to Gods worship.
I speak not of that infirmity which does follow necessarily upon the remainings
of corruption, and is common to all the godly, some wandering thoughts in good
duties, but I speak of their carelessenes and negligence to prevent wandering
thoughts, whereupon follows store, and abundance of them. The former is their
sin, because unavoidable; wandering thoughts are the fruits of our sin, our
first voluntary Apostasy from God, but this is an addition of sin to sin, an
increase of sin, not only a neglect of Gods worship, but also a neglect of our
first injuring of God and his worship by our fall. For were we sensible of our
sinful frame of mind, that does as necessarily and naturally send out
wandering thoughts, as the fire does heat, were we troubled that we have brought
upon our selves a necessity of wandering and roving from God in his worship, we
would take care that this original corruption should not be fruitful. I
appeal to the consciences of the godly: do not your thoughts accuse you for
carelessenes of your thoughts in Gods worship? Were there nothing else to
convince the godly of the carelessenes of their thoughts in Gods worship, and
their fault therein, this were sufficient, the fruit of their wandering
thoughts. What makes Sabbaths so wearisome to the godly, but this, that they
cannot keep their thoughts to God? the more the day and our thoughts suit, the
more contentment and delight therein, and the less out thoughts and the day
suit, the more wearisome the day will be. What makes the ordinances so
unprofitable? the hearts of the godly are not affected in the word, in prayer,
because of these wandering thoughts, as the thoughts are taken up about any
thing, so the affections do work; if the thoughts be but sleighty, the
affections will be but slightly moved; if the thoughts be deeply possessed
with a thing, the affections are strongly moved. Nay, what is the cause of Gods
absence in his worship, that the godly cannot see him, feel him, have communion
with him? Surely wandering thoughts are the cause, if not all the cause, yet one
cause, and a first cause, they carry away the soul from Gods worship, and leave
only the body, and God is a spirit, and does converse with our spirits; if they
be absent, God also will be absent, for there is no suitablenes between him
and our bodies, a mere bodily worship is sit only for idol Gods, that are all
body, God is a spirit, and spiritual worship only does agree unto him.

3. To teach the godly, and to press them. 1. In their soul-searchings and
examinations, to find out their sins, to remember their wandering thoughts in
Gods worship, which are no small part of the sin of their souls, especially
when we come to look over the manner of the performance of holy duties, forget
not our wandering thoughts, but consider them, and look into them: these do as
well rob and spoil the worship of God of its due, as other sins, these
neglected in our hearts, may make God angry with us, and we not aware of the
cause. The more these are removed from the sight of others, the more need we
have to look after them, because they are the more easily overskipped and
forgotten, they have the excuse of secrecy.

2. In their humiliations, to humble their souls for their wandering thoughts,
these are part of their sin, an offense and injury to God, therefore should be
part of their humiliation. Four things considered may help our humiliation in
this respect.

1. We sin by wandering thoughts in all the ordinances of God, none excepted, in
prayer, wherein we come nearest to God, when we speak unto the highest majesty
of some things, our though^s are busy about other things, yea in extraordinary
prayer, when we specially separate our selves unto communion with God, and have
nothing, or little to do with the creatures, lest they should hinder us in the
worship of God, yet we cannot separate our selves from wandering thoughts: nor
in the word, when God speaks unto us: nor in the Sacraments, when we come to
bind our selves from wandering thoughts.

2. We sin much by wandering thoughts in all parts of Gods worship. If our
wandering and pertinent thoughts were compared, for the most part, it were hard
to say, which would be the most: so often do our hearts run out in duty, and
sometimes long stay out ere they return, especially in such duties wherein we
join with others, to be sure our wandering thoughts would be found to be very
many.

3. We continually and at all times do much offend, by wandering thoughts in all
parts of Gods worship, though sometimes more then at other, yet all times much,
not one time excepted.

4. Though we offend so much in all the ordinances of God, and so continually,
yet we are but little sensible of our sin this way. We complain of our other
sins in public, private and secret, but litt^e do we complain of this sin,
though we offend more and more continually by it, the^ by words ordeeds.

3. To labor in the use of all appointed and sanctified means to prevent
wandering thoughts in Gods worship. Though we cannot altogether prevent them,
yet let us do what we can: though we cannot attain to what we desire, yet it
will be our comfort that we have done our duty. Is not my doctrine argument
sufficient, that they weaken Gods worship, i. e. make our prayers, hearing,
cracked vessels that they cannot hold and carry that measure of glory to God,
that otherwise they would, nor that good to us? The very best thing we do, or
can do, is to worship God. We do well when for Gods sake we do right unto our
neighbor, but we do best when we worship God, for we do that which is most his
command, the other is the second command, but this is the first and great
Commandment; We do that which is most for Gods glory, we do that which is
nearest our work in heaven, for there we shall worship God, even when we shall
have no outward works of justice or mercy to do one to another. Should we not
be careful to do our best work, the worship of God, in the best manner? and if
in the best manner, then with as much of our hearts as may be, for they are the
best part, then take we heed our thoughts do not wander. But beside, let me use
some other arguments to press us to take heed of wandering thoughts in holy
duties.

1. They make a Christian to play the part of an hypocrite in Gods worship:
what is it to be an hypocrite, but to seem to be that which he is not? When we
bring our bodies to the worship of God, we seem to worship him earnestly, but
when our thoughts wander, we do nothing less, we seem to do that we do not,
and therefore play the part of an hypocrite: so much as our thoughts wander in
good duties, so much do we as hypocrites do, though our hearts be sincere, yet
herein we play the part of hypocrites. This is contrary to the nature of grace,
which desires a man may have truth, though he have never so little, and may do
what he does in truth, though he do never so little, now the less our hearts
wander, the more truth we express in Gods worship, and the more truth, the
more acceptable to Gods grace.

2. Wandering thoughts considered in themselves and their own nature, are a
curse. God may, and certainly does sanctify them to his own people, to be means
of humiliation, of watchfulnes, of more dependence upon Christ, but in
themselves they are a curse. For what is a curse but separation from God, the
fountain of blessing, the fountain of good, in whose presence is all good,
nothing but good, and out of whose presence is all evil, nothing but evil?
Matthew. 25.41. Depart, ye cursed, therefore cursed, because they must depart
from God, never to come near him again. Wandering thoughts they do carry the
heart from God. God comes near to his people in his worship, wandering thoughts
do carry the heart far from the worship of God, therefore far from God. So
says God, they draw near me with their mouths, and honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are removed far from me: and the first instrument of
removing of the heart, is the wandering of the thoughts. Will not the name of a
curse prevail with us, to persuade us to take heed of wandering thoughts? Oh
consider when wandering thoughts come to us in holy duties, the curse comes, and
when they stay with us, the curse stays with us. We come to the Ordinances of
God for a blessing, and to have a curse instead of a blessing in time of
blessing, is a double curse. Profane ignorant Esau, when the blessing was
denied him, he lift up his voice and wept, he had so much understanding, that
he thought the blessing was worthy having, though it cost dear. So on the
contrary, wandering thoughts being a curse, are worthy preventing, though it
cost us tears to God, yea many tears, and much pains with our own hearts.

3. The Lord has threatened to punish these wandering thoughts, which carry away
the heart in his worship, and make it only a bodily exercise without spirit and
life, with a secret but sure blasting of inward spiritual good, that as God
has but a shadow and outside of worship; so they shall have but a shadow, and
show of spiritual wisdom and prudence, Isa. 29.14. Therefore the wisdom of the
wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid.
Therefore, why? Because they have drawn near to God with their mouths, and have
removed their hearts far from him. They gave God a body without an heart,
therefore he will give them a body without an heart, the shape of wise men
without wisdom and prudence, a suitable judgment. What is the reason that
Christians are so much shadows and shows of Christians, rather then substance
and truth? when they should come to bear injuries and wrongs, to forget and
forgive, they can do it no more then other men: when they should express their
dependence upon God, and submission unto God, in willing and cheerful parting
with comforts and friends, when God will have it so, they can no more do it
then other men, they hold comforts fast, as if they should part with God and
all, when they part with them, and they hold friends fast, and will not let
them go, as if friends were made more to serve one another, then to serve God,
and when friends and comforts are gone, they grieve as if all their joy were
gone. When they should bear quietly the cross and grieving passages of Gods
providence, as those who have learned in whatsoever state they are to be
content, knowing they are in heavines if need be, they cannot bear, but carry
themselves as untamed heifers, that would rather shake off the yoke, then bear
it: they have the show of these graces in their profession, but they want that
measure of substance, the reason is, because their service of God is more in
show then substance, therefore they are Christians more in show then substance.
As we spend our Sabbaths, so will our week days be spent, and as we perform
holy duties, so will our conversation be. Is it not a heavy judgment to be
inwardly worse then we think our selves, or others think us to be? to be unable
to use grace, when we have most need to exercise it? yet thus has God
threatened to afflict us, and he will make his Word good, if we suffer our
thoughts to wander in his service.

Quest. By what means may we prevent wanderings in Gods worship?

Answ. First labor the increase of grace: Heb. 13.9. It is good that the heart
be established with grace, i. e. with g^acious knowledge of old and well known
truths, which the Apostle opposes to new and strange doctrine. And when the
Apostle would direct the people of God to keep their own stedfastnes, yea
though the error of the wicked took course to draw them away. He gives them
counsel to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Which places do show, that grace is
of an establishing, settling nature, and so indeed it is, for

1. It is contrary to vanity and inconstancy, being the nature of God, who is
stable and firm, always one and the same.

2. It sets the soul in order, puts every faculty into its place, and sets it
about its own proper office, and so it does establish.

3. It does establish, as it is the work of the free or liberal spirit, Psalm.
51.12. David prays that God would establish him with his free spirit: grace
does establish a man as it is the work of the free spirit, because it makes a
man's spirit free and liberal, like to the spirit of God, to slight earthly
things in comparison, and to mind heaven and heavenly things: earthly things
do unsettle, they are themselves changeable, and do change the thoughts and
affections pitched upon them. Let a man pitch his thoughts and heart upon his
nearest friends he has in the world, to whom nature, society, interchange of
love, Christianity has bound him, yet his thoughts and affections placed upon
these nearest friends, shall change, and not always contitinue one and the
same; because they change, and are not always the same, therefore the thoughts
pitched upon them, do change also; spiritual and heavenly things are of the
nature of the spirit and heaven, steady and stable, immovable, unchangeable,
therefore will establish the affections pitched upon them. Now the more grace
we have, the more we shall mind heavenly things, and so be the more
established.

2. Labor the increase of thy reverence and high esteem of the worship of God.
According to thy thoughts of the worship of God, so much-what will thy thoughts
be in it, Psalm. 48.9. We have thought of thy loving kindness, oh God, in the
midst of thy Temple. They profess their thoughts were busied about Gods loving
kindness in his Ordinances: why so? because of their high thoughts thereof, ver.
2, 3. beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion: God
is known in her palaces for a refuge. And herein were they helped by the report
of their fathers, ver. 8. as we have heard, so have we seen in the City of the
Lord of hosts: they had seen Gods mighty presence and protection, in and about
his own Ordinances, but they had also heard so, and that before they had seen
it. To help our reverence of Gods worship, it is good to talk with ancient
Christians, that have lived long before us, to hear what they will say; we may
be helped by their experience, when we have none, or but little of our own, and
if we have experience of the worth of the Ordinances, we may be further helped
by their experience.

3. Prepare our selves aforehand, Prove. 18.1. Through desire a man having
separated himself, intermedleth with all wisdom, if a man have a desire to
meddle with matters of wisdom, and would do it as becomes such occasions, and
as may be for profit, he will first separate himself, not pass immediately
from common and trivial matters, to matters of wisdom, but he will have some
time betwixt the leaving off of the one, and taking to the other. If we pass
from our callings to Gods worship without separating our selves, how is it
ordinarily possible, but that we should have the same thoughts in Gods worship,
that we bad in our callings? There are some separating duties that do prepare
unto others, as examination, meditation, prayer, and they do prepare, by
stirring up the grace of God, and providing an heavenly assistance to begin
with us in the duty. If thou can not always have separating time, betwixt
other occasions and Gods worship; Yet have some separating thoughts ere thou
enter upon the duty, thou art not fit else to meddle with wisdom.

4. Accustom our selves to meditation, so we shall get a skill of thinking
well. Meditation in its nature, is the composing, settling, and congealing of
our thoughts. It is to our roving sluent minds, as a damme to running water:
when much water is gathered together, the damme makes it there to stand: So
when many thoughts are gathered together in the soul, meditation makes them
there to stand, keeps them from running out again. The nature of it being a
settling of the mind: the effect of it must needs be so, and the use of it
frequently must needs perfect the effect, more and more settle our minds. When
Paul desired to have a good conscience always, the means he used, was to
exercise himself therein, so Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.7. Exercise thy self
unto godliness: the way to gain the trade and skill of godliness, is to exercise
our selves therein: ver. 15. M^ditate on these things, give thy self wholly
unto them, that thy profiting may appear unto all. If Timothy would be busied
wholly in stirring up the gift of God, all should see his profiting. So if we
would give our selves to meditation, be much in it, it would apparently settle
our minds. It is made the property of a blessed meditating man, to bring forth
fruit in season, Psalm. 1.3. Why so? because he is as a tree planted by the
rivers of waters. As a tree planted by the rivers of waters, cannot want fitnes
to bring forth fruit in season, because it has abundance of nourishment: So
the meditating soul cannot want fitnes to bring forth fruit in season, good
thoughts in holy duties, because it is planted amongst Gods springs, the fulness
of the assisting spirit.

5. Add to these watchfullnes: wandering thoughts will not be prevented without
watching. Watch

1. Thy mind; it needs watching, for it is nimble, therefore will soon be
gone, and go far in a little time.

2. Watch thine eye: a rolling eye, a wandering heart: if thou give liberty to
thy eye, that will set the mind at liberty, Job. 31.1. I have made a Covenant
with mine eyes, why should I think on a maid? the eye depends on the mind,
else why should he make one Covenant to bind them both? So he argues, I have
made a covenant with mine eyes, why should I think? It might be said, though
the eye be bound by covenant, yet the mind is at liberty. The answer is, that
the eye is the servant of the mind, made to help that, therefore in binding
the eye, the mind is bound, for if it cannot have the help and service of the
eye, it has not full liberty: if the mind should not be bound, why should the
eye to which it serves?

3. Watch thy ears: when thou art hearing or praying, the Devil will cause some
sound or other to draw away thy ear, he is that cunning charmer that labors to
inchant our ears, he will make us think that we hear some pleasant melody, of
our profit, or pleasure, or honor, if we keep not our ears stopped with
attention, thickened with watchfullnes.

4. Watch thy affections,

1. That they be affected and moved with the duty in hand; dead affections make
a wandering mind: if what is thought on do not affect, the mind will think of
something else that may affect: this is one reason of wandering thoughts,
because present thoughts do not affect: the mind does naturally serve the
affections, the more they are delighted, the more content the mind has, for
it has its end, if duties in hand delight not, the mind will wander till it
has found matter of delight.

2. Watch thy affections, that they continue as they begin, if they be
affected. A bow continuing bent, does carry the arrow level to the mark, but
if it slip, the arrow wanders: So if our affections continue in that vigor and
life wherein they begin, they will keep our minds steady, but if our
affections tire, and wax weary, our minds will rove. Though by watchfulnes we
cannot wholly prevent wandering thoughts, yet we shall in part prevent them:
hereby we shall more easily discern them, and resist them: this is a way of
command, therefore a sure way.

Ob. But when we have used all means, still we shall be troubled with wandering
thoughts.

Answ. True, therefore when we have done God the best service in his Ordinances
that is attainable, these three things must allwaies follow.

1. Sense of our failings.

2. Recourse unto the Lord Jesus, for renewment of repentance, and pardon, and
increase of power.

3. Confidence of Gods acceptance, in and through Christ, of what he enableth
us unto.

CHAP. IIII. Of the third hinderance of instant worshipping of God,
unpreparednes.
PSALM. 57.7. My heart is fixed, oh God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise.


THis verse does afford us an help, and means to the better praising of God, i.
e. fixednes, firmnes, or preparation of heart and soul: which gives us just
ground to speak of another hinderance of our earnest worshipping of God, viz.
unsetlednes, loosenes, and unpreparednes of heart.

N. God cannot so well be worshipped, without a fixed or prepared heart:
unpreparednes of heart does weaken our worshipping of God. What is said of
thanksgiving, which is one part of Gods worship, is true of all, for there is
the same reason of one, and of all. Preparation of heart does commend all
thanksgiving even unto God himself, and in like manner does it commend all
other parts of worship, and the want of it does discommend the worship
performed, and therefore discommend it, because it does weaken it, for had the
worship its full and due strength, and worth without it, how should the want
thereof discommend? But this is clear in the Text, ver. 8. That worship that is
performed with a sleepy drousy body, is a weak worship, but the Psalmist here
makes the awaking of the body, to be the fruit, and effect of the preparation
of the heart, awake my glory, awake lute and harp, I my self will awake early:
why so? My heart is prepared: the heart prepared and thereby awaked, will awake
the body. To worship God therefore without a prepared heart, is to worship him
with a drousy body, because with a drousy heart, and therefore weakly.

Three things will fully manifest the truth of this point.

1. The command of God for preparation, see it both in ordinary, and in
extraordinary worship. God requires preparation unto ordinary worship. A
general command that reaches unto all parts of ordinary worship, expressly
is the fourth Commandment. There are four things in that, which do call for
preparation.

1. Remember the Sabbath day, and he that sets down no particular time when
we should remember it, means all time, a sign there is, somewhat more in that
day then in other days, that we must remember it more then any other, yea then
all other, surely for some end we must remember it.

2. Keep it holy, and ver. 11. The Lord sanctified it: there is a difference
between this and other days: we may and must spend them in our own occasions,
but we must keep it holy, as a day set a part for his glory, and how shall we
keep the day holy, if we our selves be unholy?

3. It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, as in Revel. 1.10. The Lords day, he
has reserved it for himself: the six days are our days, allowed us for our
occasions, and shall we make no difference between Gods day and our own? If the
King will have the coronation day, kept as his day? If a Landlord will have his
marriage be kept as his day? we difference the same by change of apparel: and
shall we not difference Gods day from other days by change of spirit?

4. Six days thou shall labor and do all thou have to do, and ver. 11. In it
thou shall do no manner of work; What is this but a charge to prepare, when we
are commanded to get all our earthly occasions dispatched, ere that day come?
And if it be a difficulty so to do, yet we must labor, and take pains for that
end, and if we must have none of our occasions to do on the Lords day, which
are lawful all the six days, much less must we have our sinful occasions to
do on that day, which are never lawful. Another general place is, Eccl. 5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God. It is spiritual worship
chiefly that is performed in Gods house, therefore it is a spiritual foot that
is here chiefly meant, and the foot of the soul, is the inclination or
disposition of the soul, for all the faculties of the soul do move, and work by
the dispositions thereof, good or evil, by them we walk toward God, and
converse with God, Phil. 3.19, 20. The Apostle speaking of the wicked, says,
they mind earthly things, but of the godly he says, their conversation is in
heaven, i. e. as men by the help of their feet, carrying them from place to
place, do converse amongst men; so the godly by means of their understanding do
walk to heaven, though they live here upon earth, do converse with God. The
feet of the soul must be kept, when we go into the house of God, then our
mind, will and affections, must be in special compass, and under special
command: and that will not be without preparation, we have them not at a beck.
As the Scripture does plainly command in general, that we prepare unto all the
worship of God, so does it plainly command preparation, in particular parts of
Gods worship. For hearing the Word of God, Jer. 4.3. Break up the fallow ground
of your hearts, and sow not among thorns: The ground, the heart, must be
prepared by the plow of repentance, the very inwards of the heart must be
fastened and opened thereby, and the weeds plucked up by the roots, Luke 8.18.
Take heed how you hear, it must be done with caution, not with carelesnes, he
does not say, you need not heed how you hear, but take heed how you hear. For
prayer, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God, we must not rush upon prayer, nor rashly pour out
words in that duty, but be well advised and ponder well what we say. For
singing psalms: be filled with the spirit, and then sing, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. For
the passover: the paschall lamb was not to be killed till the fourteenth day of
the month: Exodus 12.6. but it was to be taken up on the tenth day, ver. 3.
What was this but to prepare them? The paschall lamb was set apart four days
before the celebration of the passover. So in regard of the Lords supper, 1
Cor. 21.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, not first eat, and
then examine himself. The like command we may find for extraordinary parts of
Gods worship. When the people were to hear the Word from Gods own mouth, he
commanded, Exodus 19.10, 11. That they should be sanctified two days together,
Go sanctify the people to day and to morrow, and be ready against the third
day: Joel 2.15, 16. Sanctify a Fast: and how shall the people be fitted?
Sanctify the Congregation. When God was about to bring inexpressible evil upon
his people, and would set them an effectual way to prevent it, he bids them
prepare to meet him, meet him, but not without preparation, Amos 4.12. The like
command lies upon vows, which are the companions of extraordinary special
prayer, Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6. The sum of this first argument, to prove, that the
want of preparation does weaken the worship of God, is this* To want that which
God has commanded as an help to his worship, ordinary and extraordinary, is to
weaken that worship. But to want preparation, is to want that which God has
appointed as an help to his worship ordinary, and extraordinary: therefore to
want preparation, is to weaken that worship.

2. The examples of the servants of God agreeable to this command, Psalm. 26.6.
I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine Altar, oh God:
David alludeth to a command injoined to the Priests, who served at the Altar,
viz. to wash their hands and their feet, when they went to do the service of
the Tabernacle, Exodus 30.18, 19, 20. This no doubt was exemplary to the people,
to teach them with what preparation they should worship God, and David says,
he will wash his hands in innocence, i. e. put away the evil of his doings, and
then come to worship God, as Isa. 1.15, 16. God excepted against their duties,
because their hands were full of blood, cruel hands, and must be washed, 2 Chronicles. 35.6. It was Iosiahs command, that the Priests should prepare
themselves, and sanctify their brethren against the passover: what a pithy
letter did Hezekiah write to his Subjects, to fit them for the passover, 2 Chronicles. 30. A letter of instruction, showing them how they should prepare
themselves, a letter of exhortation, pressing them thereto, a letter of
consolation, showing the benefits that would thence flow, and when he
perceived the peoples hearts were prepared, yet they vvanted some ceremonial
preparation, he was not satisfied, but prayed to the Lord to heal them.

Notable was Jacobs care to fit his family for a day of extraordinary
thanksgiving, Genesis 35.1, 2. and if he were so careful to prepare many, surely
he was not careless of one, of himself: He said to his household, Put away the
strange Gods that are amongst you, and be clean, and change your garments; put
away the strange Gods, more open and gross sins; be clean from more secret
sins, change your garments, the frame of their hearts from earthly to heavenly.
Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. When he was in danger, set himself to seek the Lord,
and proclaimed a Fast, turned his face from other occasions, and set it toward
that great occasion. From this argument we may reason thus.

To neglect that which the servants of God have practiced, as a way of due
worshipping of God, is to weaken that worship.

But to neglect preparation, is to neglect that which the servants of God have
practiced, as a way of due worshipping God. Therefore to neglect preparation,
is to weaken that worship.

3. God has generally put it into the minds of men, as a point of wisdom, to
make preparation for matters of less moment, Prove. 24.2^. prepare thy work
without, and make it ready for thy self in the field, and afterward build
thine house. When men build an house, they first bring materials to the hill,
(as we say) and then fit and prepare those materials, that they may sit the
work intended, and then they build, they do not build without preparation, Pro.
21.31. The horse is prepared against the day of battle; the horse is not used
in battle out of hand, nor will any ordinary common horse serve for that end,
but the horse is prepared against the day of battle, by exercising unto
warlike skill, by fit keeping, by harnessing. Men prepare their ground by
mannuring and plowing, ere they cast in the seed, Isa. 28.24, 25, 26. Does the
plowman plow all day to sow? does he open and break the clods of his ground?
when he has made plain the face thereof, does he not cast abroad the sirches,
and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat, and the appointed
barley and the rye in their place? And why does he thus prepare the ground, ere
he sow? ver. 26. for his God does instruct him unto discretion, and does teach
him. Is it wisdom to prepare, ere we build a material house for man to dwell
in? And is it not much more wisdom to prepare for that house, that it want
nothing, which must entertain the God of heaven? Isa. 66.1, 2. Heaven and earth
are Gods, he has made them, and they are ready prepared: but what house will
they make for God? The Lord tells them what house he chooses more then heaven
and earth. To him will I look, that is poor and contrite, and that trembl^th at
my word: a prepared heart to worship God, is Gods horse: a poor heart sensible
of its emptines of grace, a contrite heart, that is ground to dust and powder
in regard of sin, and a heart that trembles at Gods word, that is deeply
affected therewith, and wrought upon thereby.

Let me add one instance more, which comes a little more nearer to the matter
in hand. When we are to come to the house of God, we prepare our bodies, in
regard of the company we come unto, we wash our selves, and change our
apparel, and see that it be clean, we put on some clothes that were not worn
since they were washed, but are pr^pared in the week for that day, and we
should condemn a man of uncomelines and rudenes, of rashness and indiscretion
that should come unprepared in body. Nay, many that go abroad all the week, yet
will not come to Church on the Lords day, and all the reason is, because they
have no better clothes: had they n^w clothes they would come as well as any,
and the reason why this does hinder them, is, beca^^^ a^l m^^ t^ke ^^re to come
i^ ^^^^l^ (...) th^s to the C^^r^h, ^n^ they should be (...) b^dy. Nay more,
t^^^ t^^^ ^^^t comely clo^^^^ o^ (...) own, do count it a less matter to
humble themselves to borrow clothes, then to come unhansom^ly. Nay, yet a
little furt^er, many when they come to the Sacrament, rather t^^n they will not
have their bodi^s prep^^ed, as they think, they will deprive themselves of
food, necessary to the comfort of their bodies, they will come fasting, though
our bl^ss^d Savior and his Apostles did celebrate the Lords supper after they
had eaten the passover, which (I suppose) was a competent meal, for they were
to be no more at it, then could well make an end of the paschall lamb. If the
body cannot come well into the presence of man without preparation, can the
soul come well into the presence of God without preparation to worship him? The
body comes to meet men, the soul to meet God: the body men count unfit till it
be prepared, and is the soul sit without preparation? shall we make the
presence of men of greater consequence, then the presence of God? Beside, the
principal end why the body comes to Church, is, that the soul might meet with
God, and we trim the handmaid, but not the mistress, that which has least use
in the present occasion, not that which has most, just as if you should trim
the horse you ride upon to Church, but not your selves, which were a ridiculous
thing. This argument therefore does conclude strongly and sensi^ly. If matters
of a less moment cannot be so well done without preparation, then not the
worship of God. But less matters cannot so well be done without preparation,
as appears by instance. Therefore not the worship of God. God will at last day
bring out men's plowing, to witness against them, and condemn them: and this
shall be so sensible and plain an argument, that men shall have nothing to say.
As when the Lord said to the man that wanted the wedding garment, Friend, how
came thou hither, not having a wedding garment? What? come a wedding and not
have on a wedding garment? The argument was so sensible and plain, that he was
speechles. So when God shall say to us, as he will do at the last day, ^^i^nd,
did not thou prepare thy ground for thy seed? What? and not thy heart for my
worship? This shall be so sensible and manifest an argument, as men shall n t
be a^le to say any thing against it, but be spee^hles.

What is unpreparednes of heart to worship God?

It stands in three things. 1. Rash^^s. 2. Prophan^nes. 3. Unaptnes or
indisposednes.


1. Rashness, a rash heart is an unprepared heart, and begins the unpreparednes
of the heart at the highest faculty of the soul, the mind: Eccles. 5.2. Be not
rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God. God has given a man a power to deliberate, and consult with himself about
matters, what is fit to be done, and what not fit: how matters may best be
done, and how not, and hereby the mold and pattern of things is made in the
mind, according to which the outward man does them, and without this a man is
not fit to do any thing, (much less the worship of God) for he does the same
in great part without the soul, is carried thereunto by the force of sense and
blind affection, and herein represe^t^th the br^te beasts. It is called, Prove.
22.2. A devouring of holy things. It is a snare to a man that devoureth holy
things, and after vows to make enquiry. When a man devoures holy duties,
performs them at all adventur^s, considers not time, nor place, nor manner, nor
end, such a man is in a snare, the food he has devoured is within a net, and
has an hook within it, evil will befall him after such duties, anguish in
heart, and outvvard trouble. And after vows to make enquiry is a snare; When a
man ha h vowed, to enquire whether he has done well or no, and to vvish he
had his vow in again, were it to do again he would not do it, this is rash
vowing, and brings a man into a snare, he should have better considered
afore^^nd: Eccles. 5.6. Say not thou before the Angel, It was an error, why
should God be angry at thy voice? do not so vow, as that afterward thou
should have cause to say, thou were mistaken, that were to make God angry
with thee. To worship God rashly, is not to consider of six things before we
go about any part of Gods solemn vvorsh^p.

1. The persons worshipping. 2. The person worshipped. 3. The worship it
self. 4. The means of assistance and acceptance. 5. The manner. 6. The end.
1. We must consi^er the persons that do worship, Eccles. 5.2. By this argument
the spirit of God disswa^es from rashness in prayer or vows. We are on earth,
dust and a^hes, base and vile, that considered, would make us more serious and
weighty. So Abraham, when he was further to speak unto God, does consider he
was but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. Job also, chap. 40.40. When he was to
converse with God, acknowledges his own vileness, Behold, I am vile, this
consideration does stir up our humility, yea and our repentance, for we
cannot think of our vileness, but we must be put in mind of our sin, which
has had the chief hand in it?

2. We must consi^er the person worshipped: Eccles. 5.2. Be not ^ash with thy
mouth, Why? God is in heaven, thou have to do with an high, holy, powerful
God; thou can not be too serious and deliberat^. So Ab^^ham, Genesis 18.27. I
have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes: God is the
Lord, a person of greatest place and authority, Abraham bust dust and ashes,
great difference between dust and ashes, and the Lord: this consideration will
further our reverence, and respect of God, yea and our repentance; the geater
God is, the greater is our sin against him: when Jobs eye did see God, chap.
41.16. i. e. he had a clear knowledge of God, he abhorred himself in dust and
ashes. It will help our faith also; God having a power above us and others, can
do that for us, which neither we nor others can do.

3. We must consider the worship it self, whether it be ordinary or
extraordinary, more or less solemn, for ^ore i^ required in the one, then in
the other, and what part of ordinary worship it is, we must consider; for
beside the heart, which must be employed in all, we have more special use of
the ear in hearing the Word, and the hand, and eye in the supper of the Lord:
and by the well using of them, our hearts are helped; the worship of God is a
separate way, an holy way, a way above an high way, Prove. 15.24. a way of
converse and communion with God.

4. We must consider the means of assistance and acceptance, the Lord Jesus
Christ; we have no ability of our own to worship God, nor have we any worth to
commend our duties unto God, when we have done them: this consideration will
stir up our humility and faith; ou^ humility, for we have no strength of our
selves to do any good, nor is there any thing in us that can procure savor and
acceptance of Gods hands of what we do, and they that have no strength nor
worth, had need by faith depend upon him that has perfection, Heb. 11.4.
Faith, depending upon Christ for assistance and acceptance, did make Abels
sacrifice excel Cains, which, it may be, did not exceed in matter.

5. We must consider the manner of Gods worship, how God will be worshipped,
with inward affections and the life of them, with willingness and
cheerfullnesse, with reverence, love, humility, repentance, faith, Eccles. 5.1.
be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools, i. e. do not
satisfy thy self with an outward performance of duty, or with some other
service beside that in hand, which thy self do fancy, which a fool may do,
one that has no spiritual understanding, but be more ready to hear, attend
and give thine ear unto the present ordinance, which does argue inward
reverence and affection.

6. We must consider the end of Gods worship, which is double, His glory. Our
good.


His glory more immediately, fully then in other works, which yet honor God.
Our good, the good of our souls more immediately, fully th^n in other occasi^^s
wherein yet is a blessing.

If we consider not of these things before we worship God, we are rash and not
prepared, and the more serious, solemn and set any worship is at any time, the
more must we consider of them.

2. The second part of an unprepared heart, is prophanenes or unholines of
heart. Prophanenes and unholines are all one, Ezekiel. 22.26. They put noe
difference between the holy and profane: the holy and profane are contrary,
therefore these two, unholy and profane, are al one, and unsanctified and
unprepared are all one, for prepared and sanctif^^d are all one. 2 Ch^o. 29.^9.
An heart is profane, common or polluted two ways, in relation to the worship
or God. 1. When it lies under an act of sin unrep^nted of. Sin does poll^te and
defile, ^ Cor. ^.17. touch no unclean thing. cap 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves
from all fil^hines of flesh and spirit: sin is the unclean thing, and does
defile, for it takes the soul from God, which was set apart for him, and from
the holy way, and nothing but repentance will wash away this defilement. Ier.
4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, how long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? To come therefore to worship God with sin
unrepented of, is to come with a defiled heart, Ezekiel. 23.38. they have defiled
my sanctuary, and profaned my sabbaths: and how does he prove it? ver. 39. for
when they had slain their children to their Idols, then they came into my
sanctuary to profane it: they came from their Idolatry unto the sanctuary of
God without repentance, and so they profaned it, by making no difference
between it and an unholy place, and especially did they first defile their
hearts, by making no difference between an holy and unclean heart. Numb. 9.7.
We are defiled by the dead body of a man: why are we kept from offeringe an
offeringe to the Lord in his season amongst the children of Israel? that
uncleannes was a sinful uncleannes, though ceremonial, hindering them from
preparednes unto the passover till they were washed: shadowing out that
defilement we get by touching sin and sinners, which are dead things; Exodus
2.48. No uncircumcised person shall eat thereof, uncircumcision was a sinful
uncleannes, that did unfit them for the passover, and to this the Apostle
alludes when he speaks of preparednes to bear the word, Iam. 1.21 Lay aside
all superfluity of naughtines: the fore-kin was a superfluity, therefore to
be cut off: so sin is a superfluity: we may well spare it, and it must be cut
off when we come to hear the word, if we would be clean.

2. The heart is then un^lean and propha^e, when it come to worship God, not
having laid aside earthly thoughts, and affections, these thoughts and
affections are common, not set apart unt^o Gods worship, therefore do defile
the heart in Gods worship, because they make it common, when it should be set
apa^t for God. Common is as well opposed to holy, as sinful, 1. Sam. 21.4.
There is no common bread under my hand, but hallowed, common or ordinary bread
in comparison of hallowed bread, is unholy, and so common ordinary thoughts and
affections, inreference to holy worship, are profane and unholy, and make the
heart a profane vessel. Nehe. 13.17. Nehemiah did contend with the Nobles,
because they did profane the sabbath: How did they profane the sabbath? viz.
in suffering wares to be sold, and tradesmen to be employed in their trades on
the sabbath day, much more did they that were employed in them profane the
sabbath, and especially their hearts, by intermedling with such occasions. Isa
58.^3. Thou shall not do thine own ways, nor find thine own pleasure on my
holy day; the day and duties are Gods, therefore the works and word, yea and
thoughts and affections too, must in a special manner tend to God upon that
day. This was shadowed by Gods command to Moses, when he drew nigh to the bush,
where God did manifest himself in glory (setting the bush on fire, yet keeping
it from being consumed) put off thy shoes from thy feet, Exodus 3 5. why? For
the place whereon thou stand is holy ^round. Those shoes, those affections
whereby we tread upon the earth, converse with men, and with earthly
occasi^ns, must be put off when we come to Worship God, else they will make
our hearts unholy and unclean, because common.

3. A third part of the unpreparednes of the heart, is, unaptnes or
indisposednes: suppose a man lie under one sin unrepented of, and lay aside
wordly thoughts and affections, yet experience proves a man may be unwilling
and backward to the Worship of God, or may have an indifferency, or carlesnes
of spirit, that he could as well let it alone as do it, a spirit of
lukewarmenes, that does neither strongly incline to the Worship of God, nor
from it, but stands in a middle way. This unaptnes is not only a want of Grace
(without which a man wants a will, for God works the will: till God work a
will in a man to that which is good, he has none) but also a want of readiness
in grace to be put in exercise in Gods worship, by reason of spiritual sloth:
the case of the wise virgins, who by reason of their slumbring, had their lamps
to trim when the bridegroom was coming, ere they could be prepared, the orb
of grace grew low, and so their lamps of profession did burn obscurely, they
awaking and using the means, got supplye of oil from Christ, and so their
lamps recovered their brightness; and the want of that which Paul calls upon
Timo^hy for, 2. Tim. 1.6. Stir up the gift of God, there are gifts and graces,
but they are like fire in the ash-heaps, not fit to kindle and flame the
ordinances of God being put to them, because the ashes of security lie between
grace and the ordinances of God, unblowne away. This we find in Jacobs
preparing of his family, Genesis 35.2. First, put away the strange gods, that was
all manifest and open sin. Secondly, be ye clean, i. e. from all ceremonial
pollutions. Thirdly, change your garments, not only put off those they had on,
but put on others. The garments of the soul are the dispositions of the soul,
Isai. 61.3. a garment of praise is opposed to a spirit of heavines; a spirit of
heavines is a sad or mournful disposition, a garment of praise on the contrary
is a joyful and thankful disposition. We must change our garments, put off
our earthly and worldly dispositions, thoughts, desires, cares about the world,
and not there rest, but we must be clothed with heavenly thoughts, affections,
graces, have them in a readiness to express themselves in the worship of God.

This is the wedding garment, spoken of, Matthew. 22.2. for by the marriage feast
there, is meant all the ordinances of God, word, sacraments, prayer, for in all
does God give our souls liberal and honorable entertainment, does set all
his dainties before us, with great solemnity; the wedding garment is our fitnes
and disposednes unto the ordinances, by reason of certain heavenly suitable
dispositions in a readiness in our souls, appearing to Almighty God, and in
measure to the godly, by our outward carriage and behavior. If we take Christ
for the wedding garment, as some do, how does he fit us for the ordinances, but
by imputing his righteousness unto us? which is our worth, and communicating to
us heavenly dispositions to make us meet. They that put on wedding garments, do
first put off their ordinary common apparel, and then put on comely pleasant
apparel meet for such an occasion: so when we come to the feast of Gods
ordinances, where God is the feast-maker, and Christ the feast, and Angels
entertainers, and attenders; we must not only put off our ordinary and common
affections, but we must put on such affections as are meet for the ordinances
of God, sanctified and holy affections for holy duties, as reverence, humility,
love, repentance, faith, these in a readiness do make the heart apt and
disposed, and these not put on by new care and diligence in use of means and
dependencie upon Christ, do make us unapt and indisposed, and so unprepared. If
a man take not care to stir up holy thoughts and holy affections, when he
comes to the ordinances of God, he has an unprepared heart, because his heart
having no holy affections ready to meet and close with holy duties, has no
fitnes unto them, because no present ready suitableness unto them. It is one
thing to have grace in the heart, another thing to have it ready for exercise,
and so it is one thing to have a general fitnes for the ordinances, another
thing to have a particular and present fitnes at this and that time, for this
and that ordinance. A child of God that has grace in his heart, has a
general fitnes for the ordinances, because the same holiness that is in the
ordinances, is in his heart, and they must needs fit one another but the same
child of God, if his grace be not fit for exercise through some impediment, at
a particular time and in a particular ordinance, may want a perfect and
particular fitnes for that ordinance. If this were not so, a child of God
could never perform any duty unworthyly, as to bring special judgments of
si^knes, ^eaknes and death upon them, as the Corinthians did, 1 Cor. 11.3^. for
a particular act of unworthy receiving; for God does not so correct for
unavoidable infirmities, but for carelessnes, for God did not so afflict them
at other times, there was some diffe^rence therefore between them at that
time, and at other times, the difference was not in the frame and habit of
grace, for then they had not been truly godly, therefore in the exercise of
grace: see it in an example. There is a general affection in fire always to
burn, but suppose fire be covered over with ashes, it is not fit to burn in
that present state, because it has a present particular hinderance, but when
that is removed it will actually burn: so Gods grace in our hearts has a
general fitnes to worship God, but when a spirit of security and sloth lies
upon the soul, if ye bring the soul to the word, to prayer, it has not a
present fitnes for grace, is not ready at this time to be exercised, because
hindered by security and sloth, and therefore unprepared till that be removed.

Let us recollect what has been said. An unprepared heart to worship God, is,

1. A rash heart, that does not consider what a poor creature it is that does
worship, what an high and holy God he is that is worshipped, what an holy and
high way Gods worship is, that Christ is our strength and acceptance, that God
will be worshipped inwardly and spiritually, that Gods glory and our souls good
must be our special aims in Gods worship.

2. An unprepared heart, is a profane heart, that comes to worship God in
sin unrepented of, or in worldly thoughts and affections.

3. An unprepared heart, is an heart indisposed to exercise grace, to put forth
holy and gracious affections in the worship of God.

Quest. It follows in the next place, that we make enquiry after the reason,
why unpreparednes of heart does weaken our worshipping of God, or the manner how
it does it?

Ans. An unprepared heart does weaken the worship we perform, three ways.

1. As it makes the soul an unmeet instrument to worship God. If the soul
cannot be sit to worship God without preparation, then unpreparednes makes it
unfit. But the soul cannot be fit to worship God without preparation. That I
shall make manifest many ways.

1. Take the soul in the best preparation, when the soul has walked in all the
preparing w^y of God, and taken all the pains that humane frailty allow, it
will be but in measure fit, because there will be but a m^asure of grace and
readiness to exerc^se grace in the heart, perfection of these alone will bring
perfection of fitnes to worship God. We on earth pray that we may do Gods will
as it is done in heaven; only they that are in heaven are a perfect pattern of
worshipping God. Nay I appeal to the experience of the people of God, when they
have endeavored to renew their repentance, to pitch their thoughts and
affections upon heavenly things, to stir up their graces, and do l^oke upon
the r preparation with eyes awaked and clear fighted in measure, do they not
see but little preparation? rather what they want then what they have, there is
such difference between the one and the other. If the soul prepared has but a
measure of fitnes, yea but a small measure, then a soul without preparation
cannot be fit at all.

2. We cannot be fit to worship God without preparation, because we continually
disfit our selves between time and time of Gods service. In the general, the
flesh does lust against the spirit uncessantly, Gal. 5.17. As grace does make a
man willing to worship God, and desirous to be employed about that; so
corruption, on the contrary, does make a man backward thereto, nay forward to
sin, this is that Paul says, Romans 7.21. When I would do good, evil is present
with me. When his regenerate will chooses good, his unregenerate will out of
hand chooses evil. And the effect of this lusting of the flesh against the
spirit, is this, (says the Apostle) ye cannot do what ye would, though there
be a will to be prepared for duty, yet the corrupt will, will hinder the act of
the regenerate will, or at least weaken it. More particularly, we do
continually unfit our selves for the worship of God two ways.

1. We sin continually in all our actions, and every act of sin does strengthen
the habit, and weaken the contrary habit of grace. Not only we do sin
necessarily and unavoidably, but through carelesnes, for want of watching to
avoid occasions, and to take hold of advantages against sin. And the more of
the will in sin, the less opposition it meets with all, the more does it
gather strength, and weaken grace, because grace is less exercised, Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God: Sin does not only
separate us from God, as a fountain of comfort, but as a fountain of grace, so
that the more we sin, the less communion we have with God in grace, and the
less communion we have with God in grace, the more unfit to worship him. It
fares with us in this case, as with Samson, when he had given way that the hair
of his head should be cut, which was to break his covenant, (a sin rather of
carelesnes, then of presumption) he thought to have risen up, and gone from the
Philistines as at other times, but he knew not that God was departed from him:
sin had bereaved him of his strength: So when we have been careless of our
watch, as we generally are, and have let loose our thoughts, affections,
speeches, we think to pray, hear, meditate, with the same spiritual life and
strength, that we have formerly done, but we know not that God is absent from
our hearts, and so our strength is absent.

2. We do specially unfit our selves for Gods worship by the use of our
callings, and the comforts of this life. Neither our callings nor outward good
things do of themselves unfit us to worship God, for God would not then have
given man a calling, and set him in midst of outward comforts in innocence. But
we abuse our callings and comforts, to make us unfit for Gods worship, and that
we do three ways.

1. We spend too much affection upon them. 2. Too much time. 3. Too much
labor.
1. We bestow the strength of our affections upon our callings and outward
comforts, contrary to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. and they that buy,
as if they possessed not: and they that use the world, as not abusing it:
teaching us a weaned affection from them; we should be in regard of setting our
hearts upon them, when we are in the midst of them, as if we wanted them. But
we not only use them, but let our hearts go into them, we too much care about
them, when we want them, which made our Savior take so much pains with his
Disciples, Matthew. 6. from ver. 25. to the end, to prevent this: did not care
make Martha unfit to hear our Savior, yea so change her into care, that she
would have hindered Mary also, yea and charged it as a neglect upon our Savior
himself, that he did not relieve her in this immoderate care? Luke 10.40.
Master, do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid her
therefore that she help me; her immoderate care made her think that Mary had
too little care, and our Savior also. Is not the reason rendered, why cares
immoderate do unfit us for Gods worship? Luke 21.34. Take heed that your hearts
be not overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life.
Immoderate cares are to the soul, as a surfeit of drink, too much drink unto the
body, the body is overcharged with it, and so unfit for occasions: so the soul
is over-burdened with immoderate cares, therefore unfit for a farther weight of
Gods worship. Why do cares choke the seed of the Wo^d, Matthew. 13.22. but
because they choke the soil, draw away the strength of the heart and
affections? When we are about our callings, and enjoy the comforts of this
life, we lose our hearts in love and delight, and if they have the strength of
our joy and desire, God cannot have it also. No man (says our Savior) can
serve two maste^s, for he will love the one, and hate the other, Matthew. 6.24.
Ye cannot serve God and mammon: If these worldly good things have the best of
our love, God cannot also have it. If we be at any time busied about the
worship of God, our hearts will go after our covetousnes, the good things we
have coveted will have our thoughts and affections, when God should have them.

2. We bestow too much time upon our callings: Psalm. 127.2. It is vain for you
to rise early, to sit up late, showing that ordinarily our care is to gain all
time for our callings and occasions, hardly can we spare time daily for the
worship of God, and when the S^bbath does approach, all the time that we can
any way get, we lay hold of, lest God should have too much, no time will be
allowed for preparation, not only so long as light will permit men, will they
be laboring about their callings on saturday night, but so long as sleep will
suffer them: when we are counseled, Ephesians. 5.16. to redeem the time, part of
the meaning is, out of the hands of our callings, unless we can prove that
they do not take up too much time, Luke 14.18, 19. The foundation of their
refusing to come to the supper, the ordinances of God, was this, they could not
spare time from their callings.

We bestow too much pains and labor about our callings, too much spend the
vigor and strength of our bodies, that they become unfit to serve our souls in
the worship of God. What means our sleepy prayers every night in our families,
but the over-wearying of our bodies? What means our sleepy Sabbaths, but the
overtiring of our bodies on the week days?

3. We cannot be fit to worship God without preparation, because of Satan's
continual main endeavor to make us unfit for Gods worship; Satan is more Gods
enemy then ours, because God stands more directly opposite unto him then we do.
God is the greatest good: Satan is the greatest evil. What is more opposite to
the greatest good, then the greatest evil? We have somewhat like Satan,
therefore he is not so great an enemy unto us: God is altogether unlike him,
and contrary to him, therefore he is an utter enemy to him; so that though
Satan will endeavor to unsit us for our own callings, yet chiefly for Gods
worship, for that does most concern Gods glory, and in that he does more
immediately and fully oppose God. When did Satan put that thought into Judas
heart of betraying Christ, but when the passover did approach? And experience
tells the godly, that they have never more confusion of thoughts, then when
they desire to meditate and to fit themselves thereby for prayer.

4. Unpreparednes of heart does weaken the worship of God performed by us, as
it does hinder the breathing and working of the spirit in our hearts. If the
spirit assist us not, we shall but weakly worship God, therefore it is said to
help our infirmities in prayer, and so in other duties, Romans 8.26. Whereas the
burden of duty is too heavy, the spirit of God does help to lift the burden. If
the soul come unpreparedly, the spirit of God will not ordinarily assist.

1. Because a lesser breathing of the spirit is neglected: and will the spirit
lay out more, when lesser is not prized and improved? The spirit of God does
allwaies move and provoke the soul unto all the will of God, and therefore unto
preparation, if men therefore come without preparation, they come with neglect
of the spirits motion unto preparation; and if less of the spirit be not
improved, will he be lavish of more assistance?

2. The spirit will not ordinarily assist the unprepared heart, because it is
out of the way and road of the spirit: the spirit of God is a spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1.13. and is therefore conveyed to the soul in a way o^
promise, but the unprepared heart is out of the way of promise, and therefore
out of the way of the spirit. Indeed the spirit of God will sometimes meet an
unprepared heart in a duty, but it goes out of the ordinary way at such a
time, as it must do when we are out of the way; the spirit of God must first
come out of its ordinary way to us, ere we can get into our way; but the effect
of the spirit meeting a soul unprepared, is to make it ashamed of
unpreparednes, and more watchful thereunto for time to come.

3. Unpreparednes of heart does weaken our worshipping of God, as it does give
advantage to Satan to interrupt and hinder us in the same. To what end serves
preparation? is not this a main end to prevent impediments in worship, and
Satan the master of them? When the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.8. would have us be
vigilant, upon this ground, that Satan walks about, seeking whom he may
devour, does he not give us to understand, that the more careless we are, the
more advantage Satan has against us, and the more watchful we are, the less
harm can he do us? This was our Saviors counsel to his three disciples in
the garden in the very hour of temptation, watch and pray, that ye enter not
into temptation, implying, that it is not sufficient for the preventing of
Satan's temptations to perform duties, unless we add watching, that we be
fit to perform them. It is not duties that weaken Satan, but duties
performed in the power of the spirit, Gal 5.16. walk in the spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: so much as we express the spirit, we
oppose sin and Satan. The devil makes great advantage of duties, of men's
hearing, reading, praying. Into whom does he enter with the unclean spirit, but
into the house that is swept of gross and foul sins, and garnished with
common gilts and performances of duties? The scribes and Pharisees made a
cloak of their long prayers to cover their oppression. The devil himself will
sometimes put on the form of an Angel of light: and herein do his instruments
imitate him, as a way of more effectual deceiving, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. so
that duties performed unpreparedly do more advantage Satan then otherwise.

But that we may see more fully how unpreparednes of heart does give advantage
unto Satan, let us enter into some particulars.

1. The heart unprepared is indisposed unto good duties, has no readiness unto
them, but disposed unto other things, unto sin, or unto worldly occasions:
the soul is ever working, because it is sometimes indisposed to good duties, it
is not therefore indisposed to every thing else, but it stands inclined to
other things. Now no disposition of the soul is so contrary to Satan, as a
disposition unto that which is good, for that is Gods image, and the devil can
make least advantage of it, for though he make great advantage of good duties,
yet for the most part it is when the heart is indisposed; but when the heart is
unprepared, and so has no readiness unto that which is good, but rather unto
other things, it does come nearer the devils disposition, and so gives more
advantage to Satan; it is more fit to close with his suggestions, and unfit to
resist them.

2. When the heart is unprepared, the spirit of God is withdrawn, for that is
the principal cause of the unpreparednes of the heart, the absence of the
spirit, and if the spirit be absent in any measure, the greatest enemy and
opposite of Satan is absent, the light and power of the soul is absent, light
to discern Temptations, and power to resist them; and if Satan has the
advantage of the darkness and weakness of the soul, has he not great advantage?

3. Unpreparednes of heart does weaken the grace of faith, whereby we should
draw strength from Christ, both to perform duty, and to resist Satan's
temptations in duty. The ground of faith is the promise: unpreparednes of heart
does take the soul out of the way of the promise, therefore takes away the
ground of says; and faith being weakened, Satan's temptations are strengthened,
for faith is the shield that quenches the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians.
6.16. The less use of faith in the heart, the more fire in Satan's temptations.

4. As unpreparednes of heart does weaken faith, so at the same time it does
weaken the comfort of the soul, and bring in doubts in the room thereof: so
much want of faith in the heart, so much want of comfort: if the soul be out of
the way of assistance in duty, as in unpreparednes it is, what comfort or cheer
can it have to go about the worship of God? It will be full of doubts and
fears, and that will be Satan's advantage, for as the joy of the Lord is our
strength, Neh. 8.10. so the sorrow of the heart, and doubt of the heart, is the
weakness of the heart, and that is Satan's advantage. The heart already
doubting, is sit to have doubts multiplied by Satan, the doubts of the soul do
darken the soul, and so Satan may with less notice and discerning scatter his
temptations in the heart.

Use. This doctrine does prove four things.

1. The fall; The worship of God cannot be so well performed by the servants of
God without preparation, a sign they are not always fit to worship God, a
sign of their imperfection: and imperfection is a sign of their fall. Did God
send us out of his hand imperfect? If we were perfect, we had no unpreparednes
unto that which is good. God made us in his image and likeness, and Gods image
is ready and free unto that which is good: we are not therefore as we were
made. Hence the Apostle says, we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. our first creation unto good works, was not in
Christ Jesus: but before we can have any disposednes unto that which is good,
we must be created again through the power of the Lord Jesus: we are not
therefore the same cretion we were at first, but have lost it: and the sign
hereof we carry continually about us, an unreadines to that which is good.

2. The evil of the fall. What greater evil, then to be allwaies out of frame
to what is good, any further then the heart is set in temper? All evils of
punishment do spring from the distemper of the heart, and are appointed to
punish that, therefore that is greater then them all. It is the Lords greatest
good, and so his greatest glory to be allwaies disposed unto good, and never
unto evil. And it is the greatest evil that the fall has brought upon us, that
naturally we are allwaies disposed unto evil, but never unto good, and when we
are regenerate, we are allwaies more ready unto evil then unto good.

3. The miserable estate of unregenerate persons, such as are in the same
estate wherein they were borne. If Gods people that are new creatures, that
have Gods image renewed in them, cannot be fit to worship God, till they have
prepared their hearts, and stirred up grace unto particular act and exercise,
how should they be sit to worship God that have no grace at all, no general
reddines? Unregenerate men may read, pray, hear the word, receive the
Sacraments, but they can never be fit for those duties, whilst they remain in
an unregenerate estate. And what a misery is it to be unfit for Gods service,
which is the best work we can do, a work we shall never repent of, a work that
tends to Gods glory, and to our best good? And the misery is the greater, if we
consider, unregenerate men are fit for any thing else, but to serve God: fit
for their own occasions, fit to sin against God, they are wise to do evil, but
to do well they have no understanding, Jer. 4.12. put the case that a subject
should find himself fit to do any business of his own, yea also fit to war
against his Prince, but unfit to do him any service: would he not think himself
in a miserable temper? Nay, suppose a man should find himself unfit to do for
the best friend he has in the world, that which he would have him to do, and
what might pleasure and honor him, but fit to do the mind of his greatest
enemy, would he not think himself in an evil and lamentable temper? So it is
with unregenerate men, they are fit to do their own occasions, fit to do
against Gods mind, and against Gods honor, but unfit to do for him, yea fit
to do for their greatest enemy, Satan, but unfit to do for God their greatest
friend: and is not this an evil temper? who would rest in this condition?

4. The necessity of regeneration unto glory. If Gods worship cannot be so well
performed without particular preparation, then it cannot be performed well at
all, where there is no preparation, as in the unregenerate there is not. And
can they be fit for heaven, that are not fit for Gods service? What? fit for
wages, and not fit for work? They that partake in the inheritance of heaven,
have it among them that are sanctified, Act. 26.18. and what is it to be
sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus, but to be set apart unto God and his
service, to be purified for Christ, zealous of good works? Tit. 2.14. Change of
place will not change the disp^sition of the soul, no not heaven it self, could
an unregenerate man come thither, no more then a man coming from hell, and
relating his experimental knowledge of the torments there, would change the
soul, Luke 16.31. If therefore men be unfit for the service of God here, they
will be much more unfit for the service of God in heaven, where more
perfection, and continual worshipping of God is required.

2. To reprove the usual and ordinary, general and common unpreparednes of
Gods people unto Gods worship. It is not the fault of some particular
Christians only, but of all the people of God generally, and their fault it is
not, at some particular times only, but ordinarily. No one thing, I am
persuaded, the godly are more failing in, then in preparing themselves for Gods
worship. They cannot be ignorant that it is a way of Gods command, and a way of
promise, therefore of advantage and benefit unto them, therefore in neglecting
it, they sin against Gods sovereignty, and their own good. Do not the practices
of Gods several servants in Scripture cast shame upon them? Nay, do not their
own consciences reprove them, when they are out of temper in holy duties, and
cannot find God? Do not their consciences whisper to them, and tell them that
they may thank their unpreparednes? Nay, does not the thing it self deeply
reprove them, and take away all excuse? what, come unprepared to Gods worship?
Suppose that God would not at all hide himself, when his people come unprepared
to his worship, and they were sure of so much; yet were it their fault to come
unprepared: should not they suit themselves according to the presence they come
unto, and the work they go about? Does not reason teach as much? Can we without
fault less prepare for eternal ways, for ways that concern Gods glory, and
our good most, then for other matters? Gods worship is an eternal way: though
this and that particular worship of God be not eternal, yet some worship of
God is eternal, and shall remain with us for ever in heaven, and all the
worship of God does tend more to Gods glory and our good, then any thing else;
yet we prepare more for any thing else. More particularly we are to be reproved
for sundry things that tend to our unfitting to the worship of God.

1. The godly do not remember the sabbath in the week day. That remember, which
the Lord has prefixed before that commandment, rather then any other, does
imply, as a necessity of special remembrance of that, so an easines to forget
that, a difficulty to remember it, or else the Lord would not have set this
remember before it. And if the godly consider, they shall find, that the
Sabbath comes seldom into their minds the week through, though it be the most
solemn day in the week, and of more weight then all the days in the week.

2. The godly do not ordinarily keep up their watch, and so advantages for
grace are overslipped, and sin is committed through carelessenes, which does
exceedingly unfit the heart for Gods worship: sin makes grace unto the
performance of duty as a knife to cut without an edge.

3. They do not spiritualize their callings and earthly businesses, by going
about them in the strength and wisdom of the spirit of God, and propounding
Gods glory as their aim and end, and making some spiritual use of passages
therein by meditation, often raising up their thoughts and desires to heaven,
so that they grow earthly and carnal, like the occasions they meddle with, and
so unfit for heavenly and spiritual worship.

4. The times of their vacancie from their callings, and of liberty, they
spend in empty and unprofitable ways, letting loose their thoughts and
speeches unto vain and empty things, which tend to no profit, and so the heart
is more empty: whereas if the people of God would but season the times of their
repast and recreation, with some sprinklings of good discourse, as salt, or
wind up the same with some good discourse, or with prayer, or with some
heavenly thoughts, their bodies would be more fit for Gods worship, and their
spirits not the more unfit.

5. The people of God do their worldly occasions unto the utmost period of
time, on the Saturday night, that sleep will allow them to take, and do not
improve their time that day, that they might get their occasions dispatched,
and have some time to prepare their hearts.

Herein, I persuade my self, the godly that use our Saturday markets, do
exceedingly fail, in that they do come home so late, not through necessity of
business, but carelessenes, much time is spent on that day which they can give
no good account of, when they come to recollect themselves. Nothing but sleep
does part the Lords day and their days with them, beside ordinary duties. Will
sleep change the frame? No surely, but as they left with the world last when
they went to sleep, so they shall meet with that first when they awake in the
morning. That which may the more reprove the godly, is the consideration of a
treble cause of this unpreparednes.

1. The difficulty of it: it is an harder matter to prepare the heart, then to
perform a duty, for the godly do not ordinarily neglect duties, but they
ordinarily neglect to prepare their hearts: were it as easy to prepare the
heart, as to perform duty, they would do that as well. And if difficulty
hinder, is not spiritual sloth the cause? and what more loathsome, then to
neglect that which might exceedingly tend to Gods glory and their good, for
want of taking a little pains?

2. A second cause, why the godly do no more prepare themselves, is, an
opinion that a little preparation will serve: for if they did not think a
little would serve, if they were persuaded that God would not take a little
well, they would prepare more. And if this opinion did spring from mere
ignorance, because they know no better, it were less matter; but it does
spring from heedlessenes, and carelessenes, because they do not attend to, and
consider of the light they have, for did they but consider the command of God,
the practice of the servants of God, and their own practice in other matters,
they cannot but know that a little preparation will not serve.

3. A third cause, is, confidence in duties done: did they think duties would
do them no good without preparation, they would more prepare: but they think,
if they pray, hear, read, receive the Sacrament with any hearts, these duties
will help their hearts. What is this but to make idols of the ordinances, to
make gods of them, to think they can help our hearts without any further
help? only God can help the heart without any other help, no ordinance can
help our hearts without the help of other ordinances. As the godly are to be
reproved for their unpreparednes in ordinary ordinances, so especially in
extraordinary, a frequent fault with the godly, and, if seen in nothing else,
yet in the fruitlessenes of such duties. It is a sin to come unprepared unto
ordinary ordinances, but a double sin to come unprepared unto extraordinary
ordinances. It is a taking of Gods name in vain to come unprepared to ordinary
worship, but it is a taking of Gods name in vain, in an high degree, to come
unprepared to extraordinary worship. Hence God does often make them to be of
contrary effect, straitning, hardening burdensome, wearisome.

3. To provoke the godly to take heed of unprepared worshipping of God, my
doctrine is argument sufficient. It will weaken the worship we perform, and we
cannot serve a better master, nor do better work, and therefore no where
better bestow the strength of soul and body. I know if thou have the spirit of
a child in thee, the spirit of reverence, and the spirit of love, and thou
know aforehand what would help or hinder thee in the worship of thy heavenly
father, thou will avoid the one, and use the other. But because the wise man
says, Eccles. 12.11. that the words of the wise are as nails fastened by the
masters of the assemblies, and consequently the more loose any nail of wisdom
sticks in the heart of the godly, the more and harder blows must be given, and
because it will be confessed that this word of wisdom (preparation for holy
duties) hangs loose in the hearts of the godly, therefore by force of argument
I shall endeavor to fasten it: I will use a double motive, one from the evil
of unpreparednes, another from the benefit of preparednes.

1. Consider the evil of unpreparednes. 1. It is a tempting of God. What is it
to tempt God, but to move him to go out of his own ordinary way? Math. 4.6, 7.
when Satan willed our Savior to cast himself from the pinnacle of the temple,
upon this ground, that God would give his Angels charge over him, our Savior
answered him, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Wherein should our Savior
have tempted the Lord by casting himself down? because that was not the
ordinary way to go down, and therefore not the ordinary way of preservation, we
may gather that from the devils leaving out part of the scripture [in all thy
wayes] without which it would not have served his turn. The like is here, thou
come to an ordinance to find God, to get good to thy soul, with an
unprepared heart, thou now putst God to go out of his way, or at least temptest
and triest the Lord, whether he will go out of his way or no, for if he meet
with thee, and do thy soul good at this time, he must go out of his ordinary
way, for his ordinary way of meeting the soul, is preparation. It is a grievous
sin to tempt God.

1. It is a presuming of Gods mercy and goodness, that he will be good above all
he has revealed, which does imply a secret unthankfullnes for Gods mercy
revealed, as if that were not enough; for if it be enough, why should we
presume of more?

2. It is a lording it over God, instead of subjecting our selves unto him:
when thou preparest, thou subjectest thy self to Gods will; but when thou
come for Gods blessing in unpreparednes, thou desire and expectest that
God should let go his own will, and stoop to thine: God says, thou shall have
it in unpreparednes, thou sai'st in unpreparednes; his will is thou should
prepare thy self, thy will is to be unprepared, and thou look that God
should stoop to thy will, for thou come for his blessing in a way of thine
own will.

3. It is a falsifying of Gods truth. God says, he will bow his ear to the
prepared heart, Psalm. 10.17. We say, God will draw near to us, though
unprepared, and this we profess when we come unpreparedly to seek God: we
might as well say, God indeed has said, he will bow his ear to the prepared,
but he will not stick to his word, he will go from it.

2. The god y complain they cannot meet God in ordinances, they do not affect,
move, work upon them: here is the cause we are not prepared, and so we are like
the deaf adder, ( Psalm. 58.4, 5.) upon whom the charmer cannot prevail, charm
he never so wisely, because his ears are stopped. A man finds no sweetness in
his meat, the reason is, not because his meat is unsavory, but because his
taste is distempered: the Ordinances are sometimes sweet, and would allwaies be
so, were the souls palate allwaies in the same temper.

3. The godly complain they cannot profit, they get no strength by Ordinances,
corruptions are still strong, and grace unready for exercise: Let me ask a
question, Why does not meat nourish some bodies? Because they do not digest it.
Why do they not digest it? Because their stomachs are not prepared, though the
meat may please the appetite well: so the heart may be affected with the Word,
may purpose, and resolve upon obedience: but some sin in the heart, or some
immoderate affection may keep off the heart that it cannot so meditate upon the
Word, or pray over it, and so it comes to no perfection.

4. If thou come unpreparedly, and meet God, a great part of thy comfort will
be abated before and after; before, thou can not have the comfort of thy
faith that God will meet thee, because thou art out of the way of the promise,
thou can find no promise to suit with thy unpreparednes; afterward, thy
heart will be grieved, Gods comforts are not heat and warmth, comfort and
refreshment only, but light also, to discover the sinfullnes of the soul.
When David found help in the sanctuary, Psalm. 73.17. his comfort was abated
from sight of his former distemper, verse. 22. otherwise he had had his comfort
without that mixture of sorrow: so if we find God in unpreparednes, our
comfort will be more mixed comf^rt.

2. The benefit of preparation. ^. The more we prepare our selves, the more in
ordinary course we find God. Indeed, God does sometimes hide himself when his
people are prepared, because he will not have them make an idol of preparation,
to think that therefore God will draw near to them, as if that deserved so
much. No, he will have them know that it is of mere mercy if he be found of
them, though in preparation, he is not bound in justice (s^tting aside his
promise) to reward their preparation, it is but their duty, and he can ^spy in
it matter of displeasure. But ordinarily the godly find God according to their
preparati^n^ hereto the curr^^t of ^ r p^^^^e ^oth b^are witness (they that
seek the Lord shall praise him, Psalm. ^2.26. open your g^^es, and the king of
glory shall come in, Psalm. 24.^^. If any man open to me, I will come in to him,
Revel. 3.20.) and the experience of the godly does second it.

2. Some of the godly complain of difficulty of understanding, and weakness of
memory, but if they prepare, God will clear and open their understandings.
Preparation also will empty their memories, and so strengthen them, it may be
they are too full: If they say their momories are weak also for other things,
yet preparation will strengthen them, for so they shall stir up, and improve
the good in their memories, and bring in the assistance of the holy spirit.

3. Others of the godly complain they cannot find peace and sweet communion
with God, they have prayed, heard the Word, received the Sacrament, yet cannot
find peace. Let them be persuaded to try this one way more, prepare unto
prayer, prepare unto the Word, prepare unto the Sacraments. There is a promise,
Job 11.13, 14, 15. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands
toward him, etc. Then shall thou lift up thy face without spot. It may be thou
have stretched out thine hands, thou have prayed earnestly; but now prepare thy
heart, see if there be not somewhat amiss in thy hand or family, that might
hinder, then thou shall have comfort in thy heart, and boldness in thy
countenance: guilt of heart makes a man hang down the head, as spots make a man
to hide his face.

4. If God do not meet with thee, yet thou shall not have this increase of thy
burden, that thou were unprepared, but on the contrary, thou shall have
assurance that God, who has prepared thy heart, will bea^e witness to it, and
has some good for thee in store, which he will prepare thee for, in a further
measure, by present withdrawings.

Quest. How should we help our selves unto preparednes for Gods worship?

There are three helps, Examination. Meditation. Prayer.


1. Exam^nation. This is made an help unto p air, Lam. 3.40, 41. Let us
search and try our ways, let us lift up our hearts with our hands, so, Psalm.
4.4.5. Commune with your own hearts, offer to God the sacrifices of
righteousness: thou must be a soul-searcher.

Examine 1. What the general frame and temper of thy heart is, whether in a
better or worse temper then formerly.

2. What particular failings have lately escaped thee, that might specially
indispose thy soul.

3. What graces are specially to be exercised in the worship we go about.

4. What are the special occasions for which our souls desire to meet God.

2. Meditation, Psalm. 119.59. David will look over his way^s on every si^e,
ere he will set his feet into Gods ways. Meditation is of a separating and
settling nature, it separateth heavenly tho^ghts and affections from earthly;
and setleth the heart in heavenly thoughts and affections, for it often goes
over with thoughts. It is as the bellows of the soul, that does kindle and
inflame holy affections, and by renewed and more forcible thou^hts, as by
renewed and stronger blasts, does renew and increase the slame.

3. Prayer. David prays to God to prepare the heart of the people, 1 Chronicles.
29.18. God prepared the people, 2 Chronicles. 29. ult. pray therefore to him.

1. To pardon our original indisposednes, and particular failings.

2. To give success to examination, and meditation.

3. To supply his spirit unto the heart, which has put grace into the heart,
therefore can revive and bring out the same.

Ob. I cannot get time thus to prepare.

Ans. In diligence in thy calling thou servest God; but if thou be so employed
in it, as to shut out preparation, thou servest Satan more then God, because
thou do more his mind and for his advantage, then Gods.

Ob. I am a child or servant, under government, and cannot get time, having
not my time at mine own dispose.

Ans. 1. Thy governors ought to allow thee time for Gods service, thou art
more Gods servant then theirs.

If they will not, yet 1. By diligence gain time. 2. If thou can not do that,
take it from thy meat, or sleep. If neither father, nor mother, nor master,
will take care of thy soul, yet do thou take care of it.

Before I leave this point of preparation, the want whereof does weaken that
worship of God which we perform, I will take occasion to answer some cases of
conscience, which may fall in the way of the people of God, and trouble them
for want of light.

1. Quest. Whether are we bound to prepare more for the Sacrament then for the
word?

I will premise four things, and then answer to the question.

1. The Sacrament is an ordinary ordinance of God, and so stands in the same
rank of ordinances with the word: that it is an ordinary ordinance, appears,
in that it is often to be celebrated, and that without the condition of special
and extraordinary occasions, 1 Cor. 11.25.26. do this as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me, for as often as ye eat this bread, etc. It is an ordinance
often to be used, without special occasion, and and for an ordinary end, the
remembrance of Christ's death.

2. The question is not between the whole word and the Sacrament, but between a
particular Sermon, and the Sacrament, whether we be bound more to prepa^e for
the Sacrament then a particular Sermon, going before the Sacrament.

3. The question is of those, who in regard of grace received, are generally,
and habitually prepared, both for the word and supper; for of the unregenerate
more preparation is required to admit them to the supper then to the wo^d.

4. The Sacrament in some respect has it is place below the word, in that the
word is the covenant, yea a particular Sermon does contain part of the
Covenant, and the Sacrament is the seal, now the seal does receive necessary
force from the covenant, but not the covenant from the seal, the seal is of no
force without the covenant, but the covenant is of force without the seal,
therefore the promise is called an immutable thing, Heb. 6.18. the seal does
but increase the validity and force of the covenant, add a further degree and
measure. The seal follows the covenant and serves unto it.

To the question then I answer, That it should seem there is not more
preparation required unto the Sacrament then unto the Word. This truth will
more plainly appear, if the objections be cleared, which are brought to the
contrary.

Ob. Of a Sermon it can but be said, This is my Word: but of the Sacrament it
is said, This is my body, and more reverence is due to the body of the Lord,
then to the word of the Lord, and so more preparation to be made for the
Sacrament, then for the Word.

Ans. 1. If it be said, that Christ's body is present at the Sacrament only in
the Word, the word of promise, then this objection does fall to the ground, as
of no force, for we must prepare to receive the word in a Sermon, and the word
in the Sacrament, but diversely dispensed, to the ear in a sermon, to the eye
and hand, mouth and stomach in the Sacrament, these senses are appointed to
help faith to embrace the promise. That Christ is no otherway present in the
Sacrament but by his Word and promise, appears by our Creed, which says, he
ascended up into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God, and from thence
shall come to judge the quick and the dead: If he sit at Gods right hand in
Heaven, then he is not bodily present in the Sacrament.

2. Suppose Christ's body were present in the Sacrament, was it not so at the
passover and supper? yet we do not read, that in those Ordinances they did
show more reverence to his bodily presence, then to his Word, though at other
times they did so* therefore did not prepare more for his bodily presence and
for the Sacrament, then for his Word. And whereas they were bound continually
to worship his bodily presence, in regard of the union of his humane nature to
the divine, and our Sa^iour did sometime^ manifest his divine nature, to
^n^o^ce from them bodily worship, as Luke 13.8. Matthew. 14.33. Why did he hide
it now at this time? and rather show himself most humble in washing their feet,
Joh. 13.4. But that he would not in this Ordinance have them to worship his
bodily presence? but intended to admit them unto familiar and honorable
converse with him.

3. I^ the Sacrament be but a sign and representation of the body and blood of
Christ, as it must needs be granted, then the word will require more reverence,
for the Word, so far as by Scripture it can be proved to be the Word of
Christ, is not a sign or representation of his Word, but his very Word, Luke
10.16. He that h^areth you, hears me: not an Image of me, but me speaking in
you, as he speaks in a special case, Mat. 10.20. It is not you that speak,
but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you.

2. Object. Of the Sacrament the Apostle says precis^ly, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat; he does not say so much of hearing the Word;
therefore we are bound to prepare more for the Sacrament.

Answ. Though so much be not expressed concerning the word, in any place that I
remember, yet so much is implied, Ier. 4.3. When it is said, break up the
fallow ground, and sow not among thorns: the meaning of that is, the rooting
out of sins out of the heart, which are as thorns piercing the soul, and
choking that which is good. How shall they be rooted out, unless they be
known to be there? And how shall they be known to be there, but by examination?
Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord.
Examination must go before repentance, and repentance must break up the fallow
ground ere the seed of the word be sown: 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. When it is said, Lay
aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies, and then desire the sincere milk
of the Word, is not examination employed? How can they lay aside these sins,
unless they know them to be in their hearts? And how shall they know them to
be there, unless they do examine.?

2. The Apostle had just occasion, at that time more punctually and precisely,
both to declare the institution and manner of preparation, that he might root
out the disorders and unworthy receivings, that were deeply and strongly
fastened amongst the Corinthians, and brought down from heaven eminent
expressions of wrath and displeasure. And this will the rather appear, if we
consider, that setting asi^e what is here said upon special occasion, so much
is no where else spoken of the Sacrament, no more then of the Word.

Object. In the Sacrament we do renew our Covenant with God, therefore we
should prepare more for it, then for the Word.

Answ. So we do renew our Covenant in every Sermon, for God declares what ^e
will be unto us, and what he requires of us back again, and if we consent, and
obey, as we do, if we hear well, we do renew our Covenant with God.

Ob. In the Sacrament we do more fully renew our Covenant with God: the
Sacrament has relation to the whole Covenant, a Sermon does but treat of a
part of the Covenant, therefore we must prepare more for the Sacrament then for
the Word.

Answ. If a Sermon do treat but of a part of the Covenant, but a branch of it,
yet of an essential part, so including the whole; for if every part of the
Covenant be not kept, all is void, nay the substance and sum of the Covenant
is in every Sermon, viz. that God will be ours, and we his, or if one part be
only expressed, the other is employed, for the Covenant is mutual, and one
part inseparably depends upon the other.

Quest. Why then do Ministers many times take more care that their people be
prepared for the Sacrament, and people take more care to prepare themselves?

Answ. I deny not but there may be an opinion rooted in the minds, both of
Ministers and people, that more preparation is required unto the Sacrament,
then unto the Word, which may now be taken away by what has been said: The
causes of this opinion may be two.

1. The more solemn gesture used, yea and commanded at the Sacrament, a gesture
not only of reverence, but adoration, a gesture of worship, as the Papists
themselves acknowledge, who profess they kneel, in regard of the real
presence, and wonder that we deny the real presence, and yet kneel. And
indeed, if there be no more in the supper, then in the word, why do we use a
gesture in the Sacrament that signifies more? If opinion of greater
preparation due to the Sacrament, then to the Word, did not breed kneeling, yet
no doubt, kneelling has bred and nourished this opinion in many.

2. The seldom, and so more solemn use of this Ordinance, monthly, or
quarterly, or yearly, more like an extraordinary then an ordinary Ordinance of
God, which might lawfully be used every Lords day, has furthered this opinion,
for were it used as often as the Word on the Lords day, as it lawfully might,
men would not think it of more weight and consequence, then the Word preached.

2. Considering this Ordinance so seldom used, there may be some reason
rendered of the Ministers special care to prepare the people before the
Sacrament.

1. There is a preparation of separation, belonging to the Sacrament, which
does not belong to the Word; all may partake in the Word, Mark. 16.15. Go,
preach the Gospel to every creature, no creature is excepted from hearing: some
think the excommunicate should not be kept from hea^ing the Word, for they are
to be but as the Publican and the Heathen, and the Publican and Heathen may
hear the Word. But all may not receive the Sacrament, for that is the seal of
the Covenant, and the seal does belong to none but them, who by the Word are
brought into the Covenant.

2. Where there is a meeting of more Ordinances, more preparation is required;
but where the Sacrament is administered together with the Word, is a meeting of
more Ordinances, therefore more preparation is required: were this Ordinance
more frequently used, men would better be acquainted with the preparation due
thereto.

Quest. Suppose a man come to Church on the Lords day, and the Sacrament be
administered there, beyond his expectation, whether may he receive, not knowing
of that aforehand, to prepare himself for it?

Answ. 1. If a man doubt whether he may receive lawfully or no, he shall do
best to forbear, for in this case holds that of the Apostle: Romans 14.23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: if a man do an action, and knows not
whether he shall do well or no, he sins in that action, for the rule of our
obedience is the Word of God: if therefore I do not know that such an action is
according to the Word, I do not obey in it, and therefore sin.

2. If thou be prepared for the Word, thou art in measure prepared for the
Sacrament, for those duties of examination, meditation, prayer, which do
prepare us for the Word, do not only stir up those affections and graces,
that are more properly requisite unto the Word, but those also that more
peculiarly belong to the Sacrament.

3. God may increase the beginnings of thy preparation by the Word, further
provoking and stirring up thy graces, especially thy faith and repentance.

4. Though there be some defect in thy preparation before thou did come, yet
if thy hearts desire be set to seek and find the Lord, he will have such
respect to the prayers of the Congregation, that he will pardon thy
unpreparednes, and conveigh to thee the blessing: so 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.
Many of the people, whose hearts were prepared, yet were ceremonially unclean,
did eat the passover, contrary to the law, but Hezekiah praid for them,
saying, The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek the
Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary, and God hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the
people.

Quest. Suppose there be a day of fasting kept, and I know not of it till the
morning of it, whether may I go unto it, it being an extraordinary duty, and
requiring extraordinary preparation, and I unprepared, not knowing of it?

Answ. A day of fasting ought to be kept from even to even, Levit. 23.32.
therefore to be known before the morning, and they that hinder such knowledge
of it, are like to bear their sin.

2. If thy soul be earnestly desirous to seek God in that Ordinance, unwilling
to miss the opportunity, and sensible of thy unpreparednes, the bare want of
extraordinary preparation need not hinder thee, if thou do not lie under the
guilt of some sin unrepented of, for thy unpreparednes is not through any
neglect of him: It is not bare want of such a measure of preparation that does
displease God, so as to disrespect our duties, but neglect and sleighting of
it. God requires no more then he gives: had God given thee time of
extraordinary preparation by foreknowledge of the duty, he would have required
the same; but having not given thee that time, he will not require that. Nay,
it may be God will specially prepare thy soul by want of special preparation,
humble and soften thy heart.

Ob. But the scrupulous heart, as the most conscientious are, will be ready to
say, If God would have had them to partake in the duty, he would have given
them time of preparation.

Answ. Not so, God may give thee the substance of preparation, disposednes of
heart, but deny the circumstances of preparation, viz. time and performance of
preparing duties. Preparation serves unto the worship of God, the measure and
time thereof cannot strictly be set down, but the rule thereof, is the measure
of the souls unpreparednes. God has commanded extraordinary preparation for
extraordinary duties, because the heart usually is extraordinarily unfit: but
suppose by affliction, or some other way, the heart be more then ordinarily
prepared, then extraordinary preparation is not required, for it is already
done some other way; so if thy soul be much humbled and quickened by want of
preparing time and means, it is all one as if thou had them. True it is, God
requires preparation, as well as duty, but preparation is the lesser part of
Gods mind, though a necessary part: when therefore thou may do a greater
part of Gods mind, thou art not to neglect it, though thou can not do a
lesser, when that not doing of the less, does not proceed from any known and
willing neglect of thine, which alters the case. For if a man have time, and do
not prepare, he does presumptuously, not believingly, p^rform holy duties. To
be sure, this case may put the godly in mind, what need they have to keep
their hearts continually in a good frame, that so they may have a continual
preparednes unto every good work.

Quest. Suppose I labor in the use of means to prepare my heart, and cannot
find it prepared, what should I then do?

Answ. 1. Thy soul may be prepared, and thou not sensible of it: it is the
measure of preparation, and evidence of the spirit in the heart, that makes a
man sensible of his preparation.

2. Sense of preparation is a separable fruit of the use of the means, part of
the success it is, but may be separated from the use of the means: when thou
therefore have prepared thy self, thou have done part of thy duty, thou must
not now stay from going about the Ordinances, which is a further part of thy
duty, till thou be sensible of thy preparednes, which is part of the success,
and so Gods part: thy duty is to prepare thy heart, and when thou have
prepared, to go about the worship, though God, for reasons best known to
himself, does withdraw his part, the sense and feeling of preparation. Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat, not forbear, when he has examined
himself, because he finds not matters as he would.

Quest. Suppose I find God helping my heart in preparation, and withdrawing
himself in the worship prepared unto, there my heart is dead, careless, what
should I then do?

Answ. 1. The godly are apt in experience to run upon extremes, if their
heart be not assisted, in preparation, they are discouraged, if they be much
assisted, they grow proud and confident, therefore God withdraws himself
sometimes in one way, and sometimes in another, that they might not be
discouraged, nor be confident: Not be discouraged, if they do not find God in
one way of promise, yet they may find him in another; Not be confident or
proud, for though they have found God much in an Ordinance, yet they may miss
him in the next. Where they least expect to find God, there many times, they
find him most, therefore not be discouraged: and on the other side, where they
are most confident to find God, they many times miss him: trust not
Ordinances therefore, but the God of Ordinances in all.

2. Set awork thy faith in the promise, the condition whereof thou have in thy
heart: Psalm. 10.17. Thou will prepare the heart, thou will bow thine ear: these
two go together, if God do prepare the heart, he will bow the ear, he will do
thee good, thou may believe it, thy preparation is an earnest, a pledge,
thou may thereby help thy faith. Thus did Manoahs wife comfort him, when he
was afraid they should die, because they had seen an Angel of God: Judge. 13.22,
23. If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have accepted a sacrifice
at our hands, nor have showed us such things as these so if God had not
intended thee good in his worship, he would not have accepted thy preparation.

3. Thou must difference the different effects of Gods presence, or else thou
may wrong God as well as thy self, to say he was not with thee, when yet he
was. Not only are there more manifest and evident fruits of Gods presence in
duties, as much liberty of spirit, much joy, peace, assurance of faith, but
also there are more inward, and reserved fruits of his presence, as sense of
want, sorrow for want, desire of enjoyment, willingness unto further duties, to
find that which we want in some: in the former, God is with us, and we know he
is with us, in the later, God is with us, but we know not so much: an instance
of the later we have in the two Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24.16. Their
eyes were holden that they could not know him, yet afterward, when they did
know him, they remembered that they had sufficient evidence of his presence,
even when they knew him not, ver. 32. did not our hearts burn within us, when
he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the Scriptures? Whence was that
fire in their hearts, but from the spirit of Christ conveyed in his word? Yet
till they knew him, they made no account of this. The godly cannot see God in
Ordinances, though present: because sometimes their eyes are altogether pitched
upon those more evident fruits of his presence, sometimes also they stumble
upon the presence of God, slight, make no account of such fruits as are put
forth, sense of many failings in duties, makes them think God was not there,
whereas that sense is from God in the Ordinances, who is the father of lights.

CHAP. III. Of the fourth hinderance of instant worshipping of God, Wearines.
AMOS ^. Part of the 5 verse. When will the new moon be gone, and the sabbath?


TWo things are in the verse, whereof the words read are a part.

1. A desire.

2. The reason.

Their desire is, that the new moon, and sabbath were gone, laid down
interrogatively, to show the greater vehemence and earnestnes of it, When will
the new moon be gone, and the sabbath? they thought the time long that they
continued, their stay was a burden unto them: when a man's desire meets with
hinderance, his grief takes place, so the new moon, and sabbaths were matter
of grief and burden unto them, and they were weary of them, because they
hindered, for present, their civil commerce. The reason of their desire that
the new moon and sabbath were gone, is, that they might sell corn, that they
might follow their worldly occasions wherein they would oppress.

We have to do with the first particular. Their desire that the new moon were
gone, and the sabbath ended. Why, what was the matter that they had enough, and
too much of the new moon, and sabbath? Why did they stand in their way for
buying and selling?

Ans. At every new moon, or in the beginning of every month they had a great
solemnity, special sacrificing to God, Numb. 28.11. a solemn feast day, Psalm.
81.3. wherein they were wont to hear from God by the prophets: for when the
Shunammitish woman would go to the prophet for her dead son, her husband
dissuaded her, from the ordinary unseasonablenes of the time, Wherefore will thou go to day? it is neither new moon, nor sabbath, 2 Kings 4.23. A sign the
people did communicate with the prophets in the counsels of God, in the new
moons and sabbaths, and special seasons and times appointed for that purpose.
And whether here be meant the weekly Sabbath, or by this general name be
intended all the Sabbaths, or days of rest mentioned, Levit. 23. it comes all
to a reckoning, in regard of their exception, for in the weekly Sabbath and day
of atonement or humiliation, they might do no work, Levit. 23.3.28. and on the
other Sabbaths, or days of rest, feast days, they might do no servile work,
Levit. 23.7. which is expounded in case of the passover, which was one of the
feasts, Exodus 12.16. no manner of work shall be done, save about that which
every man must eat, no work might be done but about providing meat for the
feast, they might not do any work of service, or labor about their callings,
as plowing and sowing, buying and selling. They therefore wish the new moon,
and Sabbath gone, that they might sell corn, because that was forbidden work
in those times and seasons, they are therefore weary of them, and gladly would
be shut of them; could they sanctify these holy days, or perform fervent and
hearty worship to God in the same, when all their desire was that they were
gone? whence we have just occasion to lay ground for handling a fourth hindrance
of our earnest worshipping of God.

N. Wearines hinders our earnest worshipping of God.

When the worship we perform is a burden to us, we do but weakly perform the
same. This people being weary of the new moon and Sabbath, instead of setting
their hearts upon solemn worship of God therein performed, they set their
hearts upon the end of the same, they do not say, O when will the new moon and
Sabbath come? or, O that they would stay long; but when will they be gone? no
days so long as those days of solemn worship, in them the sun seems to
stand still, or to go back, they pass not away fast enough, and if the end of
these solemn services have all the heart, what shall God have in the
performance of them? This God complains of, both in priests and people, Mal.
1.13. That they had said of his worship, What a wearines is it? and that
worship is poorly performed, which is but a weary worship. Though some take
this place otherwise, yet this sense suits well with that despising of Gods
name, blamed, verse. 6.7. for what a man thinks meanly of, he will be weary of:
and what did their offering of the blind, lame, sick, torn, manifest, but
wearines of G^ds worship, that it was a burden? the actions of the weary and
tired, are blind, sick, lame, divided and distracted actions. When the
Apostle, Gal. 6.9. 2 These. 3.13. does call upon the people of God not to be
weary of well doing, does he not give them to understand, that wearines will be
an hinderance to them in well doing? and therefore they must not give way unto
it, though the way of God be laborious and painful. When God would direct his
people how they might be kept from doing their own mind on the Sabbath, Isai.
58.13. and so might thoroughly sanctify it, he advises them to call the Sabbath
a delight, i. e. not only inwardly to delight in it, but to grow to such a
measure of delight, to call it so, openly profess, and make it manifest that
it is our delight, let that be the name we give it, as God terms his people,
Isai. 62.4. my delight is in her; let others see by our speeches and actions,
that it is the day of our delight; otherwise if we be weary of it, and it be a
burden unto us, we will not be kept from doing our own pleasure.

What is it to be weary of Gods worship?

Ans. There is a wearines of the soul that reflects upon the body, and a
wearines of the body that reflects upon the soul.

The wearines of the soul stands in the absence of two affections, which are
the strength of the soul, desire, and delight, and the presence of two, which
are the weakness of the soul, unwillingnes, no desire, no delight,
uncheerfulnes, backwardnes, grief. When God in Scripture commends the
fervencie and strength of any action, he commends it from these two
affections, willingness, and delight.

1. Willingness, or desire, makes any action strongly to be performed, when
there is a sutablenes or agreement betwixt the will and the action, a man does
choose to do it, and that rather then any other, such an action must needs have
the power of the soul, for the will commands the whole soul, 1 Chronicles. 29.14,
17. the people of God did offer willingly, and therefore abundantly to the
building of the temple, that David admires and joys at the offering. The
fervent worshipping of God, prophesied of in the days of the Gospel, is
comprehended in this affection of desire or willingness, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the day of the powerful preaching
of the Gospel; the worship of Gods people should be willing, freehearted
worship, not constrained. The Bereans hearing of the word was hearing indeed,
commended above that of Thessalonica, Act. 17.11. they received the word with
all readiness of mind, they had a forward affection, a forth-putting desire
to hear, and embrace the word, Act. 16.14. God opened the heart of Lydia to
attend to the word, her ear was open, and ready to hear, and that open ear came
from an open heart, a desire to hear.

2. Joy or chearfullnes makes an action strongly to be performed, when the soul
is cheared and comforted in the doing of it, then will it do it in the best
manner and measure, because it is comfort and delight is the greater, Psalm.
19.5. when the psalmist would express how strongly the sun does run his
course, he says, It rejoices as a strong man to run his race, 2 Cor. 8.2. The
Apostle says of the Macedonians, that the abundance of their joy, and their
deep poverty, abounded to the riches of their liberality: though their poverty
was abundant, and so unfit for liberality, yet their joy being abundant in that
Christian action, made their liberality to abound, so that according to their
power, yea, and beyond their power they ministered to the necessity of the
Saints, their joy in the action carried them to forget themselves in measure.
They prayed Paul and his companions, with much entreaty, to take the gift; such
was their comfort in the action, that if Paul would not take their gift, they
should miss of their comfort, Psalm. 100.2. we are commanded to serve the Lord
with gladness, the joy, and mirth of our hearts, in Gods service, does better
the service performed.

But on the contrary, when desire and joy are wanting, the strength and vigor
of the soul is gone, and it is weary of such actions as it performs
unwillingly and sadly.

1. What a man does unwillingly, backwardly, he does as a burden, and therefore
weakly, because wearily. Thus the wicked express their wearines of Gods ways,
Job 21.13. we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, they have no desire to be
acquainted with the worship of God, therefore will but poorly perform it if
they perform any, 1 Pet. 5.2. feed the flock of God, not by constraint, but
willingly, 2 Cor. 9.7. as every man has purposed, so let him give, not
grudgingly or of necessity; whatever duty a man performs, if he have no
mind, no desire, no will unto it, if somewhat without move him to it, and not
somewhat within, if he had rather not do it, or rather do somewhat else, he
does it without strength, therefore wearily, it is a burden unto him, Exodus
25.2. God willed Moses to take an offering of every one whose heart was willing
toward the service of the Tabernacle, Ex. 35.21. They came every one whose
heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing to offer, God
would accept none but from the willing heart; there would have been no strength
in their offerings had the will been wanting.

2. That which a man does sadly and unchearfully, with inward grief of heart,
he does without strength of his soul, and therefore wearily, for such a man
does but bear a burden and carry a load all the while he does the action, and
therefore will not care how soon it be done. Not but that a man may be sad in
Gods worship, David says, Psalm. 6.8. God heard the voice of his weeping, as if
his tears did prevail more with God then his prayers. We are also commanded to
serve the Lord with trembling, Psalm. 2.11. and we know that trembling proceeds
from the affection of fear, which is of a sadding nature. But when our grief is
pitched not upon our sins (which are just matter of acceptable grief, yea,
when we come to joy before God) but upon the duty, we are sad, because we must
pray, or hear, or keep the Sabbath, because we must fall to that employment,
and may not go to any other, or when sorrow for other causes become a flood so
great, that it over-whelmes and drownes our joy, then the duty is a wearisome
duty, the soul does it with no joy, with no comfort, therefore with no
strength. In this case when the people wept sore upon that day of thanksgiving,
Nehem. 8.10. they are commanded not to weep, nor to be sorry, for the joy of
the Lord is your strength; so to weep, and to be sorrowful as to drown or
eclipse their joy on that day, was to make their souls weak, and so weary of
the duty. When Moses chod with Aaron and his sons Levit. 10.17. to the end,
because they had not eaten the sacrifice in the holy place, that day his sons
were destroyed, his answer was, Had I eaten it, would it have been accepted?
Why not? oh he could not have done it with any cheer, and comfort, so heavy a
hand of God having lately befallen him, and therefore he should have been weary
of the service, and then God would not have accepted it: if thus the heart be
weary, having no desire or delight, the body will be weary, for that follows
the disposition of the soul, the soul carries the body with it which way so
ever it goes.

There is a wearines proper to the body, when the strength thereof is spent and
the spirits exhausted, and so the body is left weak and feeble, and so weary of
any further action, because it has no strength.

There is a four fold cause of exhausting the strength of the body, and so
making it weary of Gods service.

1. The or^ginall corrupt disposition of the body by reason of sin, whereby
it withholdeth and dries up it is strength from that which is good, but freely
expendeth it upon that which is evil. Thus naturally the eyes had rather look
upon a company of sinners, then a company of Saints, see a company in the
alehouse rather then in Gods house, profaning the Lords day, then serving
him, the ear had rather hear evil, then good, the feet had rather walk to any
sinful meeting on the Lords day, then to the house of God, Romans 6.19, 20.
The Apostle says, We naturally give our members, instruments of
unrighteousnes, there is no unwillingnes in us, but we readily part with them
all at sins motion, nay, we are free from holiness, will have nothing to do
with that, not any part of our bodies, but we are servants of sin, all for
sin: And this disposednes to withhold the strength of our bodies from Gods
service, and to give it unto sin remains in part in the godly.

2. The strength of the body is spent in sinful actions sometimes, Jer. 9.3.
They weary themselves to commit iniquity. Particularly the sins of uncleannes
and drunkenness do wast the strength of the body, Prove. 5.11. The holy ghost
tells what shall be the end of the unclean person, a mournful end, thou mourn
at the last, when thy flesh, and thy body are consumed. And does not experience
tell that men are forced to ly in their beds, or keep their houses, on the
Lords day, because they have drunk so hard in the week, or on saturday, that
their bodies are weak and tired. The sin of idleness does weaken the body:
strength used does increase, and not used does decay, beside the nourishment
taken for want of exercise does turn to corruption, and so rather weaken the
body then nourish it; none more weary of any employment and of the service of
God, then idle persons.

3. The strength of the body is exhausted, sometimes by natural distempers,
sicknesses, diseases, either such as are continually with men, which is the
case of some, or such as lie upon the body at particular times only, the case
of others.

4. Sometimes foregoing recreations and businesses of men's callings, do so
spend the body, that it has no strength lest for Gods service.

The body thus wearied, will reflect upon the soul.

1. In regard of sympathy, agreement, and like affection between soul and body:
what the body delights in, the soul does in measure delight in, and what the
body is weary of, the soul will in measure be weary of.

2. As it does express, and act the wearines of the soul by reason of sin, for
so the wearines of the soul is increased, and the contrary strength of the
soul, desire and delight, weakened.

3. As it is an unfit instrument to express the desire and delight of the
soul, if those affections may not be expressed, they will decay and weaken.

4. As by the eyes and ears it does let in new objects of delight: the soul by
sin is new fangled, will entertain them, and so grow weary of former delights.

The soul does express its wearines.

1. By letting loose thoughts and affections, it will not keep them bound, but
suffers them to wander about for refreshment.

2. In thinking the service hard, painful, grievous.

3. In thinking the time long that is spent therein, wishing the same at an end.

The body does express its wearines.

1. By restlesnesse, it cannot rest in any position or gesture of it, but as a
door upon the hinges, turns first one way, and then another.

2. By letting the eyes and ears loose to all objects, to choose their delights
where they please.

3. By speeches too, if occasion serve, as here they are brought in, saying,
when will the new moon be gone? If they did only say so in their hearts, yet
God saw they would say so with their tongues, if occasion were offered,
therefore he sets it down so.

How does wearines weaken our worshipping of God?

1. Wearines in the very nature of it is weakness, a denial, an absence of
strength, and actions performed in weakness, must needs be weak: wearines denies
the strength of the mind. Can a man think well of what he is weary? It denies
the strength of the will. Can a man be willing of that he is weary of? What, be
willing of a burden? It denies the strength of the affections: a man will
neither desire, nor joy in what he is weary of: and if the strength of the soul
be denied, the strength of the body also will be denied, and that service which
has neither strength of soul, nor strength of body, must needs be weak service.

2. As it is contrary to the spirit:

1. To the nature of it, which is a spirit of liberty and freedom, a spirit of
desire and delight, a spirit of Adoption, opposed to a spirit of bondage, Romans
8.15. The spirit of a child, which a spirit of love: a child does his fathers
commands with desire and delight, he loves his father, joys in him, therefore
in his commands: 2 Cor. 9.7. God loves a cheerful giver; wearines being
contrary to the spirit, must needs damp that, hinder the assistance of it in
worship.

2. To the work of it: 2 Cor. 3.17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty: sin is compared to cords: Prove. 5.22. to a snare, 2 Timothy 2.26. because
it takes away a man's liberty and free will unto that which is good; when God
calls a man to any duty, his will is not in his own power, he is not able to
move thereto, no not in desire, God therefore is said to work the will: Phil.
2.13. there is no will till God work it. But when the spirit of God comes into
the heart, it breaks the cords and snares, sets the will at liberty unto God: 2
Cor. 8.3. The Churches of Macedonia were willing of themselves to minister to
the Saints, to their power, yea and beyond their power. How came that to pass?
ver. 1. We do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed upon the Churches of
Macedonia: their outward bounty proceeded from abundance of grace within: 1
Cor. 15.10. I labored mort abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace
of God in me: abundant labor and wearines are contrary, but the grace of the
spirit makes a man labor abundantly; wearines therefore being contrary to the
work of the spirit, must needs weaken the work of it, and so the service of God.

3. To the testimony of it: the Word of God is the testimony of the spirit, for
holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: what the word says in
this case, is the testimony of the spirit: the word says,

1. That forwardnes unto good duties is our duty, when it says, Christ has
purified unto himself a people Zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. Has Christ
been at cost and pains to make us pure for that end, and are we not bound to
endeavor unto that end? he has laid it as a duty upon Ministers, to put their
people in mind that they be ready unto every good work, Tit. 3.1. That they
charge such as have ability, to be ready to communicate, willing to distribute,
1 Timothy 6.17, 18. a sign, that not only the duties themselves are our duties,
but readiness and willingness therein also.

2. The word says, that cheerfullnes in duty is Gods delight; 2 Cor. 9.7. He
loves a cheerful giver: Isa. 64.5. The Lord cannot as it were contain
himself, till the soul come to him, that works righteousness with joy, but he
will go to meet him; as we out of joy cannot contain our selves, but we must
run to meet them we delight in, when we espy them coming toward us.

3. The word says, that the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantnes, and all
her paths are peace, ^rov. 3.17. Christ's yoke is easy, his burden is light,
Matthew. 11.30. The Commandments of God are not grievous, 1 John 5.3.

4. The word says, that forwardnes and delight in good actions, is
beneficial: 2 Cor. ^.6. He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully,
full handed works shall have full handed reward: 1 Cor. 15.58. always
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord: If the Lord be the rewarder, the most abundant service shall
not want a reward; wearines does contrary the several branches of this
testimony of the spirit. Is willing and cheerful service our duty? wearines
denies it. If it be our duty to be willing and obedient, why are we weary?
Where is our obedience? Is God delighted with cheerful service? wearines
denies it. Who would be weary of that, which is Gods delight? of that which is
so good, that it joys God himself? Is the way of God an easy pleasant way?
wearines denies it. Who is weary of ease nd pleasantnes? Is the way of God a
beneficial way? wearines says to the contrary. Who is weary of benefit?
wearines therefore does make the spirit of God a liar, which unworthy dealing
must needs hinder the spirit in the heart.

4. To the honor of the spirit of God: wearines does cast reproach and
dishonor upon the spirit in two things.

1. As if it did not dispose and fit them inwardly whom it sets awork, as if it
did not work the will in them, by whom it requires the work to be wrought: for
what is the ground of wearines in the person, but unfitnes, unsuitablenes unto
the work: and is it not a dishonor to the spirit, to set unfit persons to
work? Are we not his workmanship unto good works? he does inwardly fashion us
thereunto; should a man go to work with an instrument, and not first fit it
with hand and edge? should it not shame him? wearines says, that God takes up
unhandled, unedged instruments to do his work; which is a dishonor to him.

2. Wearines of good duties does cast dishonor upon the spirit, as if his work
had wearying properties, and so were worse then Satan's work, or our own work,
which do not so weary. Wearying properties are these three; Hardness, Harshnes,
Hurtfullnes. Why does a work weary, but because it is hard and difficult, does
cost much pains and labor, more then can well be afforded, or is harsh,
unpleasant, uncomfortable, or is hurtful, no profit, no benefit in the same,
but the contrary? Thus wearines says of the work the spirit of God does set us
about, which must needs be a dishonor to the spirit of God, who is the best
master, therefore appoints the best wo^k, contrary to his wisdom, goodness,
justice: Will it stand with his wisdom, to set us about work too hard for us?
Will it stand with his goodness, to set us about evil work? No work but evil
work is wholly uncomfortable: Will it stand with his justice, to make us labor
in vain, and to no profit? Has he not promised to the contrary? And is he not
righteous to make good his promise? yet wearines does at same time cast
dishonor upon the wisdom, goodness, and justice of the spirit: and must not
such dishonor hinder the work of the spirit in the heart?

3. Wearines does weaken our fervent worshipping of God, as it does dispose and
fit us for the work of sin and Satan in Gods worship, which will weaken the
worship we perform. Wearines does dispose us for the work of corruption: a
weary soul is fit for wandering thoughts, and wandering affections: a weary body
is fit for change of objects, fot new sights and sounds, it is natural to man
to seek refreshment elsewhere when he is weary. Corruption does always work in
holy duties to hinder us in the same, but when the man is weary, it works with
advantage, he is in a corrupt temper, fit for corruption, now it may prevail
more then at another time. Wearines fits us for Satan's work, for his inward
suggestions, for his presenting of objects to withdraw us; the heart is weary,
therefore fit for new work; there is small ability to resist him, and he
walks to and fro, seeking whom he may devour, a great part of his work is to
watch advantage against us. When we are at best he will hinder us, much more
when we are so fit to be hindered.

4. Wearines does weaken our fervent worshipping of God, as it produces
certain other effects, both in opinion and affection.

1. In opinion, it makes a man think the worship of God evil, if not in it
self, yet to him, at least at this particular time: what a man is weary of, he
apprehends to be an evil to him, for no man is weary of good and suitable good,
for suitable good is delightsome, therefore not wearisom.

2. In affection.

1. Wearines makes a man desire the end of the work, rather then the work: what
a man is weary of, he would have finished, that his wearines might be at an
end; for whilst the work continues, wearines does continue, and increase.

2. It makes a man desire to change the present service for some other
employment, a weary man would have new work to take away his wearines, and to
bring him contrary comfort and delight. Can that be fervent service, which a
man thinks to be evil? the end whereof he more desires then the doing of it?
which he would change for any other employment? such service does wearines make.

Quest. It may be said you told us lately, what some causes are of the wearines
of the body in Gods service: tell us now what the causes of the wearines of the
soul are in the same service of God?

Answ. 1. Remnants of corruption, which do always strive to draw the strength
of the mind and affections another way, and sometimes do prevail by our
carelessenes, and Satan's watchfullnes. Thus David, when he was acted by
corruption, having looked too much upon the worlds prosperity, and his own
affliction, without reflecting upon the end of both, he was ready to throw off
all the service of God, Ps. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed mine hands in innocence: if all the fruit of his piety be affliction,
and all the fruit of the worlds prophanenes be prosperity, then has David
spent a deal of labor in vain, and it is time to make an end: but this was the
faulse suggestion of corruption: so Jer. 28.8, 9. When he was mocked and
reproached daily for his ministry, he said, he would make mention of the Lords
name no more, he grew weary of his ministry, if he could see no better fruit
of his labor, but reproach, he would give it over but then he was acted by
corruption, as appears by his bitter cursing the day of his birth Thus the
godly have sometimes their spiritual sick sits, and so are spiritually weary
of spiritual things.

More particularly.

1. Ignorance of the inward worth and excellency of Gods worship and service.
So much know; so much desire and delight, and no more; we cannot desire and
delight in what we know not, for so we might desire and delight in evil as
soon, and as much as in good, which cannot be: we do but little know the good
of Gods worship, and so can but little delight in it, and where is but little
delight, will be wearines.

2. Imperfect suitablenes of soul to Gods worship: suitablenes and agreement is
the cause of desire and delight: Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be
agreed? Can they desire and delight in one another company, unless they suit
and agree in disposition? Prove. 27.19. As in water face answers to face, so
does the heart of man to man. Why does a man love some particular man with a
more inward, free, strong love? because, (as in water face answers to face) a
man may see the image of his face in water: the represented face has the
likeness of the true face; So a man sees the image and representation of his own
affections and dispositions in some more then in others, he sees himself in
him, and every man loves himself more then others, and consequently such men,
in whom he sees himself more then in others: Psalm. 40.8. The more suitablenes
and agreement, the more desire and delight: we are but in a small measure
suitable to the worship of God, because the Image of God is but in part renewed
in us, and if there be but a measure of likeness in us to Gods worship, there
will be but a measure of delight, and therefore wearines present; likeness alone
does exclude wearines: beside there will be a measure of unlikenes, and that
naturally causes wearines.

3. Immoderate desire and delight in other things, even lawful callings,
occasions, and comforts, so in my text. Why are they weary of the new Moon and
of the Sabbath? the reason is rendered, That we may sell corn, and set forth
wheat: and why should they sell corn? that they might gather riches. When they
were in the midst of Gods worship, they had a greater desire and delight to
their callings and worldly business, the strength of their souls went that way,
therefore they were weary of Gods worship.

4. So much earthly converse with our callings and earthly occasions, I say
earthly converse, after the manner of men, who are altogether earthly, for it
is not the use of our callings that draw our hearts from heaven to earth, but
the manner of our use of them, when we do not set awork grace in them, do not
use them as an appointed way, to fit us for Gods worship, and therefore watch
our hearts, that they be not drawn too much unto the things we have to do with.
We do not use them with fear, lest there be a snare in them, we do not use them
with dependence upon God, with strife against our natural earthly mindednes,
therefore they steal away our hearts.

5. Over-length of duties: there is but a measure of desire, and delight in us,
therefore duties should have but a set time: in heaven, when our affections
shall be perfect, there shall be no time to measure duties by, but they shall
be immeasurable. The measure of the affections is regulated by judgment and
discretion, when therefore duties are drawn out beyond discretion, they are
burdensome or indiscretion: beside, the soul has other occasions to attend
beside Gods worship, even on the Lords day, works of mercy and necessity: if
therefore time be taken up, so that convenient time is not reserved for these,
the soul grows weary, because it cannot do all its work: so in a family,
duties are then wearisom, when they do not consist with our particular callings.

6. Absence of the all-filling and quickening spirit. It is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit and life, Joh. 6.63. As the body is dead without the spirit, so the
Ordinances without Gods quickening spirit, it must both quicken our desire and
delight, and stir up the good of the Ordinances, Psalm. 84.10, 11. David
exceedingly prizeth a door in Gods house: why? the Lord is a sun: when there
is such a presence of God that is both light and heat to discover the good in
the Ordinances, and to warm our hearts therewith, then are they delightful, 2
Cor. 3.18. When the spirit shows us the face of God, peace, comfort, grace, in
the glass of the promise, and so reflects the sun upon us, that whilst we
behold Gods favor, we are at peace with him; whilst we behold his grace, we
are made gracious; whilst we behold his comfort, we are made comfortable, then
are the Ordinances delightful, but if the spirit be absent, there is no
affection stirring.

Use. This Doctrine does manifest, First, that God has but weak service at the
hands of the most, weak praying, weak hearing, because but weary service. But
because all will say they come willingly and cheerfully to Gods worship: I will
show by several instances, as so many arguments, that the most are weary of
Gods service, some whereof will fall upon some, and others upon others, and one
or other upon the most.

1. That coming after the beginning of Gods worship, and going away before the
end of it, which I blamed heretofore, as an act of despising of Gods worship,
will prove wearines in this place. Were it matter of delight, Gods worship,
then the more of it, the more delight, the sooner men come, the longer they
stay, the more delight, if men come with the first, and stay with the last,
they shall have more delight: but if it be a burden, the less of it, the more
delight. Were man to go to a delightful recreation, they would be there with
the first, and stay with the last, upon this ground, lest they should lose part
of their delight; let not men say, they have many hindrances when they should
come, and they have many things to hasten them when they should go home, for
delight would break through hindrances, and make a man forget what would take
him off. Do not men forget their meat and sleep, when they are about pleasant
occasions? And were the worship of God delighfull, men would forget their
occasions at home, till the worship of God be ended.

2. That allowance of the forenoon only on the Lords day to the worship of God,
and reservation of the afternoon, by some, which is a clipping of the Kings
coin of heaven, for the Sabbath is the Lords day, in a special respect: all
the days of the week are Gods, in respect of creation, and end, but the
Sabbath is the Lords, as the Kings coin is his, it bears the Lords image of
holiness, it is an holy day, set apart from common use unto Gods worship, to
take away the afternoon of that therefore, is to clip the Kings coin, yea
though a man should spend so much time in private reading, as he is wont to
spend in public worship: seeing therefore there is such variety of Gods
Ordinances, such convenient time of rest and refreshing between the forenoon
and afternoon exercise, and due and timely finishing of the afternoon exercise,
what but wearines does keep men from it? Nay, many do take so liberally of Gods
good creatures on that day (which most will have on that day, more then any
other, though it be fit for very few bodies) that their bodies are made unfit
to perform Gods service. Suppose the day be cold, or rainy, as it does
sometimes fall out on that day, and it may be to try whether that will keep men
away: would not delight break through? will not men do the like for their
callings and recreations?

3. That hasty, hearty and full speech of the world and worldly occasions on
the Lords day, in some, when the service of God is finished morning and
evening, as if the Sabbath were a market day, a day of bargening, paying,
receiving, rather then of worshipping of God or seeking the good of the souls
of men. If the Sabbath be holy, then nothing must be spoken or done that day
but what is directly holy, or done directly for an holy end, to further Gods
worship, to help our hearts. Were not men weary of holy duties, would they so
soon be gotten to earthly occasions? would they be so hot and fervent in the
same? would there not be some remembrance of the duties newly past, but that
men lay aside a burden when they finish them?

4. The neglect of all private duties by some on the Lords day. If they were
not tired with, and weary of Gods public worship, would they not pray in their
families? speak something of the word they have heard, though it were the
less, the Sabbath being appointed only for holy duties? But if a man should go
from family to family, how few should he find that pray on the Lords day
night, or speak any thing of the word preached, but spend the time in idle
talking? a sign they have enough of Gods service, are tired therewith.

5. The haste that some make out of the house of God into the alehouse, wherein
they can sit longer then at the worship of God. All these things which fall
upon the most, some or other of them, do show what weary service. God has
generally performed, and consequently weak service.

2. The weak service God has done him by his own people, for it is weary
service, as appears.

1. In that they are not so willing of the approach of the Sabbath, that light
is not so pleasant unto them, they think it comes too soon, could wish it would
stay a little longer.

2. Their hearts are not so cheerful in Gods service, nay, many times the
Lords day is the saddest day in the week, they are more merry before it comes,
and when it is gone, then in it.

3. They give too much way to wandering thoughts and affections in holy duties,
they are not so unpleasant and burdensome to them, they do not strive against
them.

4. Secret wishings and desires that the Sabbath were gone, to the end they
might go about other occasions.

5. Too much gladness of the end of the Sabbath, too much ease and rest in their
hearts, these things show how weak service God has, because so weary.

3. Their sin that take course to weary soul and body, so as to make them unfit
for Gods worship, for they take course to weaken his worship: they that
overcharge their bodies with surfeting and drunkenness, that overtire them with
labor, that suffer their affections to run at their will upon earthly things,
do take course that God might have but poor service: to do God but poor
service, is a sin: but to take course that God may have but poor service, is a
double sinnne, that argues we are willing he should have but weak service, or
at least are careless of the strength of his worship.

2. To reprove 1. Our general wearines of Gods worship. If we consider it, it
may shame us.

1. A sign we have lost Gods creation. Is it likely that God would make
creatures on purpose for his service, and make them so that it should be a
burden to them, when it was in his power to make them otherwise? Thou art weary
of the word, of prayer, can rest no where, do continually wish the minister
had done; oh be ashamed, God did not make thee thus, thou have lost his image,
wiped off his spot: should a father take pains and be at cost with a child,
to learn him the skill of some trade, and he should have lost it when he should
come to exercise it, would he not be ashamed? thou have lost the skill of
serving of God, which God gave thee, wherein he was at more pains and cost,
then in making the rest of his creatures. Me thinks this should make men hang
down their heads for shame, when they find themselves weary of Gods worship,
they were sometimes fit to do Gods service, but now unfit.

2. There is no matter of wearines in Gods worship, for it is Gods work,
therefore all good, God can command but what is good, and in that which is all
good is no matter of wearines, Esai. 43.23. I have not made thee to serve with
an offering, nor wearied thee with incense, these God commanded, but there was
no matter of wearines in them, as appears by the contrary, Thou have made me
to serve with thy sins and wearied me with thine iniquities, in sin is
matter of wearines. If thou be weary of that which is good, thou have Satan's
image upon thee in measure, for that is his image, to be weary of good as good,
John 8.44. when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own: the Devil can call
nothing his own but sin and falsehood, for there is no truth in him, he has
no disposition unto truth: and will not this shame thee, to be like the Devil?

3. This wearines in good is the road way unto wearines in, and by evil and
affliction; for temporal tiring evil the word of God is express, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
48. because thou servest not the Lord thy God with joyfullnes and gladness of
heart, for the abundance of all things, thou shall serve thine enemies in
hunger, and thirst, and nakedness, and want of all things, and he shall put a
yoke of iron about thy neck, until he have destroyed thee: they that serve God
with a weary heart, instead of being in the hands of God, a friend, they shall
be in the hands of enemies, a weary condition, instead of serving God they
shall serve their enemies, those whom they do not love, those who will not
recompense their labor, for they shall serve them in hunger, etc. they shall
have hunger, but no meat to eat, thirst, but no drink to drink, nakedness, but
no clothing to put on, no though they serve for it, and so deserve it, a weary
condition; yet if they might have any liberty, it were less matter, but they
shall put a yoke of iron about thy neck, until they have destroyed thee, a
yoke shows restraint, but an iron yoke shows wearisome restraint, yea so
wearisome, as it shall bring on death. They that are weary of Gods service, the
way of life, must make account of wearisome bondage, the way to death. No joy
of Gods service who is the God of thy life, no joy of life? Look into the
conditions of men that are much weary of Gods worship, and see if they have not
some wearying, tiring affliction, like an iron yoke, that they can neither
break nor cheerfully bear, if God would open their eyes they might see herein
wearines in Gods worship. A notable example see, 2 Chronicles. 12.1. when Rehoboam
was strengthened in his kingdom, he forsook the law of the Lord, and all Israel
with him, they grew weary of the Lords worship, whereupon he sent the King of
Egypt to take the fenced cities of Judah, and to make toward Jerusalem, the
Lord sends a prophet to tell them that he had left them in the hands of their
enemies, because they had forsaken him, this word seconding the Lords work did
draw them to humiliation, yet the Lord would not wholly deliver them, and he
renders the reason. verse. 8. they shall be his servants, that they may know the
difference between my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the
countries. They might have served God, and none else, but they would not, his
service, was a bondage and burden unto them, therefore they shall serve their
enemies, whom they would not, till they know by experience that Gods worship is
the more easy yoke, and by such experience be made to delight in it. And for
heaven they that are naturally weary of Gods service, must never look to come
there, unless their natures be changed, for we pray that we may do Gods will
on earth, as they do in heaven, a sign all that are in heaven do Gods will
cheerfully, for were they weary of it, we might not, we need not pray to do it
like them, we might not, it were sin, we need not, for we can do it wearily
of our selves, a sign also, that as we look to come to heaven to be hereafter
as they are already that are in heaven, we must do Gods will cheerfully in
measure upon earth, as they do it in heaven. Though God suffer to come into the
earth, and to tarry upon the earth, such as worship him but wearily, yet he
will not suffer them to come into heaven: earth is a place of change, in heaven
is no change: Nay, heaven would more weary such a man, then he is wearied here,
for there is the same work for substance, but more of it, more earnestly, more
constantly done, and if a little weary men, more will weary them much more.
Should I ask you one after another, what you hope will be your condition in
another world? you would say, you desire to go to heaven, and you hope to go
to heaven. But your wearines of Gods worship does say to the contrary, heaven
shall never have you till you be altered, for heaven could not keep you, if it
had you, for you would take no contentment there, for the delights there would
increase your discontent and wearines. The most curious and exquisite music
does incre^se the sadness of a sad heart. The godly have experience, that when
their hearts are out of temper, the worship of God, good duties, are an
increase of their burden, and when their hearts are very uncomfortable, the
very comforts of God do increase their discomforts. And if weary services of
God cannot come to heaven, they must to hell, which every body judge to be a
weary condition, Math. 25.30. and cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, there shallbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. Why was this servant
unprofitable who must be cast into this weary con^ition? the reason is found,
verse. 24. I knew thee that thou were an hard man, reaping where thou have not
sowed, he thought God an hard master, and his work a weary work, therefore he
would not meddle with it. Therefore his wages is wearisome, no light, no
comfort, utter darkness, weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

2. To reprove the godly in special, as more blame worthy, in regard of their
weariness. Nor do I mean that weariness which proceeds from infirmity,
which yet may shame us, because it is our sin, and the fruit of our sin,
but I mean that wearines which does proceed from carelessenes, the godly not
bearing the same a their burden, not using means to remedy it, but rather
neglecting it, and suffering it to increase in their souls, whilst they
content themselves with the outward performance of good duties, this is the
special fault of the godly, and for this they deserve specially to be blamed,
and that upon my doctrine, as a sufficient reason, it weakens the worship of
God, make their prayer, hearing, reading lean sacrifices: let them but consider
whom they serve so poorly, because wearily, that God who is not, has not
been, nor will be weary of doing them good, the beginning of his mercy was in
everlasting, and the end of it shall be in everlasting, it began before time,
and shall continue after time is ended without end, Psalm. 103.17. He gave them
the best gift he had to give, the measure of which love cannot be expressed,
but is set down in a gross sum, as inexpressible, so God loved the world,
John 3.16. He gave his Son, his begotten Son, therefore his own Son, a natural
son, his only begotten son, he had no other, so he loved his people, if any
can tell the measure of that love.

To fasten this reproof upon us, let us consider Gods ways of willingness and
delight toward us.

1. When we have wearied him with our sins he is willing to pardon them,
Isai. 43.24.25. yea, he delights in this mercy, Micah 7.18. he will
abundantly pardon, Isai. 55.7. a sign of delight, at that time when our hearts
are weary and heavy l^^den with our sins, he will pardon and give us rest,
Matthew. 1^.^8. His abundant willingness appears in that,

1. He invit^th us to come to him in our weary condition.

2. He charge his Ministers to urge and press comfort upon us, to take no
denial, Isai. 40.1.2. Comfort ye, Comfort ye, speak comf^r^ably, speak till
they hear, till they be comforted.

3. He gives his Ministers the tongue of the learned, to speak a w^rd in sea
on, in the fittest time, to the weary soul, Isai. 50.1.

4. He creates the fruit of the lips peace, Isai. 57.19. whilst the Minister
speaks peace, he creates peace by his Almighty power he makes the fruit of the
lips of his servants, to be peace to the troubled soul, as when Eli bid
troubled Hannah, Go in peace, and the Lord grant her petition, she had peace
to go with, for she did eat, and her countenance was no more sad.

2. He gives us refreshing comforts, in that very worship of his, in which we
are weary, Psalm. 36.8. abundantly satisfy us with the fatnes of his house, and
make us to drink of the river of his pleasures. He gives us the choicest, most
excellent delights, Isai. 25.6. fat things full of marrow, wines on the lees
well refined. He invites us unto these places of delights, that there he might
give us his loves, Cant. 7.11.12. and when we are there, he gives us rich
welcome, Cant. 5.1. eat, o friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, o beloved!
Isai. 55.3. eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in
fatnes.

3. He accompanies us in our afflicted weary conditions: when Israel was a
burning bush in Egypt, the Angel of the Lord appeared in a flame of fire, in
the midst of the bush, Exodus 3.2. He dwelt in the midst of the bush with good
will, to preserve them, as he did the three children, Dan. 3.24, 25, 28.

He is as it were wearied in their weary condition, Isai. 63.9. He was
afflicted, Judge. 10.16. His soul was greived, Jer. 31.20. His bowels were
troubled.

He gives them refreshing delightful comforts in their weary conditions, Psalm.
119.92. Gods law was David's delight, Psalm. 94.19.

Psalm. 41.3. God does strengthen them upon the bed of languishing, and turn
their bed to make it easy in sickness.

He turns our mourning into dancing, takes away our sackcloth, and girdeth us
with gladness, Psalm. 30.11. turns our fasts into feasts, Zech. 8.19. makes
sorrow and sighing flee away, Isai. 51.11. makes us to forget our troubl^s and
sorrows, Job 11.16.

4. These ways of Gods willingness and delight toward us, are not limited to
some times of our life, and some special conditions and occasions, but carried
along the whole race of our life, and that we may be confident of with David,
Psalm. 23.6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life, they are therefore styled sure mercies, an everlasting covenant, Isai.
55.3.

These refreshings are renewed as his Ordinances, and our afflictions are
renewed. And if so much refreshment be given out on this side heaven, in time
of our absence from God, in time of our pilgrimage, what is in heaven reserved
in the presence of God, as our welcome home, as the wages of all our weary
work and affliction, especially as the perfection of our communion with Christ
our head, in heavenly delights, who drunk the dregs of sorrow for our sake?
Compare Gods willingness toward us, with our wearines in his service, that we
may the better see our sin, and be filled with shame. No work has that
delight, that assistance, that encouragement, that reward, yet we are weary.
Look back to the days of our youth, and see what delightful work sin was,
what time, pains spent therein. We could find meat, drink, sleep, work, rest,
and recreation in sin, yea so great was our delight in sin, that it is very
hard not to think with delight, of what delight we formerly found in sin. This
considered, we may break out with Paul: Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? This heavy tiring body of death?

3. To exhort us to labor the redress of this wearines in Gods worship, which
causes us to put off God with so unworthy, unwellcome, unacceptable service.
And let me first speak to them, who are in an unregenerate condition, if so be
it might please God, I might prevail with them in two things.

1. To grow out of love with themselves.

2. To grow in love with the Image of God.

1. There is great cause we should grow out of love with our selves, be weary
of our selves, if we consider our natures will not, nay cannot suffer us to do
God any good service, for they cannot be willing unto it, or cheerful in it:
should I ask any man that believes there is a God, and that God made him, and
bestowed upon him all he has, he would say he were to be worshipped in the
best manner: but then come to the heart for a will unto Gods service, and cheer
in it, and it will not, nay cannot yield it, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is
enmity against God: and he proves it by the affection it has to his will, for
it is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be, it neither does, nor
can come under the command of God, subject and submit unto it, that what it
requires shall be done willingly and cheerfully. See it in an instance, the
little family, religion, that is (I say not amongst heathens, but) amongst them
that have lived long under the preaching of the Word, and even in this place.
Men cannot but be convinced that it is a duty to read the Word, and to pray in
their families, and they cannot but think it is good, sometimes at least, yet
it is not done, they cannot fall to it. How comes that to pass? their hearts
will not suffer them, they have no mind, they have no delight therein; It may
be they will say they are unable, and that hinders them, but that is but a
pretense put upon their unwillingnes, for what a man is willing of, he will get
some skill in, he will try what he can do; when he has no skill, he will
inquire of others, and by exercise gain skill: so had men a will to be
religious in their families, they would get skill, they would first pray betwixt
God and their own souls, they would beg skill of God to pray in their own
families, they would get some body to pray for them in their families, their
wives, if they be able, or children, or servants, or some friend, they would
first learn a prayer out of a book, and after pray of themselves; what is it
that will will not do? Have not men just cause to be out of love with
themselves, who naturally have no will unto Gods service. They are willing to
do their own works: as here, When will the New moon be gone, that we may sell
corn? they have more mind of selling corn then of Gods service, they are
willing to do sins work, Prove. 2.13, 14. evil men do not only leave the paths
of uprightnes, to walk in the ways of darkness, but they rejoice to do evil,
and delight in the frowardnes of the wicked. Are these not bad hearts that can
delight in any thing but what is best? More then thus, our hearts do not only
make us unfit to go to heaven, because they make Gods worship a burden to us,
but they make us unwilling to go to Heaven. No unregenerate man can be willing
to go to Heaven, as he is unregenerate. You will say, every unregenerate man
desires and is willing to go to Heaven: I answer no, you are deceived, no
unregenerate man is willing to go to Heaven, for he is not willing unto the
worship of God, the necessary way to Heaven. Indeed, if you consider Heaven,
and Gods service as parted, then they may be willing of Heaven, and not of Gods
service: but if you consider Heaven and Gods service inseparably knit together,
then if he be unwilling of Gods service, he is unwilling of Heaven, because he
cannot possibly have heaven, but in a way of Gods service: Ruth 4.3, etc. Boaz
tells Elimelechs next kinsman, that Naomi sells a parcel of land, that was
Elimelechs, and he is next to redeem it, he says he will redeem it. Boaz tells
him, that what time he redeem the inheritance, he must take Ruth the wi^e of
the dead, then he says, he cannot redeem it, though he were willing to redeem
the inheritance, yet because he was not willing to redeem it, in that way
wherein it was to be redeemed, he was not willing to redeem it at all, so he
plainly says, I cannot redeem it. In like manner, because unregenerate men
cannot be willing of Gods service, the way to heaven, they cannot be willing of
heaven: are not those natures to be loathed that love not heaven?

Object. The Scripture does bear witness, that unregenerate men have delighted
in the worship of God: Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my
ways, they take delight in approaching to God: Herod heard John Baptist
gladly, Mark 6.20. The stony ground hear the Word with joy, Matthew. 13.20.

Answ. Unregenerate men may have some willingness unto, and delight in the
service of God in three cases.

1. When Gods service is a leading way unto some end, that suits with corrupt
nature, and so it is not Gods pure worship that they love, but their corrupt
end, for they love Gods worship no further then serves to that corrupt end.
Thus John showed abundance of zeal in destroying the house of Ahab, and the
idolatry of Baal, that thereby he might establish the Kingdom to his posterity,
and get himself a great name: ^ King. 10.16. Come with me, and see my Zeal for
the Lord: he was so full of vain glory herein, that he cannot hold in, but is
forced to break out. And that he was forward unto Gods service, only for a
corrupt end, appears plainly by the testimony of the Holy ghost concerning him,
ver. 31. He took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with all
his heart, he did walk in some part of the law, but not with all his heart: the
service of God had but a piece of his heart, he was no further willing unto it,
and forward in it then served his corrupt ends, that he did not walk in the law
of God with all his heart, the spirit of God makes it plain, in the later end
of the verse, for he departed not from the sins of Iero^oam, who made Israel to
sin, had he destroyed Baals Idolat^y, because it was Gods will, he would also
have destroyed Ieroboams Idolatry, because that also was Gods will, but that in
worldly policy would have been against his own ends, for that Idolatry was set
up in policy, as a means to establish the Kingdom, 1 King. 12 26. Jeroboam said
in his heart, that if the people should go up to the house of God to worship in
Jerusalem, then their hearts would turn again to the King of Judah, and then
his Kingdom were gone, therefore he made two calves, and put this pretense upon
it, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, but his intent was, to
preserve the Kingdom to himself, and so it is likely, that Iehu let them alone,
in the same policy, for he spared them out of the unsoundnes of his heart.

2. When the matter of worship, or manner of dispensation, does suit with his
disposition. An understanding judicious man may love preaching that is
judicious and understanding, fit to increase knowledge, and to perfect his
understa ding. A man of meeknes may delight in a Sermon of peace, peace, may be
refreshed with smooth, soft, mild, quiet preaching. A temperate man may joy in
a Sermon that is tart and bitter against drunkenness, uncleannes: the liberal
man may delight in severe preaching against covetousnes: a man musically
affected, may delight in singing Psalms, because these things suit with their
dispositions. The gifts of Ministers may have an affecting pleasingnes, they
may express their minds in such sit terms, or so pathetically, or they may
have such a grace in utterance, so ready, so smooth, so distinct, with such
comely carriage of body as may affect, etc. Ezekiel. 33.32. So many, no doubt, may
be very forward to Gods Ordinances, ordinary and extraordinary, as a way unto
their credit and good name: Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and
thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no
knowledge? they thought they deserved to be regarded highly for their fasting,
even of God himself, and expostulate with God for disregarding them, a sign
they made account of that, and aimed chiefly at that in doing the duty,
otherwise they would rather have complained of the sins found in those duties,
a God does: Matthew. 6.5. Our Savior speaking of hypocrites, says, they love to
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets: they do
not only pray in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, but they
love to pray there, they have an affection thereto, a delight therein; why? not
in regard of the duties themselves, or Gods glory, but their own ends, that
they may be seen of men, get praise and glory to themselves.

3. Unregenerate men may have some affection to, and delight in the service of
God, by reason of some work of the spirit of God upon them for the time. As

1. A work of illumination, giving some clear discerning of that good is in
Gods worship, more then in any other employment, and the apprehension of such
good, whilst it lasts, will somewhat stir the affection.

2. Awaking and exciting the conscience to do its office, which by promises of
good, on the one hand, and threatenings of evil, on the other, assisted by the
spirit of God, has a power to command the desire and delight of the soul to
work. Felix his conscience awaked by the preaching of Paul, stirred his
affection of fear. And when the conscience does charge it upon the affections,
as a duty to joy in Gods worship, and to be willing unto it, a duty which God
will reward, the contrary whereto God will punish, it may forcibly compel, and
draw out the affections.

3. Lifting up the affections of desire and delight, by an heavenly power of
experience. As a man which dips his finger in some sweet liquour, and tastes
the sweetness of it, does afterward desire and delight therein; So God does by
the work of his spirit, sometimes drench the affections of unregenerate men in
the sweetness of his worship, does so make their affections, and the good of the
Ordinances to meet, that they feel and taste a sweetness, which make them
affected afterward to the means thereof: Heb. 6.4, 5. Such as afterward fall
away, may taste of the powers of the world to come, may dip their finger in the
rivers of the pleasures of Heaven. But this work of the spirit, making
unregenerate men willing to, and cheerful in the worship of God, is rather a
work upon them, then in them, a forced work, not natural, rather a flash, then
a fire of affection. The affections are lifted up, not altered and changed,
acted only by an outward principle, the work of the spirit, the experience the
spirit has forcibly and powerfully wrought, not by an outward and inward
principle, both the spirit of God, and the suitablenes of the affection to that
which is good, as in the godly. If this were well considered, that men's natures
have no affection to that which is good, it would keep them from priding
themselves in their knowledge, wisdom, wit, gifts, it would keep them from
pride in beauty, and trimming their bodies, considering there is no part of the
body but gives it self away to sin, and is wholly unwilling to bestow it self
in the service of God.

2. As there is great cause that unregenerate men should grow out of love with
themselves, on the one hand, so in love with the image of God, on the other
hand, that, and that only can affect their hearts with Gods worship, for Gods
Image is that in the heart, which the law of God is in the book of God: Act.
13.22. I have found a man after my own heart, says God of David, which shall
fulfill all my will. David was therefore fit to fulfill all Gods will, because
his heart was after Gods own heart: and what this is to be after Gods own
heart, we shall know, if we consider David expressing his willingness to do the
will of God in other terms: Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, oh my God,
yea, thy law is within my heart: David therefore delighted to do Gods will
outwardly, because he had the law of God within in his heart. Who would not
have an heart like Gods heart, an heart adorned with the good law of God? Till
thou have this heart, thou can not from within taste sweetness in, and readily
come unto the worship of God. Oh therefore thou that find thy self in an
unregenerate condition, and the worship of God a burden to thee, go to God,
tell him that indeed it was his goodness to make thee after his image in Adam,
when thou could willingly and cheerfully have served him, but it was thy sin
in Adam, to make away that image which now thou perceivest the want of, tell
him, he has promised to wri e his law in the hearts of his people a second
time, pray him to make good that promise to thee, thou can not else serve him
with thy heart; as the good will be thine, so the glory will especially be his.

2. Having thus spoken to the unregenerate, to persuade them to grow out of
love with themselves, and in love with the Image of God, as the way to grow in
love with Gods worship, and so to remedy their wearines; let me now turn my
speech to the people of God, who are sensible of wearines, bear it as a burden,
and would gladly be rid of it, and that upon this ground, which they are well
aware of, because it hinders them in Gods worship. Let me first exhort, and
then direct them to get rid of this wearines in a greater measure. First let me
exhort them, and for that end I will use a double argument.

1. The first shall be my Doctrine, Weariness makes us perform weak service
unto God, which every child of God has great reason to remedy. The weight of
this first argument will appear, if we consider Time Past, Present, Future, or
to come.


1. Time past: we may call to mind, that before God brought us home to him, we
did the work of sin both willingly and cheerfully, Ephesians. 2.3. The Apostle says
of the converted Ephesians, that in times past they had their conversation in
the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, they were willing
to do whatsoever corruption desired, would deny it nothing, if that did but
desire, it must be done, Tit. 3.3. Paul puts in himself, and Titus, and the
rest of the godly, and says, We our selves were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, not only had we to
do with sinful lusts and desires, but pleasures, sweet sins, that did bring us
delight and joy, and these we served, were commanded by them, they were our
masters, and we did them as willing and cheerful service as ever servant did
his Master. The Holy Ghost speaking in the language of young men, that will not
be reclaimed from their sinful ways, says, Let thine heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart; not only do young
men and others walk in the ways of their hearts, but their hearts are cheered
therein, Prove. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, and all
unregenerate men are fools: Paul says of himself, Titus and the godly, before
conversion they were foolish. And cannot we remember, that we showed our selves
fools by making a sport of sin, of Sabbath breaking, of filthy speaking, of
cruel exercises, as bear-baiting, cock-fighting, men quarrelling, and the
like? Have we not gone merrily from the Church on the Lords day, unto some
unlawful meeting, and sinful recreation?

2. Add hereto, that we had no desire or delight in any good, sin had not some
of our will and joy only, but all of both: Gods service had none at all, no
not a small measure. It may be we forced our selves to pray, to hear the Word,
and to do other good duties, because our parents would have us, or law did call
upon us, or we were ashamed to neglect the same, but no will had we thereto.
Nay have we not spoken ill of praying, going to Sermons, making profession,
living strictly? a sign what our will was to such courses. It was that lay
heavy upon Paul after his conversion, that he persecuted the Church, spoke ill
of them, and did ill to them, and that for well doing, and that with zeal,
abundance of willingness and delight: 1 Cor. 15.9. I am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God: Phil. 3.6. Concerning Zeal,
persecuting the Church: he did not only persecute them for well doing, but he
did it with zeal, with an ardent affection. This is the description of all
unregener^te men: Tit. 1.16. They are unto every good work reprobate, not only
does God reject them, and make no account of them, when they come to do any
religious work, but they also in their own natures are sit to reject and to
cast away, rather then to embrace, and to do what is good, and not some good
works only, that are most difficult and spiritual, but every good work (...)
Amos 3.10. They know not to do right (says the Lord) they have neither skill
nor will to do right.

3. Add to both, the time spent in willing and cheerful service of sin: most
of us have spent more time then we have to spend in the service of God: we
know what is past, and that much is past, but we know not how little is to
come. Put all together. Have we willingly and cheerfully served sin, when
we had no will at all to good, and that longer time, for ought we know,
then we have to spend in Gods service: and shall we do God vveak service?
What? after we have served sin with our strength, shall we allow our selves
in such poor service unto God, as we would not put off sin with? What?
considering that the time of sins service is past, and therefore sure, but
the time of Gods service is uncertain, because to come, shall we proclaim to
all the world that sin was a better master then God, by our more wearisome
service of God then sin?

2. Let us consider time present, and therein two things.

1. God has put into us a principle of willingness and cheerfullnes in his
service, a new nature, which wants nothing but stirring up, and improving, and
we should be more affectionate and lively in Gods service; this appears in
that the Apostle calls upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. to stir up the gift of God,
there was an holy fire of grace in him, which did but need stirring up, were
the ashes but blown from it, it would flame, Heb. 12.1. He calls upon the godly
to lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset them, and
run with patience the race set before them; there is in them an active and
cheerful disposition, a joyful running in the race of godliness, were the
cloggs of sin and earthly cares and comforts removed, Heb. 10.24. He calls
upon them to provoke unto love and good works every one his Neighbor, and
every one his brother: there is love in the godly, which is a fountain of good
works, which needs only provoking and spurring on. That the godly are no more
cheerful therefore in Gods service, is carelessenes, want of taking pains:
and does not that make our sin much greater?

2. We do expect that God should willingly and cheerfully meet us, and do us
good in his ordinances, if we want counsel, comfort, grace, provision, safety.
The godly have not only prayed to God in case of their necessity, but they
have added their desire, that God would not keep silence, but when they have
spoken to him in prayer, that he would speak again to them by his spirit,
word, and providence; when they have spoken their troubles, that he would
speak comfort; when they have spoken their doubts, that he would speak
counsel; when they have spoken their wants of grace, that he would speak
supply. When God has withdrawn himself from his people, though seeking him in
his Ordinances, they have been exceedingly troubled, Cant. 5.6. did not the
spouse faint because she could not find her beloved when she sought him?
Psalm. 44.24. does not the Church think that God forgets her oppression and
affliction? forgets how ill matters go with her, because he does not hear her
prayers? Nay have not the godly desired a speedy answer without delay? Psalm.
143.7. Hear me speedily. They have desired God to make haste and not to tarry,
Psalm. 70.5. make haste unto me, make no tarrying, which shows they desired that
what God did for them, he would do it cheerfully and willingly, for slacknes is
usually a sign of unwillingnes. Nay, when the occasion of their praying has
been some temporal outward affliction present, they have begged the favor of
God, as if that had been the only thing wanted, Psalm. 80.3. It was salvation
from enemies that the Church desired, but she especially prays again and again
for the face of God to shine upon her, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be
saved, Psalm. 143. was penned by David in regard of the persecution of his
enemies, verse. 3.12. yet he earnestly prays, verse. 6.7. that God would not hide
his face, that God would cause him to hear his loving kindness in the morning,
which shows whatsoever God should do for them, whether preventing of evil, or
removing of evil, they desire God would do it lovingly and heartily, and the
love wherewith he does it, does them more good then the mercy it self. It is
the frame of the heart of the godly thus to desire God cheerfully to meet with
them in ordinances, God must come off with every mercy cheerfully, and give us
his love, more then the mercy; and shall we come off heavily with the services
we perform to him? What equity is in this, God must do our minds and desires
cheerfully, and we his mind, wearily? do we more desire and value the Lords
love then his mercies, and will not the Lord look more at our love then the
duties we perform? It argues too much self love, too little love to God, to
desire all may come from God to us heartily, but to let all go from us to God
grudgingly.

3. Consider the time to come, and therein also 2. things.

1. We look for heaven hereafter, and for heaven as wages and recompense:
Moses had respect to the recompense of reward. Will God reward unwilling work?
do we recompense children for work unwillingly done? No, we make them do the
work, and chide, and beat them for their unwillingnes. Work done unwi^lingly we
wish undone, rather then done, and will we recompense work we had rather were
undone? There is no difference between the work of the godly, and wicked, the
work of the Devil and the godly for matter; the Devil comes to Church, he is
the fowls of heaven that pick up the seed sown by the high way side; the Devil
prays, ye shall find him at prayers upon his knees in the gospels; it is the
will that makes the difference. The Devil does the will of God, and the wicked
do the will of God, but God will reward neither in heaven, because they did not
the same willingly, but by compulsion and constraint: God will recompense none
but willing work, 1 Cor. 9.16.17. Though I preach the Gospel, etc. Though Paul
be a preacher, yet he cannot glory of his pay and wages in heaven, for
necessity is laid upon him, God has given him a calling and gifts for that
purpose, do it he must; but if he do it willingly he has a reward; God rewards
none but willing work, other work, that which is done unwillingly, is not
worthy the name of work, so much affected is God to willing work, that which is
done willingly, according to his mind, though it be done for by ends, yet God
will recompense it with temporal savours. Iehu executed all the will of God
upon Ahabs house, his intent was not to obey God, but to gain glory to himself
for present, and to make the kingdom sure to him for after time, yet because
he did it heartily, God promised his children should sit upon the throne to the
fourth generation, 2 Kings 10.30. Nebuchadnezzar did accomplish Gods whole work
upon Tyrus; his intent was to serve himself of them, yet because he did it
willingly and cheerfully, though he did undergo great loss, therefore God did
recompense him, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. And surely should not the godly be humbled for
their weary serving of God, he would not reward their service in heaven. And so
much as the godly give way to backward and uncheerfull service, so much they do
blur and blot their evidence of heaven, for God does not reward our praying,
hearing, alms, but our willing and cheerful performance of the same, for we
do no more any work then we do it willingly.

2. God will reward us according to our work, measure for measure, 2 Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully
shall reap bountifully, and what the measure of their bounty must be, we may
see in the next verse, as every man has purposed in his heart, so let him
give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, so much willingness and heartines, so
much bounty; and so much as men give constrainedly, and grudgingly, so much
sparing and covetousnes. We may therefore increase, or diminish, make more, or
make less our reward in heaven, by our cheerful or uncheerfull serving of
God, for God will reward us according to our works, and that not so much
according to the work of our body and outward man, as according to the work of
our will. That this is so, appears hence.

1 The will that is set awork in any action, is the work of the more noble
part, the soul, and therefore is the more noble work, the better work,
resembling Gods work more, and glorifying him more; surely God will most
recompense the best work.

2. So much of the will in any action, so much and no more we alone do the
action, without help of others, so much as we do it willingly, we do it from
within, moved thereunto by our selves; but so much as we do it unwillingly, so
much we do it from something without us, and the more we do an action alone,
the more will our reward be; if others join with us, and by ends set us on,
part of our reward is due to them.

3. When any duty is performed the work of the body is but single, but the work
of the will is double, for beside it own act of willingness unto the duty, it
does set awork the body, the body only does the work, it does not set awork the
soul; indeed in it is working it may increase the willingness of the soul, but
cannot begin the duty, lead the soul, set awork the soul, it may occasion the
working of the will, but has no command or power over the will, but the will
does set on the body, and where the most work is done, there the most wages is
due.

4. Should God reward according to the outward work, rather then according to
the will, then were it not possible for poor men to have so much glory in
heaven as rich men, nor women as men, because they have not so much
opportunity, to serve God, in regard of the outward work. Nor should ministers,
that do but little good in their places, possibly have so much reward, as they
that do much good, no though their will were better, which would contrary that
of our Savior concerning the widow, and the rich men, casting in their gifts
into the treasury, this widow has cast in more then they all, not more in
quantity in the outward work, but more in the will: if therefore the outward
work of the poor be less then that of the rich, yet if the will be more, the
work is more, and so the recompense shall be more.

The second argument to persuade the godly to remedy this wearines, is drawn
from consideration of the evil of wearines, and the benefit of delight in Gods
service. The evil of wearines we may find in the chapter where my text is, the
evil threatened to the sins of that chapter whereof this is one: see this evil
laid down in three degrees.

1. Change of joy into sorrow, yea the greatest joy into sorrow, verse. 3. what
greater joy then the joy of the Temple, under the old Testament, when there was
such variety of instruments of Music, which, being commanded by God, were
assisted to increase the joy of his people? to have these songs silent is a
sadness, but to have them turned into howlings, makes much more sorrow, verse.
10. To have the ordinary days of Gods people turned into mourning, and their
ordinary mirth into lamentation is heavy, but to have their seast-dayes, days
of greatest mirth turned into mourning, and their songs, the greatest
expressions of joy, into lamentation, is much more heavy, yet God will change
the greatest joy of weary worshippers into greatest sorrow, as he says, verse.
10. I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a
bitter day, it shall be a mourning with a witness.

2. This change of greatest joy for greatest sorrow, shall be sudden and
unexpected. The benefit of expectation of evil is this.

1. A man may possibly prevent evil expected.

2. Or at least he may labor to prepare for it, and so the evil will be
mitigated, but sudden and unexpected evil has this aggravation, a man can
neither prevent it, nor is prepared to bear it, so it shall be here, verse. 9. I
will make the sun to go down at noon, and darken the earth in the clear day:
for the sun to go down at night is no strange thing, but to go down at noon,
who expects that? to have the earth darkened in a clear day, who does look for
it? so here, when their sun shall be at the height, their joy at the
greatest, when their day shall be most clear, and likely so to continue, yet
then their sun shall set, and their day darken, their joy shall turn into
sorrow.

3. The kind of evil that shall cause this sorrow shall aggravate it: were it
some outward affliction, that, in it, the soul might be safe, though
uncomfortable, it were less matter; but it shall be such an affliction,
wherein the soul shall neither be comfortable nor safe, a famine of hearing
the words of the Lord, a scarcity of that worship, they have been weary of,
which evil is many ways aggravated.

1. By comparison, not a famine of bread, though the famine of the body be
grievous, as experience does prove, yet this shall be greater, that shall be
nothing to this.

2. If God did take away spiritual hunger together with food, it were
something, but they shall hunger and thirst, be pinched and pained spiritually,
find, it may be, more emptines and inward gnawings of spirit, then when they
had the means.

3. Might they with little ado, do, and some small pains be supplied, it
were less matter, but they shall take weary pains, wander from sea to sea,
runn to and fro: they were weary of going to a set place of Gods worship, but
now they shall wander to and fro, go to seek it they know not whither, places
unlikely as well as likely, they were weary of going to Gods worship, though
had with ease, but now they shall run to and fro, weary themselves with
taking pains.

4. Might they find what they seek with pains taking, they should find rest
after pains t^king, but they shall not find it, after their pains taking,
they shall still be to seek, which makes the evil more heavy, because
remediles. Let the godly fear and tremble lest their wearines of Gods worship
bring this evil, the change of greatest joy into greatest sorrow, and that when
we least exp ct it, and which is most of all, by the irrecoverable loss of
that worship of God we have been weary of.

Touching the benefit of delight in Gods worship, on the contrary, the 112.
Psalm. will inform us, where the man that fears the Lord, and delights
greatly in his commandments is pronounced a happy man. And because outward
blessings do carry the greatest show of happiness to the eyes of men, therefore
the holy ghost does especially insist upon them, they may be ranked to three
heads.

1. Enjoyment of outward good things, children, riches, honor, 2. 3, 9. He
shall not have these mercies barely and nakedly as others, but with a threefold
addition.

1. Inward dispositions of graciousnesse, mercy, righteousness, discretion to
improve well his riches, giving unto some, lending unto others.

2. Establishment and firmnes of estate, verse. 3.9. his rightenesse endures
for ever, he shall have ability to give and lend, not for a time only, but for
ever, his outward condition shall not be a flourish only, but a settled
condition.

3. Succession of these mercies to his seed and posterity, verse. 2. his
children shall come into his place and mercies, be heirs of his blessings,
that a man may see and say his seed is blessed, Psalm. 37.26.

2. Change of darkness into light, verse. 4. He may be in darkness, in
affliction, but that shall not always continue, light shall arise, and as
when the morning is at the darkest, the light breaks out, so when they and
others think the night will always continue, they shall perish in darkness,
then shall light break out, Isa. 58.10. as cheer has arisen in his heart in
the difficulties of Gods service, so light shall arise in the darkness of his
condition.

3. Establishment of heart against seares of evil, verse. 6, 7, 8. tidings of
evil may come to his ear, but his heart shall be armed against them, to keep
it is present temper, it shall be fixed, established, he shall be confident of
Gods preservation, in whose service he has delighted, he shall rather see his
desire upon his enemies, then they their desire upon him. His good shall be so
great every way, that it shall be matter of great envy, even to the consuming
of the wicked.

Having thus exhorted the godly, now unto direction.

1. How may we remedy the weariness of the soul?

Ans. Two things are this way useful.

1. Generally, labor to be more suitable to Gods worship, get increase of
grace, Prove. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgment, judgment is suitable
to that inward justice is in him, therefore a joy unto him, Romans 7.22. I
delight in the law of God after the inward man, so much grace, so much delight
in Gods worship, were we more holy, spiritual, heavenly, as the worship of
God, we should be more affected to it.

More particularly.

1. Labor to increase love to God, 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God that we
keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous: love to God
makes the commandments of God good, pleasant, easy, love takes away the
difficulty of an action, and makes it delightful.

2. Labor the increase of perfection of heart, these two go together 1 Chronicles.
28.9. serve him with a perfect heart and willing mind, the more perfect the
heart is, in regard of Gods service, the more willing. Why is the heart
unwilling, but because parted and divided, set too much upon other things? 2 Chronicles. 15.15. they rejoiced at the oath, because they had sworn with all their
heart, and sought him with their whole desire, 1 Chronicles. 29.9.

3. Labor the increase of uprightnes of heart, these two go together, 1 Chronicles.
29.17. when we desire and delight in the worship of God, for by respects or
affections will vary, be more or less, according to those respects, but when
we desire and delight in the worship of God for right ends, the purity thereof,
Psalm. 119.140. Gods command, Gods glory, these will ever continue the same to
draw our affections.

2. Frequently exercise Gods worship, communion does increase affection, hereby
we shall see more the good of Gods worship, and feel the sweetness of it. Use
will take away difficulty, which does hinder affection: what men disuse they
are unwilling to, they will say it is out of their fingers: so if we neglect
Gods worship it will grow out of our hearts. The more we worship God in secret,
the fitter shall we be for family worship, and the more we worship God in our
families, the sitter we shall be for public worship?

Quest. 2. How may we remedy the wearines of our bodies.

Ans. By the exercise of Temperance governed by watchfulnes, 1 These. 5.6. watch
and be sober. This watchful, advised, observant Temperance, must be exercised
about Sleep. Diet. Labor. Recreation.


Some less sleep makes fitter for Gods worship, some more, some are more apt
by less food some by more, some more labor makes fitter, some less, we must
carefully observe, and accordingly order our selves, too much recreation will
make the body altogether sensual, and so loose that it will not be fixed in
any ordinance.

Caution. Let the godly be advised not too easily to hearken to the complaints
of the body, i. q. the soul may deceive us, thereby we may rather suspect the
complaints of the body in Gods worship, and trust them else where, for the soul
is more apt to be weary in Gods worship, and less weary in other works, and
the body is more apt to be weary in other works, and less in Gods worship; the
soul is more weary of Gods worship; because it has less disposednes thereto,
and it is more spiritual, and so lies heavier upon the soul, it is less
weary of other works, because it has more disposednes unto them, and they are
more bodily, and do not so lie upon the spirit, the body is more weary of other
work, because they take more of the body, less weary of Gods worship, because
it is more spiritual, and does not so press upon the body: suspect therefore
the complaints of the body in Gods worship, and do not easily hearken unto them.

2. There is time and place for the execution of an holy revenge upon the body.
It has spent the whole day, and it may be the night after that, in sin,
therefore put it to, make it do somewhat more for the service of God, then it
willingly would. This is not cruelty, but mercy to our bodies, to constrain
them to Gods ^ervice, and that in some proportion to their service of sin.

3. There is a necessity of beating down the body, if we mean it should be
helpful to our souls, if we too much favor them, we do against our souls, 1
Cor. 9. ult. There is a danger, that Paul himself may be cast away, whilst he
does preach to save others, if he do not beat down his body. The occasions and
comforts we daily converse with, do give a strength to the body, and the body
gives a strength to sin. Hence the fruit of the godly is more mellow and
gracious in old age, because the vigor of their bodies decaying, the strength
of sin is wasted.

CHAP. VI. Of the fifth hinderance of instant worshipping of God, sle^ping.
MATTHEW. 26.40. And he comes to his Disciples, and finds them asleep.


I Now come unto another hinderance of our fervent serving of God, which is
sl^^p: a sin that does not only hin^er our fervency in Gods worship, but also
at this time will hinder the means of redress, if not forborne. A sin not
only dogs the careless, who regard only to have their bodies present at
Gods worship, but steals upon the godly, yea the godly of most lively inward
affections, and therefore it may be of general use, to discover how it hinders
our instant serving of God, and the remedy thereof.

The coherence of my Text is this: our Savior knowing that the place of his
solace in communion with God, should be the place of his suffering: Joh. 18.2.
He resorteth to that garden, which he was so accustomed to, when he knew Judas
would look for him, rather then elsewhere, and he takes with him his
Disciples, to the intent they should assist him in prayer, having lately
received the strengthening passover, and Lords Supper: this appears by his
speech unto them: v. 36. Sit ye here whilst I go and pray yonder. He that
bids us when we pray privately, to enrer into our chamber, to shut the door,
and to pray to our Father in secret, Matthew. 6.6. would not have disclosed his
secret praying, had it not been to provoke them unto praie^, for they might
easily apprehend, if he had need to pray, much more they, for though he had
more work to go through then they, yet he had incomparably more strength then
they: his so difficult work was less to his strength, then their so easy wo^k,
comparatively to their strength. Three of his Disciples he takes unto more
intimate and retired sympathy with him in his troubles, these three, Peter and
the two sons of Zebedee, he took, rather then the rest, as we may conceive,
because they had expressed most forward confident affection unto him, he will
try them, that upon trial they might better know themselves and be humble.
Peter, ver. 33, 34, 35. professes that he will not be offended because of the
evil shall befall Christ, though all be offended. And when Christ tells him
that he shall deny him thrice that night, he believes himself rather then
Christ, and affirms that he will sooner die with him then deny him. The two
sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 20.20, 21, 22. desire to sit the one at Christ's right
hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom, he asks them whether they be
able to drink of his cup, and to be baptized with his baptism: they say they
are able, as little considering what they now answered, as what they before
asked, when our Savior had parted these three from the rest, he began to be
sorrowful, and very heavy, he communicates his sorrow to them, and the
extremity thereof, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, he had as
much sorrow as life could hold, he exhorts them, to whom he had thus
specially unbosomed himself, that they would tarry in that place, and watch
with him. As he was sensible of affliction, so of comfort, and the means
thereof. It became him to fulfill all righteousness, therefore not only to pray
himself, but to resort to the prayers of others. His suspended comfort, must be
recovered in Gods own way. The weak Disciples may help their persect Savior,
whilst he suffered as a sinner, if they do but watch. But watching was not
all that Christ aimed at, that is a duty no further useful, then it seems
for some other end: Christ would have them watch, that they might pray with
him, as ver. 41. Watch and pray, watching without prayer had been but a waking
idleness. Our Savior himself goes a little further from them and prays
earnestly, that if it were possible the cup of his sufferings might be turned
some other way; He returns again to his Disciples, and finds them asleep.
Though they had professed great love to him, and great ability to express that
love, though he singled them out, and told them his present great necessity,
and called upon them to watch and pray, i. e. to pray, not drousily, but
fervently, which in all these regards did press upon them as duty, yet they
fell asleep, and were thereby hindered. Whence I note.

N. Sleep is an hinderance to commanded fervency in Gods worship. Sleep in time
of Gods worship, is an enemy to fervency therein. It was the duty of the
Disciples in this place, to watch and pray, i. e. to pray fervently, to pray
with the use of all helps unto the same. Christ gave them command so to do, he
stood in need of their help, as an Ordinance of God, his command was to watch
with him, and his reproof, that they did not watch with him, but they were
hindered by sleep, they did not pray at all, that we read of, if they did, yet
not so fervently and diligently as there was cause: for then our Savior would
not have reproved them. I remember but one only instance in this case in the
book of God, a young man that fell a sleep at a Sermon in the night, and in his
sleep fell down from a third loft, and was taken up dead, Act. 20.9. A passage
in the Acts of the Apostles, which God would have recorded, to be a warning to
all Sermon-sleepers. Where was that young man's attentive hearing, when he was
fallen into a dead sleep?

For our better instruction concerning this truth, let us enquire two things.

1. What may be the causes of sleep in time of Gods worship?

2. How sleep does hinder our earnest worshipping of God?

Quest. What may be the causes of sleep in time of Gods worship?

Answ. We will begin with the causes of the Disciples sleeping in this place:
they are two Isntrumental. Principal.


The Isntrumental cause Luke reports and Matthew: there were two
isntrumental causes.

1. The weakness and infirmity of the body: Matthew. 26.41. The spirit ind^d is
willing, but the flesh is weak. Though the soul be not perfect, yet it has a
greater perfection then the body, the power of will in the soul goes beyond the
power of performance in the body. The body is not allwaies ready, when the soul
is willing to do good. The spouse, Cant. 5.2. does acknowledge that she did
sleep, when her heart did wake, she had good affections inwardly, which yet
wanted outward expressions: So here there was a waking heart in these
Disciples, a will to watch with Christ, but the body was vveak and infirm. It
was now night, the time appointed for man's rest, Psalm. 104.23. The body knows
its time, is spent in the occasions of the day, cannot well work day and night
both, therefore it falls asleep, when it should watch and pray at such time;
the case of these Disciples.

2. The second isntrumental cause of their sleeping, was sorrow of heart:
Luke 22.45. He found them sleeping for sorrow. We find our Saviors own
testimony concerning their sorrow: Joh. 16.6. Because I have said these things
to you, sorrow has filled your heart; Speech of his departure from them, did
fill their hearts with sorrow; so no doubt when he told them of his grief,
that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, unto the death, it did increase their
grief, for they did exceedingly love him, as appears in that he spends four
whole chapters, J^h. 14, 15, 16, 17. to comfort these with the rest against
his leaving of them, and having communicated unto these, over and beside their
known loss of him, his present extreme affliction, it bred in them a sympathy
of sorrow, which filled their heads and eyes with moisture, and so with sleep.

The p^incipall cause of this their sleeping when they should have prayed
fervently, was the vvithdrawing of divine assistance, which could and would
have strengthened the infirmity of their bodies, and have kept their sorrovv
from excess.

That this was so, appears,

1. By the consideration of the persons that did sleep, they were specially
chosen to be with Christ, and had not long before expressed more confidence
then the rest, and God is wont to desert the confident.

2. By our Saviors reproof of them, Matthew. What, could ye not watch with me
one hour? What, not so small a tim^? How then will ye drink of my cup? How
will ye die with me? Where is the strength you boasted of? This he spoke
specially to Peter, who had expressed more confidence then the rest, so Mark
has it, Mark 14.37. He says unto Peter, Simon, slee^est thou? could not
thou watch one hour? Where is thy ability not to be offended because of me,
though all men be offended? surely it is gone.

3. By our Saviors speech unto them, declaring the cause of their sleeping:
the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak: as if he had said, because
you find some freedom and readiness of will, you think you can do any thing.
Indeed your regenerate will stands bent to all the will of God, but little do
you know what impediments and hindrances you have, and what help and
assistance you need from heaven, to do that which you have a general will
unto. God withdrew his assistance, and left them to their own weakness, that
they might better know their weakness, who were confi^ent of strength, for
their humili^tion. This appears,

1. In that he suffered them thus to sail, not once only, but twice and
thrice, not barely to sleep, but to sleep after exhortation unto watching, yea
after reproof for sleep, yea after a second reproof. Here was weakness indeed,
to add sin to sin, notwithstanding the use of means, after means to reform.

2. By our Sav^ours putting them in mind of their weakness, upon occassion of
their sleeping, a sign they did forget it, and these failings did put them in
remembrance thereof.

3. By the effect, the sense of their second sleeping, after reproof, had in
them, Mark 14.40. They wist not what to answer him, they were troubled, and
confounded in themselves.

This was a sit means to humble these self-confident Apostles: not to exercise
grace in ordinary course, is matter of humiliation; but not to exercise grace,
when we have most need to exercise the same, in the worship of God, for our own
good and the good of others, is matter of greater humiliation. To sin at any
time is matter of abasement; but to sin in time of time of special sorrow and
affliction, yea to add sin unto sin, when we should add one expression of
grace unto another, is more matter of abasement: to be worst when we should be
best, how evil is it?

To these we may add some other causes of sleeping in time of Gods worship.

1. Slothfulness: Prove. 19.15. Sl^thfullnesse casts into a deep sleep. It is
the effect of slothfullnesse, and refusal of labor, to make a man heavy and
^^mpish. Labor does dissolve and dispell vapors, does re^resh and lighten the
body, and make it fitter for action: but sloth and idleness does fill the body
with humors, particularly when a man does not make a labor and pains or
praying and hearing, does not stir up, and put forth soul and body, but is
careless in the same, he contracts an heavines and dulnes, whereas attention
unto duties, and pains-taking in the same, does cheer, and awaken both soul and
body.

2. A present senselessness of the necessity of watching, both to attain good
and prevent evil. A sleepy conscience makes a sleepy body: when that does not
its office, as a monitour to warn and press unto duty, the conscience is made
thus sleepy and so senseless of good to be found, or evil to be prevented by
watchful performance of duties, two ways.

1. By some false opinion, and error of mind, some false representation of
things, some false conclusion drawn sometimes from some truth, whereby the
conscience is deceived, and so cast asleep: Matthew. 25.5. Whilst the bridegroom
tarried, the Virgins slumbred and slept: from this false opinion, that it was
no matter if they slept in time of the bridegrooms tarrying, and no good was to
be gotten by waking and watching, unless the bridegroom had been at hand,
which was false, contrary to that of our Savior: Luke 12.35, 36, 37. Let your
loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, And ye your selves like unto men
that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding, that when he
comes and knocks, they may open to him immediately. Blessed are those
servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find watching: Verily I say
unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and
will come forth and serve them. Something is to be done, when the Lord delayeth
his coming unto us, according to his promise, and our expectation, we are then
to wait for him, and it is not in vain so to do, for by that means we shall be
ready to entertain him speedily when he comes, and shall receive more
honorable acknowledgement from him. So ver. 45. If that servant shall say in
his heart, My Lord delaieth his coming, and shall begin to beat the
menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken. Why does the
evil servant miscarry himself thus, in the delay of his Masters coming, but
from a false opinion, that there was no danger in his misbehaviours, unless
his Master were coming and at hand, contrary to what our Savior adds: v.
46. The Lord of that servant will come in a day, when he looks not for him,
and in an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his portion with the unbelievers. Though God come not presently
unto misbehaving men, yet that will not take away their danger, he will come
soon enough, and too soon for them, and bring recompense enough, though he
delay, and that they may resolve upon, as sure and certain.

In like manner, had men true and present apprehensions of the benefit of
watching in time of Gods worship, and the danger of sleeping, they would leave
sleeping, and fall to waking; but they are deceived by a false opinion, that
there is no good to begotten by waking, nor evil to be found in sleeping, and
so they are senseless, not at all affected with the good of the one, or evil
of the other.

2. The conscience is made sleep, and so senseless of good to be obtained, or
evil to be prevented, by waking in the time when God is to be worshipped, by
some sin committed, but not repented of, whereby grace is dulled, and the
awaking quickening spirit of God grieved and withdrawn. This was Ionahs case,
when he had fled from Gods work, against his knowledge and conscience, the
grace of God was so dulled, and his conscience made so sleepy, that whereas he
should have spent his time in confessing his sin, and humbling his soul, and
seeking peace with God, he settles himself to sleep: Jonah 1.5. yea in time of
the storm, when the natural consciences of the heathen, did call upon them to
pray, and would not let them rest, Ionahs conscience was so sleepy, that it
suffered him to continue his sleep, which had it been waking and restless, it
would not have done; Not Ionahs conscience, but the shipmaster does awaken him,
and that with upbraiding his sleepiness. What meanest thou, o sleeper? arise,
call upon thy God. Thus the conscience of a godly man after sin committed, may
be more sleepy an^ more hardly awaked, then the conscience of a natural man.
Jonah having sinned, his conscience was sleepy, and he not sensible of the good
of waking and praying, and returning into the way out of the which he was gone,
nor of the danger of sleeping in sin, the way to pull down the awaking
judgments of God, as it fell out; So when men, even good men, come to the
house of God in their special sins unrepented of, they come with sleepy
consciences, not sensible of the good found in watchful attendance upon the
Ordinances, nor of the danger of drousines and sleepiness, and a sleepy soul
makes a sleepy body, yea they sleep fast whom sin rocks asleep.

3. A third cause of sleep in time of Gods worship, is weariness, when the
spirit and body is tired, and so made fitter to rest then to labor. This
wearines that brings on sleep, comes,

1. From toiling and overworking the body in other occasions: Judges 4.21.
Sisera being weary, falls fast asleep, to the loss of his life. When men come
to family duties with overwearied bodies, or to the house of God, having
overtoiled their bodies in the week, or allowing themselves too little sleep on
the Saturday night, they are fitter to sleep, then to perform duties.

2. This wearines that fits the body for sleep, does also come from the length
of good duties, we are imperfect creatures, and can endure but a measure in the
best actions, though they be most comfortable: Act. 20.9. The spirit of God
speaking of Eutychus sleeping at the Word, does add, that Paul was long in
preaching, thereby intimating that it was some cause of his sleep, through the
weakness of nature.

4. There is something also, sometimes, in the season of the time, when duties
are performed in the night. So in the forenamed place, Act. 20. where Eutychus
is foun^ sl^^ping at Paul's sermon, it is also recorded that Paul continued his
speech until midnight, being to depart on the morrow. Now it was grown to a
sl^eping season. The bodies of men are more dull and heavy in the night, then
in the day, because of the absence of the warm and reviving beams of the sun,
the coldness and darkness of the night. It is not good therefore to choose the
night to spend in holy duties, unless there be some necessity or special
occasion on the next day. Necessity and special occasion will make sleep
depart from our eyes. Jacobs care of his sheep and fear of their danger kept
him from sleeping in the night, Genesis 31.40. The same man afraid of his brother
Esau, whom he was to meet the next day, spent the night in prayers and tears,
Genesis 32.24. there wrestled with him a man till the breaking of the day, Luke
6.12, 13. our Savior spent the whole night in prayer, when he was to choose his
apostles the next day. And in the place where our text is, when he was
presently to be betrayed by Judas, and apprehended by the soldiers, he prayed,
and prayed again, and had no sleep in his eyes, though his disciples were so
sleepy that they could not hold open their eyes. When Paul was to depart on the
morrow, and the disciples to see his face no more, he continued his speech
until midnight without any drousines. If we will spend the night in holy
duties, there must be something beside the bare duties to keep us awake, some
awaking necessity or special occasion, it will not be sufficient that we are
loath to spend the day, there must be some circumstance which will so stir the
the affection, that it will stir and disease the body. Nor, is it good to put
off family duties till late at night, unless we think God will be served with
sleeping instead of praying. These isntrumental causes I have been speaking
of, are over ruled by the principal cause, God, to punish such sins as these.

1. Idleness in our particular callings. Is it not just with God, that they
who are drousie in the occasions that concern their bodies, should be drousie
in the matters that concern their souls?

2. Overmuch labor in their callings. Is it not just with God, that they who
spend too much pains upon their own callings, should spend too little upon his
service? too much upon their bodies, and too little upon their souls?

3. Heartlesse worship of God, when men bring God a body only, and take no care
to bring the soul, it is just with God they should not give so much as a body,
but rather sleep.

4. Pride in spiritual abilities. Is it not just with God, that they who are
conceited of strength, should express weakness, as they do that sleep? and
shall we think the Devil has his hand out of this sleeping? It is sure we
oppose him in Gods service more then elsewhere, therefore he will oppose us
most. He helps men to over-weary themselves, in the week, whereby they are
unfit for the Sabbath. He helps them to choose the Saturday night to spend till
late in trivial occasions, for ordinarily of all days in the week men choose
Saturday night, and Sabbath night for occasions of least moment, the worst
chosen time in the week (for Saturday night they should be preparing them
selves, and Sabbath night considering how they have spent the Sabbath) a sign
the Devils hand is in the choice. He suggests unto men that there is no benefit
in watching, no danger in sleeping, he helps men that are naturally heavy to
settle themselves easily, to hang down their heads and shut their eyes, as
furtherances. He can if God permit cast an heaviness upon a man. He is
compared to the fowls that pick up the seed: and is not this our way? shutting
up the soul by sleep, stopping the ear.

Quest. How does sleep hinder our earnest worshipping of God?

Ans. We need not go far to know that, sense and experience does teach every
man the nature of sleep, does answer this question: why is death compared to
sleep, but because they agree in somethings? a sleeping man has no more use of
his senses then a dead man, they are for the time bound up, and suspended from
their use, if a man be in a fast sleep, so that he cannot worship God at all.
For though the soul be able to worship God without the body, as appears by the
working of the fancy in sleep, and the separation of the soul from the body
in heaven, yet in those duties, wherein the soul must be helped by the body, as
in all outward worship with others, it cannot worship God if the body be
asleep, for herein the soul is directed by the eye, and by the ear, what part
of worship to set about, when to begin and when to make an end, what order and
decorum to keep; for in public duties, we are so to worship God, as not only
God may be glorified by us, and we bettered in our souls, but also others may
be edified in their worshipping of God, which they cannot be by the works of
our souls, any farther then they appear, and break out in our bodies, the
actions whereof do flow into the eyes and ears of others.

If our sleep be not fast, but rather a slumbring, a drousines and heavines,
our service of God is marred, for our bodies are unto our souls in this case
as an hollow trunk stopped in the midst, our eyes do but half see, and our
ears but half hear, the sight dies in the eye, and sound in the ear, they
come not to the soul, there is no distinct understanding of the worship in
hand, much less any affection moved, but a man in respect of hearing, praying,
singing, is like unto that man in a dream spoken of, Isa. 29.8. He dreameth he
is eating, and behold he awaketh and is hungry, he dreameth he is drinking, and
behold, he awaketh and is thirsty, so men think they pray, but when they a wake
they know not what is prayed, they think they hear, but when they awake they
know not what is spoken.

Use. The application of this point shall be first to them whom God helps
against this sin of sleeping in time of his worship, they are waking and
watchful, lively and stirring in holy duties, sleep does not then trouble
them: their duty is,

1. To be thankful unto God, it is a mercy, and a mercy denied unto many
others. Hereby we are kept from sin and from much sorrow of heart, which
befalls others of the godly, hereby we have that advantage to worship God, and
get good to our souls, that others want. It is not because thy heart is
better, or thy body better by nature then others, nor because thou have more
grace, or have better improved grace then others, but as Christ says in case
of knowledge, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God,
so say I, to you it is given to wake and watch in holy duties, it is nothing of
your own, but Gods free gift, be thankful therefore. It is no small mercy to
do God lively service: hereby our good is the more abundant the more sensible.

2. Take heed of despising, or hardly c^ns^ring them that a^e very heavy in
Gods worship: though they sin, yet do not thou sin also, rather mourn thou,
that God should have such poor service, and pity them that lose, they know not
what good: who knows what a man loses when he sleeps, a sermon while, or
prayer while? If Peter had watched and prayed, he had not so denied his master,
nor the disciples had fled, and left their master, for our Savior bad them
watch and pray, that they might not enter into temptation: had they watched and
prayed they had not been so overcome of temptation: who knows what the young man
might have gotten for his soul by Paul's last Sermon, had he not slept?

3. Improve your waking and watching in holy duties, let not your souls be
like children, the more waking the more unsettled, whom therefore we wish asleep
rather then awake: so the more waking our bodies are, the more wandering and
roving our souls may be, and though Gods worship be not hindered by our sleep,
yet much more by our wanderings. Make we use therefore of our waking, by binding
our souls close to Gods worship, by the attention of our eyes and ears, and
that for a double reason.

1. Some will always be drousie and sleepy, others had need be more diligent
in watching, that their defect might be supplied, and their sin pardoned. If
Hezekiah be clean himself according to the purification of the Sanctuary, he
may prevail for them which are impure, 2 Chronicles. 30.9. If Job himself be
humbled, he may prevail to turn away Gods wrath from his friends unhumbled, Job
42.6, 8. And if we be diligent in waking, soul as well as body, God may pardon
them that sle^p, to be sure God will manifest more acceptance of the duty.

2. If we wake in duties and worship God no better, and get no more good to our
souls then they that sleep, our sin is greater then theirs that sleep, because
we abuse and take in vain more means and advantages: they that sleep in
ordinances have no use of ordinances, are as without them: they that wake in
ordinances, have the use of them, and to have the use of ordinances and not to
make use of them is the greater sin. Beside sleeping is a continued act of
sinning belonging to the body, and the soul may also sin, but a waking person
not attending to the worship of God, will sin more, for the body has more
power to sin it self, and to help the soul to sin being awake then asleep.

4. Take heed you provoke not God to change your wakefullnes into drousines, so
will a great change be made in Gods service, and no less in your souls. To
this end,

1. Be not conceited of your livelynes of affection, and confident thereof, as
if now you could do any thing, remember upon what foundation you are built, and
upon what root you grow, you are indeed lively at present, and have been so,
but consider you must be newly assisted by the quickening spirit every time you
do any new duty. Thus were the disciples undone when they perceived themselves
affected unto Christ, in a comfortable measure, they thought that would always
continue and do any thing, not considering they should need Christ's help
continually to renew it and increase it unto greater work.

2. Take heed of known sins, of going against light received, opposing the word
of God, and the checks of conscience in our practice, especially take heed of
continuing in sin unrepented of. If we be drawn to sin against knowledge,
let us not be quiet till we have humbled our souls, recovered our peace with
God, and the free passage of Gods spirit in our hearts, sin against
knowledge, especially sin continued in, will dead the quickening spirit in our
hearts, will make dull and sleepy our consciences, and so our bodies.
Experience shows both in our selves and others, how sin ^n^^pent^d of will
r^ck the body as^^ep in Gods service.

3. Maintain in our souls a cheer, and present apprehension of the ben^fit of
waking and watching in holy duties, and the danger of sleeping; give not way to
such delusions of Satan, that there is no good to be gotten by diligent hearing
and praying, and that there is no dang^r in sleeping, nor come with our minds
so filled with other things, that these thoughts should be far from us when
we come to worship God, then shall we neglect the way of God ^^d he will
neglect us, withdraw himself from us, and leave us to our weak souls and
bodies.

4. Look at Gods worship as matter of pains, matter of difficulty, an hard
thing to pray well, to sing well, to hear we l, no easy matter, harder far
then thy other occasions, because thou have less disposednes unto the same,
more inward opposion against the same. Things easy we are careless of, things
difficult we take more care about. If thou look at it as an hard thing to serve
God well, thou will set thy soul and body to it, thou will c^ave Gods help, and
assistance unto wakefullnes and attention, and against drousines, and in a way
of endeavor and prayer, God will assist.

2. To comfort 1. Gods ministers against the grief and trouble of their souls
at this sin of sleeping in Gods worship and the effect of it, weakening of Gods
worship. It cannot but be a great grief to Gods Ministers, to whom the care of
the holy things and of the people of God is commit^^d, that their people should
sleep when they come to worship God, especially if many sleep, and they sleep
much, con^i^^ring what poor service God h^th, and what little good peop^^ ^^t,
though God and his Ministers ta^^ pains for both. How do they ^^ar, pray sing,
when they s^^^p? How can God be w^ll ^^rved? How do they pro^^^e for their
souls? How shall they walk well the week th^row? the M^^isters of God cannot
but ^e tro^^led hea^at, if t^^y (...) any a^^^ction to Go^^ glory, and the good
of their p^oples so^ls: b^t that which ^^y ^^^^what comfort them follo^^.

1. It is no new thing, it is not a sin peculiar to these times and
congregations, it has been found in the Church of God formerly: we cannot say
that our people are worse then any people, and thereby vex our selves.

2. There have been sleep found under better government and ministry then any
now enjoyed, our Savior charged his disciples to watch, and reproved them once
and again, yet they slept still: whose authority and words like our Saviors?
Nay more, all his company slept, not o^e ^est to awake another. Paul was a man
of stirring gifts, he excelled all the Apostles in ability, yet the young man
slept at his Sermon: the fault therefore is not altogether in Ministers.

3. Though people get no good by Gods Ordinances whilst they are sleeping, yet
God will order and dispose of the sleeping of his own to do that good the
Ordinances should do them, he will hereby experimentally acquaint them with
their own weakness, and humble their hearts, though it cost them more trouble
and smart, and an humble heart is a fit vessel to carry glory to God, and good
to it self. Thus Christ taught his discipes their weakness, and humbled their
hearts, more by their sleeping then his former preaching. So that whereas we
think they that sleep at the Ordin^^ces do lose Gods glory and their own good,
God will recover both, and that ^y means of their sleeping, that which has
been the means of their sin shallbe the means of their amendment, though with
more smart, as they shall well perceive, it being easier to cure the body by
diet then by physic, and so the soul by the ordinances, rather then by afflict
on, especially sin the greatest affliction, when sin must be the souls
cure, the cure will be found but smarting. But this may be some comfort to us,
when we do desire the good of our people, and they walk in a contrary way,
better they should smart then perish. If thine eye offend thee (...) thy ^^^t,
says Christ, pl^^k ^^t the one, ^ut off the oth^^ ^^tter go to heaven (...)
the (...) eye and halting, (...) eyes and (...) ^in^ll and de^r (...) better
thou perish^ (...) comfort and ^^^^ure a little trouble for a time, then miss
the comfort of the whole, and endure the trouble of the whole for ever. Hearers
that profit not by careful attention, may and shall profit (if they belong to
God) by the sin, and smart of their carelessness; and that which is their
good, may be our comfort, so far as it is their good.

2. To comfort them to whom sleeping is a burden. It cannot be denied but it
does him erour worshipping of God, but there is comfort in that case, if it be
a burden. Let us try that first.

1. Thou will lay in against it before thou go to the house of God, in thy
prayer thou will (...) in of it, and desire help against it.

2. In the Ordinances thou will st^ive against it, stir up thy self, disease
thy self, desire others to awake thee, be thankful when they do it.

3. After duties, thy heavy head will be turned into an heavy heart, when thou
go to God in prayer, when thou go to thy meat, and to thy rest, thy heart
will be weary.

If thu^ thou find thy sleeping a burden, there is comfort.

1. The obedience of Christ, for the sake whereof thy obedience is accepted,
was a wakefull lively obedience, what was wanting in thine, was ^^^und in his
obedience for the^.

2. Thy obedience is presented to Go^ by the intercession of Christ without any
defect, as it is in thy will, not in performance.

3. For Christ's sake, God will make thy sin thy physic, both to discover
thy self to thy self, and to humble thy heart.

3. For information.

1. God has but weak service at the hands of very many, for sleeping is very
general. To speak first of Gods public worship; How many sorts of sleepers
are found? some sleep from the beginning to the end, as if they come for no
other purpose but to sleep, as if the Sabbath were made only to recover that
sleep they have lost in the week, for love of their own occasions, as if Gods
Ordinances were rather a cradle to rock them asleep, then the office of the
watchmen of God to awaken sleepers. Some sleep from the beginning of the
Ordinance, till prayer or Sermon begin, as if they came to the house of God,
not well awaked, or wanted part of their morning sleep. Some after some time of
waking and watching, do fall asleep, as if the service of God were the only
unpleasant tiresom work. Some their serving of God consists of short sleeps,
and short wakings, as if they met with a continual intercourse of startling,
and quieting in Gods service. Some have a continual heavines and lumpishnes in
Gods service, as if it were night rather then day, their heads are so leaden
and weighty, that they cannot hold them up, and their eyes so heavy, that they
cannot hold them open. And if we set aside these sleepers, the several sorts
of them, how many waking watchful worshippers of God shall we find? If there
be so many, and such variety of sleepers on the Lords day, in the day time,
having rested the night before, and resting from their labors in the day, how
much more will these be found in family duties, performed late at night, and
after weary labor? which makes it manifest, that God has but weak service in
public, or private from the most.

2. The effect of sin, it does prevent the course, and frame of nature and
grace both, sleep was appointed of God for the refreshing of the weary body,
that so it might wake, and be the more cheerful in Gods service: but si^ makes
the body sleep, when it is not weary, when it should especially wake: and makes
a man unfit for Gods worship. Were there no other evidence of our sullen estate
and condition, this were sufficient. Would men, made according to the Image of
God, sleep in his service, who made them fit to wake in it? And if there were
nothing else to bring us out of love with sin, this were enough, it does
unfit us to serve God.

3. The coldness of their hearts in Gods worship, who fall asleep in it,
especially that give way to sleeping. It hinders them in Gods worship,
therefore, were their hearts fervently bent to the worship of God, they would
hinder that. It is not only the motion of the body in men's callings, nor
chiefly that which keeps them awake, but the intention of their thoughts, and
fervency of their affections: and though there be not the like stirring of body
in Gods service, yet if the soul were so bent upon it, as upon other occasions,
that would keep the body awake.

4. For reproof.

1. Generally of them that sleep in Gods worship. We are commanded to love the
Lord with all our strength, as well as with all our soul; but we by sleeping
deny the strength of our bodies, and thereby the strength of our souls also.
God reproves some for drawing near to him with their lips, when their hearts
were absent, but sleeping sets the body far from God, as well as the soul.
But that we may be more ashamed of this sin of sleeping, let us consider the
aggravations of it.

1. It is a needless, or at least a careless sin. We except against
swearing in ordinary speech, because it is a needless sin men are not put upon
any necessity, it does not grace their speech, nor bring credit to their
speech: so sleeping in Gods service is hereby aggravated, that it is a
needless sin. Have not men houses and beds, and time allowed them to sleep
in? they have no need to sleep in Gods worship. God has suffered his own
commands to be transgressed in case of necessity: Matthew. 12.3, 4. David might
rather eat holy bread, then his body should come to any h^rm by hunger, which
yet might not have been done, had not God given allowanc^ and c^mmand: but to
transgress the command of G^^ when there is no ne^essity upon us, how great a
sin is that? What is this but a despising of the command of God? a setting
light by it, as if a man should say; Indeed it is a command of God, we should
not sleep, but it is no matter whether we keep it or no, it it not worthy
observation. It was the aggravation of David's adultery, 2 Samuel 12.9. His
despising of the command of God: how did that appear? because no necessity lay
upon him to commit that sin, he had wives of his own: had he not slighted the
command of God, he would not have done it: So men have no necessity to sleep,
or if they have necessity, it is through carelessness, because they will not
take that time which God has allowed, and so they make themselves a necess^ty
o^ sinning, which is a greater sin.

2. It is an unthank^ull sin, God in pity has allowed man sleep to refresh
the weary body, to further digestion, to repair the spirits: and we abuse this
power to hinder Gods service: he gives us sleep to strengthen our weak bodies:
and we use it to weaken his service.

2. He gives us sleep after the labors of the six days, a night to sleep in,
that we might be fresh and lively in his service, and we notwithstanding sleep
on that day of his worship: do we not deal unkindely and unthank^ully with
him? When we rest and favor the creature, we make account it should be fitter
for service: but when God has rested us, and we should serve him, we rest
still.

3. It is an unreasonable sin.

1. It denies God the least we can give him in his service. Man consists but
of two parts, soul and body, the body is the meanest part, yet sleeping denies
the body. Reason tells us that God deserves both, for he has made both, and
does maintain both, and if he have but one part, yet he should have the best
part; but sleep will give him none, no, not the body, which God would not
accept alone, were it given.

2. Sleeping in Gods worship is unseasonable, a misplaced action, especially
Lords day sleeping, and reason tells us, that things are to be done in season:
sleeping in Gods house is unseasonable.

1. If we consider the time, which is the day: the day is not the appointed
time for sleep, but for labor: 1 These. 5.7. They that sleep, sleep in the
night. That time which is appointed for the wild beasts labor, is appointed
for man's rest: But the night is appointed for the wild beasts labor, Psalm.
104.20. therefore for man's rest, for they cannot both labor together, they
will hinder one another.

2. If we consider we are in employment, in action: employment is no season for
sleep, but rest from employment: Ps. 104.23. Man goes forth unto his work, and
to his labor, until the evening: Man cease his labor with the day, and
then goes to rest: Eccles. 5.12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet: They
that sleep according to reason, do not sleep in labor, but after labor: but
they that sleep in the house of God, do sleep in midst of labor.

3. If we consider what kind of employment it is that we sleep in, the service
and worship of God: it is against reason to sleep in midst of any labor: how
much more in Gods service, which requires the most pains and labor? We are
commanded to do whatsoever we find to do with all our might, do every thing
thoroughly, and to purpose: how much more Gods service, the best work?

4. If we consider the place and society: to sleep in a place appointed for
waking, and in the midst of them that wake, is against reason. If then
carelessness of sinning, or unthankfullnes in sinning, or unreasonablenesse in
sinning will shame us, this sin of sleeping in Gods house may shame us, for
thereby we show, that we make b^t a light account of sinning, that we are
unthankful, that we are unreasonable.

2. Particularly, the godly are to be reproved more then others, if they sleep
in time of Gods worship: will they suffer Gods worship to be weakened and
hindered, who are tied by special engagements to do him special service? From
whom God does expect it, and the rather, because others will sleep? God says
in this case to them, as to Judah in another case: Hos. 4.15. Though Israel
play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend. So says God to his people, Though
others sleep out Word and prayer, yet do not you sleep. They have more cause
to be ashamed then others, if we consider,

1. They set an ill example, and draw on others by the same, in as much as they
have excuse, and shelter for their sleeping, from the example of such, because
they profess more care of Gods service. If they that profess more zeal for
Gods service, yet will ordinarily sleep, much more may they that profess less
care. Thus, they not only sin themselves, but draw on the sins of others.
Elies sons sins in Gods worship, made the people to sin, in abhorring the
offerings of the Lord: so the sleeping of professors, does make others more
careless of Gods worship, thinking sleeping to be but a small sin, else they
that profess much, would not use (...) so much.

2. The godly have more encouragement to awake then others, for the Ordinances
are specially appointed for them, Gods expectation is more of their service
then others, they have promise of more special presence of God, communion with
him, benefit from him: their sin therefore is against much encouragement that
others want, therefore a greater sin in them, then in others, who have not that
encouragement.

3. The godly have more means to keep them awake then others, they have the
grace of God in their heart, assisted by the spirit of God, they have in their
minds a more clear and through light to discern of the excellency and worth of
Gods worship above other things, they have in their consciences a more divine
and strict observation of carriages, a more divine authority to command what is
good, and forbid what is evil, a more divine application of promises or
threatenings, as good or evil is practiced, they have in their wills a special
bent to that which is good, they choose that as the chief good, they have in
their affections a love to it, and desire after it, so that they sin against
more means and helps against sin, and then sin is the greater.

3. Them that suffer others to sleep by them, and do not wake them, they suffer
God and his worship to be wronged, and might prevent it: Is it not their sin?
Yes doubtless. Why was Meroz cursed, yea bitterly ^ursed? Not because they
^ought directly against the Lord, but because they came not out to help the
Lord, Judge. 5.23. And our Savior is express, that not to be for the Lord, is
to be against him: he that is not with me is against me, he that does not what
he can for the Lord and his worship, is in that regard against the Lord and his
worship: they that therefore do not waken sleepers, are not with the Lord
therein, but against him, for they do not for him what they might. These do not
that for the comfort and good of their neighbors, which God requires to be
done for our Neighbors beast, though an enemy: Exodus 23.4. If thou meet thine
enemies Ox or Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again:
how much more a friends beast? When a man sleeps in time of the word and
prayer, he is gonne astray, for he should pray and hear: to wake him, is to
bring him into the way: if he were an enemy, we were bound to do it, for God
has more care of men, then of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. Much more if he were a
friend should we do it: Exodus 23.5. If thou see the Ass of him that hates
thee, lying under his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall
surely help with him. A man was bound to help up his enemies Ass lying under a
burden, and in case new, and fresh thoughts of hatred came into his mind, and
he should say in his heart, he is mine enemy, I have no good will unto him, I
will not do to him that good turn, he was to lay aside all, and in any case to
help him to lift it up: And is not a sleeping man in Gods worship under his
burden, even the heaviest burden, sin, which sinks the soul to hell: and does
not waking take off this burden? and does not sleeping continue this burden on
them? and they that suffer them to sleep, suffer them to lie under their
burden, which shows a want of mercy, which God would not have us to show unto
the beast that lies under the burden, no not the beast of an enemy, much less
to the beast of a friend, and least of all, to our neighbor himself. This
fault is the greater, if we shall enquire into the same, in the causes thereof.

1. It proceeds from want of love. Were there that affection to our neighbors
good should be, we would not suffer them to lose that good they might get, nor
to sin by sleeping: but as sin has made man defective in love to himself,
therefore he sleeps in Gods worship: so much more has it made him scant in
love to his neighbor, and therefore he suffers him to sleep: Levit. 19.17.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Why must a man rebuke his neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him? The reason is rendered, thou shall not hate thy
brother: So when we suffer others in sin, and particularly in sleeping, and do
not labor to help them, it is from want of love. To neglect a duty to our
brother is a sin, but to neglect it for want of love, is a greater sin: not to
awake a sleeping brother is a sin, but not to wake him for want of love to him,
is a double sin: yet thus it is, we do not awake those that sleep, because we
are wanting in love unto them.

2. Another cause why we do not wake sleepers, is a conceit, an ungrounded
conceit that God has not committed to us the care of our neighbors, but it is
enough if we look unto our selves: the common proverb, though ungodly, shows
what is in men's minds: every man for himself, and every one look to one. That
there is such a conceit in men's minds, as appears further, by Cains answer to
the Lord, which was no put off for that time, but did spring, no doubt, from a
principle, seated in his understanding. The Lords question did import a care
that lay upon Cain concerning his brother: Genesis 4.9. Where is Abel thy brother?
Cains answer does acknowledge no such duty of care belonging to him; I cannot
tell: Am I my brothers keeper? he knew not where he was, nor did he conceive it
to be his duty to know what became of him, he did not apprehend that the care
of his brother did lie upon him; So surely men think it is not their duty to
take care of their neighbors; contrary to the Commandments of the second
table, which are summed up in this one word. Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self: what care we take of our selves in the first place, we must take of
our neighbor in a second place. To neglect our duty to our neighbor is a sin,
but to neglect it upon this ground, because we think it is no duty, is a double
sin, to deny both our duty, and the command of God.

3. A third cause why we do not waken sleepers, is a base and unchristian fear
that we shall anger them, they will be displeased at us: grant it be so; Shall
we run upon Gods displeasure to avoid men's? If thou awake thy neighbor, he
will be displeased; and if thou awake him not, God will be displeased; make thy
choice of Gods displeasure or man's, show thy self holy, and not corrupt, let
holy fear of Gods displeasure banish corrupt fear of man's displeasure. Will thou esteem thy affliction a greater evil then their sin, when they stand in
competition? If thou do awake them, and they be angry, it is but thy
affliction, which is thus sweetened, that it befalls thee in a way of obedience,
thou do endure it for doing thy duty: if thou suffer them to sleep, thou
suffer them to sin, nay thou sinnest thy self, in that thou do not thy
duty to keep them from sin. Not to awake them is a sin, but to forbear upon
this ground, lest we should procure trouble to our selves, is a greater sin, to
prefer our comfort before the preventing of their sin, and our own.

Many objections come to be answered in this case.

1. I see one sleep indeed, but I cannot reach him, he is so far from me.

Answ. If thou cannot reach him thy self, yet speak to some body else, if thine
eye cannot make use of thy hand to wake him, yet let it make use of some other
man's hand, if thou stir up and provoke another to do it, it is all one as if
thou thy self did it: beside, I have seen some lengthen their arm with a
staff, to call others into their seats, and had they as much affection to the
souls of their neighbors, as to express coursity, they would lengthen their
arms with a staff also to waken them.

2. Object. They who are nearer then I will not do it, though I be within
reach, and why should I do it, since they that might better will not?

Answ. The question is not what they who are nearer do, but whether they do
well or ill: if they do well in not waking them, do thou follow them: if they
do ill, thy best way is not to follow them: Exodus 23.2. God says, Thou shall
not follow a ^^ltitude to do evil: much less one man. What argument is this?
others will not obey Gods command, will not help their neighbors out of sin,
will express hatred unto them, therefore I will do so to^: because others
neglect, thou should resolve the rather to do it: neglected obedience is the
more obedience, because neglected, it will not be done at all unless thou do
it. This is one reason why Gods people are called his portion, because they
make up that loss of service God sustaineth in the world.

Object. 3. They are my betters that sleep, and it will be thought presumption
and unmannerlinesse in me to awake them.

Answ. 1. Thou may then desire those to do it, that are equal to them, or
nearer equality then thou.

2. If thou can not do so, know it is no unmannerlinesse nor presumption, to
help thy betters against sin, and to do them a good turn: God did never
forbid thee to help thy betters, to see their faults, and to help them against
them, but has commanded thee rather to do unto them as thou would should be
done to thy self. If thou have Gods command, thou do not presume: and if
thou help them against ill manners, such as sleeping is, thou do express
good manners.

3. Thy care must be to do it respectively unto thy betters, so as it may
appear to them, and others, that it proceeds out of love, and is carried with
respect, do it in the least way of notice, with care to hide it from
observation, 1 Timothy 5.1. rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a father, that
religion that teaches duty to superiors, does also teach a respective
carriage in the same, that both the duty may be done to them to the utmost, and
their honor at the same time maintained.

Ob. 4. I am loath to awaken them that sleep, lest I should put them to shame
whilst others thereby take notice of their sleeping?

Ans. Wake them therefore as privately as thou can, so it be done, if thou
can with the skirt of love cover their infirmity and help them out of it
both, thou shall do a double office of love.

2. But suppose tho^ cannot waken them without notice, and so without shame,
yet it is better shame shou d rest upon them then sin, nay it may be shame
(when they perceive it is taken notice of) may prevail much to keep them awake.

3. Where a public cause of shame is found in measure, as sleeping is in a
public place and in public duties, if public shame follow no wrongs done,
they may thank themselves. Nay there is a due place of putting them to open
shame that sin openly, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin, rebuke before all men,
that others also may fear: this indeed belongs to public persons; but private
persons may occasionally put others to shame in a public place, without any
fault at all, or stepping out of their place.

Ob. If I do awake them they will sleep again and again, and ^o it is to no
purpose, I therefore ^eave, because I see it does no good?

Ans. 1. If they fail in their duty, yet do not thou fail in thine: our Savior
found his di^ciples asleep again after he ^akned them, the first and second
time, yet he did not leave them sleeping, but wakened them still. If thou must
renew thy act of love in forgiving till ^eventy times seven times, Matthew.
18.22. much more the act of love in awaking them that sleep, for that is a
greater act of love. And where awake^ng will not keep awake, it may be useful
to add admonition at some other time when they are awake, which may take more
^mpression then continual shaking of a sleepy head.

Ob. I waken them till they be angry with me, should I not then forbear?

Ans. That anger must not cause thee to forbear, for it is not at the action,
but the disquiet of it, as a patient may be angry at the smarting of physic,
and yet not at the physician nor the physic, it is therefore rather the anger
of the drowsiness of the person, then of the person.

2. This anger is not an advised, deliberate act, but a sudden and violent
motion, which will not only cease when a man better considers of it, but will
turn unto love, Prove. 28.23. He that reproves a man, shall find more favor
in ^he latter end, then he that flattereth with his lips, this privilege (...)
has, the more it is looked into, the more worth and excellency ^here is in
it, when they have ^onsidered both their sleeping and thy waking of them, the
^arelessenesse of themselves, and ^hy care of them, they will ^eare good will
unto thee, in^^ead of anger they will be an^ry at themselves, but favor ^hee,
be disquiet with themselves, but quiet toward thee, when they have put off
passion and put on wisdom; when A^igail had talked to David, not ^nly wisely,
but so long till his ^assion was gone, he acknow^edged her a blessed woman.

5. The fifth and last use is, so persuade us all to take heed ^f sleeping in
Gods worship. If we have any care of the wor^hip of God, this exhortation must
prevail with us; for sleeping expresses an utter carelessenesse of Gods
service, for it hinders both soul and body. Because this particular needs
urging, and I know not when I shall have the like occasion, therefore I will
use three sorts of arguments.

1. To all in general.

2. To unregenerate men by themselves.

3. To the people of God by themselves.

The arguments that concern all, are these.

1. That proverb of Solomon chap. 10.5. He that sleeps in harvest is a son
that causes shame. All men bestirre themselves in harvest, and if a man sleep
then, all his friends are ashamed of him, for sleep now is most unseemly and
uncomely, now men have most need to wake and work, there is most occasion, and
most benefit. And is not every Lords day an harvest day? a day of spiritual
plenty? wherein men may store their souls? if therefore they sleep on that
day, Gods Ministers, and people will be ashamed of them: what sleep when there
is most work to do, in the busiest season when most good is to be gotten?
sleeping therefore is a shameful sin, and if we have any shame in us,
unless we care not what we do, nor who see us in our uncomelinesse, let us
shake off sleeping.

2. It is a sorrowful disquieting sin: the end of sleeping in Gods worship
will be disquiet. There is a three fold time, even in this life, wherein such
sleeping will disquiet.

1. Time of the want of those ordinances wherein we have slept, when men shall
wish they had but those sermons and prayers they have slept out, how heavy will
it be? when men shall think, that had they the ordinances now, they would wake
in them, whereas when they enjoyed them, they slept, how heavy will it be? when
men shall think the ordinances are not so much gone or taken away by force, but
they have slept them away, it has been their voluntary careless doing, had
they waked, they still had enjoyed them?

2. A second time, is the time of their conscience awaking, upon some other
occasion, the more sinful rest soul or body have had, the more miserable
disquiet, when the conscience is awaked by divine light and power, to do it is
office: the soul may be arested at Gods suit specially for some one sin, but
then will God take his advantage, to lay upon the soul other sins, for God
stores up trouble, as men store up sin, that it comes by heaps when it comes.

3. Time of the want of sleep in sickness. Then as the bodies of men shall toss
from side to side, so their minds shall roll from thought to thought, from
Lords day to Lords day, from Sermon to Sermon, then shall the ordinances they
have slept in, accompany them, wake and watch with them. As they turned their
seats into beds, their heads were so heavy, that they needed no place of ease:
so now their beds shall be turned into seats, hard under them, that they shall
take no rest. When men shall think the sleep they should have now in sickness
to make the pain less, the nights short, their bodies more able to bear, they
have had it long ago, they spent it prodigally, therefore must now pinch for
it: how heavy will it be?

3. It puts God upon violent courses, to awaken men and make them lively in his
service, when men do not awake of themselves, the vapors being dissolved and
senses loosned, which is natural, we do by sound, or by shaking them force
them to awake: so when the ordinances, Gods appointed natural way, will not
awaken them, God forcibly breaks open the eyes and ears of men. Why did that
young man sleep at Paul's Sermon, Act. 20. fall down dead? not only to punish
him, but also to make the company (...) wakefull, and to be a co^^^^^ll noise
sounding in the ears of sleepers; for that (...) vide^ce of God is a real
^oice continually and for ever sounding thus much, that death (...) contained
in ^ermon sleeping. Indeed it does not always appear, but there it is in^olded
and ^nwraped in sleeping: it did once appear, and may always appear ^or ought
we know. Why did God send a storm after Jonah? not so much because ^e ran away
from Gods work, but because his conscience was sleepy and would not awaken
with^^t violence. Why does God and amongst a people the shrill ^ounding and
eare-piercing ^rumpet, the thundering drums, ^he warring terrifying cannons? but
to awaken them whom the silver trumpets of the Temple, the Ordinances of God,
that joyful sound, Psalm. 89.15. would not awaken. When a people have too much
^est, and are secure thereby, they must hear noise of war: God will have his
people awakened, men are so settled in sleeping, that the word will not do it,
no, not the word against sleeping, the Lord must therefore take some violent
way. And I pray God from my heart that this ordinary Lords day sleeping which
will not be reclaimed, be not a forerunner of some forcible curse, either the
loss of the Ordinances, or some other judgment, if not the waking stirring
sword. The sword has long slept in this nation, and we mean while give our
selves to all rest: but when the Lord shall bid the sword, awake, as Zech.
13.7. our sleep shall be gone.

The arguments that particularly con^e n the unregenerate, are these.

1. By sleep thou do as much as in thee lies, to keep thy soul out of heaven,
thou do shut the door of life, the ear is the door of life, for fa^ h comes
by hearing. Romans 10.17. no hearing no faith, no faith no salvation, Ephe. ^.8.
by grace ye are saved through faith. And whereas thou think to awake another
day, though thou sleep this day, know and consider of it, in sleeping this
day and this Sermon, thou do sleep all thy time and all thy Sermons, for no
time is thy time but the present, no Sermon is thy Sermon but the present
Sermon. Why do thou reckon upon another Lords day, how can thou tell thou
shall reach it? The man that made account of many days to come, was styled
Fool by the Lord, Luke 12.20. Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy
soul. Is it not a folly, for a man to reckon upon many days, that has not a
part of a day, one night in his power? In sleeping this day thou do what
thou can to shut thy soul out of heaven for ever, for thou have no time to
labor for heaven, that thou know, but the time present: sleeping therefore
in men unregenerate is a desperate action, they have but the time present to
provide for eternity, they may be in hell for ought they know ere another
Sermon, yet they sleep out this. Beside, there is a certain set particular time
when God will call every man, which should make men be in expectation every
Sermon, because they know not which is the time: to sleep is to do what we can
to prevent the Lords ^all, and so our own salvation.

2. Hell was made for Sermon sleeprs: torment is the ^^st recompense of sinful
ease: ^hey that sleep when they should awake, must make ac^ount to wake with
pain when ^hey would rest. And it may ^ot be unusefull here to relate the
providence of God concerning a maid who was much given to sleep at Church. The
^ase was this. A certain maid went to Church with a purpose to sleep from day
to day, as she confessed afterward, thinking he could sleep more swee^ly ^here
then any where, it pleased God one night she fell into a dream, in her dream
she imagined her self walking, two ways were presented to her, in the one way
was a great fire, that way she would not go, the other way she took, it led her
by the Church, she awaked with this application of her dream, she had been wont
to sleep much at Church, and if she did not amend that fault, she must expect
no other but hell fire. This dream thus applied made her leave sleeping, and
fall to hearing, and from hearing to believing and repenting.

The arguments that particularly concern the godly, are these.

1. Let them read with understanding, and ponder our Saviors carriage to his
sleeping disciples, Luke, chap. 22.46. brings him in, expressing himself in a
sh^rt and sharp angry ^eprose, Why sleep ye? What ^eason have you to sleep?
Have you no other business? Matthew, chap. 26.40. brings him in upbraiding them
of unkindnesse, yea great unkindnesse, that denied him so small a matter, could
you not watch with me one hour? What, not with me? not one hour? not so small
a time? If ye cannot do so small a thing for me, how will you do more? If you
cannot overcome a little sleep, deny your selves of a little ^est, how will you
endure persecution, and overcome death for my sake?

2. He tells them of the danger they had brought themselves into by sleep,
Matthew. 26.41. watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation, so much as you
sleep now, you should watch and pray, so much you enter into temptation, give
Satan advantage, will be overcome of sin and Satan in this hour of
affliction. Their sleeping was a procuring cause of their flight, and of Peter's
denial of his master: this was the reason that in his winnowing he discovered
so much chaff, he slept when he should have praid, therefore he sinned in
trouble: he slept the time of his preparation, therefore sinned in time of
temptation.

3. He brings them into a condition wherein they could not sleep, and yet
bids them, Sleep on now, and take your rest, Matthew. 26.4^. Sleep now if they
could, a bitter upbraiding of their sleeping when they should not, and an
intimation of punishment by present disquiet. Sleep on now: what? could they
now sleep? No, if you mark the following words, behold, the hour is at hand,
and the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners, rise, let us be
going, behold, he is at hand that does betray me. How could they both sleep,
and rise, and be going? A sign our Savior did intend to speak ironically, i.
e. to mock at their restless condition, so bidding them to sleep, that they
might well perceive he intended no such matter, which is the bitterest kind of
reproof: jestingly to bid a man to do a thing, when he knows he cannot do
it, to make a rest of a man's trouble. So when God shall cast men into restless
conditions, and they shall apprehend God bids them sleep now, when yet they
cannot sleep, i. e. does not pity their want of rest, but rather mock at their
misery, as Prove. 1.26. how heavy will it be? before Christ did thus bitterly
reprove them, their sleeping brought a confusion upon their hearts: Mark.
14.40. They knew not what to answer, they had no excuse for themselves. How
much more when the godly are in affliction will it trouble? and God shall then
lay it home to their hearts.

2. Consider that proverb of Solomon, Chap. 23.21. Drousines shall cloth a man
with rags. Is it not true spiritually as well as bodily? Were not the
Disciples ragged and uncomely when they fled from their Master? and Peter
especially, a man of a poor torn and distracted soul, when he denied his
Master with swearing and cursing? In like manner drousy Christians are ragged
Christians, of distracted spirits, of uncomely conversations. How can it be
otherwise, when they sleep out those Ordinances, wherein they should put on the
Lord Jesus? How did Dalilah get God from Sampson, but by getting him asleep?
and in his sleep causing him to break his Covenant with God, by cutting off his
locks. So whilst men sleep in holy duties, God goes from them, and they are not
awa^e, for thus the way of intercourse between God and them is shut up.

3. Has not the spirit of God some respect to this sleeping in that
Scripture Phrase, which the godly have occasion to make use of in their
afflictions, finding somewhat suitable thereto in the providence of God: Psalm.
44.23. Awake, why sleep thou, oh Lord? God sometimes does no more for his
people in affliction, in their apprehension, then a man asleep; we call and
cry, desire others to call and cry for us, times and days do pass over our
heads, yet God sleeps still, he does nothing for us, our afflictions do
continue. Does not this suit our dealing with God? we sle p in his service,
therefore he sleeps in our occasions. When we are in affliction, and none can
help us but God, and we cannot perceive that God does take any course for us.
Now in Scripture God is said to sleep, and when we find it so, have we not
just cause to consider whether we have not slept in Gods service? And if so,
God will not awake till we be hum^led for that sin. As therefore ^e would have
God wake and ^tirre about in our troubles, when no body else can do us good,
let us take heed of sleep^ng: Prove. 28.9. He that turns ^way his ear from
hearing the Law, ^ven his prayer shall be abomina^ion: do not men turn away
their ear from hearing the Law, when they sleep in time of the preaching of the
Word? If God therefore will not come near their prayers, he will sleep as it
were in their afflictions, when they pray to him.

Quest. How may we be help^d against sleeping, in time of Gods worship?

Answ. Somewhat must be done Before, In time of the worship of God, After.


The things to be done before, are these.

^. Allow thy self conveni nt sleep the night before the Lords day: do not
then ab^i^ge thy self, that thy body should have cause to complain thou have
done it wrong, therefore it must make bold with God: Nor take too much, that
also will make thee lumpish.

2. Moderation in diet, feeblenes and faintnes, through want of food, will cause
sleep, so also will fullnes: therefore do thou so order thy fasting or
feeding, as experience tells thee will best conduce to thy waking.

3. Moderation in weekly labor, i. e. when we manage them with dependence upon
God, for wisdom, strength and blessing: Psalm. 127.2. So the burden somnesse in
measure, is taken away, and our bodies have not that vexatious toil, whereas if
we think to carry our occasions with the strength of our own abilities, the
whole burden will lie upon us: so shall we be overwearied, and unfit to wake on
the Lords day.

4. Pray before thou come for Gods quickening spirit to thy soul, that quickened,
will quicken thy body.

5. Love not sleep. It is a phrase the holy Ghost uses: Prove. 20.13. It is one
thing to take our natural rest in time convenient, another thing to have an
affection to drouse and slumber, when we should otherwise be employed, so we
shall bring our selves to an habit and custom of dro^sinesse, which will not be
shaken off on the Lords day. The things to be done in time of Gods worship are,

1. Intention of soul, and attention of body: intend thy thoughts and
affections to the Ordinance in hand: and attend with eyes and ea^s:
carelessness is the mother of drowsiness, Prove. 19.15.

2. Disease thy body. If thou find thy self drousy, and shall soul thy self
to ease, thou shall increase thy drousines.

3. Desire them that wake to watch over thee, and chase away thy heavines, by
their freequent stirring of thee.

4. Lift up an ejaculation to heaven in midst of thy heavines, from the
bitterness of thy heart, and inward opposition of thy ^ullnes, that help may
come from heaven, though there be ^one upon earth.

The things to be done after Gods worship, are,

1. Family repetition of the word, so should men discern how they wrong God,
his worship, themselves and theirs, when they find all lost by sleep.

2. Secret calling of our selves ^o account how we have spent ^he Sabbath: so
it would appear how ill sleeping becomes that day, and the duties of it.

3. Renew our godly sorrow for this sin. It works repentance, change both
in heart and life, 2 Cor. 7.10. It is a work of the new man, therefore does
mortify the deeds of the old man, it is a fruit of the death of Christ,
therefore will dead this sin of sleeping.

4. Burden thy thoughts and affections with it the week through, so shall thou
be weary of it on the Lords day: but if it lie light the week through, it will
be no burden on the Lords day.

Object. Here come old age in the last place to plead its infirmity.

Answ. 1. Nature is infirm by age, and so is corruption.

2. There are promises of bringing forth fruit in age: Psalm. 92.14. of renewing
the youth as the Eagle, Psalm. 103.5. she in age breaking off her beak, and
renewing her feeding, does renew her youth. If old men did live by promise, and
feed as savourily and fully upon the Ordinances, as in ^outh, their affections
would ^e as lively as then, and their ^odies waking.

Directions to prevent sleeping in night family-exercises. 1. Put them not off
too long, get to them as soon as may ^e. 2. If they cannot well be ^one till it
be late, dispatch them before supper: we say in ^ur proverb, When the belly is
^ull the bones would be at rest, which is specially true after ^abour, Eccles.
5.12. 3. If that cannot be, then ^e short in them, a thing which many will
greedily take hold of, thinking all prayer time to be lost: but if it be
observed, out of conscience, will be found useful. We are so to perform good
duties that they may have all our strength for present, and our honorable
esteem afterward, which will not be, if we be long in them, we or ours will
fall asleep, so our strength will be denied: and if we sin in duty: we shall
less love and esteem duty, one sin draws on another.


CHAP. VII. Of the sixth and last hinderance of instant worshipping of God,
Slothfullnesse.
ROMANS 12.11. Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit serving the Lord.


HAving finished the fifth hinderance of our earnest worshipping of God, sleep.
I now come to the sixth and last slothfullnesse, which the Apostle here
delivers, as an opposite to fervency of spirit, and therefore an hinderance to
it. In this verse the Apostle does direct in the manner, and end of all our
service to God and man: for the manner, it must be with fervency, fervent in
spirit: for the end, it must be to serve God, not our selves or others, but in
the first place, and chiefly to serve God, for his use and advantage. That they
might not be hindered in this fervency, he discovers the impediment of it, which
he diswadeth them from, viz. slothfullnes. Though this verse may seem to be
restrained to the duties of charity, because they immediately go before, yet
as much may be said for the duties of piety, for they immediately follow after,
ver. 13. rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in
prayer. Being therefore set in the middle between both the duties of piety and
charity, it may most fitly be applied to both, nay we shall do wrong, if we
take it from either. Beside, the object whereabout fervency is to be exercised,
and sloth avoided is general, propounded without restraint or limitation. Not
slothful in business; he does not say in love, in giving honor, in
hospitality, in distributing to the necessity of the Saints, but in business,
any serious labor or exercise, (as the word signifies) whether it concern God
or man. I shall apply it to my purpose in hand, spiritual business and
employment, whereof the Apostle treats in the chapter, as well as of civil
and outward offices of love to our neighbor. The Apostle exhorts to fervency
of spirit in such employments, and to help that way, dehorteth from
slothfullnesse, implying that it is an opposite, and enemy to fervency, they
cannot consist and stand together, sloth will hinder fervency, and fervency
will hinder sloth.

N. Sloth is an hinderance to fervency in spiritual business. Not slothful
but fervent, take away sloth, or there will be no fervency: a slothful spirit
brings forth cold service. What was the reason the fervant that had but one
tallent, did hide it, and not employ it, some increase he might have gotten,
though not so much as the rest? Our Savior renders the reason, Matthew. 25.26.
Thou wicked and slothful servant. He was a wicked servant of an ill spirit,
fitter to think hardly of his master, then to do his duty: and a slothful
servant that had no mind to take pains: showing us that slothfullnesse is an
enemy unto use and increase of talents ^or Gods advantage, Heb. 6.12. When the
Apostle desired to ^inde up the Hebrews to an ^igher pitch of knowledge, v. 1.
Of love, ver. 10. Of hope, ver. 11. of faith and patience, ver. 12. Which if
they were in them and did abound, they should not be ^arren and unfruitful, 2
Pet. 1.8. He did not only press them ^ereunto from the danger of Apostasy,
from the recom^ence of reward, and the example of the Saints, but also direct
to the use of means, viz. diligence, ver. 11. The contrary whereto is sloth,
which he dehorteth from, viz. That ye be ^ot slothful, but followers of them,
implying, that sloth will ^^and in the way of forwardness and zeal in holy
ways.

Let us enquire three things, 1. What this sloth is? 2. Whence it comes? 3. How
it hinders our fervency in spiritual duties.


Quest. What is this sloth?

Answ. It is an evil disposition of soul and body, whereby a man is addicted to
ease, and avoideth disquieting actions.

This description of sloth has three things in it.

1. The general nature of sloth what it has common with other things: it is a
disposition, an inclination and affection, not an act, but a fountain of
actions. It is an evil, not a good disposition, a branch of Original
depravation, contrary to the Image of God, of whom Christ says, John 5.17. My
father works hitherto, therefor the image of Satan.

2. The subject of it, it is not ^he soul alone, or body alone, ^ut soul and
body both, soul and body are capable of labor, therefore of sloth, which is
contrary to labor. In this place ^^othfullnesse is opposed to fer^ency of
spirit, implying there ^s a sloth in the spirit that damps the fervency, and
Prove. 21.25. The spirit of God says of the loathfull man, that his hands
^^suse to labor: there is therefor a sloth of the body; and ^hap. 10.26. He
speaks of a ^luggish messenger, one that goes and comes slowly, is slow ^n
dispatch of business, leaden^^eel'd as we say.

3. The particular nature of it, that whereby it differs from other things,
it is an affection to ease, and stands in oppositition to disquieting actions.
This appears by the gestures and speeches whereby slothfullnesse does express
it self: The gestures of slothfullnesse are these: He foldeth his hands
together, Eccles. 4.5. The fool foldeth his hands together, whilst others open
their hands, spread them abroad, and stretch them out to labor, he foldeth
them together, makes one to embrace another for ease; He hides his hand in
his bosom, and will not bring it again to his mouth, Prove. 19.24. The warmth
of his bosom pleases him, for that end he puts his hand there, and thence he
will not remove it: Prove. 26.14. As the door turns upon the hinges, so does
the slothful upon his bed. A door upon the hinges easily turns, to open and
shut, on one side, and on another, but does not turn off the hinges; So the
^lothfull man does roll from side to side on his bed, for ease ^ake, when he is
weary on one side, he turns to another, but turns not off his bed. The
speeches of sloth are such as these; Eccles. 4.6. Better is a handful with
quietness, then both the hands full with travel and vexation of spirit: what
ever he has or wants, he would have quiet; and his opinion is, that a little
with ease, is better then as much again with trouble of mind and body: Prove.
22.13. The slothful man says, there is a Lion without, I shall he slain in
the streets; There is no safety in stirring out of doors, therefore he will
keep within, all safety is in the house, but nothing but danger abroad, if he
should stir about any business. His discouragement from labor, is difficulty
and trouble: Pro. 15.19. The way of the slothful man is as a hedge of thorns:
when he should go about any business, it seems as troublesome to him, as a
man's way that must go through an hedge of thorns; no comfort, nothing but
vexation to be found: Prove. 20.4. The sl^ggard will not plow by reason of the
cold; He cannot endure the could though for profit, he is all for warmth and
ease. The slothful man's work tends to ease, rather then to labor: is a
cessation from pains-taking, a life of rest, rather then of labor, as the holy
Ghost declareth^: Prove. 6.9, 10. How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When
will thou rise out of thy sleep? Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep; A slothful man dwells upon ^ase, gives himself
much to sleep, and will not be drawn to labor.

Quest. Whence comes this sloth?

Answ. It is the fruit of the fall, which has brought about a double cause of
sloth, one within us, and another without us. The cause of sloth within us is,

1. The loss of inward strength, activity and ability unto action, the native
and natural strength of soul and body is gone, we are altogether weakness and
insufficiency, and how should a man be willing unto that he is too weak for?
Naturally we know not how to do things in the best way; we know not the
benefit of labor; our will is perverse, refusing what we should choose, and our
affections careless, so that we cannot set about any action without inward
trouble and disquiet, in regard of our unfitness.

2. The contrariety that is in our nature to the law of God: if God would have
us love labor, we love sleep, Prove. 20.13. and so abhor labor. The outward
cause of sloth is the travel and toil, which sin has made unavoidably to
accompany all actions, as a punishment and part of the curse which God has
threatened, and man deserved, (wherein he is separated from God, who is in a
condition all of comfort, and works all his works with ease and comfort)
whereas man in innocence should have labored without trouble: Genesis 2.15. God
set Adam to dress the garden of Eden, and to keep it, but speaks of no toil.
Adam was made perfectly fit for all employment, and fitness for action causes
comfort therein. The blessing of God also was perfectly upon him, he dwelt in
the midst of blessing: and Prove. 10.21. The blessing of God makes rich, and he
adds no sorrow with it; Where Gods blessing is, there sorrow cannot be, if it
be in perfection and fulness as with Adam. But now that sin has entered into
the world, and the curse of God by sin, a man cannot use any power of soul, or
part of body, without vexation and toil: the soul is vexed in its labor:
Eccles. 1.13. I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning all
things that are done under the heaven: this sore travel has God given to the
sons of men, to be exercised therewith; Let a man set a work his wisdom, to
find out the secrets of actions, he shall find that travel sore and
grievous, to exercise and humble him therewith, verse. 17, 18. I gave my heart
to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also is
vexation of spirit. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. The labors of the soul, the exercise of wisdom,
and knowledge in the means thereof, is accompanied with grief, and sorrow, and
vexation of mind. The body is toiled and wearied in it is labor, sweat forced
out, and strength weakened, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, Genesis 5.29. This shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our
hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed. The curse of God upon
the ground did not bring man labor, but toilsome, painful afflictive labor.
This outward trouble which accompanies all labor, meeting with an inward love
of ease and aversnes unto labor, must needs further and increase the same.
When a man finds himself unfit for action, and therefore disquietnes will
arise from that unfitnes, it will make him backward thereunto; but when he
considers disquietnes from within, shall be met with outward trouble, that
cleaves fast even by the bond and tie of Gods truth unto all labor, it will
make him more backward.

Most of all are these causes of sloth found in spiritual actions, inward and
outward disquiet.

1. Because our greatest weakness and insufficiency lies in spiritual actions,
man's perfection in innocence was to be after Gods Image, so that though he
could perfectly dress and keep the garden, do the work of his particular
calling, rule and govern all the creatures put under his feet: yet he could
best do those works that come nearest to the works of God, spiritual and
divine actions, love the chief good, and delight himself in communion with God:
on the contrary now he has lost the Image of God, he can do any thing better
then spiritual actions; natural and civil actions he can do, but express no
life of grace and holiness therein, no more then a dead man can express
natural life. And when God has bestowed grace upon men, yet that is but
imperfect, the contrary sloth does remain; spiritual actions are still above,
and most contrary to the natural temper, so that the soul quickened by grace is
most unfit for them, therefore most disquiet will thence arise to their souls,
which will make them more backward to them then to other actions, any farther
then faith assisted by the Spirit of God, does apply and make use of the
all sufficiency of Christ: does not experience tell us that the vexation which
arises from sense of insufficience unto spiritual duties, does keep back and
is a continual clogge unto them in the way to such performances. Beside our
nature is enmity to the law of God, Romans 8.7. therefore most enmity to that
which is most Gods law, as the commandments of the first table.

2. The curse lies heavier upon spiritual actions, the curse of sorrow that
attends actions, for where the blessings of comfort did most appear, there the
cause of sorrow will be most manifested, but the blessing of comfort was
especially contained in spiritual actions, because a man in them did come
nearest to God, and had most to do with him, the fountain of comfort therefore
the curse of sorrow is most found in spiritual actions, because in them
naturally a man is furthest from God, and does ^east express him. And though
the godly do find much sweetness and comfort in holy duties, more then in
other actions, yet they taste of the curse here, more then elsewhere, they find
more travill trouble and sorrow attending spiritual actions then any other;
the sweat of their brows and wearines of their bodies is not so troublesome,
as the pain of their hearts in holy duties; their general calling is more
sorrowful and bitter then their particular; an harder matter to keep their
thoughts close to good duties, then to their particular callings; their minds
are more vexed and their bodies more tired in good performances then with so
much labor any where else. If most disquiet from within and from without be
found in spiritual actions, then there is most cause of spiritual sloth.

This spiritual sloth that hinders our fervent performance of good duties is
improved and increased sundry ways.

1. By ignorance of three things.

1. Our necessity and want of spiritual actions, we see not what need we have
to pray much, and hear much, because we naturally want Gods favor grace apart
in heaven, and they that are renewed have but little grace, much to do with it
and much opposition against it, yet know not what need they have of the
increase of grace. When our Savior commands his Disciples, Matthew. 6.31, 33.
to take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink? or where
withal shall we be clothed, But first seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness: does he not give us to understand that they, and so we, are more
sensible of wants for our bodies then for our souls, that we had need be
called from the one unto the other.

2. Ignorance of the worth and excellency of holy duties, which have a worth
above other actions, inasmuch as they are commanded in the first place, do
require more expression of grace, do more immediately concern God, do bring
more honor to him; we do duties on Gods day and at other times, because God
commands them, others do so, and we are wont so to do, but we look at them as
mean work, as poor employment, we do not see the hidden worth and excellency of
them; It is not in vain, that the Lord says, Isa. 58.13. they should call the
Sabbath honorable. It is one thing to keep the Sabbath and another thing to
keep it as an high day, a day of honor, thinking our ordinary worldly
thoughts, words and works, too mean and base for it: we perform good duties,
but we know not the honor of them; if we did we should not be ashamed of good
speeches and actions, as if they were matter of shame rather then honor.

3. Ignorance of the benefit and good that redounds unto us by the performance
of good duties, as increase of our communion with God, increase of his Image in
us, increase of peace and comfort, increase of all other good things. Why does
God so frequently use the argument from the benefit, to move us unto
performance of them? but to declare our ignorance herein, as well as to declare
his bounty, and to meet with our self-love and desire of our own good. If we
know experimentally the trouble and toil of good duties, and not so well know
our want, the worth and benefit of them, how should we but be backward unto
them, as disquieting us without any great necessity, worth or benefit to
countervail that disquiet.

2. Spiritual sloth is improved and increased by false reasonings in our
minds. For instance,

1. Less frequencie in performing good duties and fervencie will serve the
turn, and if less will do what needs more. Are not the hearts even of the
godly apt to say, what need we be so often in prayer, and take so much pains
with our hearts therein? surely God is not so strict, nor the way to heaven so
straight? Why does the Apostle call for all diligence in the adding of grace to
grace, 2 Pet. 1.5. and in making our calling and election sure, verse. 10. but
that we think a little will serve? Why does our Savior call the way to heaven
a strait gate, and narrow way, Ma^th. 7.14. and command us to strive to enter
in, Luke. 13.24. but that we are not easily possessed, that so much pains is
required in good duties, as indeed there is? especially others do cry out of
them as prodigalls, that take much pains, in hearing, praying, and are not
backward to say, that they hope to get to heaven with less ado, and if less
will not serve, God help them; That there is no need of so much pains in good
duties, they undertake to prove by experience; others (say they) have done
well, others have done well in times past, and do well now, that take not so
much pains, spend not so much time in good duties, labor not so much with
their hearts, were not such and such honest men? were they not well thought of,
of the Church of God? are they not gone to heaven? dare you think otherwise? yet
they were not forward, strict, and precise as some, they went on fairly and
made not so great a noise and stir in religion. Are not such and such now
well thought of, you would be loath to think they do not fear God, that they
shall not go to heaven, yet they do not so much as keep company with the godly,
you can discern in them no great labor and pains-taking for heaven, one may
therefore do well, and get well to heaven, where nothing will be wanting,
without so much ado; the labor then is well spared, so says sloth, spare
what one can; but reason grounded, upon experience says, a man may do well
without so much labor, therefore spare it. This reasoning is false, for
suppose some have gotten to heaven, and shall get to heaven, that are not so
diligent in good ways, and so shall do well in the end, yet they do not so
well in the way. Who knows what smart their sloth costs them, in life, in time
of sickness, in the hour of death? who knows what peace, comfort, grace, what
heaven upon earth they deprive themselves of? who knows how God in Ordinances
would raise them up to heaven, and come down from heaven unto them, were they
more careful to take pains? Nor do they so well in the end, they shall have
less grace, and glory in heaven, less of God, and so be less happy: They
shall have a crown, but not be set with pearls; they shall sit in thrones, but
not so near the King of Kings, as others; they shall be filled with the rivers
of Gods pleasures, but their vessels shall not be so able to contain as others.

2. There is no profit in performing good duties, we shall fare no otherwise,
no better, in performing them, then if we neglected them, Job 21.15. What
profit should we have, if we pray unto him? We say in our proverb, as good sit
for naught, as work for naught: this keeps men from the work and labor of
prayer, a conceit there is no profit in it, they see no good come of it; they
that pray much and spend much time in religious exercises, are as poor in the
world, as much despised and afflicted as any, yea and more, Mal. 3.14. Ye have
said, it is vain to serve God and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinances, and walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts? They are not
ashamed to say, that it is vain to serve God, an unprofitable way, and they
undertake to prove it by their own experience, they have kept Gods Ordinances,
and have mourned for their failings, yet have found no benefit, things have gone
no better with them, Jer. 44.17.18. they speak their minds fully since they
left off burning incense to the Queen of heaven, they wanted all things, and
were consumed with famine and sword, but when they did burn incense to the
Queen of heaven, they had plenty of victuals, were well and saw no evil: so the
godly have times of temptation, wherein carnal reason, assisted by Satan, does
prevail to make them think and say, all their sincerity is in vain, and the
pains they have taken in Gods service, Psalm. 73.13. Verily, I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence, he thought that neither the
purity of his heart, nor innocence of his conversation was to any purpose, he
should be never the better for it. Nay, because the more they pray and walk in
the use of Gods means, sometimes the worse matters are with them in providence;
are they not ready to reason from sense, that there is no benefit in precisenes
and strictnes. This is a false reasoning, Psalm. 19.11. There is reward and
great reward. If so small a matter, as a cup of cold water, given for Gods
sake, shall not go unrewarded: how much less greater matters? Gods
righteousness is engaged, Heb. 6.10. He may as soon cease to be righteous, as
leave unrewarded the labor of his peoples love.

3. So much pains and care about good duties will hinder the particular
calling, and so the benefits of this life, and bring poverty. And though the
godly do not expressly say so, as others will, yet would they not take more
pains about good duties, if they did think it would not hinder their particular
calling and profit, which they are so sensible of. This is a false reasoning,
for though careful and fervent performances of duties may take up more time,
yet if it bring a double blessing what loss will there be? That it is thus, we
may see in the case of the Jews, Hag. 1.2. They did not refuse to build the
Temple and therein to take care of the Lords worship, but they were careless
of it, and for carelessenesse he does reprove them. This people say, the time
is not yet come, the time that the Lords house should be built, at present they
wanted opportunity, and hoped they should have opportunity afterward, but would
not try whether opportunity would serve. See how this carelessenes of Gods
service did redound to the frustrating of all their care about their own
occasions, verse. 6. ye have sown much and brought in little, he that earneth
wages, earneth wages, to put it into a bag with holes, their labor did not
prosper, they were not the richer for their sowing and laboring, they looked
for much and it came to little, verse. 9. I did blow upon it, I called for a
drought, Why? because my house is wast, and ye run every one to your own house.
Their too much care of their own occasions and carelessenes of Gods service,
got them nothing, but it lost them much: Chap. 2.16, 17. When one came to a
heap of twenty measures, there were but ten; when one came to the press fat,
to draw out fifty vessels, there were but twenty. When come does not prove does
not fill, men do not consider that this is, because they take more care about
their own matters, then Gods service. It follows, I smote you with blasting and
mildew, and with hail in all the labors of your hands, when men's corn is
spoiled with blasting, and mildew, and hail, they do not consider it is,
because they are careless of Sabbaths, and Ordinances of God, more careless
of his service, then their own occasions: on the other side, see, how care of
Gods service brings a blessing upon our occasions, verse. 18, 19. Consider from
this day, that the foundation of the Lords Temple was laid, consider it, from
this day I will bless you. And that they may know that the Lord does bless
them because of their care of his worship, he adds; Is the seed yet in the
barn? Is it already past Gods blessing? yea as yet the vine and the fig tree,
and the pomgranet, and the Olive tree has not brought forth: Zach. 8.10.11.
before this time there was no hire for man nor any for beast, but now I will
not be as in the former days, for the seed shall be prosperous, etc. so that
what time Gods service takes up from our callings, it will abundantly make up
in blessing; and it must needs be so, for all success is Gods, Psalm. 127.1.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it, and where
God is best served, he will bestow the most blessing.

4. The comfort will not countervail the sorrow, the ease, the difficulty, the
rest the labor. Thus much we may gather from the sluggards speech, Eccl. 4.6.
Better is a handful with quietness, then both the hands full with travel and
vexation of spirit: He thinks the filling of both hands will not be answerable
to the pains taken therein, the less he has, the less disquiet, and the
more, the more disquiet, and that disquiet will not be exceeded by comfort and
quiet, but the vexation seems to him more then the quiet, therefore one
handful is rather to be chosen, then both* because the less he has, the
less disquiet. So much also is implied in the spouse, her answer to Christ,
calling on her to awake out of the bed of security, arise and open to him:
Cant. 5.3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet, how shall I defile them? Had she thought the benefit would have
countervailed the trouble, she would not have made that exception. This is a
false reasoning, for it says; Christ has not purchased so much as sin has
deserved.

5. As the difficulty, of good ways is unavoidable, so unconquerable, not
possible to overcome it, the evil, and discomfort of good ways is destroying:
Prove. 22.13. The slothful man says, their is a Lion without: the difficulties
of his way, are as unable to be overcome as a Lion, he shall be slain in the
streets, nothing but death and destruction lies before him: So, many think that
frequency and earnestnes in good duties; much praying, hearing, reading, is the
only way to bring malancholly distractions, and madness upon the soul, and
diseases upon the body. Whereas it is the way of greatest promise, therefore of
greatest blessing and good. The godly often think with David: 1 Samuel 27.1. They
shall one day fall, never hold out, never go through the difficulty of holy
ways, nor the danger of them, they shall never hold up their heads with
comfort. Elijah desires he might die, 1 King. 19. he thinks he can never keep
his life, and uprightnes both: now Iezabell is so incensed against him, whereas
the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantnes, and all his paths are peace, no
ways are peaceable and pleasant but the ways of wisdom, and all her ways are
so; Prove. 8.9. All the words of wisdom are plain to him that understands, so
are the ways of wisdom plain to grace, though obscure and dark to corrupt
nature: Prove. 14.6. Knowledge is easy to him that understands: to the
spiritual understanding, knowledge is easy.

3. Spiritual sloth is improved and increased by neglect of good duties, or
careless performance of them. Neglect of good duties does weaken diligence,
for strength not exercised does decrease, and does increase sloth, because
strength of opposition is removed, yea sloth is exercised. Careless
performance does increase sloth, because it is an act of it, and every act does
increase the habit. Let a man pray or hear carelessely, and he shall be fitter
to do so another time. Let a man spend one Sabbath carelessly, not minding
whether he be at any public exercise, and he shall be fitter to do so
another day, and at length he shall come to think, that there is no difference
between the Lords day, and another day, and no matter how he spends it.

4. Spiritual sloth is improved and increased, by too much use of sensible
comforts, or carnal sensual use of them. When we are much in recreation,
given to our appetite, to please and content our selves in sensible things, it
will cherish a love of ease, and an abhorring of trouble: Amos 6.1. Woe to them
that are at ease in Zion; How do they further themselves in ease? We find in
the sequel of the chapter; On the one hand they put far away the evil day,
they will not suffer thoughts of trouble to come near them: on the other hand
they eat the calves out of the stall, they drink wine in bowls, they invent to
themselves instruments of music, they chant to the sound of the violl, they
bring near them all things that might please and content nature, that it
increases the love of that ease and delight, and averseness unto trouble:
they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph; grief can get no place with
them, be there never so great need.

2. If we do not exceed in the measure of sensible good things, if we miss it
in the end of the use of them, we desire sensible comforts for themselves,
only the comfort of them, and not to fit us for Gods service: if ease be all
our end, love, and desire of ease will be cherished by the use of them. Means
do not only bring unto the end, but increase the desire of the end, by
bringing the desire and the end together: good, the more enjoyed, the more
desired, because by enjoyment we have experience of the good of it. If we
desire outward good things for ease sake, and comfort sake, because we would be
freed from trouble, then the more we enjoy them, the more we shall love ease,
because we shall more free the sweetness and content of it unto nature,
whereas if we did use outward mercies, and sensible comforts; that we might be
sitter for Gods service, we should find our selves fitted by the use of them
for his service, and find our affection thereto increased; Means used for a
sanctified end, do increase ability, sanctified ability to attain that end.

Quest. How does sloth hinder our earnest worshipping of God?

Answ. Three ways.

1. As it stands in opposition to fervency, and so fights against it. Sloth
stands in opposition to fervency, because it opposes diligence, without which,
fervency in Gods worship will not be attained. That fervency in Gods worship,
will not be had without diligence, and painstaking, appears by the command of
God: to seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6.33.
To work out our salvation, Phil. 2.12. To stir up the gift of God, 2 Timothy
1.6. To contend for the faith, Jude 3. Which were in vain, if carelessness
would serve the turn. It appears also by the different affectednesse in Gods
worship in different Christians, the diligent and careless. May not they that
observe it, see some more affected and taken up in the Ordinances? and they are
not the idle, careless Christians, but such as take pains, and make a labor
of Gods service. It appears further by the experience of the most diligent
Christians, who find a manifest difference in the hearts-warmth, and liberty
of their hearts in holy duties, when they take pains with them, and when they
are careless, ordinarily they find most presence, and life of the spirit in
worship, when they have taken most pains, to cleanse and empty the vessel of
their hearts, fit for the breathing of the spirit, and have labored most to
stir up grace in their hearts, fit to meet with Gods Spirit. Though it appear
to be a truth, that fervency in Gods worship, will not be had without
diligence, yet let us further see it in the causes thereof, which are,

1. The weakness of grace considered in it self. The weakness of grace is
this; that it is imperfect, we have not that full measure of strength, which we
should have, and which we had in innocence, we have but a part of it, but a
little part as Job says: Job 26.14. These are part of Gods ways, but how
little a portion is heard of him? So could the godly look into their own
hearts, they would admire what little grace they have, and that little they
have is above, and contrary to that which is our nature since the fall, and is
subject to be made less, to be weakened. To make weak grace, bring forth strong
acts, such as fervent worshipping of God is, will need pains and labor: things
very weak are hardly strengthened. Hence is that exhortation of the Apostle,
Heb. 12.12. Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees:
He compares grace to faint hands and feeble knees, which are not easily
strengthened; Let a man lift up hands that are weak in the joints, they will
presently fall down again, he must make a continual labor and work of it: Let
a man lift up feeble knees, it will cost him some pains, and they will
presently sink down again; So if we will fervently worship God, we do not lift
up strong hands and knees, but feeble hands and knees which we shall find to
be a labor.

2. The direct opposition that is found against fervent worshipping of God,
both within us and without us. The opposition within us is corruption, a
disposition contrary, not one only disposition of coldness in good duties,
but many dispositions, many seeds of sin, all these are one nature, they have
had longer time of groath in our hearts then grace, they lie at the very root
of grace, as suckers at the root of a tree, to suck away the nourishment; some
of them are ever working, every act does weaken grace: Romans 7.23. I find a law
in my members, warring against the law of my mind. Not only does corruption
work in the parts of the body, which the Apostle calls the members, but it
works in opposition to grace, as an adversary to it, on purpose to foil and
overthrow it: 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly lusts; Why? they war against
the soul, they do not only work in the soul, but war against the
spiritualnes of the soul, to make it wholly sensual and carnal.

The opposition without us is,

1. Satan, who is our adversary, as gracious, because therein we are contrary
to him. When we were perfectly fit to worship God, and he had less advantage
against us, yet he was never quiet, till he had utterly made us unfit to
worship God; how much more will he now endeavor to make us unfit, when we are
in some measure fit again, and he has more advantage against us? When the
Apostle, Romans 16.19, 20. had told the Romans of the commendation of their
obedience every where, and had exhorted them to be wise unto that which is
good, how seasonably does he add? The God of peace shall bruise Satan under
your feet short; for they might have objected, what an enemy Satan was to them,
how he did blind and befool them, and oppose them in what they should show
wisdom in, as indeed he did? Satan is Gods enemy, he would have God to have no
service at all, much less fervent service: the more service God has, the
less he has, and the better service God has, the worse he has, for no man
can service two masters. No finite being can bestow it self wholly two ways at
the same time. Did not Satan himself set upon our Savior, who was perfectly
able to worship God, with desire that he would worship him, and promised to
give him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, in way of
recompense; which showed his enmity unto Gods worship to be such, that he cared
not what he gave, had he it in his power, so he could hinder God of his service?

2. Our particular callings and the comforts of this life, which are not in
themselves opposite to Gods service, for God has made, and appointed nothing
contrary unto himself, but subordinate to himself, and a furtherance in his
service; our callings as God has commanded them, and the comforts of this
life, as they are Gods good creatures and blessings, have a fitness in them to
help and further us in Gods worship, but corruption does make more advantage of
them then grace, because of our carelessness in the use of them, and want of
exercising the grace of God in the use of them, and so they rather hinder us,
then further us.

3. The common and general sinfulness of the times and places in which we
live, this is, as much cold water poured upon the fire of our love, Mat. 24.12.
Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. A flood of
iniquity, will a thousand to one, cool and abate the heart of the warm hearted:
for in respect of men they have many hindrances, and but few helps. Example
has a great force in us, especially if it be general, for so it is the more
example; particular and singular forwardness, and strictness is observed,
reproved and reproached; Solitariness in any way is uncomfortable and so
weakening; two are better then one, and more better then a few.

This opposition within us and without us, is therefore strengthened, because
it is not scattered and divided, but united. If Satan be divided against Satan,
his kingdom cannot stand, Matthew. 12.26. Satan and corruption do not work
seve^ally by themselves, in opposition to Gods service, but jointly both
together: Satan works in and by corruption: Matthew. 16.22, 23. When Peter
diswaded our Savior from going up to Jerusalem, there to suffer, saying,
Master pity thy self, these things shall not be unto thee: our Savior
answers, Get thee behind me, Satan, for thou savourest not those things
which be of God, but those things which be of men. He did perceive Satan
working in Peter's carnal disposition, which loves ease, but cannot endure
trouble: Luke 22.31, 32. Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat: our Savior
saw that Satan would work with Peter's carnal worldly fear, to make him so
shamefully deny his Lord and Master. So Satan does work with our corruption, in
the use of our callings, and outward comforts, to make us sin in them. Satan
does sometimes cast in temptations over, and besides, and without our
corruption, but he does ordinarily assist, and work with our corruption.

3. Fervency in Gods worship will not be had without diligence, because to make
grace fervent and lively, there must be assistance and influence from heaven;
Romans 8.26. The spirit helps our infirmity, for we know not how to pray as we
ought: Jude 20. Praying in the Holy Ghost, we cannot pray without the
assistance of Gods Spirit: Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North-winde, and come thou
South, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth: our graces
though the seed of them have taken root in our hearts, yet will not put forth,
without the wind of heaven which blows where it lists, without the Spirit
of God does breath upon them. The assistance of the spirit will not be had
without diligence, these two go together, and depend one upon another, our
diligence and Gods assistance: Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your salvation, for it
is God that works both the will and the deed; God will no otherwise work in
us, then as we work with him. The slothful man's talent was hid in a napkin, no
use made of it. The spirit will not breath in us, without our diligence and
pains.

1. Because the spirit is at pains to assist and strengthen grace; will he take
pains for us, and will he allow us to take no pains for our selves? he is at
pains in his Ordinances, at pains by afflictions, at pains to oppose
corruption, to watch advantages, to help grace. Shall the spirit take pains for
us, and we be idle?

2. It agrees and suits well to the worth and dignity of the spirits assistance
to cost pains, Shall common matters, and matters of price, be had with one and
the same labor? does it not better agree to the worth of things, that
different worth should challenge different labor, the less worth in things,
the less labor about them, the more worth, the more labor? Thus our Savior
does express things, Matthew. 6.33. speaking of earthly good things, he says,
they shall be added to us, cast in as an overplus, but speaking of heavenly
things, he bids us seek the kingdom of God take pains about that, diligently
employ our selves; we must take no pains about earthly things, in comparison of
the pains we take about spiritual things.

3. It will help to our prizing of the spirits assistance, and consequently to
our thankfulness for it, not to attain it without pains, our knowledge of the
worth of heavenly things is but little, it is increased by experience of the
difficulty in attaining them; evil things come easily, good things hardly: and
the more we know the worth of the spirits assistance, the more we shall value
and prize it. Beside, if the spirits assistance should not be so precious in it
self, as it is, yet it is of worth to us, if we attain it by diligence, for it
costeth us much, and what we pay much for, we set store by. And according as we
prize the spirits assistance, we shall be thankful for it: the greater good it
is, the greater mercy from God to us, and the more cause of thanksgiving. If
thus it be, that fervency in Gods worship, will not be had without diligence,
because of the weakness of grace, the strong opposition against it, and the
necessity the supply of the spirit, then sloth will hinder our servent
worshipping of God, for that is clean contrary to diligence, and does destroy
that where it prevails.

2. Sloth hinders our fervent worshipping of God, as it gives advantage to
Satan, the enemy thereof. Satan has always a ready mind to hinder us in Gods
service, but he has not always the same advantage, therefore he walks to and
fro, seeking advantage; Sloth gives him advantage, not only as it is a
corruption, contrary to fervent worshipping of God, and suitable to the Devils
dispositition whereby he works, but also as it is a fit corruption, whereby
to screw into the soul the Devils temptations against the fervency of Gods
worship, as the difficulty, uncomfortablenesse, needlesnesse, unprofitablenesse
thereof, all these sloth stands ready to entertain, and is increased thereby.
If less will serve, what needs more? If it be so hard a thing to serve God
with earnestness, if there be no profit nor comfort in it, who would take the
pains, though he had a love to pains? Much less where there is no love, as in
sloth. The diligent man has much ado to withstand these temptations, they
cause often waverings and staggerings in them, and present abatements of
diligence, they make their hearts cold within them, much more must they take
hold of the slothful, who are prepared and ready for such temptations. Beside,
sloth does give advantage to Satan, as it does make no use of appointed
strength against him. Duties of preparation unto more solemn worship, are means
of strength against Satan, laboring to hinder our fervency in Gods worship,
thereby we shake off sloth, stir up diligence, procure the presence and power
of the spirit. But sloth will either neglect duties of preparation, or
carelessly perform them, and so the soul is stripped of that strength against
Satan. Watchfulness in duty, is a means of strength against Satan, but
watchfulness is too painful for sloth: resisting of stirrings of corruption,
and temptations of Satan in duties, is a means of strength against Satan: Jam.
4.7. Resist the devil and he will flee from you: He is a most impatient
discontented creature, and cannot endure to be resisted, he will not there
abide; but resistance of Satan is too painful for sloth, it will not be done
without a detestation of his temptations, and an increase of attention to
Ordinances in hand.

3. Sloth hinders our fervent worshipping of God, as it does grieve the holy
spirit, and make it withdraw his working and assistance: it grieves the Spirit
of God.

1. As it is contrary to its nature, which is all life and action, compared to
things most stirring and active, as the fire, the wind.

2. To its command, to be fervent in spirit, to be zealous, to be diligent, not
to be slothful.

3. To its title, when it is called a spirit of promise, Ephesians. 4.30. for sloth
is not the condition and way of the promise, but diligence.

4. To its operation and working, which is to baptize with fire, Matthew. 3.11.
The spirit does besprinkle the soul with inflamed affections toward God and his
service. Sloth being thus contrary to the spirit, must needs grieve the spirit,
and the spirit grieved, will reserve its assistance, without which we cannot
fervently worship God.

Use. To inform us,

1. That God has but little fervent worship. For

1. All unregenerate men are overwhelmed and drowned in sloth: there is not so
much as a seed or principle of diligence, till grace come into the foul; all
the service therefore of men destitute of grace, is cold and heartlesse,
whatsoever it may seem, such only as sloth will afford, and how full are our
Congregations of unregenerate men and women.

2. There are many lazy and slothful Christians, that do indeed perform duties
in public and private, but they make no labor of them, they take no pains to
prepare and fit their hearts, they are not diligent to get the assistance of
the spirit, they say not with David, 2 Samuel 24.24. I will not offer to the Lord
a sacrifice of that which cost me nothing; they do not offer the Lord costly
services, but cheap, such as cost them nothing; all their preparation to the
duties of the Sabbath, is family duties, and it were well, if they did perform
them, so much the more carefully. No wonder that they are thus idle in Gods
service: grace for want of ordinary exercise is sluggish, they do not use their
faith, love, and spiritual wisdom in their callings, and how should they be
diligent in Gods worship. Their diligence is taken up other ways, in some
about some lust they savor. It was their case, James 4.2, 3. Ye fight and
war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not, ye ask and receive not, because
ye ask amiss, that you may consume it upon your lusts. They were so busy
about their contentions and wranglings amongst themselves, that they could not
pray at all, or if they did pray, it was for their lusts sake, to get advantage
unto them. Thus a man may be conversant about good duties, and his end not be
Gods worship, but his own corruptions, that they may not be discovered, that
the ragings of conscience may be quieted, that he may the more easily compass
his corrupt and sinful ends. The diligence of others is taken up abo^t matters
of the world, meat, drink, apparel, riches. This was their case, John 6. they
seem to take much pains to enjoy Christ his ministry, and miracles, they
compass land and sea, after they had enjoyed him at land, they take ship, and
follow him. But he that knew what was in man, did see that their diligence was
not pitched upon spiritual things, because it was taken up other ways, verse.
26, 27. our Savior peremptorily sets it down, as a most certain truth, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but because
ye did eat of the loaves and were filled: their pains was not about their
souls, but about their bellies. And again, Labor not for the meat that
perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting life; they did take
pains indeed, but not about everlasting food, wherein they might have honored
God much, Why so? their diligence was employed about perishing food. Others
their hearts are over clouded with ignorance, and unacquaintance with their
spiritual estate, that they see not the necessity of diligence in holy duties,
so that they want a main motive and whetstone unto pains-taking, knowledge of
the necessity. Others through carelessenesse, so long neglect their hearts that
at length sloth ends in discouragement, they think their hearts are past pains,
all labor will do no good, Prove. 24.30, 31. I went by the field of the
slothful, and lo it was grown over with thorns, and nettles covered the face
thereof, and the stone wall was broken down. So a slothful neglected heart
will be so overgrown with lusts, that a man will be hopeless of any good
springing there.

3. The best of Gods servants, and the most diligent, how little pains do they
take with their hearts unto Gods service? how unstable and unconstant are they
that way? how soon does discouragement take hold of them, when they feel their
life and fervency in good duties to come hardly? I appeal to the consciences of
Gods people, when we find our hearts dead, and unaffected in Gods worship, do
not our consciences smite us that we have been careless of preparation? Is not
God forced to drive us unto careful and conscionable worshipping of him by
afflictions, we need his direction in doubts, his comfort in sorrows, his
deliverance out of troubles, else we would not pray so fervently, nor hear the
word so attentively, do not our consciences thus witness? all these things do
evidence that God has but little fervent worship.

2. Who they are that do God the best service, spend the Sabbath best, and
perform duties best, the laboring diligent Christian, they that think it no
easy matter to serve God well. It is an ill thing for a soul to be troubled at
the aproach of the Sabbath, because of it is own unfitnes, but it is a good
sign that the soul apprehends some difficulty in keeping a Sabbath well.

2. To condemn this slothfullnesse in spiritual employment, this argument is
sufficient, it puts off God with cold service, which is the greater sin, if we
consider our ordinary and general diligence in our own occasions. To take
pains in earthly occasions, and to be careless in Gods worship is a great
evil, we shall fully see it in three things.

1. Gods worship does immediately concern God, our callings do immediately
concern our selves; shall we do more for our selves then for God? set up our
selves more then him? are we not his and not our own? and therefore bound to
respect him more then our selves? Hear what our Savior says, Luke 14.26. He
that comes to me, and hates not father and mother, yea and his own life,
cannot be my disciple, that is, as Matthew says, chap. 10.37. He that loves
friends or himself, more then Christ, is not worthy of him, God is better then
our selves, therefore if we do not love him better then our selves, we are not
fit to enjoy him, but if we take more pains about our callings, then his
service, we love our selves more then sin.

2. Gods service does immediately concern our souls, our particular callings do
immediately concern our bodies; if we take more pains about our callings then
about Gods worship, we show more care of our bodies then of our souls which is
a folly; for our souls are the best part, our bodies are but dust, when our
souls are absent, the worth of our bodies depends upon the indwelling of our
souls, and not the worth of our souls upon our bodies. We may know where we
ought to place our chiefest affection, by that of our Savior, Matthew. 10.28.
fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, if they
can kill but the body, no matter of fear, that must dye though they kill it
not, if the soul be alive the body is safe though dead; The body lies open to
the violence of man, the soul is out of his reach; the body falls short of the
soul in excellency and therefore less affection is due to it.

3. Gods service does concern our welfare, not only for the present, but also,
and especially for eternity to come, our particular callings do concern only
the time present? shall we take more pains about the time present, which may be
we know not how short, to be sure, but a moment, then about eternity, this is
our Saviors argument, and it is full of weight, John 6.27. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to everlasting life. Ye
will take pains and spend your labor, but do not mispend it, do not waste it,
spend it not about perishing food, but about food that endures everlastingly,
earthly things have a time to be, and a time to perish; the wealth we have now,
ere long we shall part with for ever; spiritual things have a time to be, and
shall never cease to be, they therefore are worth your labor. Is not this
spiritual sloth to be condemned, considering such are more diligent for
themselves, then for God, for their bodies, then for their souls, for things
perishing, then for things eternal? Will not the consciences of men condemn
them for this sloth, in sickness? at the day of judgment? in hell, unto all
eternity? doubtless it is so gross a miscarriage that it cannot but lie heavy
upon men, when they shall come to cast up their accounts, and sadly consider of
things, when their consciences shall tell them, that they have risen early, and
gone to bed late, about their own occasions, but have been too lazy, to read
Gods word or to pray; they have endured hard labor before the Sabbath, and
after the Sabbath; but on that day, they have been too sluggish to go to the
house of God: the day appointed for spiritual labor, in Gods worship, for
Gods glory, has been the day of their rest to recover their strength spent in
the week, it may be in sin, to be sure in their own occasions: surely this
shall increase the torment of the damned in hell, when they shall think with
themselves; that had they been as painful for their souls, as they were for
their bodies, they had escaped that place of torment: Nay had they taken as
much pains for their souls as for sin, had they taken as much pains to go to
the house of God on the Lords day, as they have done to go to the alehouse, in
the week days, had they searched Gods book, but as much as they have tossed
the cards and tables, yea it may be on the Lords day, they had been Saints in
heaven.

3. To persuade the godly to shake off this sloth. If we prize the manner of
Gods worship, and affect it, we must do so, if we care not how we pray or hear,
if we think any affections are meet for him we may continue our sloth. We find
this commanded, Josh. 22.5. Take diligent heed to keep the commandment which
Moses charged you, to love the Lord your God, to serve him with all your heart
and with all your soul; take heed and diligent heed, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart
with all diligence, we find it commended, Act. 18.25. Apollo being fervent in
spirit, taught diligenly the things of the Lord. 2 Cor. 8.7. The Apostle makes
it part of the commendation of the Corinthians, that they did abound in all
diligence. Of our Savior the head of the Church, that he went about doing
good, Act. 10.38. he did not only do good, but was diligent therein. To
discourage the more from sloth, and bring in love with diligence, consider how
the wisdom of the holy Ghost does compare them in Solomon's Proverbs; all
which comparisons we may improve with advantage, against spiritual sloth, and
for spiritual diligence, spiritual sloth being a greater sin, and lying under
an heavier curse, and spiritual diligence being a greater grace, and attended
with an happier blessing.

1. For wealth, Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand,
but the hand of the diligent makes rich. It holds especially true in
spiritual riches, the slothful Christian is poor in grace, the diligent
Christian is rich, has store and abundance of precious grace, Prove. 18.8. He
that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great waster, if a
man have a good stock of grace, yet by slothfullnesse he will waste it, not
laboring to increase it, he will diminish it, Prove. 20.4. the slugard shall
beg in harvest and have nothing, they who have nothing of their own, nor no
interest in them that have something are poor indeed, God will shut up the
hearts of men toward slothful Christians, when they come to beg counsel and
prayers, when they come to complain of their spiritual wants and poverty.

2. For honor, see how they are compared, Prove. 12.24. The hand of the
diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be under tribute; A diligent
Christian shall be a King in his own soul, and amongst the people of God, God
will set him up, give him authority, and rule in their hearts, they that can
rule themselves, are fit to rule others, so do the diligent; but the slothful
Christian shall be an underling in his own soul, and amongst the people of God,
he shall be a slave and tributary to his lusts, Prove. 22.29.

3. For fruit of pains-taking, see how they are compared, Prove. 12.27. The
slothful man rosteth not that which he took in hunting, but the substance of
the diligent man is precious. When a slothful Christian has taken some pains,
for want of taking a little more he loses that pains, as if an huntsman should
take pains to kill an hare, and then through lazines should suffer the dogs, or
some other to run away with it: for instance, a man is at pains to come to the
house of God, to pray, in the word or prayer, his heart is much affected, he
goes his way and thinks no more of it, that man does in great measure lose his
labor. but the substance of a diligent man is precious, what he gets by
labor he does not easily part with, he makes precious account of it; that help
of heart which a diligent Christian finds in the Ordinances of God, he thinks
often of, he improves by prayer, by praise, by treasuring up the same: he can
tell you what it cost him to get down such a corruption, to get to such a frame
of heart, to obtain such a mercy, how often he praid, how long he waited,
therefore he makes a precious account thereof.

Lastly, That which is not the least to discourage us from sloth, it is full of
pride and conceitednesse, Prove. 26.16. put the wisdom of seven men together,
the sluggard conceits he goes beyond it, and no wonder, for he neither knows
what he has, nor what he wants, and ignorance is the mother and nurse of
pride, If a man knew the thoughts of sluggish Christians, he should find that
they think all is well with them, though a man may be able to convince them by
reason, that things cannot be well with them. And the devil will not stick to
tell them all is well to keep them from taking pains. It is a misery to have an
heart empty of good, but to think an empty heart full, is a double misery, so
is it with the slothful Christian.

To help against sloth and unto diligence, it will be useful first, To ponder
these weighty considerations.

1. Fervency in Gods worship, and ease cannot possibly stand together, whilst
so great opposition remains both within us, and without us.

2. The difficulty and toil found in Gods service, is a bitter afflictive fruit
of sin. Shall we not bear the burden we have brought upon our selves willingly,
though not cheerfully? It is a sign sin is pardoned, when we have patience
to bear the chastisement of sin; it is a great favor when there is a will to
bear, where there is no power to shake off.

3. The deceitful ease that proceeds from sloth, is both Gods loss, and
thine, and who would covet that ease whereby God, and himself, his best friends
must lose?

4. The more painful the service of God is, the more sweet, for that sweetness
comes out of the strong, it is the delightful fruit of a powerful conquest
over corruption, of more honor done to God, of the condition of the promise
performed with a greater measure of heavenly assistance.

5. If sloth prevail in thy soul, it will shut out diligence, but at the same
time it shuts in more disquiet then ease, for sin is shut up in that ease; the
disquiet of lawful labor is but affliction; the ease of sloth is sin, and sin
is attended with more trouble then ease, it will prove more easy to taste the
sower of affliction, then the sweet of sin.

2. It will be useful to inure our selves to the serious and thorough
examination of our hearts, and ways, of our spiritual estate, this will
discover what need we have of diligence, and what hurt sloth has done us. This
cured David's lazines, Psalm 119.59, 60. Though he were slow-paced in his
obedience in the neglect of this, yet when he was once past this difficult
useful duty, he made haste, he lost no time, nor ground as formerly.

3. It will be useful, not to cherish our pride, by poring upon what we have
atained, but to strengthen humility, by frequent, and serious meditation of
what we want, and what is to be attained. This helped Paul, Phil. 3.13, 14.
what he was come to was behind him, he could not so redily, and constantly look
upon that, but what he was to come to, was before him in his eye, to alure and
draw him forward. Look we also upon what is before us. Have attained some
measure of fervency? stay not gazing upon that, but look right forth, look
onward; do see what thou wantst? Look not so much upon thy work, as thy
patter^; the affection not only of the best of creatures upon earth, but also
and chiefly in heaven, the spirits of just men made perfect, yea the flaming
Angels, yea the Lord Jesus Christ who had zeal enough to carry him through the
flames of hell, to do his fathers will, in whose breast alone that fire of
heavenly love dwells, that has inflamed Saints on earth, and Saints in heaven,
which we shall find inflaming us more and more, as we draw near to look upon
him as our pattern, with desire of imitation. The close of all, containing an
help in all that has gone before, (as prayer comes after the several pieces of
the spiritual armor: to help our skill in all, and the usefulnes of all,
Ephe. 6.18.) may fitly be David's prayer, when the people were warm hearted, in
their offering to the building of the Temple for the public solemn worship of
God, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our fathers,
keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their heart unto thee.

Finis.

