An Answer To the CHAMPION of the Wooden-Sword; OR, A DIALOGUE, BETWIXT Jack
and Will. Containing, That Part of his Argument, wherein he asserts, viz. That
the Dissenters are Members of the Church of England --

With some Occasional Remarks on Head-Corporation-Magistrates, as Dissenters.

By a Member of the Church of England.

Pudet haec Opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non aliquando refelli.
London, Printed for the Author, School.

That the Dissenters are not Members of the Church of England.
JAck. Well met, Will! I Am glad to see you again. Pray, how does the Knight of
the Wooden Sword do?


Will. Well, Jack! just after the old rate; still goes to Meetings.


J. How, Will! and to Church too? Why? then he looks (like Janus) with a double
Face.


W. What? because both sorts of Religious Doors are set open? Therefore he
appears like the Goddess Concordia among the Old Romans; (which you know, was
one of K. William's Emblems at the Fireworks.)


J. That Is well indeed! He endeavors then to make all Englishmen of one mind.
I like his Project well. But prithee! how does he design to bring it about? He
must needs be more than Caesar, or Hercules.


W. Well, Jack! for all your banter, I know what I say: He designs to do it by
Example; by this means declaring to the World, that the Church and Dissenters
are all one, except in a few indifferent things, in some Ceremonies and
Circumstantials.


J. Well said, Friend Will! Then I see, the World is censorious, as hitherto
not taking him for the Man he is: I confess it is a lewd and wicked Age: But,
Will, let me ask you one civil Question.


Will. What Is that, Friend?


J. Why? prithee Will? What Religion's this Great and Charitable Man of?


W. There Is a Question, Jack? don't you know that?


J. Prithee, Friend Will! How should I? Do You think I Am a Conjurer? I cannot tell
what to make of 'm.


W. That Is strange indeed, Jack! you see, he professes himself a Christian: Is
not that enough?


J. Ay, ay, Will! But then you know Cuckolds are Christians too: This don't
answer my Question.


W. What a Blockhead thou art, Jack? I wish all the World no worse Christians
than he is.


J. Well! that they may soon be, I suppose. But what an answer is this? I
remember, Sir, the Italians are wont to call all Naturals Christians: I
suppose, you don't mean thus of the Gentleman, whom the Wisemen of a
Corporation were pleased to elect to an Office. Tell me plainly, what Religion
this mighty Man's of.


W. Well, Jack! I ever said, you are soft-headed. Don't you know, all Men count
him an Independent?


J. Oh Lord! What Is that, Will? Do You make so great a Man depend on no
Principles of Religion at all? Or is he some Independent Officer? What do you
mean, Man?


W. Well, well, Jack! I see, you love to play the Rogue; you know what
Persuasion he is of.


J. Not I, upon my word; neither do I believe, he knows himself.


W. Well, Jack! I see, you're for banter; you reckon then, such Men have their
Religion to choose: What? do you make a Weathercock of 'm?


J. Why all this fury, Will? I Have reason for what I say. For if his Religion
depends on no fixed and solid Principle, I cannot tell what to make of 't. And
whereas mine is certain, contained in diverse Canons and Articles of the Church;
the Independent's is another thing: or (to use your own words, Will,) may for
ought I know Page 9.
depend on the Moon, and be as changeable as she.


W. Hey, Jack! what is all this?


J. Why, Friend Will? I cannot but think, they pin their Faith upon another
Man's sleeve: They make more than a Lord Bishop of their private Teacher, (and
sometimes richer too.) For whereas, Will, our Bishops have Rules prescribed
them, of Government and Discipline, of Faith and Worship; (which they cannot
transgress, without incurring the danger of a suspension:) your single
Presbyter, (if such,) has no Limits;) he may lead his Flock as he pleases; all
depends on the breath of one mouth.


W. There you're out, Jack. Their Rule is the H. Scripture, whereby they
profess to Teach and Govern their Flock; whereas yours Ibid.
is Humanity, with which we have been too long clogged.


J. That Is fine, Will! Do the Dissenters indeed then Preach and Rule by
Inspired Methods? You know, Ibid.
Protestants hold no Church or Council Infallible. But if these be guided by
immediate Inspiration, it can be nothing less; which the Church of England
never pretended to. All that she aims at, amounts to no more, than to hold the
same Scripture with all sound Christians for her Rule; out of which she has
drawn her Doctrins, not only of Faith, but also of Worship, and of Discipline,
contained in her 39 Articles.


W. Well? but they hold no other Rule, but the Scripture.


J. There you are in a grand mistake, Will. They Have likewise their Directory,
together with their Forms of Church Government and Discipline: which are all
the Deductions of Men as well as ours. How then can they have higher
Pretensions than the Church of England? And since their Prayings and Preachings
are as much the Inventions of Men, as those of the Church; why shall not theirs
be accounted Humane, as well as hers? And I Am afraid, they generally discover
more of Humane Imperfection in them, for want of Learning and good Sense: And I
cannot tell, how these Men should be wiser than our Reformers, and the whole
Church since; but as for their honesty and sincerity, I doubt not but it may
well be called into question.


W. Now you say something to the purpose, Jack.


J. Well, Will! I make bold to add more; viz. That the Doctrines and Practice
of the Church are of very ancient Use and Authority; upon which account they
cannot but be accounted far safer and better grounded. And as I doubt not, but
that Episcopacy may evidently be proved to have a Divine and Apostolic stamp
upon it; so all our Controversies will soon end by an universal consent to that
Doctrine. Beside, Will, it is certain, our Church was never ashamed of her
Principles, having fixed them in Print; (and you know, Friend, Litera Scripta
manet,) as a sure and lasting Record.


W. Well, Jack! you know the Objection. They tell ye, yours came from Italy.


J. How! and theirs from Geneva, which borders upon Italy.


W. Thou talk like a Madman, Jack: are Rome and Geneva so near? I ever count
'em at the greatest distance imaginable.


J. And then you're out in your account, Will. I tell thee, Man, if we take
Jerusalem for a fixed Meridian, you will find 'em both far removed from that Holy
City.


W. What? do you reckon then, both equally distant from the Holy Land? What do you
mean, Man?


J. Well! I tell thee, Friend, the variation of both those Places is far wide
of the Holy City, and they are equal Enemies to Her.


Will. Come, come, Jack! leave off thy fooling, and talk more honorably of thy
Brethren.


J. Yes, yes, Friend, when they deserve it. But have a little patience, and
I Will make it out.


W. You never can.


J. I Will try that; and then we'll talk to the Wooden-Sword. Thou know, Will,
the first have added many Inventions to the pure Doctrines of the Christian
Faith; and therefore all those, who protest against Her, have Reformed upon
that account.


W. Very good!


J. Thou know likewise, there are Doctrines of Worship, and Doctrines of
Discipline in that Holy Religion.


W. Well!


J. Now if our Dissenters at home, (to speak the naked truth;) and some of the
Reformed abroad, substract these Doctrines from the total account; (or at best
are corrupt and deficient in;) what will you say then?


W. These are P. 8.
only Circumstantials, Jack.


J. You Are in a grand mistake, Will. They are Essentials, and an Article of my
Creed, bearing a principal Relation to the Communion of Saints: And you may
have heard, Will, that the Hugonots of France, finding the absolute Necessity
of Episcopacy to the Constituting a true Church, su'd to their Parliament for
established Bishops, and what Answer was given to it? why? a great Man told
this King, then they will have the Face of a Church. And if Episcopacy be so
necessary to the true and complete Communion of Saints, then the Doctrines of
Worship and Discipline, drawn out by that high Order of the Holy Scripture,
cannot but be necessary too. But if you would contend about this Matter, you would best
set about the Confutation of those Ancient and Among which are Dr. Scot.
Modern Writers, who have sufficiently cleared that Point already.


Will. P. 5.8.11. etc.
Well, Jack! I ever said you are hot headed. Thus would you at one blow cut off
all our Dissenting Brethren from the Communion, and from the Privileges of the
Church of England.


J. You Are in a grand mistake again, Will. It is not I, or the Church cut off
any from her Communion, or Privileges, but Obstinacy and Self-conceit. Thou
know, Friend, the Protestant Name of this Kingdom was first founded in the
Church of England as by Law established: And that our Martyred Reformers first
settled it among us, according to the present Constitution of that Church, or
with very little difference. And though our Brethren pretend to be wiser than
those Reformers, and make a second Reformation; yet I cannot but think, it has
authority sufficient, to recommend it to all honest Englishmen, who delight not
in Kickshaws and Novelties. Nor can there be any solid grounds of Dispute about
those things, that you, and I, and all honest Men cannot but P. ult. 8.
acknowledge indifferent: And therefore, if Men will not be of the Church, you
cannot make 'em of the Church: They cannot be P. 12.
Members of that Body of Protestants, who are known by the Name of the Church
of England, that hate her Episcopacy, her Liturgy, and her Discipline: since
these are the things that distinguish Her from all other Churches.


Will. Well, Friend Jack! now you talk too severe.


J. It Is no severity, but plain honest sense; for if Men will not be of the
true Church, they are not of the true Church. But those, who reject the
necessary Terms of Communion with the Catholic Church, can never be sound
Members of ours, as far as they corrupt, or make void the Essentials of the
true Communion of Saints. This I should think a plain case: And though it be
confessed indeed, something may be given to mistaken Minds, whose strength of
understanding cannot reach the strength of those Arguments, on which these
Substantial Matters do depend; and therefore our wise Lawgivers have granted
them Liberty, without any diminution to their Honor or Prudence: Yet from the
Original of the Reformation it was not so. Men were obliged to be instructed by
their own proper Guides, and not by every Corner-creeper; who neither can
justify his Ministry or his Doctrine; who may talk Blasphemy at his pleasure,
and no Man in the Meeting capable to contradict him; who may trump up sedition
boldly, and have enough to side with him; who with a whining Cant may pretend
to Inspiration, whenas his Discourse is so far from that, as to be no better
than plain downright Nonsense. And as I doubt not, but that these are the
Circumstances of many thousands of our deluded Brethren, thus carried away by
the slight of Men; so I could heartily wish, some means might be found out to
reconcile our Differences, and create P. 14.
an hearty Union among Protestants: That so such Persons might be thoroughly
convinced of the Excellency of that Reformation, so solemnly attested by no
less than the Blood of our Martyrs, as also first planted by them in the name
of the Established Church. And you may observe withal, that our Episcopacy, our
Liturgy, our Ceremonies, and our Discipline were left by them in very near the
same form they now are: And you know, Will, that some of them were Bishops
themselves.


W. Well, Jack! upon granting you all this, you still see the Dissenters, P. 6.
on condition they subscribe to the Doctrine of the Church, are qualified for
Offices of Power and Trust.


J. True, Will. But I have proved already, how far they own the Doctrine of our
Reformation: and I observe farther, that they are not qualified, as Church of
England Men; but as they are Englishmen, by subscribing to her Articles,
except three only, they are by virtue thereof admitted to Offices. This is the
full Sum of that Matter. But you err, Friend, if you reckon them of P. 12.
that Body of Protestants, who are known by the Name of the Church of England;
since you see, they will not be so, but obstinately refuse Communion with Her:
And you know very well, the three Articles exempt such from acknowledging, her
Liturgy, her Homilies, and the Forms of Consecration of her Ministry; which are
the Principal things we differ about, and the cause of their Schism from our
Primitive Reformation. So that such Persons as reject these, are not by virtue
of such subscribing rend'red thereby Members of her Religious Body; since they
will not be so but declare against her Original Reformation. What can you make
more of it? And therefore no Dissenters, however qualified, can be incorporate
into our Religious Body, either as Englishmen, or Protestants: They are only
left, as they are, Dissenters; and called so all along in the Act. For I
suppose, the Parliament never designed to create Impossibilities, or create
Contradictions at any time. And therefore, Friend, you would do well to be more
cautious, how you rashly comprchend such Men within the Pale of the Church, who
will not be of the Church; and who were never designed by that August Assembly
the Benefits of such a Comprehension.


Will. Pish, Man! Why so long a talk about the Church, and that Reformation
that came from Rome? you know very well, P. 13.
it is the Parliament has settled the Limits of the Church, and given her all
the Authority she has; and Ibid.
the same Authority may enlarge her Bounds and Pale, when they please. And can
you deny, but they have done the same thing for the Dissenters now, that
formerly they did for you?


J. Come, come, Will! this will never hold Water. The Parliament have only
given 'em Liberty to Worship God, as they please; but never yet made 'em
Members of the Established Church, who never would be of the Established
Church. And if you look into their Act, (it is the 1st. of William and Mary, as
I take it,) they give there no more, than an ease and relief to tender
Consciences, that I could ever yet discern. And in earnest, how can they be
genuine Sons of her, who out of stubborness disown so good a Mother, whole Laws
and Government have all along preserved all the Protestancy of this Kingdom?


W. How do you mean, Friend Jack? Have her Laws preserved all the Protestants of
England; when I cannot but think they tend directly to the Destruction of all
those, who P. 8.
differ from them only in Circumstantials?


J. Well, Will! I find, thou will never learn wit. Shall I give you a numerous
Catalogue thereof, beginning from the very Infancy of our Reformation? But
since that would be too large a field of Discourse, you may take one single
instance alone, performed within our own Memory; and 'twas in the late Reign,
when those very Dissenters joined with Popery against the Church; and held it
out so long too, till at last seeing all a-going, they began to repent, almost
too late. But this is so far out of the road of my present Argument, that I Would
rather reserve it for another opportunity.


W. Well, Jack! though I long to hear your sense on that point, yet you may go on
in your Argument.


J. Well then! let me tell you, Will; the Parliament of England was never so
o'reseen, as to stamp the honorable Name of the Church of England upon
Confusion and Disorder, on all sorts and sizes of Sects and Enthusiasms. They
thought it enough to grant them Toleration: And that they might keep them in as
much order as possible: They gave this Liberty to such only, as acknowledge her
other 36 Articles, and strictly the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity. What can
you make more of it?


Will. Yet still the Dissenters are enjoined the highest Office of the Church,
the Sacrament: will not that entitle 'em to be of her Body?


J. Not in the least, Will, that I know of. Their receiving her Sacrament means
no more, than that the Parliament intended to take sufficient security of, by
laying this Restraint on those Men, who know not what Decency and Order mean;
thereby obliging 'em to pay such acknowledgments to Her, as the true Mother,
and the prime Reformation of England merits. But you may be confident, never
calls 'em her Sons in any sense whatsoever; in that they cannot be so, as long
as they oppose the true Reformation of England. What can you make more of it?
Indeed, if you would call 'em Sons, because they have all along been preserved
under the Covert and Protection of her Laws; it must be true in no other sense,
than as a stubborn Child, having forfeited his Hereditary Right, may be so far
received by a wise Parent, as to ask a Blessing of her. And thus much in their
present Circumstances she allows them; but much more, whenever they grow wiser.
But so long as they refuse the other Parts of their Duty, it is impossible to
count 'em her Members for the performance of one single act alone.


Will. Well, Friend! but for all this, what if these qualified Persons will
still call themselves by her Name?


J. Why, Will? they may call themselves by what name they please; but that will
never serve their turn. The true Requisites she expects are the Duties of her
Reformation; and these are Obedience to her Church-Governors and their
Discipline, with an hearty joining in her Offices and Devotions. These her
Canons, these her Articles, these her Homilies strictly enjoin. But for any Man
to pretend a fondness for Her, and still act the contrary, cannot but be
preposterous, and ridiculous.


W. Why, Man? can you say then, I cannot love the Church, and go to Meetings
too? May I not do both?


J. Yes Friend Will; you may do both, if you please; but then can never be a
true Member of either, if I may speak truth. But to affect the Name of the
Church of England, when you come to Church only to hear a Sermon, refusing to
join in her Offices of Devotion, I know no name to call it by; unless you will
say, it is Legerdemain, or a playing at Boo-peep with God himself. But would Men
be in earnest with God and Man, they could never trifle thus with both, and
(like Children) play at hide and seek; refusing good substantial food for
Whimseys and Novelties.


W. Well, Jack! I shall not pretend to defend all Men's actions; and know not,
whether any Man can justify such. But --


J. What would you say at last, Will? can you make the matter better than it
is? Prithee! is not this an halting between two Opinions; or rather juggling
with God and the World? For since I Am allowed to serve God, my own way, without
any restraint; what necessity or reason can I pretend for a Masquerade, thus
publicly to declare my self an Hypocrite?


W. Well, Jack! thou'st said a great deal to convince me, that the Dissenters
are not Members of the Church of England: And yet it cannot but be wished, that
all Englishmen were really so.


J. Ay, Will. I heartily wish, I could see that day; it would much better the
condition both of Church and State. But I remember, you laid the fault last
time at the Church's door; whenas you see now, whose it is. You all along build
upon that unhappy notion, that the Church have Page 11.
persecuted the Dissenters: That they would Page 7.
not own 'em for Brethren, till of late: That they Page 8.
counted 'em for Heretics, Schismatics, and God knows what. Whereas you see,
it is they have made the Breach: they have made the Defection from the
well-fram'd, primitive Reformation of England. And pray, for what? why? for
such things, as they call indifferent? Have we receded from the Principles of
our Reformers, or they? and because the Laws of the Reformation found 'em out,
and sometimes punished their Obstinacy, shall that be called the Church's
Persecution? and the Page 8.
destroying another Party, that differ from them only in Circumstantials? When
indeed, (to speak the truth, and no more,) 'twas an act of our Parliament, and
not of the Church; or rather, with more truth and good sense, their own fault.
And I cannot but think it no small abuse and affront of that great and wise
Assembly, (whose Authority cannot but be obligatory to us, when it concurs with
that of God's Words) to oppose their Acts founded upon so much Prudence and
good sense, as the keeping Men within the Bounds of Moderation and Order, and
from such Errors as blind Guides would lead 'em into. What do you think now of
the matter? Are the Dissenters of the true Church of England, or no? Or is it
possible, they should be so, as long as they oppose the true Reformation of
England? This was the grand Topic, wherewith you imposed on me in our last
Conference.


W. Well, Jack! after all the do and pother you make about the Church, you
sti'l see, these Corporation-Officers retain their Ensigns of Honor, and carry
them to Meeting.


J. Ay, Will. Much good may do their Widows with it: And yet I cannot but think
it far more reputable for those Officers, to keep the Peace much better; and
not upon the Conclusion of a dangerous War to commence a new one against that
Reformation, to which all Protestants of more than three Kingdoms are so
infinitely obliged. But when our most Glorious Monarch had brought us home
Peace, then to disturb That and the Church, when she was blessing God for it,
cannot but be ridiculous. Besides, it cannot but be counted Folly in these
Magistrates, to slight the Attendants of their Corporation-Honour, by going
(like Owls) to an House, or a Barn, or any blind Hole, where they cannot in
Honor and Conscience follow 'em: Who perhaps) as they have for a great part
born the Office long before their Worships; so it cannot but be counted an
honor to 'em, to be seen in so good Company. What do you think now, Friend Will,
of your Bounce? Can you blush for your Corporation-Man?


W. Not I. Let his Horse blush for him.


J. And so he would, were he turned into Balaam's Ass; and forbid his madness
too.


Will. Hey, Jack! why so furious? you still see, these Corporation-Officers go
to Meetings: Neither can you bind up Magistrates of so great Power and Trust,
where the Law has left 'em at liberty. Why then do you fret, and teaze your self,
or what good do you get by it?


J. Well said, Will! wisely urged, upon my word! yet for all that, I Will have
one tug more with you about that matter. You think then, Reflections on their
Wisdom and Honor signify nothing; so they keep but the saddle, it matters
not, whether they come off with credit, or disgrace. What doughty Knights, you
make of your Men in an Office? I remember, Sir, you have entitled one to the
Wooden-Sword already; with which you say, he is to do Page 4.
very noble Acts, and Ibid.
make Conquests for the Church of England. Pray, how do you make all this out?


W. Well! since you put me to it, I prove it thus; A Corporation-Officer's Page
7.
Presence at the Meetings, with the Ensigns of Authority, is an Evidence that
the Doctrine of the Church is Preached there; And Ibid.
a Declaration, that the Pale of the Church is enlarged.


J. Profoundly argued! a very noble Act indeed, Will! Thus we see, these mighty
Men can work Miracles; create Contradictions; do more, than the Wisdom of the
whole Nation could ever effect, for above 150 years together. Nay, One with a
Monstrons Sword will outdo the greatest Hero of the Age. And had our most
glorious Monarch but known it had been in his Dominions, what would he not have
done with it long since? He Would not only conquered the Power of France, but also
reduced 'em to own their Protestant Subjects, if not made 'em all such. And I
cannot but think him a very stingy Knight, hitherto to envy us so great a
Blessing; not to say, have saved us some Millions to boot. But perhaps he
reserves these Conquests for himself alone; and will give no other the glory of
so noble Actions.


Will. You Are a wicked Rogue, Jack.


J. No matter for that, Will. Since thou'st made so monstrous a Man of 'm,
let us see, what he can do at home, before we send him abroad, to France, Spain,
Italy, Germany, and all the World over. For I can assure you, we cannot but
wish all Christians no worse, than those of the Church of England should be; or
than her Doctrine would make 'em, and all Mankind. But, Will, let me whisper
one word in your ear.


W. What Is that?


J. Why, Friend? let that mighty Man make two sticks one, before he reconcile
the Presbyterian and Independent Parties with the Church. When he is done that,
he may try his skill with us; but till then you will give me leave, neither to
believe your self, or another Author. And I must tell withal, could he bring
that whole matter to bear, he would do more, than the Wisdom of the whole Nation
could ever effect, as I said before. For had there been any possible means
thereto, our Parliament would have done it long since, having made it their
endeavors, ever since the dawn of the Reformation. What do you think now, Friend
Will, of the whole matter?


W. You say right; the Parliament, I believe, would have done it; but what is
the reason?


J. Why Will? the Dissenters would never hear reason. Witness the famous
Convocations of James I. and Charles II. In both which they would all the
advantages of the World to make out their Pretensions, and argue the Point
calmly. So difficult it is to bring those Men, who will not live under the
Government of the Church, (and very hardly of the Crown,) ever to hear reason.
Your Corporation-Officer can never reconcile so great Contradictions.


Will. Well! but at last, Jack, you cannot but say, our Dissenting Brethren are
nearer the Church, than any other Protestants in Europe, as P. 7.12.13
Preaching the same Doctrine in the Meetings.


J. That Is a grand Question, Will. Prithee! in what sense can that be true? The
Doctrines of ours, as far as she is distinguished from the Universal Church, and
all others, are those of Worship, and of Discipline. These they never Preach,
unless it be backward: (as they say Witches are made by saying the Lord's
Prayer.) How then can they be counted of her Body, any more than any others? I
add withal, there are Churches abroad far nearer the Church of England, than
any the most moderate Dissenters in the Kingdom; particularly the Church of
Zurich in Switzerland; not to say, all the Lutherans in Sweden, Denmark, and
the Empire: And therefore the great Man in his Office would do well, to make
Conquests for the Church of England in all those Parts; and not trouble us
alone with his noble Acts. Or if his Ambition lead him higher, (as he is of the
Universal Church, tho'a very unsound Member thereof in my Opinion,) he would do
well to try his skill at Rome, Madrid, or Paris; and see, what he would get by his
Knight-Errantry; or whether he can convert the Pope, any more than the Quaker
did.


W. Hey, Jack! where are you sending that Sword, which you know never stirs
beyond the Corporation-Liberties?


J. Why, Will? any where; so the Throat of the Church of England been't cut
with it: to the Mogul, the Sophi, the Grand Signior, or any the remotest Parts
of the Universe; he is room enough to make his Conquests, and enlarge the Pale
of the Church, if he be so good at it.


Will. Well, Jack! thou'st tired my patience, what good will you get by
affronting your Brethren thus?


J. Why? then I find, Friend Will, you expect some great matter for your
Service. This, I suppose, dubbed you Champion of the Wooden-Sword.


W. Well! I Will hear no more. I Will get me to the Hall; and refresh my self with
some Crumbs of Comfort, and arm me for another bout, Farewell.


J. Ay, ay, Friend Will; fare thee well! I see, you love to hear truth as
little spoke, as you write. But pray, don't fail to tell the great Man, he is
not like to set up an Office de Propaganda Fide this Year in England.


FINIS.
A REMARK.
FInding such Arguments in the little Pamphlet of Jack and Will, as are
generally made use of by the Dissenters; and because it seems the Top and
Flower of their Railery against the Church of England; upon that account some
time since I undertook this Defense. Not that that Libel deserves an Answer
upon the score of its Arguments, or fierce Reasoning, (for in both I find it
very deficient:) but to curb in some measure the Insolence of that Author, and
of the Original Cause thereof. I need not be overforward to inform the World,
what approbation this Dialogue has had, since the first writing of it: All that
I desire is, that it may have that effect upon the Dissenter, at which it aims.
As for the Marginal Remarks, they are for the most part Objections out of him,
taken from the Octavo Print, (as cheapest and in most hands; there being also a
second Dialogue of that Print, which will likewise challenge some Remarks
hereafter.

THere will be Printed, by the same Hand another Dialogue betwixt Dick and
Will: Wherein the true English Loyalty is stated.


