An ANSWER To Sr. Timothy Touchstone At John the Brewers Lodging, At the Sign
OF THE Naked Truth, AT TYBURN.
HOnest Tim, To tell you in plain Truth, I am in Love with your Style, for that
it takes much in this Age, amongst the Commonalty, as in Bartholomew-Fair, the
Fool is the wisest Man in the Play, the very show of him is a Jest; and any
thing that is serious put under a Fools Coat must take well; for to write damned
serious, as Mr. Presbiter, or Mr. Papist. In this Age Sense is flung away, but
your way I must applaud, for that Buffoon fashion of your Discourse, certainly
is the best way of abusing persons in the World, in any sort of Notions that
are to be Insinuated.

For look you (said I Mr. Tim.) Can any person be at Stampford in lincoln shere
at 2 a Clock in the Afternoon, and take water with Sir Edmond Bury Godfry at
White Hall Stairs at the same time? I say he may, and be as visible as Jo. the
Brewer, at the Sign of the naked Devil: (for say I) to have 25000 l. per Annum,
to manage that Estate well, and to manage the Government, is too much for one
Man that has other matters to consider, as a Regiment of Players, Pimps,
Whores, Fluters, Scriveners, Chemists, Presbiterians, Papists, Phonaticks, and
an unconstant Temper. But this (say I) may be managed with Discretion; and
how, quoth Timothy? I Will tell you, When I am at Court, how easy a matter is it
for one to follow St. Paul's Rule, to be all things to all men, to make fair
promises to the business in hand, and afterward to know nothing of it; then to
place it on the negligence of my Servant not to mind me of it; and to call him
Rogue and Rascal for his negligence. This is commendable, this is satisfaction
without doubt, to any reasonable person, and does well enough for any public
matters.

But hang it, I hate to be a Courtier, to Hauk and Hunt in the Country: To kiss
my wifes waiting Gentlewoman, to ingratiate my self with the Citisons wives in
Town, is a better Life behalf; and a Man does it with more popularity, for (say
I) It Is more commendable in the City to go to Church with ones own Wife, and to
have his Servant follow him, with a large Embossed Bible, and to be serious,
and know nothing of the matter at Church. It must needs please God, and create
popularity, and graft a flourishing Presbiterian Head upon the Crabtree Stock
of Popery. But let the Church of England be neglected, because it is not
inclineable to mutation, as also those persons that are or shall pretend to be
true to the King and Church, but I had almost forgot Tim, that those persons
that are true to the King and Government, must be run down with noise and
nonsense, And why? Because they advise the king not to part with any point that
belongs to him of right, and that for the peoples sake and safety, and for the
King to pretend to command his own Servants to obey him, and justify him when
done, it is for certain Treason, but if it be not so, we will set such a
Countenance upon it, that none but a Papist durst contradict it.

Now Tim, I Will tell you how I manage my private Affairs; in plain truth, I
hate any man of business, except it be such as brings me money (for I abhor
durty Acres, the Clamor of Tenants or any thing that pretends thereunto.

I had once several persons of Honor and Quality for my Trustees, that keep my
droping Estate together, but they went such formal ways to work, as I abhorred
them, being not persons of dispatch, taking the trouble of looking over Bills,
casting them up looking over Parchments drawn by impertinent Lawyers, filled
with nonsensical stuff, Provisoes of Redemption and such like fopperies. At
which time I had a Fellow, tho Tim that I implied in my business, that you
mention, that effectually improved my Estate 1900 l. per Annum, and those Rents
which were ineffectual, he made them effectual; so that my Estate was in some
sort of plight. But this formal way of doing Business, was trouble some; I
therefore turned him out of my Service. (but to say truth, he was willing to be
rid of me) for such a Master and such a Servant and such Trustees, you may
imagine, could not well agree. But how do you think Tim I rewarded him. I being
a man much in Credit (as any Alderman in the City) got acquainted with the
famous Scriveners, and also with a cunning Rump Solicitor, who I knew to be men
of business, and Rogues that had the command of money, for when all is done
those sort of fellows are the best being men of dispatch and if they do lie and
cheat, they do it without troubling me and its no matter if I pay in pro and
con 10 and 12 per cent. ready money is the life of all things, and if by their
Designs they beat down the value of my Lands and Wood in Order to their or
others purchase, for I have found a great many old cunning Rascals, that will
take pains to get 3 or 4000 l. by a Purchase: It Is a Credit to be in a Srivenor
and Bankers Books. But the fellow that served me, I think I shall be even with
him, for I have employed the Scrivenor which is a man of Reputation, and
possibly may be a Parliament Man, and my Rump Solicitor, now my Trustees, to
tease that fellow at Law, upon pretense of cheating me, and that pretense cloak
their designs, but they can make nothing of the matter. But now I think one,
the Cheat will be the other way, for I being careless, did not much mind it,
and I have this comfort, that none will conspire my death for my Estate, but
there has been abundance of dirt flung and I am sure some will stick, and I
shall bear the Charactor, that I am a person that minded not things of this
world and so not fit for it. As for my Executors I shall give them little
trouble, as for my Heirs I have none. Be now say I a good Plot may repair all
sorts of negligence.

Now Tim, I expect to hear from you, but I request that you will leave off your
Fools or Knaves Coat, and disguise not your self under a Jesuittical or
Presbiterian way of Lying. Be like the Church of England whose Doctrines are
plain and intelable.

Praise God, and honor the King.

