THE ANSWER OF Mr. Wallers PAINTER, To His many new ADVISERS.

London, Printed by A. Maxwell 1667.

THE ANSWER OF Mr. WALLER'S PAINTER, To his many new ADVISERS.
GOOD Sirs be civil: Can one man (do you think)
As fast lay Colors, as you all spill Ink?
At what a pass am I! a thousand hands
I need, if I must be at all Commands.
Thy sparkling Fancy (Waller) first designed
A Stately Piece, true Picture of thy Mind.
But (how Conceits engender!) on thy Wit
Each Scribler new Advices does beget;
And so the Breed's embas'd, that now it is grown
Like Royal Blood when mixed with the Clown.
'Twas racy Wine ran from thy Loyal Quill;
But these their Brandy from its dreggs distill:
Or, like false Vintners, they adulterate
Thy Nectar with a poisonous Sublimate.
Without thy Muse, thy Fancy they purloyn;
And Bastard Cions to thy stock they join.
Thus in dead Bodies, Satan acts a soul;
And Virgils self's travesty'd to a Droll.
I shall forswear my Art, if I must be
Thus Schooled by Bunglers, whiles I paint for Thee.
Or if I must each new Adviser please;
Jumble our World with the Antipodes;
And mix the Firmament and Stygian Lake;
A Chaos, not a Picture I shall make:
And then, (as he that marred a noble Draught,
By alt'ring it as each Spectator taught)
I shall forswear the Piece too, and write by,
This Monster my Advisers made, not I.
However, Sirs, my Colors will not do;
And therefore I must be supplied by you.
I have no mixtures to paint Treason's Face
So fair, for Loyalty to make it pass.
None that will blemish Princes on report;
Which none dares own, to make the Rabble sport.
Besides, Slander's a fading Color, though
It stick a while, it will not long do so:
If I make use of that, this I shall have,
When it decays, my work will prove me Knave.
Yea, Princes (Sirs) are Gods, as they are above;
Though as Men, in a Mortal Sphere they move.
As Gods, it is Sacrilegious to present
Them in such Shapes as may bespeak contempt.
And who allows 'em Men, does therewithal
Allow 'em Possibility to fall.
Yet Paint not their Infirmities. Would you
In each foul Posture be exposed to view?
Baulk not the Noble Rule, and let them have
The charity (at least) that you would crave.
My Colors will not alter Forms of State
After the Whimsies of each Crowing Pate.
What Paint will draw Utopia's? or where
Shall the Groundwork be for Castles in the Air?
What Colors wears the Man in the Moon? who can
Limn an Oceana, or Leviathan?
Rob the Chameleon, Sirs, or Polypus,
For Colors, if you mean to employ me thus.
Fie! At the Old Play still! what have we got,
By Rota's, Ballots, and I know not what?
Who cheats me once, he fools me; but it is plain,
I fool my self to deal with him again.
Bought Wit is best, it is said; but who buys often,
Shall never sell it at the rates he bought.
Cast up your Books, (Sirs,) and I dare engage,
Creditors, falls short of the Debtor's Page;
Unhinge not Governments, except you could
Supply us better, e're you change the old.
You would have all amended, so would I;
Yet not deface each Piece where faults I spy.
It Is true, I could find Colors to expose
Faulty Grandees, and over-paint a Rose.
But this checks me, that (whatsoever is aimed)
Few such are mended by being proclaimed.
Public disgrace often smaller sinners scares;
But Vice with greatness armed, no Colors fears;
Besides, the Rout grows insolent hereby,
And slights the once disgraced Authority.
Whence, to Paint all our Betters Faults, would be,
To hang up Order in Effigy:
Leave such then, to their Masters, and the Laws;
Who play with Lions, at last feel their paws.
But one word more, Sirs; Grant I yield to you,
Am I secure, I have no more to do?
If thus Advices spawn, your three or four
May shortly propagate to half a score;
And those by hundreds multiplied, may make
A task, Briareus would not undertake.
Besides the Clash; Dash out that line, says one;
Another, Alter this, Let that alone.
So Babels builders marred their Tower, and made
An heap unlike the Project that they laid.
Pray leave Advising then, for (never crave it)
No Art can Paint a World as all would have it.
Or, if you're set upon it; to fit your mind,
I Will tell you where a Painter you may find.
Look out some Canvas-stayner, whose cheap skill
With Rhythmes and Stories Ale-house-walls does fill.
Such men will do your work best: (sorry Elves)
They paint all Kings and Princes like themselves.
So with Jack-wheels upon their heads, they slander
Arthur, and Godfrey, and great Alexander.
Here David stands with his Harp of whipcord-strings;
And Solomon's Wives, who (sure) loved no such things.
Yea Ahab, and Queen Jezabel, who never
Painted her self, as she is painted there.
Thus the Royal Oak in Country Signs is found,
In a Park Copied from the Neighbour-Pound:
And Royal Charles his head looks peeping through,
Much in the posture that is the Dawbers due.
Employ these then, not me; Except you please
To use my Art on your own Visages.
Those, I know who would thank me for; and then
Your Faces might be famous as your Pen.
And (lastly) that done, three large dashes by,
(I doubt) would serve to paint your Destiny.
FINIS.

