ANSWER To a Late Scandalous Libel MADE ON THE Ld. Arch-B. of C. And the Bishop
of Heref.
By way of Dialogue.

Enter a Church-of- England- Man, a Dissenter, and the Scribbling Author of the
forementioned LIBEL. Chapter of Engl. Man. Neighbor, I am sorry that I now adays
can never see you at Church, or at Sacrament, I remember the time when you was
a constant man.


Dissenter. Hold there Sir, I must borrow one of Roger or Harry's Distinctions,
I was constant at Church, but not a constant man of the Church; and I was
unwilling that any Advantage should be taken against me by those little
Officers employed for persecuting honest Dissenters.


Scribler. And in troth I think thou were in the right on it, when Whiggs were
uppermost the Church of- England-men could scarce preserve the Crown or
themselves, then I cried out against Popery, and it is well known that I then writ
the Packet of Advice from Rome, and gave severe glances on the Church of
England too, as not much better, and a-gad, I would have invented any. Lie to
scandalize that Party, and take with the Rabble (whom I then studied most to
please) but in good sooth I had so much True Matter from Rome that I stood in
no want for Invention. But now having made a Truce against the Common Enemy, I
have some of the other Party furnishes me with such admirable reasons, which by
example of Bays I make my own Ey, and Ey Gad too, I improve 'em.


Chapter of Engl. Hark y'e Neighbor, is not this the Saucie, Scandalous Fellow,
who writ that ridiculous Libel against the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of Hereford, which he calls a Dialogue.


Diss. This may be him, for I have heard it was done by a bold hand, and I Will
assure ye I do not know such a notable Man in the three Kingdoms for drawing a
thing to the Life, and between you and I, he is one of the best Friends we have
for endeavoring the raking away those impious Laws for Payment of Tithes, and
for enforcing af men's Consciences against their Interests and Inclinations; But
I must beg yo'r Pardon if I desire him and your self to be better Acquainted.


Chapter of Eng. I thank ye for yo'r Civility, but I believe men of a Loyal
Disposition will not sure with his Temper.


Diss. O Sir, now he is all over Loyal -- Mr. Care, Pray be Acquainted with
this Honest Gentleman, I have given your Character to him.


Scribler to the Church-of-England man. Scrib. Sir, before I become Acquainted
with ye, you must Answer a plain Question.


Chapter of Engl. Sir any honest Question I shall readily give an Answer to; but I
hope, the sense I have of things, being plainly discoursed, shall not be
informed of, or misrepresented in another place.


Scribler, It Is true, I have been a Writer in all times, for the prevailing
Side, but I have written so much against Parators, In formers, and yo'r Church
of England Constables, Justices of Peace, the persecuting Judges, and other
Presenters, and Persecutors, that I cannot now in a Court of Justice expect to
be believed, though I should become an Evidence, or sourvey Informer, but pray
Sir, keep within Compass, for I must hear nothing against the Government.


(...) Diss. No, No, God forbid (Sir) nothing against the Government, nothing
against Obedience, or for Liberty of Conscience otherwise then is granted to
us, according to Law.


Chapter of E. Why Mr. C. I understand ye commit Scandalum Magnatum, and would
frighten the Lawyers out of their Reading and Senses, and give your Advice as
frankly in public Affairs as a Privy Councellor. Is this according to Law?


Scrib. Sir, Pray Sir, I demanded the first Question, which if you will not
hear; Your Servant Sir. Will you --


Chapter of E. Oh! Sir, I see what you would beat, No. But pray, Sir, Who gave ye
the power of Interrogating any his Majesty's Subjects about Laws or Government?
What Commission have ye? or is it for the sake of Meddling, Gain, or Necessity,
as you venture at Scribbling? Come, Sir, The Thief may through Necessity, or for
some Booty, Rob; but unless the Government be very Merciful, he must hang for
it afterward. I Will tell thee, I was at the Temple with my Lawyer, and before
him lay that Impudent. False, Militious, ignorant Dialogue, Hawk'd about on
Saturday last, fixing on the Greatest Prelate and Peer of this Nation,
ridiculous Reasons for not Reading the King's Declaration; He assured me that
it was not only an Offense inquirable and punishable by the Government; But
that (according to Modern Presidents) his Grace and Lordship, might bring their
Actions at the Common Law, and recover more Damage against thee, than all thy
Factious Crew would ever give for the purchase of thy Life, or their Liberties,
otherwise than by Magna Charta and the King's Royal Protection, they ought to
enjoy.


Dissen. Neighbor! But pray, of what Religion and Temper of Mind was the Man,
I fear some Notorious Man against Blessed, Simple, and Pure Conscience?


Chapter of E. Truly I saw a late Poem in his Study, of Mr. Dryden's on the Prince;
where I observed in fol. 8. the 10. and 11. lines, speaking of his Baptismal
Drops.

Let Conscience, which is Interest ill disguised,
In the same Font be cleans'd, and all the Land Baptized.
What he meant, I leave to you, but I hope he intended only such Consciences as
thine: For in truth I always looked on thee as a Hypocrite, and so I find thee,
and so I fear shall leave thee:


Scrib. Sir, I know you not, Sir, I Will warrant you Sir, he and you were, worthy
Sir, both of a Church, a National Church, Sir, a Loyal obedient Church, Sir;
and if we knew him, Sir, We should make him repent, Sir; And so Farewell Sir.
Your Servant, Sir. Your Servant, Sir. We fear you not, Sir, Actions, Damages,
Fines, etc. Sir. This Lawyer would fain be a Judge, a Recorder, or some such
thing, Sir. I Will warrant he never was so Loyal, nor you, Sir, if you be of the
Church as you call it, to stand by the King, but to preserve your self, and to
persecute, as I have several ways in sundry of my Occurrences notably written,


Chapter of E. I Will tell thee, that he is what I am, and that we both were always
Loyal Churchmen as by the Loyal Addresses we Signed to before thy Occurrences
came in Vogue, and a little after thy Pacquets were out of fashion, and by such
Rogues as thee, called Papists in Masquerade. We were not only always Loyal,
but one of our Fathers was Sequestered, decimated, and dyed in Prison for the
sake of the Blessed Martyr, the Father of our present Sovereign (whom God long
preserve) and his Grandfather in Yorkshire raised two Troops of Horse at his
own Charge, under the Lord Hopton, and was killed in Actual Service, before the
Surrender of Oxford. My Father dyed also upon that Account. And We have been
stiff to our Duty on all Occasions, without any regard to our Interests,
against Exclusioners, who would have turned the World upside down, destroyed
the Late Good, and this present Merciful King; set up a Monmouth or a
Shaftsbury, divided amongst 'em all our Estates, and trampled on the whole
Hierarchy of the Legally Established and un-impeach'd, un-blemished, Loyal and
True Christian Church of England.


FINIS.

