TO preserve the strength of the Mariage-bond and the Honor of that estate,
against those sad breaches and dangerous abuses of it, which common discontents
(on this side Adultery) are likely to make in unstaied minds and men given to
change, by taking in or grounding themselves upon the opinion answered, and
with good reason confuted in this Treatise, I have approved the printing and
publishing of it.

November. 14* 1644. JOSEPH CARYL*

Errata.
IN page 1. line 17. read aut for and, p. 2. l. 2^. r. Kens case for Ker^s*
case, p. 9^ ^.o. r. to for as, p. 12. l. 24. leave out natural in the first
place, p. 14. l. ult, ^. Obligee for Obligor.

An Answer to a Book, Entitled, THE Doctrine and Discipline OF DIVORCE, OR, A
Plea for Ladies and Gentlewomen, and all other Married Women against Divorce.

Wherein, Both Sexes are vindicated from all bonadge of Canon Law, and other
mistakes whatsoever: And the unsound Principles of the Author are examined and
fully confuted by authority of Holy Scripture, the Laws of this Land, and sound
Reason.

Council. Anglic. Anno 670. Can. 10. Nullus conjugem propriam nisi (ut sanctum
Evangelium docet,) fornicationis causa relinquat.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for William Lee at the Turks-Head in Fleet Street,
next to the Miter Tavern. 1644.

An Answer to a Book, entitled, The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce
restored to the good of both Sexes from the bondage of the Canon Law.
FOr our more orderly proceeding in this question of Divorce, viz. whether a
man may divorce or put away his Wife for indisposition, unfitness, or
contrariety of mind, we will do these three things.

1. Show what the Doctrine or discipline of Divorce is.

2. Give some reasons why a man may not put away his wife for indisposition,
unfitness, or contrariety of mind, although manifested in much sharpness.

3. We will answer the Arguments and Scriptures, which are brought by the
Author of the Book, intitultd, The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, to prove
that a divorce may lawfully be for contrariety of minds, etc.

Concerning the first thing, what Divorce is, or the Doctrine and discipline of
it.

The word Divorce comes from the Latin word divortium, which comes a
divertendo and divortendo, to intimate that by divorce a woman is separated,
divided, or turned aside from her husband: the Greek is (...) ex (...), i. e.
repudio, rectius (...), dicitur quod ab (...), i. e. ab and (...), i. e. sto,
quasi dicas abscessio. The Hebrew word is Cherithuth from Chorath, which
signifies a cutting off, dismembring, or separating, or foedus icere; but
Cherithuth is (...), properly a Bill of divorce or parting. Thus concerning the
word.

Now concerning the divorce it self, to show what it is, we must consider it
under a twofold notion.

First, as it has been practiced by the Jews according as they thought
directed by Moses's Law, and so Divorce was a free and a voluntary act of the
Husband, made known by writing, whereby he did dismiss and for ever put away
his Wife, and give her leave to marry to another man: To this purpose some of
the Hebrew Rabbines have set down the form of the Bill of Divorce used amongst
the Jews: in effect thus.

I such an one (setting down his name, the day and year) do voluntarily, with
the willingness of my soul without constraint, dismiss, leave, and put away,
thou, even thou, (naming her name) which has^ been my wife heretofore, but now
I dismiss thee, that thou may be free, and be married to whom thou will: And
this is unto thee a writing of divorce, according to the law of Moses. Witness
R. and T.

The Jews require to make a lawful divorce, that the man must put her away
willingly, that it must be by writing, that he must put her quite out of his
possession, that she be truly named in the deed of divorce, and that the deed
of divorce be given to her either by himself or his Deputy before witness.

Thus of Divorce as practiced by the Jews in relation to Moses's Law.

In the second place we will consider of it as practiced by the laws of
England.

And so Divorce is a sentence pronounced by an Ecclesiastical Judge, whereby a
man and woman formerly married, are separated or parted. Cook lib. 7. Keras
case.

This Divorce is twofold: 1. There is a divorce a vincul^ matrimonii from the
very bond of matrimony it self. 2. There is a divorce tantum a mensa and
thoro, from bed and board only.

Concerning the first kind of divorce from the very bond of matrimony it self:
the cause of this divorce must precede or go before marriage: amongst which are,

1. Causa precontractus, because the parties or one of them was contracted to
another before: and so if a man marry one precontracted and have issue, its the
fathers child till divorce for precontract, and then is it nullius filius, a
Bastard. Cook lib. 6.66. Di^r 105.

2. There is a divorce a vinculo matrimonii causa frigiditatis, vel causa
impotentiae, for cause of impotency to marriage duties: yet if after a man be
divorced for impotency, and take another wife and have children by her, these
shall not be Bastards, because a man may be habilis and inhabilis div^rsis
temporibus, able and unable at diverse times. Cook lib. 5.93. Di^r fol. 178.

3. There is a divorce a vinculo matrimonii, causa minoris aetatis vel
impubertatis* because they are within age at the time of mariage^ and so if two
be married infra annos nubilos, and after full age are divorced for the same,
the woman may bring an Assise against the man, for land given her in
frank-mariage, Lib. Ass. 19. An. plac. 2. which proves the divorce is from the
very bond of matrimony. Besides these there are diverse other causes of divorce
a vinculo matrimonii, as causa affinitatis and causa consanguinitatis, by
reason of affinity and consanguinity or kindred, Cook com. Littleton.

So causa professionis, and termino paschae 30 Edw. 1. coram Rege, there
William de Chadworths case, how that he was divorced from his Wife, because he
carnally knew the Daughter of his Wife before he married her mother: these are
causes of divorce from the very bond of matrimony allowed on by the Common law;
concerning which the Civil or Canon law makes some distinctions and additions.
So in the case of divorce causa impotentiae vel frigiditatis, for impotency to
marriage duties. Although Justinian (as some think discreetly) did will, that
there should be three years trial of the disability: yet here the Canon law
expects present proof: yet some think this cause does not dissolve from the
very bond of matrimony, except the impotency or impediment can be proved to be
before marriage, and not to fall out after: So of impotency the same they say,
Vt per en matrimonium nunquam extitisse judicitur. And concerning marriage of
kindred in the line ascendant or discendant, it is counted so detestable, that
Bartel says, they suffer confiscation of goods and deserve exile.

The Civil and Canon law allow of divorce after a long time absence of either
party, but they certainly agree not of the time of absence. So Cod. lib. 5.
tit. 1. leg. 2. constable. sponsa post biennium, etc. allowed to marry after two
years absence, but tit. 27. after three years, leg. 27. after four years.
Others say the Civil law requires five years absence.

In Consil. Lateran. part. 50. cap. 23. There is an example of a Decree, upon a
woman complaining her husband had been gone ten years, and it was commanded
the parents of the husband should send for him home, and he in a long time came
not; upon which the Bishop did pronounce a sentence of divorce, and gave the
woman leave to marry, and the sentence was allowed of by the whole Council.

So the Canon law decrees causa 28. quest. 1. cap. 4. That if the wife refuse
to dwell with her Christian husband, he may without any fault leave her.

Thus of the first kind of divorce from the bond of matrimony it self, and
this makes the children Bastards and bereaves the woman of her dower.

Secondly, there is a divorce a mensa and thoro, from bed and board only, and
this is for some cause subsequent or during marriage, and not before marriage, as
for adultery committed. Yet this being subsequent to the marriage, the bond of
marriage by the law is not dissolved, but the freehold continues, the wife shall
be endowed, and the children are mulier, and not Bastards.

Concerning the justness or convenience of all these laws in every thing,
whether they will stand in foro conscientiae its not needful now to dispute:
our end being only a little to open the law of Divorce, that we may see what it
is. And so now we leave this first thing what Divorce is, and the doctrine and
discipline thereof, and come to the second thing.

2 Thing
And that is to prove that whatsoever other causes of Divorce may be allowed of,
yet that disagreement of mind or disposition between husband and wife, yea
though it shows it self in much sharpness each to other, is not by the law
of God allowed of for a just cause of divorce, neither ought to be allowed of
by the laws of man.

For the proof of this second thing propounded to be handled, to prove that
Husbands and Wives ought not to be divorced for contrariety or unfitness of
minds or dispositions, although it should be manifested by much harsh carriage
each to other, I shall as briefly as I can demonstrate the same.

Where the Scripture commands a thing to be done, 1 Arg.
it appoints when, how, and for what it shall be done: as in the case of death:
when any one is by the law to dye, it sets down for what cause and fact: and so
excommunication it teaches when and for what. But now concerning Divorce for
disagreement or contrariety of disposition, in regard there is between all
married people some contrariety or disagreement of minds: and the Scriptures
speak nothing to direct to what a measure of disagreement or contrariety it
must grow to, before it shall be lawful to divorce or part: therefore I
conclude the Scripture allows not of any divorce at all for disagreement, etc.

If it be not lawful for a Husband to put away an Infidel wife who
acknowledges not Christ, 2 Arg.
in case she be content to dwell with him: Then may not a man put away his wife
for disagreement of minds only: but the first is true, ergo the latter.

For the first part of the Argument the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.13. If any
brother has a wife who is an Infidel, if she be content to dwell with him;
let him not put her away.

And for the second part, that if a man may not put away his wife who is an
Infidel, much less may he put his wife away for disagreement of disposition,
this seems clear: because difference in religion in its own nature, breeds as
great a dislike and disagreement and greater than any natural disagreement of
disposition, constitution, or complexion whatsoever. Christ speaking of this
difference, even between them of the nearest relation, says, The father shall
be against the son, and the son against the father, even to persecute with
extremity: And that the Disciples should be hated of all for Christ's sake: and
yet I never heard of any that was hated of every man for his contrariety of
natural disposition.

So that if disagreement in religion be a greater cause of hatred and variance
then disagreement of natural dispositions and constitutions; and yet a man may
not put away his wife for that disagreement, then much less for this.

The third Argument shall be from Deuteronomy. 22.13, 14, 15, etc. 3 Arg.
There if a man shall take a Wife and hate her, and raise an ill report upon
her, to the end that he might be rid of her: and if the report be found true
she shall be stoned to death; but if it be not found true he shall not put her
away all the days of his life: here although a man hates his Wife, so that he
seeks by false reports to scandalize her* even to danger of her life, yet is
not he permitted to put her away all the days of his life; and yet how great
the disagreement of mind and disposition must of necessity be between such a
man and his wife who so did hate her, let any man judge.

4 Arg.
If every Christian ought to bear the burdens and infirmities of another
Christian, to whom he is not bound by any civil relation; much more is he to
bear the burden and infirmities of his Wife who is so nearly bound to him: but
the first is true, Gal. 6.1. Ergo the latter. But he that for infirmities or
contrariety of mind, or the like, puts away his wife, does not bear with her
infimities, and therefore he breaks the law of Christ.

5 Arg.
If the Husband ought to love his Wife, as Christ does his Church, then ought
not a man to put away his Wife for weakness of nature, contrariety, or
indisposition of mind. But the first is true, Ergo the latter.

For the first part, the words of Paul Ephesians. 5.29. Husbands love your wives as
Christ does his Church.

If any shall say, Similitudes hold not in every thing, and therefore Paul may
not mean a man should love his Wife in perpetuity as Christ does his Church,
but for the sincerity, so long as she continues his wife.

Answ. Paul specifies wherein they should express their loves like to Christ,
at least implicitly: that is, by passing by and healing the faults and
infirmities of their Wives, as Christ gave himself, etc. that he might wash his
Church, etc. And for the second part of the Argument its clear, because such
love as is there required ought to hide and pass by faults, disagreement of
mind, contrariety of disposition, etc.

6 Arg.
The sixth Argument is from the express words of Christ, Matthew. 5.32. where he
being a preaching to his Disciples concerning the true sense of Moses's law (as
it seems) and of some addition thereto by his own Evangelicall precepts: he
precisely tells them: That whosoever puts away his wife except it were for
(...), scortatio, adultery, he commits adultery: so that whether you make it a
true interpretation of Moses's law against the glosses of others, or take it as
a new precept belonging to the law of the Gospel, yet will it be an
impregnable proof against all eff^minate and childish divorces, for
disagreement and contrariety of minds.

If any shall say, if Christ's words hold universally and except no cause but
adultery: then all other causes, as frigidity, Object
marriage within degrees forbidden by Moses, etc. are no causes of divorce no
more then contrariety of mind.

Christ's speech holds universally according as he intended it, Answ.
namely, to condemn all such grounds of divorce as were groundlesly practiced
amongst the jews, for every cause which they thought sufficient, and yet no
ways checks the law which forbids marriage within the degrees of affinity or
consanguinity, or forbids other cause which makes marriage void ipso facto; or
by due proofs may make void the marriage. If there be any other objections
against this place, we shall refer them to what will afterward be said in
explication of this text, and of Deuteronomy. 24.1.

The seventh Argument is: If the Husband and Wife be by the Ordinance of God
one flesh, 7 Arg
then may they not separate or be separated from one another, except it be for
some cause which either in it self or by consequence may justly be thought to
be a just cause of dissolving the union of being one flesh. But the first is
true, Ergo, also the latter.

For the first part, that the Husband and Wife are one flesh, Paul confirms
it, Ephesians. 5. and Christ himself Matthew. 19.

And for the second part of the Argument as it depends upon the former, viz. if
they be one flesh, then they ought not to separate or be separated. Its the
Argument of Christ himself against the Pharisees, why divorce ought not to be
for light causes, but for adultery only; because says he, they are no more two
but one flesh, therefore, whomsoever God has joined together, let no man put
as under.

Only as I intimated, such other causes may be allowed of as dissolves this
union of being one flesh, either directly, or by consequence.

But sure contrariety of disposition and unfitness of mind c^n be no such
thing as makes the Husband and Wife (being once by marriage one flesh) to be two
again.

8 Arg*
In the next place I conceive something may be gathered to this purpose from the
words of Paul, 1 Cor. 7. when speaking of marriage, he tells them, such should
have troubles in the flesh, and not that freedom to serve God which the
unmaried had: yet he concludes, he spared them, and would not forbid them for
that cause to marry.

Now if troubles in the flesh coming by marriage which hinder the cheerful
service of God, be not a just cause to forbear marriage: Then it would seem
that to persons that are already married and bound to each other by the union of
one flesh, by covenant, by love, by the bonds of Christianity, although through
the p^evishness^ or ill dispositions of their natures, their troubles should
increase to multitudes above what is ordinary betwixt married persons, yet
ought they not to part and to marry to others, because some sort and measure
of troubles and discontent in marriage are inavoidable; and therefore where one
is by marriage bound by so many bonds, he ought not to break the bonds to ease
himself of disquietnesse and trouble which is inseparably incident to marriage,
though not in that degree as he now lies under, and is subject to.

Yet am I not over confident of this Argument, but that with some color of
reason it may be evaded.

In the next place, if the Husband ought to love his Wife as himself, 9 Arg.
then may he not for discontent or disagreement put her away, no more then for
some discontent or disquietnesse in himself, he may separate his soul from
his body. But the first is tru^. Ephesians. 5. ult. Ergo the latter.

Lastly, we may fetch an Argument from the inconveniences that would follow if
divorce were suffered, 10 Arg.
for this disagreement of disposition and unfitness of mind, as for example,
it would be an occasion to the corrupt heart of man without any just cause at
all, merely for to satisfy his lust, to pretend causes of divorce when there
is none; and to make quarrels and live discontentedly with his Wife, to the end
he might have a pretense for to put her away: who sees not, how many thousands
of lustful and libidinous men would be parting from their Wives every week and
marying others: and upon this, who should keep the children of these divorcers
which sometimes they would leave in their Wives bellies? how shall they come by
their Portions, of whom, or where? and how shall the Wife be endowed of her
Husbands estates? Nay, commonly, to what reproach would the woman be left to,
as being one left who was not fit for any ones company? and so who would
ventuae upon her again. And so by this means through her just cause of
discouragement, she would probably hazard her self upon some dishonest and
disgraceful course, with a hundred more the like inconveniences, even as the
overturning and overthrowing of all humane society, which would inevitably
follow if this loose Doctrine of Divocce were once established by law.

To these Arguments we might add the consent of Antiquity, who in this follow
the direction and doctrine of Christ.

As Council. Tolet. 12. Can. 8. Preceptum Domini est, ut excepta causa
fornicationis, uxor a viro dimitti non debeat, etc. Its the command of the
Lord, the Wife should not be put away but for fornication. So Cod. lib. 3. tit.
38. leg. 11. constable. Quis ferat, etc. who can endure that Children from Parents,
and Wives from Husbands should be separate?

So Co^sil. Anglic. 670. Can. 10. No man may put away his Wife, except as the
Gospel teaches for fornication. It is true, some of the Imperial laws allow
Homicide, Sacrilege, Robbery, Manstealing, etc. for causes of divorce. Cod.
lib. 5. tit. 17. leg. 8. but the Canon law decrees otherwise.

Diverse other authorities might be alleged as to this point rightly agreeing,
as Greg. causa 29. qu^st. 7. cap. 19. So Zach. causa 29. quest. 2. cap. 2. So
Instin Martyr Apol pro Christianis sub initio* Tertullian agrees lib. de
Monogamia. As also the Confession of Saxony Artic. 18. Especially is Erasmus
most clear in this in his Paraphrase upon the New Testament: And for our own
Writers it is endless to name them being so numerous.

Thus have we briefly passed over the two first things propounded to be handled.

In the third and last place we come to answer the Book entitled, The Doctrine
and Discpline of Divorce, which maintains the contrary, to what has been here
asserted, to answer which was the main thing intended in this Discourse.

So without any Preamble or Answer to the Introduction to this following
Discourse, we will presently come to the main Pillar upon which his whole Book
is built, which is laid down in these words.

That* undisposition, unfitness, or contrariety of mind, arising from a cause
in nature unchangeable, Position.
hindering and ever likely to hinder the main benefits of conjugall society,
which are solace and peace, is a greater reason of divorce then natural
frigidity, especially if there be no children, and it be with consent.

This being that which all his ensuing discourse is brought to prove, we shall
first consider of the position it self, and then come to answer his reasons
brought to defend the same.

This his Position or Groundwork as we conceive, may be divided into these
four entire Propositions or Conclusions.

1. That there is in some men and women a disposition, unfitness, or
contrariety of mind, arising from a cause unchangeable in nature.

2. That such a contrariety of disposition hinders the main benefit of marriage
or conjugall society.

3. That solace and peace are the main and chief ends of marriage or conjugall
society.

4. That such a contrariety of mind or disposition is a greater cause of
divorce then natural frigidity.

To the first we answer, that there is no such disposition in nature as is
unchangeable, 1 Answ.
so teaches Philosophy: That by the careful use of diet and the help of
Physic, there is no disposition or constitution but may be altered, if not
altogether, yet in a great measure. And as Philosophy teaches so, that it may
be; so Natural History teaches, that sometime there is a change even in the
natural disposition, if not wholly, yet in part.

Suppose there were some disposition in nature altogether unchangeable, ^ Answ.
yet the Scripture teaches, That by the grace of the Gospel, the Lionish
dispositions shall so be changed that they shall be fit for the society of
milder natures; and if so, it will follow, that if the disagreeing dispositions
of a man and his Wife are from their own corruption, and for want of the grace
of the Gospel, that they may not for this be separate the one from the other:
for it is a rule in all laws both Divine and just Humane laws, that no man
shall take advantage of his own corruption, to release himself from such bonds
as God and Nature has knit him in. So that here, unchangeablenesse of a
corrupt disposition proceeding from a man's or woman's own fault and corruption,
will never be allowed for a just ground, for any man to seek a Divorce from his
Wife, or the Wife from the Husband, but rather a Divorce or parting with their
own corruption, which is the cause of all discord and disagreement.

2. To the second Position, that such a contrariety of disposition will hinder
the maine ends and benefits of marriage or conjugall society.

We answer:

That if by contrariety of mind is meant diversities of constitutions, then
is it untrue: 1 Answ.
for the soft words and carriage of the patient man or woman, will so far
prevail with the choleric or sullen disposition of the other party, not only
to a submission to the main conjugall and marriage duties, but even to ordinary
converse, as experience declares, and Solomon teaches, namely, that soft
words pacify wrath, which in effect is the same we speak.

If by contrariety of mind or disposition he will mean some unheard of thing,
2 Answ.
which God and Nature has planted on purpose in such a man and woman who
afterward shall marry, who shall hate one another with that mutual antypathie
as a man does a Toad or Poison; and this is not at all for any ill qualities
that either sees in each other, but because they will hate each the other, as
creatures between whom in nature cannot be any agreement. If he can find such
an example in the World, let him send his Book to them for to take the benefit
of it.

If by your contrariety of disposition, 3 Answ.
you mean a sordid filthy sullen disposition, or other crabbed quality,
kindled in each against the other after marriage, and increased by each mutual
provocation; this is not natural: no contrariety in Nature, but a sinful and
corrupt aberration from Gods law and their own duties, which they are bound to
purge away and to amend; and so not being natural or of nature, but corruption
wilfully nourished, if this should hinder in any the main benefits of marriage,
yet does it make nothing to your purpose.

3. To your third Proposition, That solace and peace are the main benefits of
conjugall society.

We Answer.

Answ.
That this is very true in a right sense. But that s^lace and peace which is
contrary to discord and variance (in which sense you seem to take it) is not
the main end of marriage or conjugall society, is very plain and apparent: nor
yet ^he solace and content in the gifts of the mind of one another only, for
then would it have been every ways as much, yea more content and solace to
Adam; and so cons^quently to every man, to have had another man made to him of
his Rib instead of Eve: this is apparent by experiences, which shows, that man
ordinarily exceeds woman in natural gifts of mind, and in delectablensse of
converse; upon which we suppose it may be plainly concluded, that the solace
and meetnesse of a helper to Adam which is spoken of, was not that which you
seem to speak of as contrary to discord only, but is a solace and a meetnesse
made up chiefly as of different Sexe^, consisting of Male and Female.

^ Prop.
To your fourth thing, that contrariety of disposition is a greater cause of
divorce then natural frigidity.

We Answer.

^ Answ.
Contrariety of disposition or constitution is no cause at all of divorce (as
shall be afterward showed in the Answer to your Arguments) or if it were a
cause, yet not greater then natural frigidity, as will appear. For,

1. Contrariety of mind or disposition, may easier, or at the least as easy
in nature be taken away and cured, as natural frigidity or coldness.

2. But secondly, to prove that contrariety of disposition is not so great a
cause of natural divorce as natural frigidity, I argue thus.

If contrariety of mind or disposition be not so great a cause to ^ave married
persons to burning in lust toward others, as natural frigidity is, in the one
married party, to leave the other to burn in lust to others, then is it not so
great a cause of divorce as natural frigiditie is. But the first is true, Ergo
the latter.

For the first part of this Argument its apparent, for contrariety of
dispositions is no cause of burning in lust toward others; because
notwithstanding that, they may, and we see usually do perform marriage duties
each to other. But on the other side where natural frigidity or coldness
bears sway, i. e. an impotency to marriage duties, there the other party is, as
to burning in lust, as if they were not married at all, or very little better,
and for want of conjugall duties by their yoke fellow, and an impotencie to the
same, they are in a great measure as likely to burn in lusts toward others as
unmaried persons are; which such as have only a contrariety of mind or
disposition properly so called are not likely so subject to.

As for the second part of the Argument, that if contrariety of minds be not
so great a cause of burning in lust as natural frigidity, that then it is not
so great a cause of divorce as natural frigidity. This appears from what was
said before, namely, because by the natural frigidity of the one, the other is
in its manner, as to marriage or marriage duties, as if they had no yoke fellow,
and so if the marriage it self be not void ipso facto, yet all law and reason
must yield, that for the reason before cited he ought rather to be relieved by
leaving his impotent yokefellow, then the other by leaving his or her wrangling
yoke fellow.

So much for to show the error of your position, upon which all your following
discourse is, or ought to be grounded.

Now to your reasons which are to prove contrariety of disposition a just cause
of divorce; where we are to take notice, that you in your reasons go not about
to prove your Position as you have laid it down, but only that contrariety of
mind is a just cause of divorce between married persons, not taking notice
whether it be unchangeable in nature, or whether it be a greater cause of
divorce then natural frigidity, or whether there be children between them, or
consent, as he has expressed himself in his Position.

We shall endeavor to trace you in the Road you go, only we shall be driven
to contract or shorten your Argument for brevity sake.

But before we come to your particular Arguments, the Reader is to take notice
of one thing, namely, that all his Arguments, to prove a man may put away his
wife for disagreement of mind or disposition, except it be his Argument from
Deu. 24.1. they prove as effectually, that the Wife may sue a Divorce from her
Husband upon the same grounds.

1 Arg.
Your first proof is the institution of marriage Genesis 2. to make woman a m^et
help for man, because it was not good that man should be alone: whence you
collect that a happy conversation by preventing loneliness, was the chiefest
and noblest end of marriage; and in case this end cannot be found in marriage,
there may be relief by parting.

Answ.
We answer and tell you again, that it is a happy or a pleasant conversation,
made up by creating them male and female, and not simply as Eve was a fit
conversing soul for Adam, as you af^erward express it, for then would it have
been more pleasant and beneficial to Adam to have had another man created,
then a woman.

2. What will follow upon this if it should be granted? will it follow, think
you, that because the end of marriage is, that woman should be a meet help to
man, therefore if she prove not so meet as is expected, he may then put her
away and take another: I hope no: Such kind of reasoning deserves no answer at
all. But now to his second Argument.

His second Argument is, From the violence and cruelty which is in forcing the
continuance of those married persons together, ^ Arg.
whom God and nature in the gentlest ends of marriage never joined.

As for the phrase of the gentlest ends of marriage, its too abstruse and of no
use, Answ.
except it be as you think to please the Reader with a neet phrase.

And for the maine of your Argument, you take too much for granted: for though
the case may be so, that some persons are joined together in marriage neither by
God nor Nature, viz. not allowing^ of it; yet that for disagreement of
diss^tions or contrariety of minds the marriage should be void, we deny; for
void it must needs be, if it be neither of God nor Nature. Now where a thing
is void ipso facto, there needs no legal proceeding to make it void. For
clearing of this I hope you remember this distinction in our law, that some
things are void, and some voidable by due process of law. For example, if John
a Styles should enter into a bond of an hundred pound to John a Nokes with
condition annexed, that if the Obligor did kill a third person before such a
day, then the Obligation should be void. This Obligation being with condition
against law, is void by the very making of it, and the Obligor needs not to sue
the Obliged in Chancery, to compel him to free him of the penalty, because
void in it self.

On the other side, some things are voidable, i. e. to be made void by the
party himself by Process of law; as if Titus within the age of twenty one
years makes a feoffement, levies a fine, or suffers a recovery of land to
Sempronius, this is not simply void, but voidable: so that Titus when he comes
to age, if the conveya^ce were by feoffement, he may remedy it by his Writ of
Dum fuit infra aetatem, if it were by fine or recovery reverse them by error,
because within age at the time. To apply it to your case, if men and women of
disagreeing dispositions being joined in marriage, the marriage is void, being
neither of God nor Nature, then there needs no Divorce or legal proceeding to
part them, and then it is nothing to the Title of your Book, being The Doctrine
and Discipline of Divorce, which you pretend to handle, briefly when you have
proved, that such men and women who are married, and are of contrary
dispositions or minds, that their marriage is void, or not of God nor Nature,
we will grant you the whole controversy, in the mean time it is too great a
begging of the question.

In your prosecution of this Section, you are pleased to feign an Objection,
That the disposition ought to be known before marriage.

You are pleased to answer. That a discreet man being wary in this, yet may be
mistaken; for say you, the sobrest and best governed men are least practiced in
these things.

But how so? if sobrest and best governed I hope they are the better able to
judge of the disposition and carriage of a Maid or Widow: But go on. You say,
Who knows not that the bashful mutenesse of a Virgin may often times hide all
the unlivelinesse and natural floth, which is really unfit for conversation.

Some are bashful and mute indeed: but what of that? Answ.
you speak of trial of them whether they are fit for conversation or ^o: if
you would once tell what you mean by conversation, I doubt there is none so
modest but you may make trial of that: If you mean fit for discourse, and
flexible to your desires, to go abroad or stay at home, etc. I know nothing of
any modesty to hinder you, the trial of these things before marriage, if you
have so much time.

You add, ^^at there is not that freeness of access granted or presum^^
(...) to a perfect discerning till it bo too lat^.

(...) you ^ain things to your self, to make good your Arguments Kings and
Princes indeed usually have little access to (...) Queeen or Princess^ before
marriage; but for lower deg^ee^, (...) so much access is granted, without any
immodestie to disce^ne what you speak of.

You fu^^her go on, and say, That though they who have lived most loosely,
prove most successful in their matches, because their wild affections
unsetling at will have been as so many divorces to them to teach them
experience: When as the sober man honoring the appearance of modesty, and
hoping well of every sociall virtue under that veil, may easily chance to
meet, if not with a body impenetrable, yet often with a mind to all other due
conversation inaccessible.

^ Answ.
Modest men s^ldome deal with any, who as they are not of bodies impenetrable,
so neither are they to all due conversation inaccessible. It is true, if every
man were of your breeding and capacity, there were some color for this plea;
for we believe you count no woman to due conversation accessible, as to you,
except she can speak Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and French, and dispute against the
Canon law as well as you, or at least be able to hold discourse with you. But
other Gentlemen of good quality (...) content with meaner and fewer
endowments, as you know well enough.

Very true it is, that it is not amis^e, for men of the best capacities,
learning, and breeding, that they should match with those of the best wits,
quality, and breeding, and leave the duller Virgins for the simpler sort;
there is enough to own them, and ordinarily they fall to their shares, and that
it is not always so, you have no need to attribute it to modesty, that men
do not try their Sweet-hearts wits before they have them: you know that may be
done with modesty enough, although to try whether their bodies are impenitrable
(as you call it) savours of the con^^^ry.

Well, but you go on to make up this your second Argument (...) the diverse
evils that would follow if Divorce should not be ^^ffered for contrariety and
disagreement of minds.

The first you say, Is an imputation upon God and his law, of dispensing with
open and common adultery among his own people; which, say you, the rankest
politician would think it shame and dis-worship, that his laws should
countenance any such thing. But the showing how this comes to pass, you say
you will reserve to another place.

We answer you, Answ.
that we think this the fittest place for this Controversy, seeing you have
named it here, and therefore shall free the law of God from any such
imputation, and clear that here which you after bring from Moses, permitting
divorce, and the sense of Christ in the Gospel.

Only first we shall speak to your phrase and manner of speaking, and then to
the matter of it.

Your phrase is, That such an imputation as would be cast upon the Law of God
by this means, the rankest Politician would think it shame and dis-worship that
his laws should be charged with any such thing.

Is this the fine language that your Book is commended for: Good your worship
look a little upon your Rhetoric in this one piece, shall I say of nonsense:
however I am sure it is contrary to all laws and customs of speaking. Rankest
Politician. Wonderful!

What a Boarish Adjective you join with a Politician. Politician is a title
worthy of honor and respect, and why you should so disgrace it with this
homely language, I cannot imagine; except it be, because Politicians ordinarily
differ from you in this your opinion. For although its likely some Politicians
sometimes at a time of need are content to make use of others then their own
wives, yet to be divo^ced from their own upon a little contrariety of minds or
dispositions, Politicians will not easily agree to it.

But to go on, The rankest Politician would think it shame his laws, etc. His
laws; strange! Where were you bread? Sir, What are the laws of your
Commonwealth made only by one Politician? sure that same is a barren Country
of Noble and Learned men. And if it be not barbarous, yet is it a very harsh
phrase, to call the laws made in any Commonwealth, the laws of the
Politicians, much more of one only Politician.

But peradventure you mean the King, and the laws may be called his, you think.

If you do mean him, its no usual phrase to call him Politician without
farther addition: or if it were, you know its no good sense in your own
country, for I b^leeve you are not to hear of, Qui vulgus elegerit: And if
you mean of some other Country, write your Book in their language, for the
English will but deride such language as this is.

Again, He would think it shame and dis-worship, (say you) to what, say I? to
his laws: strange Philosophy! Are laws now capable of shame and blushing?
Speak a little plainer if you have any such point to broach.

But, peradventure you mean, the Politician would think it shame and
dis-worship. Well, but upon whom do you mean he thinks this shame and
dis-worship will light? for you show us not whether the Politician would think
this shame to redound to the laws themselves, or to himself, or to a third
person or thing, pray let us know the next time.

But again, why shame and dis-worship? Do the laws or the Politician that
makes them, use to be worshipped in your Commonwealth? Well, we leave the
Gentleman of that worshipful country, who looks for Good your Worship at
every word, and Vtinam they are not too worshipful to be W.

Thus from your phrase we pass on to the matter, which should be put in here
for the proof of this first evil: namely, that denying of divorce for cause
of contrariety of mind and disposition, will cast an imputation upon the law
of God, of dispensing and conniving with common and open adultery amongst his
own people.

Well, how do you prove this? For the proof of this we must be driven to bring
in your Text of Deuteronomy. 24.1. which as you say, permits, nay, is a wise and pious
law, that such who did not love their Wives for some displeasing natural
quality or unfitness in her, he should write her a Bill of Divorce: so you
speak page 26. compared with page 10. Now how this imputation will come to fall
upon the law of God, I believe you mean thus. That for a man to divorce his
Wife unjustly and to marry another, is adultery: But the law of God allows
divorce unjustly, except disagreement of mind, or unpleasant natural quality
be a cause. Ergo.

In plain terms you mean God by Moses suffered men to put away their wives,
if they found not love and favor in their eyes: by reason of some unpleasing
natural quality, (for so you are pleased to read the Text of Deuteronomy. 24.1.) Now
you infer, if Moses allowed this, and yet indeed it was not a just cause of
divorce, then did God by Moses's law tolerate adultery, in that it tolerated a
man or woman to marry to another, whilst they were not lawfully parted from
their first Husbands or Wives.

To take off this great Scarecrow and the maine Pillar which he trusts in to
hold up his whole Book, or most part of it: Answ.
it will be necessary a little to consider of this Text of Deuteronomy. 24.1. whether
it does indeed speak any such thing or no. Our English Translation has it, If
a man shall take a Wife and lie with her, and she find not grace in his eyes
because of some uncleanness, let him write her a Bill of Divorce. So that it
is for some uncleanness, and not for some displeasing quality that is in her.
According to our English: the French Bible agrees, Pourtaunt que il a trouue
quelque laid tache in elle, because he has found in her some foul, unhonest,
or abominable reproach, spot, or infamy; for so signifies laid tache. Ieromes
Translation has it, Propter aliqua^ foeditatem, filthiness or shameful
thing. Iunius and Tremelius agrees.

A Translation according to the Septuagint printed at Basil has it, Quoniam
invenit in ea foedam, the Septuagint reads it (...), the Substantive pragma, is
used, Acts 5.4. to signify res; and 1 Cor. 6.1. negotium, business: James
3.16. opus or work: and the Adjective is used by Paul 1 Cor. 12.23. for
indecorus, shameful, dishonest, or unbeseeming: so signifying that they
understood this place of Deuteronomy. 24.1. to be meant of some shameful or dishonest
thing. So they which translate by the Septuagint have it, rem turpem, filthy
thing. In the Hebrew it is Gneruath Dabhar, the very same words which are used
Deuteronomy. 23.14. The Lord thy God walks in thy Camp to deliver thee, therefore
shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no Gneruath Dabhar in thee: that is, no
uncleanness or unclean thing, as is apparent by the foregoing Verses: so
here, if she find not favor in her Husbands eyes because of some Gneruath
Dabhar, some uncleanness or unclean thing. The Hebrews themselves expound
this Text, to be understood of a woman of evil condition, who is not modest
according to the honest Daughters of Israel. So that here seems to be no ground
for your understanding the Text to speak of any unple^sing natural quality,
when as indeed it speaks of uncleanness: so that as we conceive, the maine
Pillar of your Book is not able to hold up it self, much less will it serve
for a prop to hold up the rest of your discourse.

But it may be demanded, what manner of uncleann^sse this Text speaks of;
Object*
for it seems it cannot be meant of adultery: for Christ speaking (as it
s^ems) with a relation to this Text, Matthew 19. says, Moses indeed suffered you
to put away your Wives, etc. But I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his
Wife except it be for fornication, commits adultery; so that which Moses
suffered to put away Wives for, was another cause then what Christ here speaks
of, namely, fornication, which could not be that which Moses suffered putting
away for, seeing Christ opposes putting away for fornication to putting away
by Moses's law.

Answ*
To this we answer, that though it be little material to our point in hand,
what uncleanness this Text Deuteronomy. 24.1. speaks of; whether it be a legal,
ceremonial, or a moral uncleanness; for it suffices to our purpose, if it
be not some unpleasing natural quality, as this author has affirmed: Yet we
shall humbly propose to the judicious and learned with their favor, and under
correction, what uncleanness this Text of Deuteronomy. 24. speaks of.

Not proposing it as a sense infallible, but one which may be something
probable.

And that is, that this Text Deuteronomy. 24.1. speaks of an uncleanness^ committed
before marriage, which we usually call by the name of fornication; the same
uncleanness which is spoken of Deuteronomy. 22.13, 14, 15, etc. Where it is said, If
a man take a wife and lie with her, and hate her, and shall say, I took this
woman to wife, and when I came in unto her I found her not a maid; and the
Text goes on, and shows what shall be done in this case.

This Text is doubtless to be understood of a man who takes a Wife and finds
she has committed folly before marriage, which we ordinarily call by the name
of fornication. The same kind of uncleanness (under correction) may be here
meant: that when a man marries a Wife and finds her not a Maid, but defiled,
and to be unclean by fornication committed before marriage.

Against this sense of the place we conceive there may be two strong objections
made which we shall endeavor to answer, and so leave it to the consideration
of the Reader.

The first Objection may be from that Text Deuteronomy. 22.12, 13, 1 Object.
etc. where the direction is there, that if it be found according to the
complaint of her Husband, that she was not a Maid but defiled, that she should
be stoned to death, and not be put away by Divorce; by the same reason, if this
Text of Deuteronomy. 24.1. speaks of that uncleanness, she ought to be stoned to
death, and not suffered to escape by Divorce.

To this we answer two things.

First that there was a twofold uncleanness or defilement of Virgins by the
law; the one was, 1 Answ.
when she consented not to the uncleann^sse or defilement, but it was committed
upon her by force, and this in the Maid did not deserve death, as is showed
Deuteronomy. 22.26.

Secondly, there was a defilement with the consent of the Maid, and this seems
to be distinguished by the law to be of two qualities.

1. The first was, when a man by intising words should tempt and entice a Maid
to lie with her, and she upon his promises and inticements yielded to it, but
presently after the fact did discover it to her father or kindred, to compel
the same man to marry her: and of this kind it seems is spoken of Exodus 22.16.
In this case the man was compellable to marry her, and so she was not in this
case to be punished with death.

Secondly, there was another distinction of this defiling of a Virgin, viz.
When the Maid consented to commit folly with any privately, and so as it
proceeded from her whorish spirit principally, with a mere desire to commit
filthiness, as a comman Strumpet or Whore, and concealed this; so that the
party by her concealment could not be compelled to marry her: and after, this
defiled Virgin takes another man to Husband, and he finds her not a Maid, but
to have committed folly in her fathers house, and never declared it, to the
end the man who committed folly with her might be compelled to marry: this
(under f^vour) is that which Deuteronomy. 22.12, 13, 14, etc. was to be punished with
death, and a Divorce not to serve the turn.

But then for the uncleanness, Deuteronomy. 24.1. which a man found in his Wife, it
might very well be, that a man ignorantly took such a woman to wife, as either
had been ravished by force (as in the first sense) and so was defiled, or that
had been defiled by the inticement of some man, of which fact she had made
known to her father, to the end to compel him to marry her who defiled her,
and her father upon knowledge of it utterly refused to give her to him to Wife,
as Exodus 22.17. and she after marries another who finds her defiled or
unclean is displeased therewith, so that she finds no^ favor in his eyes, he
may not in this case prosecute her to the death, as in Cap. 22. but only
divorce her, as Cap. 24.1. and 2.

But secondly we answer, that in case it should be the same uncleanness and
defilement with that Deuteronomy. 22.11, 12, ^ Answ.
etc. then we say it was left by the law to the choice of the man to prosecute
her to death, as Cap. 22. or to Divorce her, as Cap. 24. And though I know this
will sound very harsh and irreconcilable at the best: yet (under favor I
conceive) I may as easily reconcile these two places thus together, as Christ's
speech, Matthew 5.32. can be reconciled to the law of adultery. For as I
conceive, there is no man but will confess that at that time when Christ
spoke, the law of putting to death for adultery was in force; and yet you see,
Matthew 5.32. he says not, he that prosecutes not his Wife to the death for
being an Adulteress, is guilty: but whosoever puts away his Wife, except for
fornication, he commits adultery.

Now if there had been an absolute necessity in the man to pros^cute his Wife
to death for adultery, I suppose Christ would never have mentioned Divorce,
for that which must of necessity have death. So it may seem it was left to the
mercy of the Husband. The same I say to the reconciling the command of putting
to death the defiled Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22. and divorcing her, Cap. 24.

It may further by objected, that it cannot be the same uncleanness meant here
which in Chapter 22. because there direction is given for a trial of the
charge of uncleanness laid to her, but not so here: and if upon trial there
it be found a false charge he may not put her away all the days of his life.

To this we answer two things.

First it will not follow, but that the same trial ought to be in the 24
Chapter as in the 22. although not mentioned, 1 Answ.
yet to be understood; as well as the fathers dissent to the marriage of his
Daughter to one who has defiled her be not mentioned, Deuteronomy. 22.29. yet is to
be understood as well as it is Exodus 22.17. where it is mentioned.

But suppose the same trial be not to be understood in the 24 Chapter as in
the 22. 2 Answ.
yet will it not follow but that it may be the same uncleanness (only
differing in the consent of the Maid, etc.) for though it be the same
uncleanness, yet does there not need that examination and trial where only a
divorce is intended, as where death is intended.

But there seems to be another great Objection against this sense of the word
Uncleanness, Object.
that it cannot be meant of fornication before marriage; because Christ speaking
with relation to this Text, as it seems, understood it otherwise then of
fornication, as appears by his conclusion, that whosoever should put away
their Wives except for fornication, etc. So that it would seem plain CHRIST
understood not this Text to be meant of fornication, for he seems to blame
this putting away founded upon this Text, and yet allows divorce for
fornication.

For answer to this briefly, Answ.
we conceive the words fornication and adultery are used in the New Testament,
if not reciprocally, yet at the least promiscuously: and that that by
fornication is many times meant more then uncleanness committed between
unmaried persons: as 1 Corinthians 5.1. there the word fornication is used and
applied to incest: And in 1 Corinthians 10.7. Neither let us be fornicators,
etc. being applied to the Israelite Numb. 25. who lay it is said, with the
woman of Midian, which seems to be no Maid, for the title Woman is seldom
applied to them: So 1 Cor. 6 he that commits fornication sins against his own
body, is doubtless to be understood of adultery as well as of uncleanness
between single persons, if it be not solely meant of adultery.

So then our answer is, that the word fornication is often used for adultery,
after marriage: and we conceive Christ intended it so, when he says, Whosoever
shall put away his Wife, except for fornication, etc. that is, for adultery, or
defiling his marriage bed; and so Christ speaks not of the same uncleanness
Moses does, although Moses's should be meant of fornication.

Thus you have our first answer to this your place of Deuteronomy. 24.1. that it is
meant of uncleanness, as the Original and other languages reads it: and
though we are not over confident of the kind of uncleanness whether it be
fornication before marriage, as we have showed, or some natural, legal, or
sinful uncleanness, it much matters not: this we only propose to the Readers
consideration, upon trial to reject it, or receive it as he finds it upon
examination.

But in case this answer fails; we have two other answers to your place of
Deuteronomy. 24.1. only two Objections remain.

1. That Christ finds fault with this Divorce grounded upon Moses's law,
Object.
and shows it was not so from the beginning, nor ought not to be so now: which
proves the divorce for uncleanness Deuteronomy. 24.1. cannot be understood of
fornication, or uncleanness committed before marriage, for that was always
allowed of from the beginning as a just cause of divorce, and so seems to be
now.

To this we only answer, that when either of these two are proved, Answ.
we shall willingly let f^ll that interpretation; in the mean time we leave it
to the considerate Reader.

Object.
2. But it may be further objected, that whatsoever it was that Moses allowed of
Divorce for, whether for fornication before marriage, as is said before, or for
some unpleasing natural quality, as our Author would have it; yet the
imputation of dispensing with common adultery is not taken away, in case it was
not a just cause of divorce. For answer to this we come to our second answer to
this place of Deuteronomy. 24.1.

In the second place we answer to Deuteronomy. 24 1. in case your reading should be
found good to be of a displeasing natural quality, Answ*
and that they did unjustly put away by this law their wives: then we answer,
this place of Moses permits no divorce at all; but was only a law made in
favor of the woman who was unjustly put away, and a sufferer: in this case
Moses provides, that though a woman should be wrongfully and by force be put
away, yet he would by this law compel the Husband to give her a Bill of
divorce, which should be a token to her father and her friends that it was the
act of her husband to dismiss and put her away, and not her voluntary act: for
which, had it been voluntary on her part, she would have been judged a Whore
and a wandering Vagrant, and so would scarcely have been received into her
fathers house: so that Moses may seem here not to give any law of divorce; but
rather a law to compel such of the Jews, who in their cruelty, and from the
hardness of their hearts would unjustly and by force put away their wives, to
make them a writing of divorce and to give it her, which should be a testimony
for the woman after she departed, that she wandered not as a Whore or a Vagrant
of her own mind from the company of her Husband, but it was his fact by force
to put her away.

For the proof of this sense of the place we conceive three things make to
this purpose.

1. Because I find no law of divorce allowing men to put away their wives
before this law, (if in case this should be found to be such a law) and yet I
find divorce practiced by the Jews, therefore Levit. 21.14. it is commanded
to the Priest, that he should not marry a Widow, or a woman that was divorced,
which implies there were some women divorced. Now if divorce was practiced and
no law allowing it, I have reason to think this place of Deuteronomy. 24.1. is a law
to remedy the extremity of their unlawful divorces, by compelling them to
make a Bill in favor of the woman that was put away, and not a law either
commanding or allowing the divorce it self.

2. It seems to appear from the connection of the words, he shall give her a
Bill of divorce, that when she is departed out of his house she may become the
Wife of another man; so that the Bill seems merely to be made for her benefit.

3. The Text here allows the woman to marry again, she being the suffering
party and unjustly put away; but he being the offending, it speaks nothing of
allowing him to marry again; so it seems the provision of the Bill of Divorce
was for her benefit only.

Object
Against this the words of Christ will be objected, Matthew. 19. and Mark 10.10
the Pharisees, when they had asked, if a man might put away his Wife for every
cause, Matthew. 19.3. Christ answers, That God at the beginning made them Male
and Female, and that a man shall forsake Father and Mother and cleave unto his
Wife: the Pharisees upon this, ask Christ, why Moses did command to give a
writing of Divorce, and to put her away; then Christ answers, Moses, because of
the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives, but from the
beginning it was not so. So that some may say, Christ here seems to affirm not
only the Bill of Divorce to be of Moses, but even the Divorce it self.

Answ.
It appears not to be so, but rather that Christ answers the Pharisees according
to their opinion of Moses law, and he grants them that in some sort Moses might
be said to suffer men to put away their Wives, because he commanded the Bill to
be made in favor of the woman, the suffering party: but says Christ, from the
beginning it was not so, that men should put away their Wives as the Jews did,
neither was this Bill then invented: and this may seem to be the substance of
Christ's words.

We answer to your Text Deuteronomy. 24.1. in the third place, that if the other two
satisfy not, ^ Answ.
then may that be a good positive law made by Moses, during the time of the
Jewish polity or government, properly called Mosaicall: yet now Christ under
the New Testament has aboli^hed that law to all his followers. To this purpose
that of Christ Matthew. 5.31, 32. It was said unto of old, that whosoever shall
put away his Wife, let him give her a bill of divorce: then Christ adds, But I
say unto you, whosoever shall put away his Wife except it be for cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery, and whosoevr shall marry her that
is divorced commits adultery. This place of our Savior concerning divorce
may seem not to be to the end to reform the false glosses of the Pharisees
concerning divorce, (as it is usually thought) but rather to show the law of
the Gospel to require more mutual love and passing by injuries then the law:
As who should say, under Moses, where there was many duties required; and yet
through the darkness of the dispensation of heavenly things, there was little
grace and power to perform what was required, then the law of Divorce did
mercifully bear with the infirmities of people; and during the time of this
dispensation, this law of Divorce was a good positive law: But now whosoever
will be my follower and profess himself to have received the plenteous grace
of the Gospel, he must be so far from using hardship or unkindnesse to his
Wife, or others to whom he is nearly bound, that he must not revenge wrong done
from strangers and enemies, but pray for them, and bless them; he must be so
far from turning his Wife out of doors for her ill carriage, yea although it
should proceed to cursing and persecuting him, that he must use all mildness,
and love, and godly means to reform her; compare this with verse 43, 44. and
indeed with all the latter part of the Chapter, and you will find the drift of
Christ, to give as it were new inlargements of laws under the Gospel,
requiring more spiritualness in observation, then the Mosaical government.

This interpretation I cannot conceive to be either contrary to the scope of
Christ in this Chapter, which principally is, to show that he came not to
destroy the law but to fulfill it: nor is it contrary to any other sound and
wholesome Doctrine laid down in Scripture, neither opens any gap to any to
throw away Moses's law, as not at all pertaining to us. I think there is none
that thinks, but that there were given by Moses, not only ceremonial Precepts,
but even judicial, to the Jews, which for us to observe under the Gospel,
would be so far from piety, that it would be sinful; and I know nothing why
this law of Divorce may not be one.

Only one word to your corrupt and wicked gloss upon our Saviors words,
Matthew. 19. and Mark 10. where he tells the Pharisees, that whosoever should put
away his Wife, except for fornication, he did commit adultery; you ^o put off
the matter, as if Christ's speech was never intended to forbid a Divorce, for
your indisposition, unfitness, or contrariety of mind, but was only as you
say, That Christ here did only deal like a wise Physician administering one
excess against another to bring us to a perfect mean, and that where the
Pharisees were strict, there Christ seems to be remiss; and where they were
too remiss he saw it needful to seem most severe: In one place, say you, he
censures an unchaste look to be adultery already committed, and at another time
he passes over actual adultery with less reproof then for an unchaste look:
So here, say you, he may be thought to give this rigid sentence against
Divorce, not to cut off all remedy to a good man who consumes with a
disconsolate matrimony, but to lay a bridle upon the bold abuser of those
overweening Rabbis, etc.

Answ.
To this we answer, that this your gloss is not only intolerable abuse of
Scripture, but smells very strongly of little less then blasphemy against
Christ himself.

For what is it else, to say Christ was here most severe, where the Pharisees
were most remiss, and that here he administered one excess against another,
etc. For though it should be found that Christ sometimes, to check the pride
and hypocrisy of the Pharisees, should by his not affording them an answer
seem remiss, where they were too severe, and so on the contrary. Yet that
Christ should positively lay down a resolution, as one of his Precepts under
the Gospel without any exception; and this his Precept to be an exc^sse to
reduce the Pharisees to a mean, is too bold and dangerous an ass^rtion for any
man to venture upon.

And for your examples which you cite where Christ was one time remiss, and
another time more severe against a less sin, they are both utterly false;
for in the one place Christ does not say, that an unchaste look is adultery,
but he that upon looking on a woman does lust after her, he has committed
adultery in his heart, so that it is not the looking on her, but the lusting
after her which is adultery, and that but of the heart neither: truly I find
not here an excess, or too much severity in Christ, but fearful audacity in
you.

And for your other example of the woman taken in adultery, where he was more
remiss, and gave her not so sharp a reproof as here for an unchaste look;
this is as false, for he bids her go away and sin no more least a worse
thing then death by stoning came to her; and I hope this is severer then Christ
speaks of the unchaste look, as you call it.

But to answer to what you chiefly intend, you are to know, Christ Matthew 19.
does not direct his speech concerning Divorce, as an excess against the
Pharisees tempting question only, but as a firm stable resolution of the
Gospel: to clear this consider but two things.

1 That Christ before this time had given the same resolution to his D^sciples
Matthew. 5.32. where he spoke principally to his Disciples, as appears Verse 1.
And therefore it cannot be intended that Christ spoke it to repress the pride
and false gloss^s of the Pharisees only.

2 And secondly its apparent that Christ did intend otherwise then you say to
contradict the Pharisees, for if he had only told them, that he which puts away
his Wife except for fornication, committed adultery, this had been enough to
have contradicted them: but he adds, that whosoever shall marry her who is put
away otherwise, he commits adultery: And so I conclude, Christ intended this
speech to his Disciples, as a direction binding all Christians under the
Gospel; and gave it not as an expressive resolution to repress and cross the
pride and false glosses of the Pharisees.

Now for the rest of your stuff which fills many Pages about the sense of Moses
Deuteronomy. 24.1. and of Christ Matthew. 19. and the opinions of other men upon the
same, of which, some you approve, and some you confute, we conceive it
needl^sse to trace you, as thinking we have given you the true sense of Moses
and Christ already, to which we refer the trial of all which you are
pleas^d to speak upon the same.

In brief the sum of our answer to this place of Deuteronomy. 24.1. for the
lawfulness of putting away a man's Wife for some displeasing natural quality,
is, that first, that it speaks of Divorce for uncleanness, and not for
disagreement: or secondly, if it does, it allows not of the Divorce, but
appoints the Bill in favor of the woman: or thirdly, if it allows both, yet
now is it altered by Christ under the Gospel.

If any shall think these answers to fall foul upon each other, we easily grant
it, and say its usual in this kind; and besides we write not as Prophets but
as men: and if any of the answers be to the point, and overthrow that which we
conceived to be an error, its sufficient.

Your second evil which you say would follow, if Divorce were not lawful for
displeasing natural qualities, etc. is, That the Law and the Gospel would be
subject to more then one contradiction, but to show this you defer it to
another place.

Answer. We shall take it here, and tell you, its no contradiction at all, that
Moses should allow a Divorce and Christ deny it, if it could be proved: For
there is a twofold contradiction (as you know well enough;) one is, when the
Gospel shall blame the Law for tolerating things contrary to it self, that one
time it made a thing lawful, at another time unlawful; this is the
contradiction you must speak of if you speak to the purpose, that the Gospel
shall blame or contradict Moses's law, for maintaining contrary things in it
self.

Then secondly, there is a contradiction of the Gospel to the Law; that the
Gospel counts some things under its dispensation to be altogether unlawful to
be done, which the Law allowed as lawful and pious in the time of its
dispensation: this kind of contradiction we grant there is between the Law and
Gospel many times, but is nothing to your purpose at all: for example,
Circumcision was a duty of weight; now its a heinous crime: so Sacrifices,
Offerings, Washings, and a hundred the like, and yet the Gospel blames not the
Law for these things in the time of its dispensation: no more will it follow in
case of Divorce, if it should be allowed then and denied now, except you can
show the first kind of contradiction.

Your third evil which you say would follow if Divorce should be denied to
such as are of contrariety of dispositions is, That hereby the supreme dictate
of Charity, would be many ways violated and neglected. But how is ^his done?
You say, we know Paul says, it is better to marry then to burn: it is true,
Paul does say so: what will follow of that? Is Paul's positive resolution become
the supreme dictate of Charity? else how follows it, the supreme dictate of
Charity is violated by denying Divorce on your grounds, because Paul says it
is better to marry then to burn: remember your self well, sure you think all
Gospel you speak.

Well, what would you infer from Paul's words, it is better to marry then to
burn?

You say, That marriage was given as a remedy of that trouble. So say we; but
yet not properly that ordination of marriage first in Paradise, for then was no
such burning.

Well, go on; we ask you what this burning in lust is which Paul means: you are
pleased to answer, that, certainly not the mere motion of carnal lust not the
mere goade of a sensitive desire, God does not principally take care for such
cattle.

Truly you are apt to speak very high language: but what would follow if Paul
should take care, not for the nourishment, Answ.
but for the suppressing of a mere motion of carnal lust? Sure no evil.

Well, but we will have your advice positively, as well as negatively, what the
Apostle means, when he says it is better to marry then to burn.

You say, It is that desire which God put in Adam in Paradise, before he knew
the sin of incontinency: it was that desire, which God saw it was not good
that man should be left alone, to burn in a longing to put off solitariness,
by uniting another body, but not without a fit soul to his in the cheerful
society of wedlock.

We pray you seriously to retract this sentence, Answ.
and openly to conf^sse you were asleep when you writ it.

We desire any indifferent man but to consider the scope of the Apostle in that
Chapter of 1 Cor. 7. and to tell us if your exposition of these words, it is
better to marry then to burn, be not such a mere trifling and abusing the
Scripture as seldom is met with. This must needs be a just Paraphrase upon
Paul's words if your exposition were sound.

I Paul am a Batchelour, and I never met with any fit and meet conversing
soul, to fit my desire, to discourse and converse with me as I had when I was
in Adam; but I speak to you Virgins and Widows, although it be thus with me,
yet it were good if you could remain solitary without any fit conversing soul
to discourse with you: but if you cannot live altogether alone all the days of
your life (however I shift for my self) yet do you marry, viz. get some fit
conversing souls, such an one as Adam thought of when he was alone in the
Garden, and no body created but he. For it is better for you seeing you cannot
live always alone, to have some such fit conversing soul, to drive away the
time with, then to pine away like a Dove in a Wilderness, where there is none
to bear her company. This is the effect of your exposition of Paul, when he
says, it is better to marry then to burn: the relating of which your
exposition is enough to confute it and make it lighter then vanity it self.

So we pass to your third Argument, the effect whereof seems to be this.

That the not allowing of divorce in case of contrariety of minds and
dispositions in married persons, ^ Arg.
will be a ground or occasion of their desire after other persons, besides
their own Wives; because when a man finds no contentment at home he is apt to
look for the same abroad.

We answer you, what if he do look abroad, so long as it is but to meet with a
fit conversing soul, Answ.
provided he med^les not with he^ body, let him recreate himself, its lawful
enough: it is your own doctrine, A fit conversing soul for man is the noblest
end of marriage: Therefore I think we may without danger, let a man's reins
loose to accomodate himself so, if his Wife has not such a fit conversing
soul as she should have, only let him remember to come home to her at night.
If you should say, that you mean want of content at home will cause a man to
lust unlawfully after the bodies of other men's Wives.

We answer you there is no congruitie in that sense with the rest of your
Book: Answ.
for according to your own Doctrine we may reason thus: That desire which is
not satisfied at home by a man's own Wife, will break out toward other men's
Wives; but the desire which is to be satisfied by a man's own Wife is, that she
be a fit conversing soul: Ergo, the not finding a man's Wife a fit conversing
soul, will not endanger or stir up any other desires but to converse with the
souls of other men's Wives; and this we allow you to do and keep your own
still.

But enough of this: only we desire the next time you write, to tell us the
meaning of this fit conversing soul. We have heard that Angels converse with
one another as they are Spirits; but for Husbands and Wives, though they ought
not to love in word only, but in deed and in truth with the affections of the
heart, yet we know no conversing with one another, but what is by words or
actions.

Well you go on and talk in this Section, Of a man meeting instead of a sweet
co-p^rtner of pleasant society, it often happens, that young men, who have put
their chief content in a contented marriage, yet they meet with an Image of
earth and fleame.

We confess this is something a sad case: Answ.
but yet I believe you speak but hyperbolically (as they use to say) for Women
are usually more then earth and fleame, they have many times spirit enough to
wear the Breeches, if they meet not with a rare Wit to order them. I wonder
you should use such phrases; I know, nor hear of any Maids or Women that are
all earth and fleame, much less Images of earth and fleame: If there be any
such, yet you need take no thought for them, there are enough dull enough to
own them; and for your self or any other who desire them, there are spirited
Dames enough, who are something besides mere Images of earth and fleame.

Your fourth Argument is, Because marriage is a Covenant, 4 Arg.
whose very being consists not in a forced cohabitation or a counterfeit
performance of duties, but in unfeined love and peace.

It is true, but how prove you by this, Answ.
that if there be not found this peace and joy between married persons, there
may then be a Divorce: for where the chief end of a thing is not always
attained in its full measure, yet will it not be lawful to seek a separation
from it. Will you argue, that because Heman Psalm. 88. found not that peace and
solace which is the main end of communion with God, that therefore he might
break off that communion. Or how think you; suppose you should covenant with a
man at Hackney, that he should dwell in your house at Aldersgatestreet, and you
in requital would dwell in his house at Hackney for a time; I doubt not but your
main end in this your Covenant was your own solace, peace, and refreshing.
Well, but suppose when you come there, the Cavaliers or other Soldiers should
trouble you, and should be quartered there; who peradventure if they did not
quite put you out, yet would lie in your most pleasant Chamber best situate
for your solace and refreshing; and diverse other ways would annoy you; by
means whereof you could not enjoy that pleasure and delight which you intended
in your Covenant, when you changed houses with the other. Think you in this
case it would be lawful or accepted on by the other party if now you should
come to him and say; Sir, I covenanted for your house at Hackney for my own
refreshing, comfort, and solace, but I am disturbed of it, I do not enjoy the
end of my Covenant, give me my own house again, and go you live there. He
would tell you, and so he might justly, stay Sir, take your own fortune, a
bargain is a bargain, you must even stand to it. In the same case I suppose,
though it be the end of marriage, that love and peace should be maintained; yet
if it fall out otherwise they must be content.

But let us see your proofs to the contrary: and that is say you, in such a
case, where we find not that content in marriage which was the end of it, but
on the contrary vexation: Paul himself speaking of Marriage and Divorce,
determines therein, that God has called us to peace and not to bondage.

Well, we will examine what Paul makes for you, the place 1 Cor. 7. (though you
seem loath to quote the place) where the Apostle speaks to Men and Women, Answ.
who were Christians and had Infidels to their Husbands or Wives: And he tells
them if any believer had a Wife who is an Infidel and yet she was content to
dwell with him, that he should not put her away, etc. And then when he has
given the reason of it in the next Verse, he after tells them, that
notwithstanding if in such a case the Infidel Husband or Wife will not dwell
with their Christian Husband or Wife, but that they will depart and go away to
live in some other place; a believer, says Paul, is not in subjection in this
case, but God has called us to peace. Now what an argument will this be, if a
Christian Husband has an Infidel to his Wife, who out of spite and hatred to
religion and to her Husband, and will depart and divorce her self, in such a
case the Husband is not bound to follow her wandering about, to keep her company
whether she resorts, on purpose from his company. Ergo, will it follow that
when a man dislikes his Wife, and she peradventure willing to live with him,
yet he may by force aagainst her will put her away: the truth is, this place
makes quite against you as has been showed. But besides, you mistake the very
Gramaticall sense, when you will bring in these words, God has called us to
peace, as a reason why the believing Husband may suffer his Wife being an
Infidel to depart: for they rather seem to be an Introduction to what he
speaks after, how know t^o^ O man whether thou shall not save thy Wife, etc.
As much as if he should say, though I tell you in the case before cited, a
believer is not in subjection to his Wife, where there seems no means
availeable with her to procure her cohabitation; yet says Paul I must tell
you, God has chiefly called us to peace, that is, he rather expects that as we
are to follow peace with all men whatsoever, so especially with our Husbands
and Wives, and to keep company and cohabitation together: and the Apostle says
in effect, I will give you a good reason for this; For how know thou O man,
but that thou by dwelling and conversing with thy Wife, thou may convert her
and save her. So that it seems you are quite mistaken, in alleging this Text
for your opinion.

Well, but have you any other Scriptures to prove this? Yes, say you,, For God
himself commands by his law more then once, and by his Prophet Malachy, as
Calvin and the best Interpreters read, that he who hates his Wife let him
divorce her, that is, say you, he who cannot love and delight in his Wife.

We desire you to show out of your new Scripture (if any such you have) where
God in his Law commands, Answ.
and that more then once, that he who hates his Wife, should put her away;
show it but one time and we will yield you the whole controversy: If you mean
Deuteronomy. 24.1. that is but one place, and we have given you an answer to it.

And as for Malachy, although it be true, that some translations do read it
so, as Jerome and some Margents: yet why you should call these the best
Interpreters of this Text, I know no reason, but because they agree with your
opinion, which you dream to be the best. The last of our English Translations
which other men count the best, has it otherwise, Mal. 2.16. and it says. for
the Lord God of Israel says, that he hates putting away. In the Hebrew it is,
Ci saene shallach, amar Jehovah Elohe Israel: which if your learning can make
any other then a reason of what God had spoken before, you may peradventure
make this place speak something for you. The truth is, this your reading is
quite contrary to the scope of the place; for God by his Prophet Malachy in
the former verses vehemently complains against the Jews for dealing
treacherously with the Wives of their youths: Now how this was, although it be
not so plain, yet it seems probable it was, by having of other lovers, and
growing weary of their own, and so a pretending some fault in them, to the end
to put them away: Well says God in the 16 Verse, The Lord God of Israel hates
this treachery of yours in seeking other lovers and being weary of your own
wives put them away. But on the other side, if your reading should be admitted,
what a preposterous sense would here be; as if God should say, Oh you
deceitful Jews, you treacherously deal with your own Wives, I pray let me
hear no more of this treachery; but this I command you, if you would ^aine be
rid of them, do but hate them and then put them away, and then you are at
liberty: And so God to prevent treachery against men's wives, should command
the greatest treachery that can be devised.

In the prosecution of this reason you are pleased to say, It is a less breach
of wedlock to part with quiet consent betimes, then still to profane that
mystery of joy with a polluting sadness.

Answ.
Mystery of joy, what language is this? is marriage now a Sacrament signifying
joy? this I never heard of before: the Papists indeed make it a Sacrament, but
not of joy, and yet I doubt they can say more for their opinion then you for
yours.

But how a less breach of wedlock? is not wedlock quite broke by your divorce,
though it should be with consent: but I am sure it is not quite broke by living
sad and pensive lives; and yet their duties are to amend their faults which are
the occasion of the sad living, and not to be separated from one another
persons.

And whereas you say, It is not the outward continuance of marriage which keeps
the covenant of marriage whole, but whosoever does most according to peace and
love, whether in marriage or divorce, he breaks marriage least.

We answer: this is a wild, mad, and frantic divinity, just like to the
opinions of the Maids of Algate: Answ.
Oh say they, we live in Christ, and Christ does all for us; we are Christed
with Christ and Godded with God, and at the same time we sin here, we joined to
Christ do justice in him, for our life is hid with God in Christ. So you, what,
tell you of bearing the infirmities of your Wife, and so fulfill the law of
Christ, and of giving honor to her as the weaker vessel: why you can do this
when you have put her away, you do all in love and peace, you keep these
Commandments well enough. Fie, fie, blush for shame, and publish no more of
this loose Divinity. But I would ask you a question or two.

May a man keep and maintain that love which is required between married
persons toward her who was his Wife, 1 Quest.
but now is divorced from him. If not, why say you in effect, if there be but
peace and love marriage is kept well enough, either by continuing in marriage or
by divorce. If he may maintain that love to her that is divorced, this is just
fast and loose, marry and hate, divorce and love: I will hate her now she is my
Wife, but love her when my Concubine: So, so, you teach us good courteous
Doctrine.

I ask you, whether marriage may continue after Divorce, if not, why say you in
effect, 2 Quest.
that the marriage covenant is better kept by Divorce, so there be but love and
peace, then by continuance in the sad company of marriage. I grant according to
the laws of the kingdom there is a Divorce only a mensa and thoro, yet I
believe they hardly allow that manifestation of love to each other which the
covenant of marriage requires.

But let us see, have you any Scripture for this your new Gospel: yes, enough,
say you, often repeated: yea, what is, that? The words of Paul forsooth, Love
only is the fulfilling of every commandment.

You must remember you put in the word only, and so add to the Scripture. But
well it is true, the Scripture does say, Answ.
love is the fulfilling of the law, and so by consequence of every
Commandment: but how this will make for your purpose I cannot yet possibly
see. Sure I am Paul never intended to be a Patron of all injustice and injury
to be committed, under a fained pretense of keeping the same Commandments they
broke, by a secret unknown love in their hearts. Its true indeed, he that does
unfeinedly love his Neighbor, he will honor his Parents, not commit murder,
nor by adultery defile his Neighbors Wife, nor steal his goods; this is
Paul's Doctrine. But Paul never taught, that a man might despise his Parents,
murder, steal, and commit adultery, and yet with a pretense of the grace of
love earnestly burning in his heart, say he has kept all the Commandments: No
more does he suffer a man to hate and put away his Wife with strife and
variance, and tell him by the love and peace he had in his heart toward her,
he had kept the Command of marriage unpoluted. Paul's intent in urging us so
often with the duty of love is, to put us in mind not to content our selves
with the bare performance of duties to our Neighbor, without Christian love to
their persons, he says 1 Cor. 13.2. If I give all my goods to the poor, and
yet have no love, it profits not, etc. But he never intended men should gape
altogether upon this general precept of love, and stick there, for Paul knew
that would deceive thousands: therefore in the same place he descends to
particulars, and thinks it not enough to bid them to love one another, but he
bids to pay tribute to whom tribute belongs, and so keep the fifth
Commandment: that they should owe nothing to man, and so keep the eight
Commandment: To walk honestly as in the day time, not in chambring and
wantonness, and so break the seventh Commandment; not in strife and envying,
and so break the sixth Commandment: (this I speak according to the ordinary
received opinion of ranking duties under each commandment, though I could
never yet see how these duties can so well be brought in as being required in
the 10 Commandments in a proper sense so to speak: its fit every Scripture
should have its own weight and authority.) But to our purpose; as Paul is thus
particular with the Romans, notwithstanding his general precept of love; so if
you will here bring in that love which is commanded between Husband and Wife,
Paul means you shall express it, by covering or passing by a multitude of her
faults, and by seeking to heal her errors; and by your meek, wise, and godly
conversation toward her, labor to win her to God, and your self, and not most
inhumanely hate her and put her away, and still say, you keep the command of
love. Thus of your fourth Argument.

The effect of your fifth Argument is, That as the Priests of old were not to
be long in sorrow, 5 Arg.
to the end they might execute their Priesthood rightly: So Christians now
being Priests to God, dedicate to his service, they ought not by trouble and
vexation of a disagreeing Wife to be hindered from serving God, but rather by
divorce put her away, and so procure liberty to serve God.

Answ.
This Argument is far fetched, yet is it not good for Ladies, nor scarce
deserves any answer: but we tell you, most things concerning the priests were
typical, do you show this to be the moral of this under the Gospel, that men
might put away their Wives if they were cause of continual heaviness to them:
how think you? might not many poor men by the same reason, who are by the
providence of God compelled to labor, and so are hindered much from the
cheerful serving God in the things of his worship, which others have liberty
in: may they not lawfully now leave their honest labor and fall to plunder or
steal one hour or two in a day, and serve God cheerfully the rest? Why not, as
well as when a man is by the providence of God married to a yoke fellow, which
is in diverse things cause of grief and vexation to him, therefore he may now
break all bonds of law and providence, and under a pretense of serving God
cheerfully, he may unchristianly thrust his Wife out of doors with a bare Bill
of Divorce in her hand to seek her living. For the rest of our discourse in
this Division concerning divorce from Heretics, we shall pass it over as
nothing to our purpose, and so pass to your sixth Argument, the effect of
which is.

That marriage which nature it self teaches to be unlawful, 6 Arg.
that may be destroyed or dissolved by divorce. But the marriage of persons of
contrary minds and dispositions, nature teaches to be unlawful. Ergo,

For the present we agree to the proposition, Answ.
that such marriages as Nature it self teaches to be unlawful, may be
dissolved by divorce.

But for the second part, that Nature teaches such marriages to be unlawful,
as are made betwixt persons who are of a contrary mind or disposition, this
we utterly deny: and look for your proofs to the contrary.

Well, you want not proofs, for you say, Moses teaches the Jews that they
should not sow their Vineyards with diverse seeds, nor plough with an Ox and an
Ass together.

Ho brave stuff! but go on; Moses teaches so indeed: but how will you make
this last to fit your shoe?

This you will do well enough, but how? By following the example of Paul's
reasoning, say yoy. Well, lets see whether Paul or you are the best Logician.
Paul reasons; does God take care for Oxen and Asses how ill they yoke together,
or is it spoke altogether for our sake? for our sakes doubtless: thus you
would have Paul to reason for you: but the truth is, Paul does reason thus, but
it is in another case, the place is, 1 Cor. 9. Paul reasons thus; we that
bestow our labor in preaching the Gospel, ought to be maintained thereby: and
he proves it by familiar examples, that every one ought to be maintained by
that which he takes pains in: as the Wayfaring man by traveling, the
Vinedresser by planting, the Shepherd by looking to his flock; all these eat
the fruit of their labor; and to put it out of doubt, Paul cites the Law of
Moses, proving that not only Men, but even Beasts ought to eat the fruits of
their labor, for it says, Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox which
treads out the corn. Well, Paul goes on in ^is reasoning, lest any idle pated
fellow should answer and say; Paul, what makes this for you, I hope you are no
Ox, neither do you tread out the corn. No, says Paul, that is true; but the
force of my Argument is this, That God by Moses did not only intend in that
speech, that Oxen should be fed, but it was with reference to other cases among
the rest even for us Ministers of the Gospel, that we should not take pains in
the Gospel, but should also be maintained thereby, as well as Oxen and other
mean Callings are maintained by their labor: lo this is Paul's reasoning, and
it is impregnable Logic: let us see how yours agrees. Moses tells the Jews they
should not plough with an Ox and an Ass together, nor sow their field with
diverse seeds; Ergo, there being some other sense in this then merely to take
care for Oxen, etc. it will follow from hence, that it is a foul incongruity
and a great violence to the reverent secret of Nature, to force a mixture of
minds that cannot unite, and to sow the furrow of man's nativitie with seed of
two incoh^rent and incombining dispositions. Is this your reasoning like Paul's,
as you promised: sure Paul would be ashamed to reason thus.

For although we believe there may be some typical signification of that of
Moses, yet that it should be yours is ridiculous. But you say, Paul 2 Cor. 6.
alludes to that of Moses, and applies it to mis-yoking in marriage, as say you
by the Greek word is evident.

To this we answer; that it may be likely both by the Greek word and English
also, that Paul alludes to that in Deuteronomy. Yet that he applies it to
marriage with Infidels you cannot prove, but rather to all needless
conversation, but especially of companying with them in their service of Idols.

But suppose he did apply it to marriage with Infidels, and forbad it; yet you
see after marriage is perfected and consummated, he will by no means allow of a
Divorce if the Wife be but so much as content to live with her Husband, as was
showed upon 1 Cor. 7. And so this no ways makes for your purpose.

Now for that reverent expression of you^s, That it is a foul incongruity, and
a great violence to the reverent secret of Nature, to force a mixture of minds
which cannot unite, and to sow the furrow of ma^^ nativitie with the seed of
two incoherent and incombining dispositions.

This Court complement, so neatly and modestly dr^st, Answ.
I believe deserves the pains of the best Lady at Court to learn it. For
answer to it being but a complement, for your forcing ^f ^ mixture of minds
that cannot unite; I know no body by force or fair means intends any such
mixture in marriage: minds are not capable of mixing but only agreeing and
uniting; indeed you talk much of fit conversing souls, whether you me^n by
mixture or otherwise, it matters not, the language is too sublime and
Angelical for mortal creatures to comprehend it. And for your other phrase of
a great violence to the reverent secret of nature by sowing the furrow of man's
nativitie, with the seed of two incoherent and incombining dispositions.

This frothie discourse, were it not s^gred over with a little neat language,
would appear so immeritous and undeserving, so contrary to all humane learning,
yea, truth and common experience it self, that all that read it must needs
count it worthy to be burnt by the Hangman.

For who ever thought before you, that the reverent sec^et of Nature, or the
furrow of man's nativitie (so there was lawful marriage preceded) might not be
sowed by the seeds of such as are of di^ferent or uncombining disposition, if
any such there be, without violence or foul incongruitie? If any think
otherwise as you it seems do; give advice that a Petition may be drawn, to
have a Committee in every County of the Kingdom who shall carefully see to,
and severely restrain the marriage of any two Men or Maids who differ in
constitution, complexion, hair, countenance, or in disposition, lest this
reverent secret of Nature be defiled and violated.

7 Arg.
Your seventh Argument is, The Canon law and Divines allow a Divorce where one
of the parties conspires the death of the other: but sometimes through
disagreement of dispositions, by a sad pensiveness the life of one of the
parties at least, is brought into danger, Ergo it seems a divorce ought in the
latter case to be tolerated.

To this I answer three things.

1 Answ.
1. For the opinion of the Canon law, the whole body of it is not of your
mind, for Nichol. 1. de matrim. Can. 6. is contrary, quicquid mulier contra
te cogit averit, non est excepta causa ^^^ni^ationis rejicienda. Whatsoever thy
Wife conspires or plots against thee, there is no other cause of putting her
away but fornication.

2 Answ.
The case is not the like, betwixt the conspiring of one party to kill the
other, and your case: for where the one party conspires to take away the life
of the other, and the conspiration continues, there the offender does
implicitly at least act a Divorce; and though it should be true, that the
party grieved may in this case sue a Divorce, yet will it not follow in your
case, that because a man may seek divorce from her who seeks his life, to the
end to save his life, which Nature teaches: therefore for disagreement of
disposition, causing s^dnesse, and wherein they are both actors, if not equals,
there the Husband may will, she ^ll she, put her away; this is just a taking
advantage of our own faults and corruptions, to release us from our duties.

^ Answ.
But thirdly it would seem that there is no such cause merely in Nature properly
so called, that may cause such grief as is destructive to the life: and if the
cause be not in Nature, but in corruption, in pride, haughtiness, sullenness,
etc. let them amend their faults, repress their pride and s^llennesse, or else
let them if they think best, die of the sullen disease, let them try who will
pi^tie them.

8 Arg.
The effect of your eighth Argument is this:

Those who are destitute of all marriage gifts, but only fitness of body, they
have no calling to marry, and consequently if married ought to be divorced: but
such some are. Ergo,

Answ.
Briefly to this simple Argument, quite besides that which ought to be the scope
of your Book, for what is here to contrariety of dispositions, now it is a
disabilitie to all married duties: This wavering and shaking in your opinion is
not fit to be answered: for if it be a Lunatic no^ compos mentis, without any
wit, a natural Poole, which cannot count the days in the week, or tell
twenty, or measure a yard of cloth; you need not to inveigh against them, and
you can seldom show such an example: if Guardians do sometime marry such let
the Lawyers alone with it, they know how to relieve the suffering party well
enough.

Marriage is a humane society, 9 Arg.
and so ought to have the consent of the mind; but if the mind cannot enjoy
that in marriage which it may reasonably desire, it is no humane society. Ergo.

The consent of the mind ought to be had in marriage, Answ.
or else it will hardly become a humane society: but that after marriage the
minds of the Husband and Wife must in all things agree, or else the marriage
becomes no humane society, is a new principle unheard of till now, and so I
leave it. As for the discourse of Deuteronomy. 24.1. and Christ's exposition to the
Pha^isees, we have spoken of it in answer to your second Argument.

Now a word to your last Argument and so farewell.

Every law is made for some good, which good may be attained unto without a
greater inconvenience: 10 Arg.
but such is not the law that prohibits Divorce for disagreements of minds and
dispositions: Ergo, it is not a just law.

We deny this your Argument, and say, Answ.
that there are many laws which are made for good, and yet that good is not
attainable through the defaults of the party, but a greater inconvenience
follows, and yet are indeed still just laws.

I will give you two or three instances in our laws of England. It is the
righteous and just law of England, that every one shall peaceably enjoy his
estate in lands or otherwise, according to the goodness and latitude of his
title: and I hope none will deny this to be a just law: yet see by the default
of the party how this may be evaded, and he fall into great inconvenience.

And so if a man having see-simple in land^, and yet will take a lease from
another of the same lands, this shall be an Estoppell to him in an Assise to
recover his own land. ter* leg. estop.

So if a Daughter mulier will sue live^ie of lands with her sister who is a
Bastard, she shall not avoid it after by saying her sister was a Bastard not
mulier.

So if a man had a rent, liberties, Common, etc. by prescription, and after
takes a grant of the same from the King by Patent, that shall determine this
prescription. 32 H. 8. Bro. tit. Estop. 200.

So 37 H. 8. Bro. Estop. 218. If two join tenants are, which hold of the King
in capite, and the one release to the other in fee, and after both respite
homage in the Exchequer, the other has by this gained his mo^tie again
against the other, without any valuable considerations, by the default of the
other.

So it is a just law in England, that no man shall be unjustly charged or taxed
contrary to the right, and what he is bound to do.

Yet a man by his own fault may charge himself, or do such things as the law
will compel him to be charged, where before he was free.

For example. If a Towneship or a Corporation are bound to repair or maintain
a Causey or a Bridge, and a private man where he is not bound will repair this
Bridge or Causey, time beyond the memory of man, he shall then be compelled to
repair it for ever by the Law, and at the first he was compellable.

The end of citing these cases is to show you the weakness of your reason
against the law of England which prohibits Divorce, for your pretended
contrariety of mind. For though it should be granted this law of prohibition
of Divorce, the end of it could not be attained without a greater
inconvenience: yet this inconvenience coming, arising and growing from the
fault of the parties, and not from the Law; this Law of prohibiting Divorce
shall remain (maugre the malice of all opposers) a just and a righteous law.

FINIS.

