An Answer to a printed Pamphlet called the Case of the Inhabitants of Croydon
in the County of Surrey, Humbly offered to the Parliaments Judicious
Consideration.
TO all unconcerned persons who have known the people of Croydon, and time out
of mind their un-Christian dealing with the Reverend Dr. Bernard (the last
legal Incumbent, whom they Sequestered,) and all the rest of their Ministers,
it might Suffice to say, their Uncharitable and inhumane Pamphlet is a Libel,
but supposing it may be perused by Straingers, In general it will seem
incredible to any Considerate man, that if he had been guilty of those Crimes
they pretend, being all or most part alleged to be done by him above Ten Years
since, that they had not (while in memory) convicted him of one of them, having
many years used all means that Violent and Unreasonable men for their reverige,
could possibly invent.

And though he can patiently bear the malice of those who neither frequent
Church or Sacraments, And who in several other Courts if their Oaths had been
regarded, and by the mercy of God he had not falsified, would long since have
ruined him. Yet for the Satisfaction of his Friends and impartial Persons who
desire to be further undeceived, its answered, That Mr. Whitford was by some of
the late Powers sequestered from his Living, And one Mr. Seymor by his Consent
put into the same, who by the Consent of the said Mr. Whitford resigned it to
Dr. Clewer and by agreement the Dr. did allow him 20 l. per Ann. though by the
rules of the then Powers he was not liable to pay any thing in regard he had a
Temporal Estate* and no Child, and the living was worth but about 80 l. per
Annum.

As to the Allegations relating to Mr. Preston, the Dr. found him there, and
did never refine him for his Curate, but the said Mr. Preston (taking advantage
of his absence) did of his own accord then officiate as Curate, but the Major
of Northampton adjudged him to be of a Scandelous life, and convicted him of
Drunkeness for which he paid his Fine, and the Dr. being threatened to be
Sequestered if he employed him, did forbid him, But contrary thereunto there
being a Chapel of ease belonging to the Church: He did Voluntarily officiate
there, And after Commenced several suites against the Dr. under Color of
Wages; But the Dr. was never Plantive against him in any Suite* nor prosecuted
him for reading Common Prayer, The Dr. in those times so far as it was safe for
him frequently using the form thereof, in Baptisms and otherwise, particularly
Mr. How a Ministers Child of Chessamboys in the County of Bucks, Sir Tobee
Terryl, and Mr. King being Godfathers.

As to the Articles therein pretended to be preferred against him as Minister
of Ashton, which must be above 20 Years since, the Dr. neither knows or
remembers them, and its very sttrange if it should be true that the Authors of
that Libellous Pamphlet were not acquainted when, and to whom they were
exhibited, but if they had been as much lovers of truth as Calumny they would
have also inserted, That a parcel of Articles exhibited against him to the
Committee for Plundered ministers, the Principal Charges whereof were, for
neglecting to keep public fas^s, thanksgivings, and other Contempts of the
then Authorities, And afterward, the Dr. being in a possibility of obtaining a
better benefice, viz. A Rectory of 160 l. per Annum, Another Complaint was made
against him to the then Lord Fleetwood for praying in public for the King,
which hindered him of that intended Promotion; And that he did so pray for his
Majesty, And at that time when it was treason to do it, He has very good
proof; But as to the particular charges in those Articles by the Pamphleter,
the Dr. is not guilty of any of them, but is able (if though fit after so long
a time) to make it evidently appear he never Commenced any suite against any
one there but upon very just and great provocation, and the law was always for
him.

As to the Charges against his life and Conversation,
The First is a Notorious falsehood. The Second is the same, for he was
lawfully Married to Mrs. Bernard, and so lived together for above 20 Years. The
Third is also a false aspersion.
To that Paragraph concerning his coming into Croydon, The Dr. left Ashton
about a Year before his Majesty's happy Restaration, and never used any manner
of Sinister means for the obtaining of Croydon, nor made any such promise as
therein is charged.

That the Dr. was in the Year 60 Presented to the Vicaridge of Croydon which
is 30 miles in Compass, consists of about 600 House-holders, 3000 Communicants,
and worth about 200 l. per Annum, Yet the Dr. for the Two first years he lived
there (depending on the Peoples Charity) could not receive besides what some of
the Gentry gave him (whose Tithes were very inconsiderable) above 5 l. per
Annum: And he being unwilling to sue his Parishoners let all his Tithes
(excepting the Gentry) to one Mr. Wood for 60 l. per Annum, who by reason of
their Contention was in 3 years time 60 l. in arrears of the said Rent,
afterward the Dr. let the same to George Plaw Senior (the greatest farmer in
the Parish) at the same Rent, who (repenting his bargain) would not seal the
Leases, but engaged several of his Friends (to persuade the Dr. to discharge
him of it, saying the Parishoners would not pay him without trouble, and to sue
them would ruin him^ Afterward John Blake Junior offered to take them at the
said rate, and entered into an agreement with the Dr. to seal the Leases within
a fortnight after, who notwithstanding did refuse to do the same for the reason
aforesaid, then the Dr. desired the Parishoners to make him 60 l. per Annum,
among themselves, and rate it according to the poors Book, where upon several
of the Gentry meeting the vestry, and chose some of the Parishoners to make the
said rate, but his Adversaryes refused to stand to it, whereupon the Gentry
advised him to sue them, He having often demanded his Tithes of them by sending
to every man a printed Ticket in this form, A B. I desire you to pay your dues
in arreares to prevent charges and trouble to me, William Clewer. And many of
them being above Seven years in Arreares, and he (having no other preferment)
was at last necessitated least he and his Family should have starved (as some
of his predecessors almost were,) to sue several of them, Thereupon they first
exhibited Articles against him in the Spiritual Court, the principal whereof
was, That he did not within Two months after Induction read the 39 Articles,
and got Four Witnesses to prove it, viz. Robert Wood Tailor, Thomas Brigstock
Husbandman, William Turlo Gardner, and William Cumber Parish-Clerk, the three
first Swore he did not to the best of their Remembrance, but the Clerk Swore
positively that he never read them till three years after he was Inducted, but
the Dr. produced Mr. Sherman, the Churchwardens, and several other Credible
Witnesses, and likewise a Certificate under the Clerks own hand, (which Mr.
Pynsent one of his Majesty's Protonotories prooved his Confession of,) That the
Dr. read them within a fortnight after Induction, so that upon a full hearing
he was acquitted by Sir Gyles Sweit then Dean of the Arches, who gave him Costs
for the same.

Secondly, They Indicted him at the Sessions for not reading the Act against
Swearing, where the Justices fined him but Sixpence, they being Satisfied it
was a Malicious prosecution.

Thirdly, They Indicted him for taking money at the Sacrament, and converting
it to his own use, which he traversed, but none would appear against him, and
so was discharged by Proclamation.

Fourthly, In Easter-Term 24th Caroli Secundi they preserred an Information
against him for Barretry in the King's Bench, (though he never sued but one
Person for any thing but Tithes) to which he pleaded. And in Trinity-Term
following they moved for a Trial at Bar, but upon hearing Council on both
sides, and long debate, it was denied, and expressly Ordered that it should be
tried at the Assizes in the long Vacation, where the Dr. attended with his
Witnesses but they would not go on, then the day before Michaelmass-Term 24th
the Dr. giving them notice he would try it by Proviso the next Assizes, they
moved for a trial at Bar, which (being done by the Kings-Councell) could not
be denied, and therefore granted accordingly, and set up one William Rolfe (a
poor fellow, a Bailiffs follower) as Prosecutor, declaring they knew they
could not prove it, but they would do it to disgrace him, and put him to
greater charge, and they put up Scandalous Papers against him in Croydon at the
Market-House and caused the Common-Cryer on a Market, day to make this
Proclamation, O yes, All manner of Persons who have any thing to say against
Dr. Clewer, or have paid him any Tithes, are desired to repare to the Sign of
the Herne, and they shall have thanks for their pains, and so God save the
King. One Richard Heighden (a Bailiff) was the Master of that Alehouse, who
went up and down the Parish to enquire what every one gave the Dr. viz. To one
Mr. Russel Alsop, Mr. Edmund Gilpin, and Mr. Henry Piggot, who refusing to
satisfy him therein, he there upon warned Mr. Alsop to serve on the Grand Jury
at the next Assizes held at Kingston in Surrey, and the said Mr. Edmund Gilpin
(being then about 67 years of age,) to serve on the Jury for Life and Death,
and the said Mr. Piggot being above 60 years of age to serve on the Jury of
Nisi prius.

There was a rule of Court, That they should give the Dr. a note of
Particulars, and name an able Prosecutor which not being done, (though often
demanded) Mr. Attorney General entered a Noli Prosequi.

That the Dr. never made any such agreement as is pretended, with Mr.
Bickeeton, or gave him any note for the payment of 10 l.

That they presented a paper of greivances to his Grace of Canterbury (too long
here to be inserted) unto which the Dr. gave such an answer that the Libellers
thought good not to mention them.

Being dismissed at Lambeth, they petitioned his Majesty in Council where they
exhibited some Articles purporting the same in the Libell, who ordered them to
give the Dr. a particular of their Charge, which they never did, Yet brought up
their Witnesses which were then heard, and the Dr. was promised another day to
give in his answer, but instead thereof the whole matter was referred to his
Grace of Canterbury, and the Lord Chancellor to call before them the Dr. and
the principal of the Parish to settle a quiet maintenance for the Vicaer there,
which if their Lordships could not effect, to report what was fit for his
Majesty to do therein.

Upon which Order they caused the Belis to ring, and Bone-fires to be made at
Croydon, giving out in Speeches, That the King should say the Dr. was not fit
to Preach, nor should he any more, and that they had turned him out of his
Living, and caused the common Crier to make O yes, That if any Person should
pay the Dr any more tithes, they should be hanged.

As to that which concerns the Act of Grace, its an aspersion that none but
such Scandalous Pamphleters durst have took upon them.

At their Oaths at Council Table those which the Dr. answered upon the
Reference to his Grace and the Lord Chancellor are omitted, the rest they
(supposing the Dr. could not disprove) have misreported, though what was
thee-Sworne maliciously by interested Persons, (either those who were indebted
to him, or whom had sued for Tithes,) is answered as follows.

Edward Humfry gave evidence he gave the Dr. four shillings to help him into
the Almes-House.

For answer hereunto, he was really indebted to the Dr. 7 l. for Security
whereof be entered in a Judgment by consent aboate a year before he came into
the Alme-House, and about half a year after he was in, the Governors ordered
him to pay the Dr. 4 shillings which is all be ever paid of the said 7 l. to
this day, nor did he help him in, or turn him out.

To the Second, That Sir Gyles Sweit late Deane of the Arches declared to the
Churchwardens that the third part of the money collected at the Sect was the
Viccars right, as appears by their Certificate, yet he neves Converted it to
his own use, but did always dispose of it among the poor, though one of the
Doctors prose^utors would have had one of the Churchwardens to have Sworn it,
who telling him he could not, he Swore it himself.

To the Third, That M. Benjamin Preston, (the aforesaid Mr. Prestons Son) did
about^ 13 years since come to the Doctors House to demand money of him for his
Fathers officiating for him in Northamptonshire, the Dr. refused to pay him
having never employed his Father, or owed him any thing, but neither sent for
him, or arrested him.

To the Fourth, That nothing of that was prooved, as is falsely alleged, and
that Person whom they pretend was the Doctors special Bailiff, and burnt in
the hand, they produced upon a bearing in the Common Pleas as a Witness for
them, and that they never brought any to the Doctors House but upon their own
request, nor was ever any kept Prisoner, or drawn into any Judgments in stead
of pretended Notes, which the Dr. wonders they could have the confidence to
affirm when it was manifestly debated in Westminster Hall for many days,
where the Judges not only confirmed the Judgment which was greatly complained
of, but gave the Dr. costs for his unjust Vexation, The Court declaring he had
done nothing but what became an honest man and a good Christian.

And they Sufficiently show their malice in that they do not only slander the
Dr. in his reputation, but all other persons that appear for him,

To the Fifth, The Libeller was much mistaken in this proof, One Swore indeed
that one of the D^ctors Subpoenaes was rased, but could not tell any of the
Names that were in the same, whereas they are legible and free from ^asures,
and if any such were, they should have complained of it in the Court of
Exchequer, which they never did.

Nor was there a word of the Warrents prooved, only William Rolfe Swore that
the Dr. took seven shillings and six pence for a Subpoena, but could not name
any but one David Burnel who is Dead, but he denies he took it, but has
several times forgiven them all Charges, and sometimes has taken 1 s. or 1 s.
6 d. and many times the debt too, the Dr. was a very honest man in the said
Rolfes esteem till he employed another, and then he said he would be revenged
of him.

It was also Sworn by Timothy Hills (a violent Prosecutor of the Dr.) That the
Church doors were shut up for a month together while he was at London minding
his Law, whereas the truth is, the Dr. was never at London, or from his Parish
a month, nor a fortnight together since he was Viccar of Croydon, till he broak
his Leg, Nor absent 13 Sundays these 13 years, and always when he was, took
care that his place might be supplied with prayers and preaching.

To the Sixth, He never sued any man but one, for any other cause but Tithes,
though be has had above an 100 causes of Actions of Trespass against several
Persons, for their Cattle coming into his Orchard and Garden Yet he never
brought any Action against any one of them.

To the Seventh, A Carryer being hired to bring the Doctors goods to London, a
large Desk of his was broken open, and several things Of value lost out of is,
with a Bond and other Writings, which occasioned him a suite in Chancery to his
very great Damage, He never sued for 190 l. pretended to be in the Desk, not
has any Satisfaction for his Goods and Writings to this day.

To the Eighth, It was not Sworn as the Libeller alleges. Nor did he ever
hear any before pretended he spoiled the School; Indeed one Swore Rents were
much fallen, wherein he did (as in other things) a little stretch his
Conscience, they being so far from falling, that those farms which were
formerly let for Thirty, are now let for above 40 l. per Annum.

And as for the other Branch of that Article, the aforesaid Hills Swore, That
when the Dr. preached there was not above 60 People at Church, which the
Libeller has reduced to 10 or 12, but in the Afternoon when any body else
preached there were 3 or 400, which is now enlarged to 6 7 or 800, Whereas the
Parishoners have often declared their approbation of the Doctors Ministry, and
he seldom peeacheth to so few as 60 People, seldom fewer then 2 or 300, though
there are several Meeting Houses in that Town, and frequently Seven or Eight
score have received the Sacrament of the Doctor in one day.

To the last, Mrs. Cooling (one of a known Reputation) Swore, That her Husband
told her That the Doctor had advised him to be devorced from her, and offered
himself to procure it: but its denied that any such thing was advised, or
offered by him, notwithstanding the Complaints he made to the Dr. which he
forbears to mention.

The Doctor understanding his Majesty had referred it to his Grace of
Canterbury, and the late Lord Chancellor to hear his defense, he brought his
Witnesses, and made out his Innocence so far as then their Lordships proceeded,
but the Libellers would not endure any further answer, but brought other
Persons to prove new matter never before pretended; But those Honorable
Persons proposing a Separation which he heartily desired, and hoping for some
provision by the way of Exchange, he waited for the same.

That for the scandal of the Book, It was a Sufficient answer to say, That such
persons as conceal fellonyes are as equally Criminal as the Party, and the
Trepans of such Persons being notorious in the City, this was no otherwise, for
that the Doctor about the year 60 being in a Booke-sellers shop in the
Evening, and seeing one pass by whom he had buisness with, stepped out hastily to
speak with him, no farther then the door, thereupon the Apprentice of the shop
charged the Doctor as if he would have carried away the Book, hoping to have
drawn him to a Composition, rather then such a thing should have been
Questioned, but the Doctor (knowing his innocence) refused to be Trepanned, and
is able by Persons of Quality to prove the Master was angry with his Servant,
and expressed his sorrow for his abuse.

And whereas the Libeller pretends the Doctors Wife should pay money, He only
asserts what those Sherks would have had, which if it had been true, had
prooved them guilty of Smothering Felonies, which the Doctor does detest.

The great thing against the Doctor that seemed to stick with the late Lord
Chancellor was, That after several suites he did not try the modus Decimandi
which was the only real Controversy between him and his Parishoners, and
hein-forming his Lordship that he offered to try the Title with any of the
Parish, and that be never waved it, but they refusing he could not try it, and
they had 1^ years time to enforce a Trial, which they never did, but one John
Godden (another Prosecutor) pretending he offered to try it, the Dr. disproov'd
him by declaring that in the Suit between them he pleaded an agreement in lieu
of all Tithes, so that the modus could not come in Issue.

But the Dr. did then deny (as true it is) That his Grace did ever direct him
not to try it before the Lord Chief Baron, for that he would never have feared
the Justice of that Worthy Person.

And the Dr. having manifestly disprooved by Honorable Persons many of the
Scandalls they had charged upon him before the King and Council; and being
then ready to have cleared himself in all other particulars; and the
Prosecutors (being conscious of it) betook themselves to their wonted shifts
to hinder the Dr. from being heard, and thereupon proposed to settle a certain
maintenance of 160 l. per Annum, and upon that offer the business ceased: And
the Dr. was unwilling further to trouble their Lordships, and so left the
opportunity of further vindicating himself; the Crimes charged upon him (were
they true, which God forbid) being of such Antiquity, which alone had been a
sufficient answer to any rational Man.

The Dr. denies that he ever demanded any Tithes, while Woods Lease was in
being, of any that were within his Lease.

That he must ever acknowledge the Justice and Favor of the Right Honorable
the late Lord Chancellor, who did offer him a Living in Northamptonshire; but
he taking time to consider of it, was shortly after disabled by a fracture of
his Leg to attend it, in which time that being disposed of, the Dr. waited
several times after upon his Lordship to receive his Commands, but his
Lordship did never offer or desire (though the Prosecutors urged it) that the
Dr. should resign his Living before he had another, and hopes he never gave
his Grace of Canterbury any cause to refuse him a Living; for if the
Prosecutors would remember, his Grace took notice in the presence of the Lord
Chancellor of their abuse in that they had lately presented several Articles
against the Dr. to his Grace, who ordered him to give an Answer thereunto,
which was done accordingly, but they dealt there with his Grace as in all other
places, designing only to bespatter, and never to receive an answer, but waved
his Grace, and clamoured in other places; and if true (as they pretend) that
his Grace has so bad an opinion of the Dr. he is still willing to refer
himself to any determination of his Grace.

Page 11.
That the Libellers do well discover themselves in making their Judgments of
the Providence of God by their own Christian assertion in the 13th page, which
deserves no other Answer, but its well known he had the Charitable assistance
of several worthy persons.

And for the Bone-setter, the Dr. offered him 5 l. only for his pains, having
also paid his Apothecary his full Bill, and 5 l. to another Chyrurgeon, whom he
desired to attend, saying he could not; and fees to two other Chyrurgeons, but
denies he owed the Bone-setter any thing before, he being then an Apprentice to
an Apothecary, and the D. satisfied his Master, and him too; and he (being as
unreasonable as the Libellers) first demanding 100 l. and afterward saying he
would not abate any thing of 50 l. he caused the Bailiff to arrest the Dr.
coming out of the Church on Sunday, who put in Bail to his Action, and
afterward (without pleading any privilege) offered to try it with him, (for
several Chyrurgeons said they would testify the render was sufficient) but he
then readily accepted of the 5 l. and the Dr. long since had his general
Release, and also gave full satisfaction to Mr. Weldon.

Page 12.
It appears by their own Libell (as the truth was) That Sir Adam Brown, and
Sir William Howard were only to arbitrate Arrears of Tithes in difference, but
not one word of any Report to be made by them, but since they were pleased to
do it ex part, and the Libellers have made such use of it, he supposes it
will not be unbecoming him to offer some Answer to it, which is, That though by
writing he acquainted them, he hoped he should be able shortly to attend them,
if they would please to appoint a meeting at the Vicaridge House, for that he
was not able to wait upon them any where else, without great prejudice; yet
within a few days they sent for him to the George-Inn, where (being unable to
go without Crutches) he did attend them till 10 of the Clock at Night, though
to his great pain and indisposition, the Chyrurgeon telling him it was enough
to endanger the loss of his Limb: The rule they proceeded by in their
Arbitration was, to give the Vicar a third part of the Tenth of their Rent,
which was much to the Doctors prejudice in many cases, particulerly in one
George Phillips, whose Tithes in kind came to a great deal more then was due by
their Rule, yet he accepted of it, but some of the Parishioners where the Rule
was against them, refused to pay what they determined: in particular Henry
Ledgold who was Awarded by them to pay 30 s. but he told them he would spend 30
l. first; and John Aldridge, whose Tithes according to the said Rule came to 3
l. and the Dr. was persuaded by them to take 30 s. which is not paid to this
day: And several others (knowing that the Rule was against them) would not
appear; and most of their time was spent in persuading the Dr. to take less
then his agreements, which though he conceived was not within the intention of
the Reference, yet to gratify those persons (who had only power of Persuasion,
none of Compulsion) he did agree unto; being willing at their Request, to take
4 l. of Thomas George, of the 11 l. which the Court gave him, and by 20 s. a
Month, but not a penny of it (though the 4. Months are past) is paid to this
day; Remitting William Henderson 2 l. though he had good Security, Je^frey
Matthew 3 l. David Hoar 2 l. Thomas Barber about 1 l. and several others to the
value of about 40 l. and all charges the Dr. was at in sueing several persons,
and there being some who then made complaints, which he desired might have been
heard, and that he might answer them, the Referrees utterly denied it, saying,
it concerned not them, for that they only desired to make all Friends, and
would not hear any thing but matter of Tithes, and therefore he (having no
(...) of the Report, nor hearing of any till it was given in) conceives not
upon what ground the^e could be any evidence for that part of the Report,
whereby he is charged to impose by any undue means, to draw any of the
Inhabitants into Exorbit^n^ Agreements, Poenal Bills or Judgments, by Arresting
or keeping them in duran^^^ for that matter being seriously examined in a Court
upon full evidenc^* where it properly belonged, the Dr. was acquitted of it,
and did then offer the Referees to satisfy them in it, but they (as he
understood by thorn) thought it not fit to ravell into it after that had been
settled in a due course of Law, therefore the Dr. takes it as his great
unhappiness, if that in the Libell be a true Copy, that they did not give him
leave to satisfy them, which he doubts not to have done, and could still do,
or any indifferent persons, notwithstanding the Malice of his Enemies; and
whereas they conceive the Dr. in some measure has been the occasion of the
non-payment of what was his just dues, and for a ground of their belief,
allege that every person before them willingly submitted to whatsoever they
determined, the Dr. craves leave to put them in remembrance that their
foundation was wholly mistaken; for that they cannot but call to mind, and he
has several Witnesses to prove that Ledgold aforesaid (to name no more) did
peremptorily deny it; And besides there are many the Dr. never sued, who were,
and still are, many years in Arrears, therefore could not (under their favor)
be the Occasion of the Non-payment of his Tithes, and doubtless the offense
taken was occasioned by the insinuation of his inveterate Enemies, he never
being heard in the reason that induced him to Sue them, which had they been
acquainted with, they could not but have agreed the Dr. had good cause to Sue
for his Dues; and till the last Night of their Meeting he did not perceive they
were dissatisfied in his proceedings, and the Referrees (for what reason the
Dr. knows not) could not possibly be prevailed with by him to meet either in
the Vestry, or any other place, but in the only House in Town where all the
mischief against him has been contrived; Wherein the Dr. and his Agents having
received many Affronts in the time of the reference and the Master of the House
having formerly Articled against him in the Ecclesiastical Court, it was reason
enough (had he been well) to have repaired to his own House after 12 of Clock
at Night, there being no persons having any difference, who waited for any
determination of it.

As for Mr. Joyner, The Dr. knows not the value of his Tithes, but a knowing
Man in the Parish affirmed they were worth 10 l. per Annum, those years when he
had 600 Sheep, etc. and as for the second party mentioned, the Dr. at the first
meeting desired that concern might be proceeded upon; and another time
supposing it would come on, brought Council in Order to it.

And as for Bowyer the Dr. had no reason to refer that difference, a Wise and
Prudent Person (and a Justice of the Peace in the said County) after much time
spent, and hearing Witnesses on both sides, having made his Award therein, and
Sir Adam Brown declaring his dislike thereof.

The Dr, though there are now above 300 in Arrears, has scarcely sued one of
an 100, nor they, till several times summoned to pay, not so much yearly, as
they spend weekly in an Ale house. And therefore who is most oppressed, and have
most reason to supplicate the Honorable Court of Parliament, they who unjustly
detain their Tithes, and many of them from a Principle that they are not due,
or the Dr. who is necessitated for Bread, without which he and his Family must
languish, or be forced to sue for such trifles, the profits of his Living
arising out of no other payments but such small Tithes.

The Dr. admires they should close their Libell with so false an invention as
the pretended Debauchery at Newington, for he solemnly affirms, as in the
presence God, Angels and Men, that there is not one syllable of it true, and
he offers to execute that upon himself, which they unreasonably desire to be
done, if by any Credible Witnesses they convict him of it. But this is like the
rest of their un-christian dealings; having lately again Cried him in Scorn in
^he Market place, and interrupted him in Divine Service, by publishing that as
an Order of His Majesty and Council, which was never made by them. All which
might have been justly answered in their own Language, or with personal
recriminations, there being sufficient ground to do it, but they having in
prosecution of their continued Malice toward the Dr. thus publicly blasted
him in Print, it was thought fit to answer the Fact in particulers charged, to
manifest to the Parliament, and satisfy the Christian Reader, what designs
have been carried on to ruin him in his Reputation, knowing they could not
otherwise hurt him. And as for their General Accusations, when reduced to
particulers, he doubts not but to give them as full an answer.

FINIS.

