An Answer to a Scoffing and Lying Lybell, Put forth and privately dispersed
under the Title of A Wonderful Account of the Cureing the King's Evil, by Madam
Fanshaw the Duke of Monmouth's Sister.
-- Soepius clim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta,
Suerit. l. 1. An si quis atro dente me petiverit
Inultus ut flibo Puer?
Hor. Ep. 6.
IT is still, and has been of old, the cunning Tricks of Wicked and evil Men
for Religion sake, to run into all manner of Wicked and impious actions,
leaving no Stone unturned, that may any ways help toward the establishment of
their Diana. But as it has been the actions of such, who only make Religion
their stalking Horse, for their profit and advantage, which is their true
Goddess, so it is most easy to find out whence the many late and most
inveterate Libells; which have been spread abroad privately, proceed: even from
such, who would make Godliness their gain, and care not what Idolatry is set
up, so they may fill their Coffers: They care not whom they abuse and belie,
nor whom they defame and Libel, so they may gain their point, or advantage
their Interest; but let such know, that as the old proverb is, It Is ill meddling
with edge Tools, and dangerous to defame a person of Honor, who may at some
time or other, in all likelihood, have the power of Revenge. All the refuge
these fort of persons have, is the Blind under which they shelter themselves,
appearing only Incognito, or in Masquerade, only to be known to their own
party, and by such ridiculous Libells as these, to fortify the imbicillity of
a staggering Brother, or to increase the malice of an inveterate Champion.

But however this most scandalous Libel, put out under the name of Madam
Fanshaw, and attested by several persons of Honor, goes as yet unpunished, yet
since as Solomon says, sometimes Answer a Fool according to his Folly, so we
will give some reply to a Knave or Knaves, according to his or their malice:
And for this end we will consider this Libel, with it adjuncts of time and
persons, who wrote it, the substance of the Libel it self, and for what end it
was spread abroad.

As for the first, it is observable, that now more than ever, the Jesuitical
and popish party, are again very busy and very malicious, having renewed their
hopes, by reason of our sad Destractions; a time very convenient to put forth
their Venomn, and which they seldom miss to do upon very opportunity; a time
wherein they believe their boldness for their cause may be showed, and in which
they may (after their usual manner) Libel any body with impunity: a time of
Trouble and Destraction to the whole Nation, and of seeming Disgrace and
displeasure to that most noble person they endeavor to abuse: And lastly, a
time most fit for their purpose, to turn all things, whether real or feigned
into Ridicule, and to set up Folly and Lies so like to Truth, that the Vulgar
can scarce see the one from the other.

As to the persons in particular who Wrote this Libel, it were well they were
known, that they might be branded, or left to the Indignation of the people;
but as they are sheltered in the Crowd, under the Vizard of Obscurity, they may
pass unpunished for the present, till some private Judgment, usually the
Reward of malice, overtakes them: But as to the general, we may very
confidently aver, that it is one of the Popish Faction, some Jesuit, or hot
spur Dukist, for they are hardly to be separate; for you that have read the
Libel, may perceive, that tho Libeller tells you, with some Regret, That Madam
Fanshaw is not a Papist, but Converted by her Husband to the Protestant
Religion, which shows the Libeller or Libellers malice to her, for that reason,
raising their malicious and Ridiculous wonderful Narration, upon her name,
tackt on with all the scoffs and jears imaginable.

As to the substance of the Libel it self, it is a most ridiculous story, with
little Wit, and much Malice, invented of an Apple-Womans Son, Cured of the
Kings Evil, by the stroke of Madam Fanshaws Hand, in opposition of that, not
long since published, of his Grace the Duke of Monmouth, her Brother, doing
something of that Nature. But as the story, by the penning, and the Ridicule
and Buffoonery that Attends it, shows it self a mere Fable; so there is no need
to say any thing further of it, but to pass on to the last and main point to be
considered, the end of this Story which is most plain.

And as to this we may consider it Twofold: First, as to the Advancement of the
Common Cause, the securing the Succession to the D. and the bring in of Popery
into England, the main end, the other the means to that end. Secondly, As to
the abuse in particular, of His Grace the D. of Monmouth, because a Protestant,
and an obstacle to the designs of the Libellers.

As to the first, it is most evident, That this Libel, with many others lately
spread abroad, is for no other end than the Advancement of the Papistical
Interest, and the promoting of the Horrid Plot, which seems by these their
wicked endeavors, not as yet to have an end, or else they would not still go
about with these Effronteries, to abuse a person so innocent, and so
considerable in the Eyes of all good Men, and loyal Subjects, as the Duke of
Monmouth. This is the Common Cause, the Ruin of the Nation, by the overthrow
of our Religion, and setting up Popery in its Room, and as the only means to
do this, their Hopes now chiefly rely on the D. of Y. being a Papist, and his
suceeding to the Crown; therefore, they make use of all ways imaginable, no
matter how unlawful, how scandalous to good manners, nor how contrary to
Morality or Civility, nay, to all Law and Government, so it may advance this
Interest, which they so sedulously endeavor to promote, and by removing all
Obstacles, and Defaming all persons, from the highest to the lowest, that stand
in their way.

In the last place, as to the particular abuse to the Duke of Monmouth, the end
is like wise plain enough, only because they judge him to be an Obstacle, and
that no small one, to the D. succeeding to the Crown; For otherwise malice it
self could not object any thing to this Noble person, that might give the least
occasion of a Libel against him. But as Thales said, being asked what was the
most hurtful thing in the World, he answered Malice; for it hurts even the best
things if it touches them: So I say, this Malicious and Invenomus Libeling, may
do hurt to the clearest Innocence in the world, for there are many so
Evil-natur'd and affected, that they greedily suck the poison from such
Venomous Weeds.

The Foundation on which this Libel is built, is the known printed Paper of the
Dukes Curing the King's Evil, and lest that in the Vulgars eyes should seem to
give him any Title of claim to Legitimacy, and so to Succession to the Crown of
his Father (whom God preserve to defeat all their hopes by a long Reign) they
raised in opposition to that, this Story of his Sister, Curing the Evil in a
Man, as well as he in a Maid; upon which, the Libeller makes many Joking
Discants, scoffing at the Protestant Religion, and the Dukes Legitimacy. And
also concludes his Story, That the Duke also shortly intended to shut himself
up with the Lions in the Tower, to prove himself of Royal Race; with such like
abusive and Scurrilous Wit and Drollery. All which, as it might be justly
answered with Laughter and Scorn, so I shall make but a short Reply.

Improbi Consilium in extremum incidit Malum. They think by this means to do
the Noble Duke a prejudice, but it may in the end fall upon their own heads. It
is very well known, that the curing of the Struma, or filthy running sores,
called by us, the King's Evil, from long custom derived to our King, from Edw.
the Confessor, in curing this Evil Disease by stroaking; is no ways a mark of a
Right and Legitimate Successor, as the Libeller most sillily would intimate,
thereby intimating that the Duke of Monmouth was so ambitious, as to look and
endeavor for the Crown (a thing they fear because a Protestant) and this way
to raise Jealousies in his Royal fathers breast, and awaken his anger and
displeasure against him, as presuming too much: This no doubt, the malice of
the Libeller points at, and would thereby let the people see, that the Story of
the D. of Monmouth's Curing the Evil, was made by the Protestant party, or by
some of his Creatures, only to make him looked on as a lawful Successor, and
Legitimate, by reason of the curing the Evil, and this they would overthrow by
this Rediculous story of their Libel. I am apt to believe, whoever he was that
writ the Libel, had also some singer in the Black Box, which he cannot forbear
to mention. But as I have said, 'twas a weak and most Rediculous thing in the
Duke of Monmouth's Creatures to raise such a story of the Dukes Curing the
Evil, to prove his Legitimacy lawful, and so heir to the Crown, for it is not
Entailed to the Heir, but to the Crown it self, and though those who were no
right Heirs to the Crown, once in possession of the Crown, possessed the same
Gift.

But what if this story of the Duke of Monmouth's Curing the Evil be true, is
it so strange a thing, when we see it done by every Seventh Son, who at least
pretend to it, and therefore if he did Cure it, or should again Cure it, that
might better prove he was a Seventh Son, then Legitimate or Heir to the Crown.
But we know that Physicians who give Natural causes to things that seem
Supernatural to the Vulgar, do attribute the Cause more to the parties
Imagination, than to the Virtue of the Touch, and how far the power of
Imagination has wrought upon a person, has been seen in far greater miracles
than curing a running Sore; so that there is no marvel or wonder, if a Maid so
strongly possessed by the power of her Imagination, should grow well by the Touch
of the Dukes hand, and might very well pass without this Libellers malicious
and Defamitory story, in rediculing the Action, and scoffing at the person of
this most Noble Peer.

But as the Libeller Concludes with a Wish, That he Lion will Crown the Duke of
Monmouth with his Imperial Paw, that way declaring the lawful Successor, by
removing the worst King's Evil out of the way; so I shall conclude, That I wish
this braying Ass, Inveloped in a Lion Skin, may according to the Fable in
AEsop, be found out and well beaten, for endeavoring to affright and disturb
others under his Lyonish Masquerade.

Asinus Asino pulcherriuius.
FINIS.
London, Printed for T. B. 1681.


