THE ANSWER OF THE OFFICERS at WHITEHALL TO THE LETTER FROM THE Officers of the
Parliaments Army in Scotland from Linlithgow, Oct. 22. WITH A RETURN OF THE
GENERAL, and OFFCERS in Scotland, thereunto.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1659.

The Answer of the Officers at Whitehall, to the Letter from the Officers of
the Parliaments Army in Scotland, from Linlithgow, October. 22.
Dear Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers,
WE most heartily wish Grace and Truth to be multiplied unto you, through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; And also we desire the God and Father
of all Grace, to add to your Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to
Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Godliness; and to Godliness,
Brotherly-kindness; and to Brotherly-kindness, Charity.

Dear Brethren, We cannot but be deeply affected and afflicted in our own
spirits, to consider of your dissatisfaction with us upon mistaken grounds. You
have known us these many years to be your faithful Brethren, that durst do
dothing that is sinful; And we may affirm with plainness, honesty, and
simplicity of heart, we have done nothing in the late Revolution, but that
which the Providence of the most wise God prepared to our hands, and led us out
unto, without so much as one half hours time to design or resolve to take that
course we were necessitated unto; Since which most of such persons that were
not clear in the present and sudden Action, have made their acknowledgement of
their full satisfaction, and we are mutually reconciled, and they are received
and rendered by us as affectionate Brethren; And from a more full Narrative of
the providential Grounds, and gradual Steps that led us to that work, (yet with
aching hearts) and as an Answer to your Queries, signed in your Name by William
Clark Secretary, bearing date the 22 Instant: We refer you to a Book Entitled,
The Armies Plea, And also, The Armies Declaration; relation thereunto being
had, we hope will give you satifaction.

Loving Brethren, What have we done, that you are offended? We are not
conscious, that any thing is acted by us upon the Public Theater, but that
which we judge is acceptable to God; And what we have done has proceeded from
uprightness of heart, and for the glory of God, the good of his Interest, Cause
and People in these Nations; Nothing less than these worthy ends could have
caused us to adventure our All that is dear to us for your and their sakes; And
after such a hazard, our Brethren to look shy upon us, yea such, with whom we
have lived and conversed together, prayed, fought, and jeoparded our lives
together, And witnesses together of the glory of the most high God, in the high
places of the field; Yea, we, that are of one Society, of one Family and
Household, that none hitherto (through the grace of God) could disunite us, now
to be at a distance with us, is the greatest wound to us, which is
unexpressable: If it had been from our Enemies, we could have born it; Oh but,
they are the wounds of the house of our Friends. And all this arising without
dealing brotherly with us, and without so much as sending to know the
providential Grounds that led us to these Undertakings; And likewise your and
our unhappiness has been possibly by misinformations received by those who
have corresponded with the principal occasioners of this Breach; However we are
censured by you, we shall, we hope, carry Christianly and Brotherly toward
you, and exercise our selves in the Doctrine of our Savior, If any be
overtaken in a fault, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, knowing
also we are subject to like temptations; And we ought to pity and pray for one
another, and forgive one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven
us; We hope the fear of God will guide you, so that you may do nothing to
grieve Him and his little Flock, and rejoice the common Enemy abroad and at
home, nor give them advantages to make a prey of these poor Nations: What can
you propound to your selves? If you are for good things, So are we; If for a
Free State and Commonwealth, So are we; If against a single Person, So are we;
If for Reformation, So are we; If for Godliness, and the Nations to be exalted
in Righteousness, So are we; Why do we differ in the form and way to it? Oh,
dear friends, if you should precipitately engage into a War, and should conquer
your Brethren, Would not the consequence be a Conquest over your selves, and
all the good People of the Land? And if they are gone, certainly (if you retain
your old Principles) you would not desire to live long after them.

Precious Brethren, We commend unto you that place of Scripture, Josh. 1.14,
15. We shall with our bended knees implore the God of Heaven, and King of
Saints, to guide you, and persuade you, as holy Noah said in another case, Genesis
9.27. God shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem. Finally,
Brethren, Farewell, Be of good comfort, Let us be of one mind, live in peace,
and the God of love and peace shall be with you and us; We remain

Your most affectionate Brethren and Fellow Soldiers.
Dear Friends, We hope to hear, in your Answer to this, that all our dear
Friends now in Bonds, are at Liberty, and that the Lord has satisfied your
heart to acquiesce in his present Dispensations, so as we may not expose each
other to further Inconveniency.



A RETURN of the General and Officers in Scotland, to the ANSWER of the
Officers at Whitehall.
Dear Brethren, and Fellow Soldiers in the Lord,
IN the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, We return you our most hearty wishes and
prayers, That Grace, and Truth, and Peace also, might be multiplied unto you,
And that to your Faith, and your Virtue, and your Knowledge, and your
Temperance, and your Godliness, and your Brotherly kindness, and your Charity,
might be added, Patience, and Meekness, and Humility, and Self-denial. Great
are the thoughts of our hearts for the divsions in Reuben, and we are (as you
express it) deeply affected and afflicted in our own Spirits, when we consider
what cause we have to be dissatisfied with you, our dear Brethren; you, with
whom we have lived and conversed together; with whom we have prayed, and
sought, and jeoparded our lives together; with whom we have taken sweet
Counsel, and walked together in the House of God as friends: But we cannot
conceal from you, that our affection and affliction of Spirit is much increased
by the Letter you sent us by Captain Deane, and by the Books you referred us
to, in that Letter. We had before some small (indeed our only) hopes that there
might be some mistake between us, but alas! we cannot but now think (since we
find you have no more to say for your selves) that our fears were but too true,
and the causes of our dissatisfaction at your present actings but too just: We
shall deal with you with that plainness, and freedom, and sincerity that
becomes Brethren, for so we think it becomes us, to fulfill all
righteousness; and so we think it expedient, both for you and us, that we may
the sooner come to a right Understanding one of another.

We could not be satisfied that there was any such need of more General
Officers (the first occasion of this unhappy difference) as that the Parliament
should be pressed to it so unseasonably, and so just a Jealousy created in
them, that there was a Design to set up a Single Person (of which they had but
so late, and so sad experience) and we could not but think it sufficient for
the security of the good Interest, that the Army was united under one Head, the
Parliament.

We were less satisfied, that after you declared your Satisfaction and
Acquiescence in the Votes of the House, you should endeavor by a new way to
wrest the Power out of their own hands, and to prosecute the same Design; Thus
making the Army a Corporation in a manner independent from the Civil Power, and
creating to it an Interest, distinct from that of the Peoples, by whom they
hitherto have, and still must live, and for whom they are, by their Engagements
and Duties bound to die; and that, after you knew the Parliament had in effect
disapproved your Petition, you should still endeavor to get more hands to it,
which neither the Parliament, nor we our selves could look upon, any otherwise,
than as a Design to force the Parliament to grant what they had already in
effect disapproved, if not to do that which you say was done at less than half
an hour's warning.

But then, that after the sad experience of so many Confusions and tossings,
which these poor Nations had already felt by such actings as these, after the
unhappy (and since acknowledged unlawful) former Interruption of that (by your
selves called) famous long Parliament, after the Confusions and Distractions of
that little one of your own, and not of the Peoples choosing; after the
occasion by them given to some of setting up, and the Necessity imposed on us
of accepting a Single Person contrary to our former Engagements, and to our
Interests; after our late renewed Engagement, and our solemn and serious
expressions of Repentance, That you should so soon return to your former Sin,
and for the apparent Interest of nine or ten Persons (who how precious soever,
yet cannot be worth the blood that may be shed in this quarrel) to put a new
force upon the Parliament, and to destroy all Lawful Authority in the three
Nations, and to put them out of hopes of ever having any for the future, but
what shall be at your disposals; and to do these things in the Name of the
whole Army, thereby usurping a Power over your Brethren, to which you have no
right, and involving us in the same guilt with You, in those Actings, against
which we are bound to Protest before God and Man; This is that which lies the
forest upon our Spirits; this is that which wounds us deepest.

This is that which must of Necessity make the three Nations slaves to the
Army, The Armies of Scotland and Ireland, slaves to that of England, and that
of England to nine or ten Persons; and perhaps in short time those nine or ten,
to one Single One: The best effect it can have, must be that which you so much
complain of, in the Armies Plea, Page 25.

That all the pious and good People of this Nation shall not enjoy a peaceable
and quiet life in all Godliness and Honesty, but only some part of them.

We cannot but in the Name of the Lord tell you that these Actings make us
stink in the Nostrils of the good People, and cause the Name of God to be evil
spoken of, and his Enemies to rejoice.

And yet you say, Behold, what have we done? and tell us in many, but very
general terms, what good things you are for: We likewise are for good things,
as well as you; We are for a free State and Commonwealth as well as you, We are
against a Single Person as well as you; We are for the Reformation as well as
you; We are as well as you for Godliness, and the Nations to be exalted in
Righteousness; if so be that you be indeed for these things, which you pretend,
and that we differ not in the end, as well as in the way to it.

But how can you be for good things, as long as you do that which is evil? How
can you be for a Free State and Commonwealth, if, for the Interest of nine or
ten Persons, You dissolve Parliaments? To what purpose is it to be against a
Single Person, if you be for nine or ten? or for Reformation, if you return so
soon to former Sins? Or, how can Godliness or Righteousness be Exalted, by
violent and unwarrantable means?

Brethren, Our daily prayer to God is, That we may not be necessitated to a War
with you; but, if we be, we must tell you, that we do not precipitate our
selves, or run rashly, or inconsiderately into it; We have had time, sadly and
seriously to consider the whole Matter, and we must deal plainly with you, and
tell you, that what you pretend, You had not half an hours time to deliberate
about, We have expected from you some weeks; We could not but take notice that
the occasion both of Calling and Interrupting this Parliament, was the making
of General Officers.

How little desire we have of making a conquest over you, He knows who knows
how little joy, we should take in it; If there were not something in the
Quarrel that is dearer to us (...) ourlives, we should never undertake it.

And now, Brethren, as yet dear and precious in our eyes, we beseech you for
the mercies of Jesus Christ to lay these things to heart; and, as we have done
with John. 1. ver. 14, 15. so to reflect seriously upon Josh. 7. ver. 19. and
once more to take the shame to your selves, and to Repent with a Repentance not
to be repented of. Consider whose blood is to be shed on both sides, what Cause
it is that lies at stake, who they are that are like to reap the benefit of our
Contentions; Suffer not Self or Interest, nor desire of the things of this
world, to entangle you again in the same snare out of which you have so lately
escaped: Lay not up your Treasure in this world, But seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven; Do not evil, because you think good may come of it.

Finally, Brethren, stand fast in that Liberty wherein Christ has made you
free, and be not extangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. The grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen.

EDINBURGH, November. 7. 1659, Your most affectionate and afflictive Brethren and
Fellow Soldiers.
POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Brethren,
WE entreat you, put not so hard a name upon the necessary and short restraint
of our Brethren, as Bonds; We still own them and use them as Brethren; their
Pay is still continued to them, and the Restraint put upon them, for their, and
your, and our Security, and the Security of all Gods People, we hope will be
very short, shorter than either you or we can expect: And take it not ill we
acted any thing without first sending to you, We acted nothing but what was
necessary to our present safety, and we immediately sent our Letters to you,
which If they came not to your hands, it is not our faults. We have lately seat
Commissioners, Men faithful and approved, whom we hope you will treat as
Brethren.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers of
that part of the Army at London.



FINIS.

