An Answer to a PAMPHLET, Entitled [The humble Apology of the English
Catholics.] Written by a Royalist before Christmas 1666. THUANUS, Miseros
Principes quibus de conjuratione non creditur nisi occisis.



Printed in the Year 1667.

READER,
THis small Paper was printed in have, and by none of the skilfullest hands or
plainest Copyes: If therefore thou will overlook the mistakes in poynting and
correct these following errata's, it will be but right to the Author and an
help to thyselfe.

Page 4. l, 16. dele be. p. l. 9. lege infortunately. ibid. l. 24. that of,
lege of that. p. 7. l. 2. forts lege sorts. ibid. l. 16. in lege is. l. 20.
dele? l. 22. pro; lege? lin. ult. lege Incestuous. p. 8. l. 1. lege impossible.
l. 13. lege much. p. 9. l. 17. lege both. l. penult. lege persecutions. p. 10.
l. 3. lege toleration. l. 8. against his lege against his. p. 11. l. 1. lege
them. l. 8. your lege you. page 12. l. 3. of lege or. l. 4. dele, l. 28. None
lege none. p. 13, l. 6. lege pamphlet. ibid. Margin. l. 6. the IV the lege the
IV to the. p. 13. l. penult. lege since. p. 15. l. 10. lege Leaguers. lin. ult.
which lege with. p. 16. ad l. 3. in Margin. lege These Sixteen were the chief
abettors of the League in Paris. l. 9. dele, lin. 10. lege greater. lin. 23. hy
lege by. l. 34. repentance, for lege repentance for. ib. fact being lege fact;
being.

An Answer to a Pamphlet, Ent^^uled [The humble Apology of the English
Catholics.] Written by a Royalist before Christmas 1666.
THUANUS, Miseros Principes quibus de conjuratione non creditur nisi occisis.
IF the Author of the Apology could make good the beginning of his Discourse,
I could very heartily turn Apologist for him and his Friends. He says right,
(and the Devil spoke true when he cried aloud that Jesus was the Son of God)
that the Arms which Christians may use against lawful Powers in their
severities, are only prayers and tears; Thus far he speaks like a Protestant,
that is to say, a primitive Christian; and it might have stood as a fair
Character of his pretended innocence, had he not foully bespattered it in the
sequel with the dirt he casts upon the face of Authority. But first it would be
considered what it is that the Apologist would be at upon his frequent
Compellation of his Lords and Gentlemen; is it to draw them to a firm
combination with those of his Roman party against all such that shall question
the innocence of his Carriage and Intentions? Nothing less it seems can
satisfy or secure him; unless my Lords and Gentlemen, that is, the old
constant Royalist stand up for his advocate, he must fall under the heavy
censure of his greatest adversaries, who, (to complete the mischief and misery
of it) are not only become his accusers, but his insulting judges, as he
complains.

And now it is high time for my Lords and Gentlemen to remember their often
vows to that party, and renounce all further conjunction with them, that have
been the cause of so great calamity to the Nation, as he there tells them.

But is not this Divide and Impera? and though they did not nip the plant in
the bud, yet now being grown up and not likely to answer them in the expected
fruits, they will endeavor so to dismember the party as may manifestly endanger
the whole.

For what else mean those words, let it never be be recorded in story that you
forgott your often vows to us in joining to them (those insulting judges as he
terms them before) that have been the cause of so great calamity to the Nation.

Is not a disunion here manifestly endeavored? and that in direct
contradiction to what was before protested? [far be it from Catholics to
perplex Parliaments.] To reconcile this difference in the expressions will well
become the Apologist before he answer the following objections which he makes
his next task.

And here first he presents his Catholic Party astonished even to admiration,
at that calumny above the rest that their principles are said to be
inconsistent with Government, and they themselves thought ever prone to
Rebellion; As if because they account themselves the only Orthodox Christians
they must necessarily be very Loyal subjects at the least.

Indeed if they could make good the former we had reason to expect some
compliance as to the latter; seeing Religion has its name, Religio a religan^o.
from that connection and strict conjunction it works in its Professors, as with
each other, so in all, with that Government and Governor under which they have
their common protection.

But how Orthodox and united Roman Catholics are in the grounds of their
belief, (the maine ingredient in the essence of Religion) has sufficiently
appeared in the writeings of many, who have unanswerably evinced the nullity of
the Romanists Faith: whether ultimately resolved into their vertual Church, the
Pope with his Conclave, as the Jesuits will have it; Or into the
representative Church, a General Council, as others will have it; Or into both
the former conjoynd, as others contend; Or (erranti nullus terminus) into the
new mode of Orall tradition, as it is lately and clamorously urged by others
who abominate the former. Yet though our Catholics do thus stagger in the
grounds of their faith, are they not more firm in their fealties, and
Loyalties? surely their principles are every way consisting which the
Government under which they live.

Nothing less, and it will plainly appear if we consider the Doctrine of their
Church and their frequent practice.

To the former much need not be said. That the Pope, the acknowledged head of
their Church, has a plenary power to excommunicate all Christian Kings that
will not close with the Papal persuasion; and when they are excommunicated that
they cease to be Kings, that their subjects are absolved from all fealty and
allegiance to them, yea may take up Arms against them and so murder them; All
this is so notoriously known, that as no real Roman Catholic will deny, so it
were needless to urge further proof of it: Becanus, Bellarm. Bozius, Molina,
Campian. Stapleto. etc.
He that has leisure may find enough of this in Alvarez, Mariana, and diverse
others that speak expressly enough at this rate; and has it not been
sufficiently verified in the Roman Catholics practice? It Is well known who
encouraged one Parry to murder Queen Elizabeth, what Pope it was that issued
out his dreadful excommunication animateing the Subjects of England against
her; And if you will allow of Cardinal Perron's positive sentence, he will tell
you that that doctrine which renders Kings indeposeable opens a gap to no less
then schism and heresy, as if it were not only lawful, but necessary to
suppress whatever they be, that will not conform to the Popish Hierarchy.

He that should see a Sovereign Prince holding the basin whilst the Pope
washes his hands; and another no less sovereign holding the stirrup (though
unfortunately mistaken in the side) whilst he mounts up on horseback; Yea he
that should see that Bishop of Rome treading on a great Prince his neck and
abuseing that of the Psalmist for the Justification of his usurped Power --
Super Leonem and Aspidem, etc. Cannot but conclude that Dominus Deus noster
Papa (as the Canonists style him) will be the supreme Prince of the Christian
World and that all other Potentates must limit their Authority and Jurisdiction
according to the measure of his placet.

And now the premises considered (that upon the Popes excommunication Kings
cease to be such, and stand lawfully exposed to all Insolences from their
Subjects, (as has already appeared;) I can not but very much wonder, that the
Romanists should be so angry with Cromwell, Bradshaw, and the rest that of
hellish crew, for murdering our late Sovereign of blessed memory. Were they
not taught by those Romish Fathers above cited to murder CHARLES STUART, and
yet not kill the King? I dare boldly say that our late Republicarians have not
one tenet that is destructive to Civil Government and the Soveraignity of
Kings, that was not first broached by the Romanists, to whom we owe our late
confusions; Which has answered the Predictions of Gondamore the Spanish
Ambassador, who upon his return into Spain gave out that he had kindled a fire
in England which would burst out into a flame forty years afterward.

Not to insist upon those several disguises, presented by the Romanists in the
late troubles under the habit of all sorts of Mechanics, Artists, Soldiers,
and others, so to preach up and foment the rebellion with our homebred
Sectarians; this may suffice to demonstrate how ill consistent their principles
are with our English Government, and consequently how weakly they acquit
themselves of that Calumny they complain of even to admiration; But the
Apologist has his other pretenses and will clear all objections that may
encounter him in his way; it will be necessary to take a brief view of them.

And here first our Author amuseth us with a pretended submission to lawful
powers; begins then to boast how patiently their party did bear with the
proceedings of the present Parliament; how they used no tricks and subterfuges
to nip their proceedings in the bud: (this in his expression.) And I would be
glad to know what they could have done more then they did; what means he by
this nipping in the bud? Would he have had another Gunpowder treason? To what
purpose all this enumeration of our several Kings? Richard I. Edw.
Long-shanks, Edw. III. and Henry the fifth. their opinions of their Popish
Subjects; In the first place it may be said they were not so cleer-sighted as
Princes are in these days; that the Roman writers were not altogether so
insolent, plain, and positive against the soveraignity of Kings as now.

As for the French Kings, they did very roundly maintain their rights and
soveraignties, having been sufficiently tormented by their Popish subjects in
the time of the Ligue; that what the Jesuits were venting to the prejudice of
Kings, was by cunning and insinuation writeing one thing and making their
French Kings believe another, as is usual with that kind of People.

As for the House of Austria, they have the greatest dependances upon the Pope
imaginable, and the Pope has a very great tie upon that House for by their
incestious marriages authorized by the Popes they make it impossible for them
to throw off the Authority of the Pope, for should they do so, all of that
House would prove Bastards; And now even in these our days the present King of
Poland (in the life time of his Brother known by the name of Cardinal Casimir)
did marry his said own Brothers Wife, and this was the policy of the Pope with
our Henry the VIII in his dispenseing with his marrying his own Brothers Wife,
that he might have as great a dominion over the Kings of England, as of Spain.

As for the Authors branding this last Century that what was perpetrated now,
was never done before, (as to Mary Queen of Scots, and our late Souveraigne.) I
very much wonder at the impudence of the man, to mix these two actions. The
first was done by lawful authority, for her being Queen of Scotland did not
bereave Queen Elizabeth of her Soveraignity, and I have heard it averred by
learned and knowing men, that the King of Scotland has sat in an English
Parliament in former ages as a Peer of England; and then no wonder, nor
injustice neither, that the Queen of Scotland suffered death for her treason
against the Queen.

As for the latter (the murder of our late Souveraigne of blessed and glorious
Memory,) the action is without example, such and so heinous a thing was never
acted upon the Theater of the World: And as I said before, so I will again,
that the murder of that good King may properly enough be said to be the
abominable product of that accursed doctrine of the Popes Infallibility, and
his Soveraignity over Kings; For those accursed Regicides, and murderers of
that glorious King, did but a little alter the argument; For that power which
the Romanists lodged in the Pope, these wicked miscreants placed in the People;
They had heard there was a power above Kings, and instead of giveing it to the
Pope, they gave it to the Peoples Representative: And so fell this great King
to the consternation of the whole World, and for a memento to all Kings to
awake them out of their Lethargy and be an exhortation to them to vindicate
their Supreme Authority; We do all of us much commend the fidelity of Carlos,
Whitegrave, and the Penderels, and Huddlestone, and this Author is much
mistaken if he think any of us do wish them ill; We have said enough already
to evidence that they effected that glorious and happy action, (happy I say to
all these Nations) through some other Instigations then the principles of the
Romish Religion; They were led thereto certainly by a hand Divine as well as
assisted by it; They carried English hearts about them at that time; But if
they will Apostatize, it is none of my fault, for my part I am well content they
be dispensed with as a mark put upon them for their miraculous preserving our
good King.

As for the stigmatized person; I must needs say for him that he labored in
the vineyard before the last hour of the day, and was very ready both with
hand and pen, to promote the Interests of the King for his restoration, and
therefore that word of reproach might will have been left out.

That we differ in religion is but too true; and we dare as boldly as
yourselves appeal to the day of Judgment. Something you say we differ; I say
very much, else why does your Church damn ours? But this is not a place either
to dispute about Religion or express wherein we vary. We are assured our
Religion is the best; free from Superstition, free from too much homeliness;
God and the King are best served in our way; Our Church is Monarchical as well
as yours; but still with a subordination to our Sovereign Temporal Prince. What
our great Ancestors were, we shall not be ashamed to remember, nor the
Conversion of England from Paganism, which possibly (as all the World besides
converted from the like errors) did retain some few Pagan Ceremonies, from
which the Church of England was purified in the reformation of Edw. VI. and
Queen Elizabeth; He does well to put us in mind of Romish perfecutions, are not
we justified thereby if we do the same to you?

France forsooth is instanced, where the reformed Religion is permitted, which
I shall leave indifferent whether to attribute that tolleration to their vast
numbers, or to the innocence of their tenets, not at all prejudicial to Kings;
this I am sure, they own no Sovereign above their Natural King, they have no
foreign jurisdictions in their spirituals, and as little in their Temporals;
Let this be remembered they assisted their Henry the III. against his Popish
Rebels, even after the Massacre at Paris; and Henry the IIII. in his siege of
Paris, when the Duke of Parma relieved it.

But as for the French King, he is no competent instance in this case; Had you
singled out some Trent-Catholicks (such our English Catholics would be
acknowledged) there had been a fairer color for your Argument. When you have
found some Roman Catholic Princes of the Trent persuasion, allowing the same
favors to known Protestants, you may more plausibly plead for the like
allowance; till when, by their Inquisitions and such like entertainments of
protestants, they have prescribed the Law for other Princes, toward those that
no less differ from them in matters of Religion.

We will wave the Massacre at Paris to come nearer home, what think you of
the Massacre in Ireland, as a forerunner of the English troubles? was not the
Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland Countenanced, and owned by a Popes Nuntio?
Let us draw nearer to these times and speak of what passed within this
twelvemonth; Was not the Popes Bull, an occasion of Cornett Nangles Rebellion?
Which had been as universal as the first, but that the Romish party there
wanted strength? The Author by mentioning the French Kings kindness to the
French Protestants, puts me in mind to affirm he is much mistaken; for that
King has of late begun very much to persecute them; He has taken from them most
of their Churches, will not suffer them to educate their own Children, and
many other grievous punishments he does now inflict upon them, and it may well
be suspected he intends yet more against them having already purged his guards
of all of their belief.

The Author grows yet more impudent and extravagant, for first he goes about
to illegitimate Queen Elizabeth, and then bespatters the fame of our King Henry
the VIII. and by that one may see where he has his breeding, and where he
learned to speak contumeliously of Kings.

Your urge the Allegiance sworn to Queen Mary; and it is no such wonder
considering the Artifices and Power of the Roman Catholics at that time; But
all Roman Catholics will grant that Queen Mary's Mother was King Henry's
Brothers Wife; Yes and it will be replied that the Pope dispensed with the
marriage; He did so, but St John the Baptist (whom our blessed Savior honors
with so high a testimony in the Gospel) would not have done it, he condemned
the like marriage in King Herod, and had be lived in those times would have
done no less in Kings Henrys. Though perhaps the Pope like another Herod would
have cut of his head too for that bold affront; yet the Popes power, though
never so much revered in those times could not then silence the suffrages of
our Universities here, nor those in foreign parts, who jointly affirmed and
confirmed, both the lawfulness, and necessity of King Henry's Divorce from his
Brothers Wife: which does sufficiently wipe off that filth, the Auth or from
his impure mouth breathes out against that Queen of glorious memory; But King
Henry the VIII. it seems is a great eyesore to you, and you will leave no
place unsearched for some stones of reproach to throw at him: yet if you would
be pleased to cast a serious eye upon diverse of your Popes, the chief heads of
your Church (you may find a full choice in the ninth and tenth Centuries
(besides several others) and when you have thoroughly perused the exact
symmetry of their Carriage and practices (as described in some of your own
Authors, then turn your eye upon King Henry the VIII. and you vvil readily I
doubt not conclude the saint to be on his side.

And making so bold with Princes, it would be a wonder if Ministers of State
did escape his pen; and it may well be affirmed, that King James is wounded
through Cecyls side, of rather that wise King himself is deeply pierced, for
may not one thus understand the Apologist? Cecyl is compared to Ulysses and
King James to Cromwell. The whole Parliament, is likewise aspersed by him, and
according to the opinion of the Apologist, God is mocked every fifth of
November; so that God himself cannot escape him neither.

He insists much upon the merit of those of his Religion, that ventured their
lives in the quarrel of the late King of glorious memory; Where this great
merit lies I cannot well understand for these reasons; First they were his
Subjects, and so they were in duty bound to fight for him; Secondly they were
persecuted by the Long Parliament, and that good King (upon pretense that he so
much countenanced them) was persecuted likewise for their sakes, and so they
were constrained to stand by him, and for him, for their own preservation; And
there is one of his Subjects of that Religion that stipulated, and did drive a
bargain with the last King, before he would engage for him. The Author would
have us believe Dinner-bells are mistaken for Mass-bells: Do the Papists dine
at 6, 7, or 8 of the clock in the morning? All their Insolences the Author
would persuade us to attribute to the height of their zeal against Constables,
or other persons in authority formerly against the King; When it is very well
known that dureing the Rebellion, when the late Rebels Cromwell and Bradshaw,
and the rest, were in humane appearance, confirmed in their Thrones; None were
better used that went under the name of Cavaleers then Papists: and now since
the happy restoration of our gracious Sovereign many of them endeavor to
strike in with the Fanatics, desiring them to join with them, and they will
take an order with the Episcopal party; These are the men that so much boast
themselves of their Loyalty.

As to the burning of London, God reward them according to their demerit, that
were the authors of that dismal and execrable fire; This is most certain, that
the Papists rejoice much in those sad flames, and it is a common discourse
amongst them, that the burning of that City is a happiness to the Kingdom, and
has cured it of the Rickets.

It is now time to draw to a conclusion, though perhaps some things in the
Pamplet (being stuffed with many ridiculous passages, and little pertinent to
the purpose,) I have for brevities sake omitted to speak to.

For a farewell I will only add this to the Author; that if the Protestant
assertors of his Majesty's Right, had been as few as those he has set down in
red letters of his party, He should here have been imitated by me; but our
numbers are so vast, that many large folio's would not contain them.

But instead of the Apologist his bloody or red list, take here an extract of
some things out of the History of Henry the IV. of France, written by Hardouin
de Perefix Bishop of Rodez, formerly Tutor to this French King Lewis,
concerning the Ligue in France, called by its abettours the Sacred Vnios,
supported by Popes, and more especially by Sextus Quintus, and Gregory the XIV;
and entered into (by persuasion of the Roman Divines) by the Rebellious Roman
Catholic Subjects of the two Henry's the III, and IV; to oppose which they
were most chiefly assisted by their Protestant Subjects, who were always most
ready to help them in time of extremity and still proved their best and most
Loyal Subjects.

On all hands little notice is taken of Henry the IV. his right to the Crown of
France, Fol. 61. (...) Author wr^^ thus conce^^ing the suc^^sion of He the IV
Crown o^ France. 1^ year of Lord.
because he was removed above the seventh degree of blood from Henry the III.
of France; beyond which there is no kindred as to private succession. Besides
he was not of that Religion, which was ever professed by the French Kings ever
since King Clovis, and consequently was incapable of wearing the Crown, and
bearing the title of Most Christian, etc.

Some French Divines for the promotion of the League (and since approoved of by
Pope Sextus Quintus) did maintain that that Prince ought to be deposed, Fol.
66 Popish p^^^ciple con^^^ning Kings Do. 158
that did not do his duty, that power is only of God which is well regulated,
otherwise when it is ill ordered it is not Authority but theevery: The words in
the Original are thus -- Qu'il n'y a que la puissance bien ordonne, que soit de
Dieu; autrement quand elle est dereglee, que ce n'est pas autorite, mais
brigandage, and qu'il est aussi absurd de dire que celuy lasoit Roy, qui
nescait pas gouverner, and qui est de pourveu d'entendement, comme de croire
qu'un a vengle puisse servir de guide, ni qu'une statue immobile puisse fair
mouvoir des hommes vivans.

Then came news from Rome, Fol. 68. Ann. Do. 1585.
that the Pope Sextus Quintus who succeeded to Gregory the XIII. had approoved
the League; and over and above, had thundered out his Bulls of excommunication
against the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde, declareing them Heretics,
relaps, chiefs, fautors, and protectours of Heresy, and as such fallen into
the Censures and penalties imported by the Laws and Canons; deprived them, and
their heirs, of all Lands and Dignities, and incapable to succeed to any
Principality whatsoever, and more especially to the Kingdom of France,
absolveing their Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance with a command not to
obey them.

When Henry the IV. (then King of Navar) heard what the Pope had done against
him, Fol. 71. Ann. Do. 1585.
he sent presently to King Henry the III. to complain thereof, and let him know
that it concernd him more then himself; That he might well think if the Pope
took upon him, thus to determine of the succession to his Kingdom, and
declare a Prince of the blood incapable of the Crown, he might afterward
proceed further, and unthrone him, as heretofore Pope Zachary had degraded
Childerick the III.

The Pope gives to the Duke of Joyeuse all the King of Navars Territories. Fol.
82, Ann. Do. 1587. Fol. 100. An. 1589. Fol. 101. Ann. Do. 1589.


Henry the III. is excommunicated by Pope Sextus Quintus. The Leaguers would
have the Duke of Mayenne to take upon him the title of King of France; which he
refuses but accepts of another title which they give him to be Lieutenant
General of the State and Crown of France, as if the Throne were empty; the
Leaguers break the Kings great Seal and make a new one, on the one side
whereof were the Arms or scutcheon of France, and on the other an empty Throne,
and this inscription about that new Seal, [Charles Duke of Mayenne, Lieutenant
of the State and Crown of France.]

Henry the III. being killed by a Roman Priest called Jaques Clement a Jacobin,
those that did not oppose him, Fol. (...) An^^ (...) 158^
because he was a Roman Catholic, did believe themselves obliged in Conscience
to join with the Leagners against the King of Navarre now King of France by the
death of the aforesaid King Henry the III, because he was an Hugenot; For the
Papists of that Kingdom, do hold that none can be King of France, that is not
a Roman Catholic.

The reproaches of the Parisians, Fol* (...) An^^ (...) 159^
the instant desire of the Legate; (whom the Pope had sent to countenance and
uphold concerns of the League) and the Spanish Cabal oblige the Duke of Mayenne
to give battle to King Henry the IV. of France.

Paris being besieged by the French King, Fol. (...) Ann^ (...) 159^
the Popes Legate forgot and omitted nothing, that might encourage the Parisians
to hold out; he consulted the Faculty of Divinity, and obtained from that
society such resolves against the Bearnois (for so was called by the Leaguers
Henry the IV.) as he thought good; The Legate caused several processions; and
all Officers took an Oath of fidelity to the Holy Union; for so was the Ligue
called by its abettors. (...)


In the mean while Sextus the V. dies, leaveing in the treasury of the Church 5
Millions of gold; To him succeeded Urban the VII. who dyed within 13 days, and
to his Urban succeeded Gregory the XIV. who with very much zeal supported the
League. (...).


The King of Spain was seconded by Pope Gregory XIV. in his assistances to the
Leaguers who was much more eager and earnest, then the said King for them; For
notwithstanding all the entreaties, and letters from the Lord of Luxemburgh
(afterward Duke of Piney,) and other Princes and Lords who continued which
Henry the IV; and being deaf likewise to the submissions and remonstrances made
to him by the Marquess of Pisany (deputed to the Pope from them) he very hotly
embraced the Interests of the Ligue; He kept correspondence with the Sixteen
receiving letters from them and writeing to them again; the Pope moreover did
prodigally lavish the Treasure left him by Sextus Quintus, to raise an army of
12000 men, which he sent to succor and assist the League, the Command whereof
he gave to Count Hercules Sfondrati his Nephew, (whom he made Duke of
Montmortion, at that instant for the greater luster.) And this Army was
seconded by a monitory, or Bull of excommunication, against all Prelates that
should assist King Henry, and sent this Bull by Marcellin Londriane his Nuntio
with a great Quantity of money to be distributed amongst the Sixteen and other
chiefs of that faction in the principal Cities of the Kingdom of France.

The Parliament at Tours caused the Bull to be torn by the hands of the common
hangman, and ordained seizure of the Popes Nuntio: On the other side the
Parliament at Paris repelled this decree, ordaining that the Pope and his
Nuntio must be obeyed.

King Henry receives succors out of England, (...).
and from the Protestants of Germany, and then besieges the City of Roan.

King Henry turns Papist and is absolved by the Archbishop of Bourges in the
Abbey Church of S. Denis; (...).
against the said Bishop the Pope is very angry for absolveing the King, and
till he obtain it of the Pope, his Rebellious Roman Catholic subjects refuse
to obey him; Neither would the Pope be persuaded to grant the King his
absolution, till his Majesty had upon the matter totally suppressed the League.

Jean Chasiel a young Student educated by the Jesuits attempts to kill the
King, (...).
but by good fortune only wounds him in the face, whereupon the society of
Jesuits are banished out of France; and their Scholar is executed for this
wicked and lewd attempt.

King Henry the IV. is killed by Ravillac who never expressed any kind of
sorrow or repentance, for so wicked a fact being persuaded he had done the Pope
and Church of Rome a very acceptable service, because he thought that King was
marching into Germany to overthrow the Roman Catholic faith there.

FINIS.

