AN ANSWER TO PRINCE RVPERTS DECLARATION.

Printed in the Year, 1643. February 16.

THe wonder is not great to have your Highness name in Print, when no cause can
be so bad, nor dictate so unlikely, but may (for a small hope where you are)
find a pen suitable to them.

Neither can there be any great prudence discovered in suffering your self to
be held out to the people, as the chiefest Instrument that has caused this
cruel, and unheard of calamity, no more then in casting this general
aspersion upon the Nation, as if it did not deserve to be governed by so good a
King as His Majesty; the belief of which may be the cause His Majesty has
communicated so much of his power to your Highness, and the rest of his bad
Counselors, who are able to overbalance more piety and goodness, then ever
could be found in any one man living; Therefore it is against you and your
adherents (forerunners in Religion and nature) that we take up Arms, and not
against His sacred majesty, as you are pleased to upbraid us.

And yet your Highness so far forgets your own natural disposition, as to
lay falsehood at the door of my Lord Wharton, who may ignorantly err, yet can
never be charged with so much impiety, as the calling heaven and earth to
witness it, a dyalect too well known amongst you; besides I have met with
diverse that are able to take up as much belief upon their bare words, as your
Highness, who have justified this Relation in every particular.

That a great part of your Cavelry left the Battle to plunder the baggage,
your own men confess; And we cannot but acknowledge it with thanks to God. But
whether your Highness were so near danger your self, or some other more
valiant Prince Rupert besides, is hard to affirm, because about that time,
Rupert made your Army very fruitful in those did personate that title. How
fast your Highness may be bound in Honor I know not, this I am sure of, Love,
Religion, or Charity can take little hold on you, else you would not plunder,
spoil, and bring to such misery, those that have ventured their lives to
restore your Family, and have freely given from their own children, to pay for
your nursing; Therefore your gratitude to His Majesty is barely pretended, He
only gave you power to ask and receive, but the peoples goodness alone made
them give to the Queen of Bohemiah, so many great and free contributions, and
now you have not only taken away their wills, but their means of ever doing the
like; having brought us to so wretched a condition our selves, that we shall
never hereafter have leisure to pity her, but rather consider her as the
Mother of our Calamity.

It asks no great credulity to believe the Standard was taken, for I have
not yet met a man so partial as to doubt it; but such as hold no truth is to
be observed, which is in any thing can be done or spoken, as appeared by your
demeanor at Brainford.

Now here your Highness begins to shuffle your matters as if you meant to show
us a trick, and make us believe contrary to our own sense, that we lost more
men then you at Keinton, though double the number we want, were found slain
with stole Mutton, Hens, and Turkies, in their mouths, hands, or snap-sacks,
the known mark of your Highness Hospitality, and of men of note you want
forty for one, and might have done more, but that they saved themselves by
turning High-landers, as you call them, being not furnished with a spirit of
extempory fighting, though your Highness is pleased to charge them with that
gift, which may give some cause to think you are turned Brownist, as likely a
thing as that the Parliament should employ Papists: Now you cannot wonder if
your common Soldiers be not mist, consisting for the most part of arrant
Rogues and Strangers, which had never no certain being, till now in their
graves, nor will they be looked after till the day of judgment; when you shall
be ashamed of being seen in the Head of so many Popish Recusants, not only of
this Nation, but fetched from Ireland, Wales, and Denmark, And yet we must
believe your Highness does it to defend the Protestant Religion, Liberty of
the Subject, and Privilege of Parliament.

And here you bestow your Courtship upon the Citizens, who might be abused to
some purpose, my Lord Wharton never intended they should suffer you and your
Cavalieers to enter London upon your Highness word: For sure your Army that
could not hold from plundering the poor lousy Blanckets and Beds at
Brainford, Redding, Malborrow, and where not, would hardly spare the rich
Petticoats in London; I say no more for making your Highness blush, only I
believe the hope of this booty, rather then the conscience you talk of, or the
goodness of your cause, makes you continue your running valor. Your
Highness, they say, love women well enough that are for your turn, though it
should seem at Keinton your valor exceeded your lust, so far together with
the women to kill children and dogs; which may be better excused then the
hanging of Boyse in cold blood for being of a contrary Religion to the
Governor, and for having more honesty then would trouble the stock of your
Highness best Regiment.

I dare not accept the brave challenge you make, because I number no Kings
amongst my Ancestors; yet this I will promise you on the word of a Gentleman,
If I meet you in the field, before this is composed, I shall endeavor to send
your Highness into another Kingdom, where there is no plundering.

I know not who you mean that was used so cruelly, unless Savage, Layton,
Lilborne, Pim, etc. who were punished beyond the cruelty of Infidels: And if
it were that time of government, that seems to your Highness too good for
this Nation, I think the Palatinate happier now, then it would have been, had
you succeeded your Father.

You ask, whose money have you taken, which may be answered by whose you have
spared, nay was there not a Warrant under his Majesty's own hand, where the
materials of my Lord Says House is given to any that shall pull it down.

Besides, It were strange, Soldiers daily paid, should do more mischief then
those who have nothing to live on, but the spoil of the Kingdom. For
profaning of Churches, you know at Kingstone your Horses stood in the
Chancell, and the whores lay in the body of the Church, which was too immodest
to be done before the picture of our Lady, therefore the Soldiers are the
less to be blamed that removed it.

The Parliament has restrained many, but none against safe conduct, whereas
you have committed those that had his Majesty's hand and seal, making that
sacred word of none effect, which was all the Persians had to show for their
lives and fortunes.

I will not charge your Highness for doing any thing unworthy your condition,
which in charity I desire were not so suitable to these courses, yet I wonder
you should so much forget your self, and your Father, as to brand our Army
with the name of Traitors, who cannot but have as just a claim to our
Liberties, as he had to the Crown of Bohemiah, and may by as just reasons take
up Arms against His Majesty's ill Counsel, as he and your self, did against
the person of the Emperor.

Neither can your Highness think any so simple, to believe the Parliament can
employ with confidence any Papists to fight for them, no more then they can in
discretion or safety send you, with your Cavaliers, to oppose them in Ireland.

I do not find after you had by your good conduct lost your brothers Army in
Germany, that your restraint was very hard, because your next dispatch was for
your hawks and dogs.

I am glad your Highness is so godly, as to think of praying; for it has
been said, you are very seldom upon your knees, but when you drink to the
confusion of the Roundheads, and the Parliament.

And now I cannot conclude better, then your Highness does, He that has a
Design against the Protestant Religion, the Laws of England, or hopes to
plunder London, let him be accursed; And God bless the KING, and this
Parliament, and send us peace and truth to perform what we promise. Which are
the prayers of

Your Highness humble SERVANT.

FINIS.

