RUMP RAMPANT, OR THE Sweet Old Cause in sippits: Set out by Sir T. A. Perfumer
to his late Highness.
To the Tune of, Last Parliament sat as snugg as a Cat.
IN the name of the fiend, what the Rump up agin,
The Delk, and the good old cause,
If they settle agin, which to think were a sin,
Goodnight to Religion and Laws.
First Tithes must go down like a sprig of the Crown,
Although J. Presbiter grumble;
Already they tell's our Lead and our Bells
They Will sell, next our Churches must tumble.
This poor English Nation, by this Generation
Has been grieved 11. years and more,
But in that season, and not without reason,
They ha'thrice been turned out of door.
Which they please to call force, yet themselves can do worse,
For this Piercel of a House
Dare keep out of door, thrice as many more,
And value the Law not a Louse.
First by Owl-light they met, and by that light they set,
The reason of it mark,
Their acts and the light, do differ quite,
Their deeds do best with the dark.
Esquire Lenthall had swore, he would sit there no more,
Unless in with Oxen they drew him,
That he once might speak true, they picked him out two,
Sent Pembrook and Salisbury to him.
When these Gamsters were packed, the first gracious act
Was for pence for their friends of the Army,
Who for any side fight, except't be the right;
Sixscore thousand a month will not harm ye.
Yet many there be, say the House is not free,
When I am sure of that,
The One another they are so free, that the Nation do see,
Their too free for us to be fat.
Religion they waved, now they had us enslaved
And got us sure in their Claw,
They pulled of their mask, and set us our task,
Which is next to make Brick without Straw.
The next act they made, was for helping of Trade,
So they settled again the Excise,
Which the City must pay, for ever and aye,
Yet might have chose had they been wise.
To pull down their K. their plate they could bring,
And other precious things,
So that Segwick and Peter's, were no small getters
By their bodkins, thimbles and rings.
But when for the good of the Nation 'twas stood
Half ruined and forlorn,
Though It lay in their power, to redeem't in an hour,
Not a Citizen put out his horn.
They had manacled their hands, with Kings and Bishops Lands,
And ruined the whole Nation,
So that no body cares, though they and their heirs,
Be Cornute to the third generation.
May their wives on them frown, but laugh and lie down,
To any one else turn up Trump,
To mend the breed, as I think there is need
Be rid like their men by the Rump.
And may these wise Sophees, pay again for their Trophies,
For I hope the Parliament means
(Now they have been at the costs, to set up the posts)
To make them pay well for the Chains.
THE RUMP

