AN ANSWER TO A LETTER Concerning the KINGS Going from HOLDENBY to the ARMY.

Royal coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE C R


Printed in the Year 1647.

AN ANSWER To A LETTER CONCERNING The KINGS going from Holdenby to the ARMY.
SIR,
YOu desire my opinion concerning this late great business, the Kings going
into the Army: My judgment is shortly and clearly thus; That His Majesty went
thither neither against His own will, nor the desire of the Army. I believe His
Majesty had no reason to be very fond of the place where he was before, or of
the great respects he received there, being (without doubt) at the top of his
preferment, and in all likelihood not to have continued so well so long, had
not some stronger bridle, then that of allegiance to him, or religion to God,
made them forbear any further attempt. For that which you pleased, or rather
your fears, to suggest, viz. That His Majesty is leapt out of the drying pan
into the fire, left ill company, to adhere to worse; because you are pleased to
say (and you do but say it) that this Army consists of Independents, who are
worse principled for Magistracy, then those of the other party. I answer; that
indeed it cannot be denied, that out of diverse of their Books we may gather
such Conclusions, which for part I cannot allow of. But that the Fears and
Jealousies of both Houses may not forsake their old Masters, in such a busy
time as this, and wholly take up and possess your breast, I pray Sir reasonably
weigh all circumstances, and you shall find, that His Majesty has fallen into
much better company, then either his Contrymen were to him, or commended him
to, (not to say, sold and betrayed him.)

Of these men (call them Independents, or what you will) I have had a great
deal of experience. I find them in their way very devout, very just in their
dealing; and of all the Armies employed by the Parliament in this unnatural
war, I will be bold to say, none behaved themselves more civilly, more
christianly against the adverse party then they: and confidering their
different judgments and opinions, none were more in charity, and more at unity
among themselves. In all my discourse I had with them (and I talked with many of
them) I find a great deal of humility and lowliness amongst them: But as
they desire to exercise no severe jurisdiction over other men's consciences, so
they seem to desire in like manner that none may over theirs. I do not truly
perceive that they have a mind to give Law to any other, but only to procure
their own liberty and quiet: this liberty they cannot have under the
Presbytery, who have both in Pulpit and Press declared so bitterly (I had
almost said so unchristianly) against them. How then, or by whom can they hope
to enjoy this priveledge more freely, more fully, then by receiving it from
Him, who has the sole power in these Dominions, under Christ Jesus, to grant
it? And therefore make no doubt, but that there will be a very right
understanding begotten between the King and the Army: And that as they are
raised by GOD at this time to re-invest him with his just, lawful Rights and
Prerogatives, to the eternal shame of his own Nation, (the first Nation that
ever I read of who sold their King) so I doubt not but His Majesty will so well
resent this seasonable kindness of theirs, that as they preserve his Person,
Honor, and Conscience, so he will be as tender of theirs. And truly, I think
him fit to be brought to condign punishment, as an evil Counselor, that
shall even go about to alienate the Kings heart from them, or make him to
forget this handsome loyalty of theirs, that has so gallantly showed it self
in the midst of so much cruelty, neglect, and contempt, and when his
Majesty's other friends had so little power or opportunity to do him good. And
this I deliver the more clearly, because you know I am no party at all in this
business; but (according to your desire) I have given my sense: And what you
have more to say, I pray communicate as freely to

Sir, Your affectionate Friend, to serve you.


