AN ANSWER To the LATE MEMORIAL OF THE Count D' Avaux, Ambassador
Extraordinary of FRANCE; IN A MEMORIAL Presented to the States General, By the
Marquess De Castle Moncayo, Envoy Extraordinary OF SPAIN On the 3d of MAY
(84.) at the HAGUE.
THe Marquess de Castle Moncayo, Envoy Extraordinary of Spain, has been at
Brussels, for the reason he declared in the last Conference, where he had the
honor to concur with the Deputies of your Lordships, and the Miniter of your
High Allies; and being in company with the Marquess d'Grana, he received a Copy
of the Memorial, which the French Ambassador presented to your Lordshpis on
the 29th past, and they considering the Contents of the said Memorial, resolved
that the Marquess d Castle Moncayo, should forthwith return and make known to
your Lordships, that the orders which the Marquess d'Grana, and the
Extraordinary Envoy of Spain, have received from the King their Master, are
such as have been heretofore declared to your Lordships. to wit,

Not to give ear to any unjust, unpracticable, or Artificial Propositions of
France, nor to enter into Negotiation with them, but upon such terms as are
requisite between Kings, Princes and Sovereigns of equal rank, and not to
conclude any accommodation that is not warrantable and sure in general,
including all their Allies.

Upon these Principles his Majesty is resolved to hazard the rest of the Low
Countries, never to Yield to have Laws Prescribed him, unless compelled by
Violence.

The new Propositions that France makes to your Lordships, are more Arrogant
and Unreasonable then any hitherto delivered to your Lordships, and therefore
they are still the same, for this only design has been and still is to amuse
your Lordships, and to expose you to danger and render you unfaithful in your
Treatys, and cause you to pass in the Opinion of the World, as States of little
foresight, and to take from you entirely your Liberty, since the delay that
France makes not to act on one side, while he besieges a place as Luxemburg on
the other, is but a new device, found for an Imaginary pretense of repose,
which he has made use of so long to ruin us by these kind of ways.

And therefore since your Lordships are not only to assist Spain in the Low
Countries, but also in any other place whatsoever, all the progress that France
pretends to make upon Spain any where else, other then the Low Countries will
feel its effects there, for which way soever the French conquers the Low
Countries, your Lordships will thereby immediately fall under the Slavery of
France.

Which the Subscribed Envoy of Spain doubts not but that your Lordships know
too well the rancour and venom couched in the Memorial of France, which cannot
but be discerned by you: It Is to be hoped that by the Assistance of the Good
God, we may with United Forces prevent or repair the loss of Luxemburg,
assuring your Lordships again and again, that the Resolutions of his Majesty
will be unalterable (come what will) since they have been taken pursuant to his
Conscience, Honor and Interest.

FINIS.
THe PENITENT LADY, or Reflections on the Mercy of God: Written by the Famed
Madam la Valliere, since her retirement from the French Court to a Nunnery;
Translated out of French, by a Divine of the Church of England.

Sold by D. Newman, and Thomas Malthus, at the Kings-Armes; and the Sun in the
Poultry,

Printed for Thomas Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry.


