AN ANSWER TO SEVERAL REASONS Humbly Offered to the Consideration of Both
Houses of Parliament, for the Taking off the Prohibition, and giving Leave to
the Importation of IRISH CATTLE.

With Allowance.

London, Printed by J.B. 1677.

An Answer to Several Reasons, Humbly OF red to both Houses of Parliament, for
taking off the Prohibition of Irish Cattle
Proving,
1. THat the Prohibition of Irish Cattle was not the cause of the Loss of Trade
with Ireland.

2. That the granting a free Importation of Cattle from Ireland will not in the
least increase the Trade to Ireland.

3. That the Prohibition of Irish Cattle has not prevented the Coming of them
over.

4. The Laying an smposition upon the Irish Cattle, with several other
Commodities, as Beef, Mutton, Pork, Bacon, Tongues, Butter, Cheese, Tallow and
Fish, will prove a far greater Advantage both to the King and Kingdom.

Had the Author to the said Paper really Considered the nature of the Kingdom
of Ireland, what it was before the Rebellion, and the several Changes since, it
might easily have convinced him, that it was not the Prohibition of Irish
Cattle that wrought those effects he pretended: For Ireland before the
Rebellion was most planted with Native Irish, and the Lands in their
Possession, a people so wedded to their ancient Customs, that nothing was more
hateful to them then the alteration of any of them, or to make any other
Improvements then what they were accustomed to.

But those Wars making so great Desolation, and Destruction amongst them, and
most of their Lands being since planted and peopled by English and Scotch, it
is now a quite different thing.

The English when they went over to Inhabit, after the Wars were ended, bought
up and carried over with them the Largest and best Cattle, Horses and sheep,
that England could produce: And from thence have increased such a Breed of
Cattle, Horses and sheep as will compare with the best in England, both for
largeness and fatness, as also with wool. Butter and Cheese that the English
there make, not being inferior to what is made in England for goodness.

2. The Parliament of Ireland did, and the English do give all the
encouragement they can for the setting up of Manufactures, and to all
Artificers to come and live among them, which are the true Reasons of the loss
and decay of Trade the English formerly had to Ireland.

But for further Answer to the said Paper, and to their First Argument.

1. The Prohibition has proved prejudicial to his Majesty's Customs.
1. The Custom of Cattle Imported out of Ireland being very little, and the
great charge in the looking after their coming in, and Collecting the Duty, did
amount to near the Money, if not more then what the Custom came to for Foraign
goods that are Imported directly for Ireland, the Merchants of Ireland being
able to fell them cheaper by 20 per cent. then to bring them into England, and
pay Customs here, and then carry them to Ireland.

2. It has greatly prejudiced most of the Land-Owners in England, (there not
being Land in England for Breeding) to raise a stock for feeding, to supply the
Nation, and so have transferred most of the Victualling for home Consumption,
Foreign Trade, and Navall Provision out of England into Ireland.
1. For answer, This is so great an error, that ever since the Laws were made,
there has been no want of provisions in England, and that at reasonable
prizes, not only in times of peace, but in the times of War, his Majesty's
Fleets were well supplied without the going to Ireland for any.

2. No Merchants will send their Vessels for Ireland for Victualling their
Vessels, although their Provision are very much cheaper: Their loss of time,
(besides the hazards of the Seas, their Seamen being in constant pay, will be
treble the loss of what they shall save by their buying their Provision.

3. How is it possible that Breeding Land-Owners can be losers, when it is
alleged they sell their lean Cattle far dearer than formerly; and for the
Feeding-Lands they cannot be losers by them, for although Scotland daily bring
in lean Cattle, yet Ireland will fill the Markets with fat Cattle, especially
sheep, and never trouble the Feeding Lands with them, they being fed fit for
any Market.

3. This Prohibition is destructive to Navigation.
1. This is as great an Error, for the Irish have Ships anow of their own to
Transport their Cattle.

2. Those many Ships that carry Coals for Ireland, and do return only in their
Ballast, will bring over more Cattle then Ireland can spare.

4. The Dutch have been supplied from Ireland.
It is true, and so has France, Spain, Portugal, and the Straits; which cannot
be prevented; there being so many Merchants not only English but other Nations
that have their Factors residing in Ireland, and all the Ports well-stored with
Shipping, that they do not only supply all those parts with provision, but make
their Returns with those Commodities the Kingdom can Vend, and the overplus is
made in Money.

5. The Irish took no Money out of England.
This also is very true, but now much better; for they are forced to bring over
their Money to pay their Rents to their Landlords that live in England, which
are many; but for carrying over Goods, they care not, because they can be
supplied at far cheaper Rates.

6. For the price of Beef in Ireland.
That is a great mistake; For the Beef they Barrel up for Sea is not Sold
under 9. or 10 s. a C. or more, and should the English be brought to sell at
the same rates, the Land-Owners, must of necessity abate above one half of
their Rents, which will not be well pleasing to the Gentry of England.

7. For the Lessening their breed of Cattle.
1. They do not lessen their Breed of Cattle although they do increase in their
breed of sheep, for there is more Land in Ireland than will breed for more than
is yet done, had they but encouragement to transport for England what they
cannot Vend in other parts of the world.

2. For their sending their Wool for England, they do what in them lies to
prevent; The Parliament of Ireland having laid a Custom upon Wool that shall be
sent for England, of near 30 per cent.

3. They have also laid a great Custom upon all Cloth, Stuffs, Stockins, and
Hats that shall be Imported out of England.

4. To Encourage the making of those Manufactures in Ireland, they did lay a
very small Custom upon all those Manufactures that should be made in Ireland,
and be Exported into any part of the world, which has produced that effect,
that they do not now only supply themselves with all those commodities, but in
short time will be able to supply England with considerable quantities. And for
sending their Wool to other parts of the world, it is contrary to the Laws, and
if they do, it is by stealth.

5. For the Cheapness of Provisions in Ireland: They are able to work cheaper
then in England, and so can undersell them in those several Commodities: But
how can it be prevented? For it is generally observed, that in all those
Manufactures in England, when Provision is at the dearest then the Markets are
best supplied and cheapest. The Laws of England having so well provided for the
poor, that they will not at any time lay up for sickness or old age, expecting
when that comes, that the Parish is bound to provide for them; and when
provision is very cheap, they will rather play half their time, then lay up a
stock beforehand.

6. If it be the Authors design to have all sorts of provisions as cheap in
England as in Ireland, he should have done well to have proposed a way to have
raised the Lands of Ireland to the value of the Lands in England; if not, then
the Gentry of England must fall the Rents of their Land to the same rates they
are Let in Ireland, which they would certainly be very unwilling to do, neither
can it be advantageous or good for the Kingdom in general.

8. This Prohibition has put England out of a capacity of Trading to Ireland
by raising the Price of the Exchange of Money. 2. By undoing many Shop keepers,
who want Chapmen for their Old fashion-Goods, and Wares.
1. For the Exchange of Money, It is true, it was the last War at 16. or 18.
per cent. by reason of the great hazard of bringing it over, but ever since it
is at 7 l. or 8. per cent. which is no more then equal with the Value of Money
in Ireland: For when gold is here at 21 s.-6 d. it passes current in all
payments at 23 s. there: and the same difference is between English money, and
the money that is current in Ireland; for 20 s. in English silver passes there
for 21 s. and 8 d.

2. For the Shop kee pers selling their old-fashoned Wares, they must look
another Market, for they are not only grown wealthy in Ireland, but so gentile
also, that the newest fashions that England can supply them with, will not
please them: nothing less then the A la mode of France will give content.

9. This Prohibition has put them upon Industry, and taking of Fish in
Ireland, which will be fatal to England.
1. That they are industrious and fallen upon the taking of Fish, is not to be
denied, but that the Prohibiting the Irish Cattle, is the cause, is the most
irrational argument that could be invented.

2. The true Reasons are, the Merchants not only of Ireland, but the most
considerable Merchants of England, have sent over their Factors, into the Ports
of Ireland, and do provide them all things necessary for the taking of Fish, as
also with Salt to Cure them, and Cask to put them up in, with ready money for
all they take, which certainly will make them industrious, or nothing that can
be invented will do.

BY what has been offered, it is evident, that as the Prohibition of Irish
Catte has not been the Occasion of the Loss of Trade with Ireland, so it may
as easily be proved, that the Prohibition of Irish Cattle has not answered the
Expectation of the Parliament; for although the several statutes have laid very
great penalties on those that shall break the same, yet there are many whose
principles are for private gain before any public good, and who contrive all
ways possible to evade the said Laws, and run the hazard of suffering the
penalties, having so great advantage if they can escape them, as to be gainers
at least 60 per cent. of all Cattle they can Land, and full C. per C. of all
Sheep: I shall therefore mention some of those ways by which these men do evade
the said Act, and have been the great Occasion Fat Cattle have not answered the
price of Lean, by which means the Feeding-Lands have been so great sufferers.

1. By Landing the Fat Beasts from Ireland at the Isle of Man, and then
Shipping them over for England, there being so many Ports, and at that distance
one from the other, that no account can be taken of what quantity comes from
thence.

2. By agreeing with the Churchwardens of several Parishes, which many times
share with them in the Profits.

3. The English Coast lying so advantagiously for their designs, they hire
several Lordships, and other Grounds that lie near the Sea, that so upon the
Ebb of the Tides, they do throw their Cattle into the Sea, near half a League,
oftentimes more; The Cattle swimming to Land, have those to take them up as
Strays, and drive them upon those Grounds, and it cannot be proved they came
from Ireland, the Cattle being of English breed, not being able to be
distinguished one from another: The like way they have for the Importation of
Sheep.

It is therefore further humbly Proposed,
1. That a Considerable Duty or Imposition may be laid upon all sorts of
Cattle, together withal sorts of Flesh, and Fish, Butter, Cheese, and Tallow,
and other Commodities Imported from Ireland, which will prove advantageous both
to the Kings Majesty, by Receiving that, (which others who contrive and
practice the breach of the Laws) do gain.

2. Several men will be Employed to be continually Watching of the Coasts, for
Collecting the Duty.

3. By this means the Rents of Lands will be kept up in England; for although
the Lands in Ireland be very much cheaper, yet the Duty laid, will put the
English Tenant in a Capacity at all Markets to sell their Cattle at equal
prizes with those that shall be imported, whereas now what is Imported must be
sold first, because the English can no way be able to sell at the price the
Irish can, and in all Markets are great Gainers, when the English are Losers.

FINIS.

