AN ANSWER To a Paper, called, The Case of the Auditors and Receivers of His
MAJESTY 's Revenue.

WITH A Brief Description of the Ancient Course of the EXCHEQVER for bringing
in the Crown-Revenues.

AS ALSO, Some Reasons wherefore the Augmentation-Revenue of the CROWN may be
charged in the Great Roll of the Exchequer, and brought in by the SHERIFFS.

Humbly offered to Consideration.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. 1662.

A TABLE of the Contents.
THe Course held for the Crown Revenue before H. 3. time. page 1 How it shall
be levied. Magna Charta. page 4 How all Accomptants ought to be called to
Account, and make payment. Stat. 51. H. 3. page 4 Establishment made 54. H. 3.
suitable to the said Statute. page 4 Statute 10. E. 1. confirming the said
Establishment with some Additions. page 5 How foreign Accounts were taken in
all former times. page 5 How and by whom in what manner Tails of the Exchequet
ought to be allowed. page 6 How the Revenue is to be charged, and how
discharges are made in the Great Roll. page 6 The Tenor of the Summons of the
Exchequer. page 6 Tails not being rejoyned shall be reputed as null. page 7
How lost Tails shall be Innovated. page 7 The right use of the Tallies page 7
How the Sheriff not acquitting the Debtor shall be dealt with. page 7 How the
Clerk so offending shall be punished. page 7 The Authority of the great Roll.
page 7 The Comptrolment Roll and the singular use thereof. page 8 Ingrosser,
Comptroller, and Remembrancers Duties. page 9 The Ancient established Comptrol,
and how confirmed. page 9 Answers to the Auditors Objections. page 9 Many
Accounts taken, but not engrossed, and many imbezilled. 24 H. 7. page 10
Accounts of the demiseable Crown Lands to be delivered into the Pipe. Stat. 6.
H. 8. page 10 Establishment made 38. H. 8. and confirmed 7. E. 6. page 10
Accounts to be engrossed and delivered into the Augmentation Court. page 11
Auditors might take Copies thereof within their Circuits. page 11 Augmentation
Court dissolved and annexed to the Exchequer. Stat. 1. Ma. page 11
Establishment then made by Authority of Parliament. page 12 Accounts to be
yearly Engrossed, declared and delivered into the Pipe, there to remain. page
12 Accounts of the Augmentation Revenue delivered by Mittimus to the Ingrosser.
page 13 Auditors undue proceedings being no Officers of Record. page 14 In
admitting and dismismissing Accomptants to and from their Accounts unsworn.
page 15 In not suffering the Accomptants Tails to be rejoyned. page 15 In not
Engrossing, not Declaring, and not delivering up those Accounts they have
taken. page 15 Many Supers and Debts have thereby long time depended, to the
prejudice of Prince and People. page 15 Many rents have been and are omitted to
be charged. page 15 One Account in the great Roll, will comprehend 100 Accounts
now taken by the Auditors. page 17 Five times more brought in yearly by the
Summons then by all other the Process of the Exchequer. page 18 How the
Statute 51. H. 3. has been and is observed. page 18 Answers to the Mischiefs
objected. page 19 H. 6. Writ proving Sheriffs the only useful Receivers. page
21 The Lords of the Council report therein. page 22 Sir R. Cottons Learned
advice. page 25
The Ancient Course OF The EXCHEQUER.
THAT by the ancient Establishment and Ordinances of the Excheques, and by the
Statutes of this Realm, all the Revenues of the Crown of England, both Certain
and Casual, within the Government, Rule, and Survey of the Court of Exchequer,
from the time of King Stephen, until about the 25. year of Queen Elizabeth,
were yearly drawn down from the Offices of the Remembrancers there, and were
charged in the great Roll of the said Court by the Ingrosser of the said great
Roll, according to his Oath in that behalf, which in ancient times was done
thus.

All the Farm Rents, In Libro Nigr Scac. In Mag. Rot. Scac. in temporibus R.
Steph. H. 2. Rich. 1. and Reg. Johan.
with the Issues and Profits of the Ancient Demeasn and Escheat Lands of the
Crown arising within every County, were charged in the said great Roll in one
entire Body, called, Firma Comitatus, and under one gross sum for the whole,
the Particulars whereof were contained in another distinct Roll for that
purpose. And the Sheriff of each County (who anciently were Earls in diverse
Counties, and sometimes the King's Eldest Son, for so Prince Edward, the Son of
Hen. 3. for the Counties of Bedford and Bucks, for diverse years together, in
the time of his Father's Reign) was charged to answer the same at the Exchequer
of Easter, and at the Exchequer of Michaelmas yearly; and if the Sheriff failed
to appear at his prefixed day to be sworn to his Account, he forfeited for
every days failer C s. But if after his being sworn to Account, he departed
(not having finished the same) without License of the Court, his Lands and
Goods were to be seized into the Kings hands, and the Issues and Profits
thereof were to be answered, without any deduction to be had for the same upon
his account.

Afterward King Hen. 3. (who Reigned almost an old man's age) being no doubt
well acquainted, as well with the Accounts of the Crown-Revenues which were
made in his own, his Fathers, his Uncles, and his Grandfathers time, which are
safely preserved without blemish to this day. As also with those special
Dialogues which Gervasiuc Tilburiensis had Penned and Dedicated to his
Grandfather King Hen. 2. in the twentieth year of his Reign, touching the
Original Institution and Dignity of the Exchequer Court, and the singular use
of which the Authentic great Roll and Tails of that Court were, as well for
bringing all the Revenue under one due Cheque and Control, as for the Subjects
Discharge: And not unmindful of the Statutes (which himself had made) of Magna
Charta, and of the Statute of the Exchequer in the 51 year of his Reign, did by
and with the advice and consent of his Great Council (to wit, his Brother
Richard King of the Romans, Walter Archbishop of York, Geoffrey Bishop of
Worcester, Prince Edward the King's Son, who succeeded his Father in
Government; William de Valencia the Kings Brother, Roger de Mortuo, Mari,
Philip Basset, Henry de Allen, Robert Aquylin, Albert Wallerand, and other
great men who were of the King's Council) establish and provide a certain form
(suitable to the said Statute of the 51 of Henry the 3 d. to be from thence held
in writing the said Great Roll, wherein the Bodies of the Counties (called in
the Roll Firma Comitatuum, which consisted, as before has been shown, of the
ancient Demeasn and Escheat Lands and Rents of the Crown, and amounted unto
10700 l. per Annum) were to be written: afterward the Sheriffs was to be
charged with the Farm of the Profits of the County. Next that was to be written
all Farms, as well the greater as the lesser, and all determined Debts
likewise, all great Debts, and other known Debts unto the Title in the said
Roll of Nova Oblata, (which distinguishes the new Farms and Debts from the
old) and after that Title was to be written, all Debts contained in the
Originals, as well great as little, wherewith the Sheriffs were charged by
their Answers or Returns. The said word Originalls signifying the Records,
Extracts, Inquisitions, Seisures, and Certificates, delivered to, or remaining
in, the Remembrancers Offices of the Exchequer, which form (being no other in
substance than what was before that time observed in writing the said great
Roll) was afterward confirmed by Statute 10 E. 1. with some additions, which
has been constantly held, and so is at this day; and the Remainder of those
ancient forms of Counties are now in charge, and consist of many small
Vicounted Rents of sundry natures.

And furthermore all yearly, foreign, Lib. Rub. Scac. p. 279. cap. 3.6, 7, 8.
Ib. p. 287. cap. 1, 2, 3.
and other Accounts of Escheaters, Receivers, Collectors, Guardians, Customers,
and other Accomptants whatsoever, taken by the Autitors of the said Court, of,
and for any branch of the said Revenues, whether Certain or Casual, were
anciently Engrossed in Parchment, and declared before the Treasurer and Barons
of the said Court, or some of them; and being so declared, the particulars
thereof were delivered into the Kings Remembrancers Office to be there safely
kept for the use of the Crown; and the said Accounts were briefly entered in the
Rolls of States and views of Accounts in the Remembrancers Offices, and were
immediately after delivered to the said Ingrosser, to be by him, after full
Examination (all things proving clear) Engrossed and charged, and the Debts and
Supers therein contained, set forth in the said Roll.

And by the course of the Court, no Talley ought to be allowed until it be
first rejoyned and tried with its Counterfoile, by the Deputy Chamberlains
before the Barons in open Court, and the Deputy Chamberlains are sworn to
deliver the Tail (proving true) immediately to the Ingrosser of the great
Roll, who likewise is sworn to make present allowance thereof, which is done in
great Letters, by digesting the Substance thereof in writing in the Roll, as
ancient Establishment has ordained.

Nothing is charged in this Roll, but from the original Records remaining with
the Remembraners, and what is charged in the great Roll, is no ways
dischargeable, but by the Kings Letters Patents or Writs, under the Great Seal
or Privy Seal, or else by judgment of Court; And every Rent and Debt thus
charged, is according to Magna Charta cap. 8. first written forth in the
Summons of the Exchequer, directed to the Sheriffs, half yearly to be levied,
who by the Statute of the Exchequer, 51. H. 3. are to answer so much thereof as
is thereby leviable at the Proffer; or else upon finishing his account; and
that the Summons of the Exchequer is no weak process, as the Gentlemen in
their Case have set forth, will appear by the ensuing Tenor thereof, as
Gervasius Tilbu. riensis has it in the said Dialogues under this Title; Unde
fiunt Summonicones Scaccariiss. Henricus Rex Anglorum illi vel illi vic.
Salutem vide sicut teipsum and omnia tua diligis quod sis ad Scaccarium ibi vel
ibi in Cro. Sci. Michael vel in Cro. Clausi Pasche and habeas tecum ibi
quicquid debes de veteri firma vel nova and nominatim haec debita Subscripta de
ill. X. marc pro hac causa and sic deinceps annotatis debitis illic seriatim
cum causis que in Major Annal. Rot. continentur proferuntur minores quoque
perambulantium Judicum Rot. ex quibus excipiuntur quae in singul. Com. Domino
Regi labor, and industria ipsorum, and hiis taxatis a majoribus in
Summonitionibus annotantur quibus per ordinem digestis terminatur Summonico per
haec verba; Et haec tecum habeas in Denariis, and Brevibus, and Taliis, and
Quietanciis vel capientur de firma tua Test illo vel illo ibi ad Scaccarium.

And those who will not deliver their Tails to be allowed, Stat. 10. E. 1.
shall be answerable for the whole Debt they had paid, and their Tails shall
be reputed for Null.

And by an Establishment made Ann. 14. E. 1. It was provided for the Indemnity
of King and Subject, that when any Tail of the Exchequer happened to be lost
(necessity urging the same to be innovated) the foil or Counterpart thereof
should be damned, and that new Tails should be made as in times then past in
such cases had been accustomed to be done; which course has ever since
continued, as witnesses the Rolls thereof remaining in the Tailey Court in the
Lower Chequer.

And this point has been the longer insisted upon, because that the very life
blood of the Exchequer lies as it were wrapped up in the due and right use of the
Tails of the Exchequer, being the chief heart strings of the said Court, for
bringing the whole Revenue under one certain Check and Comptroll, which of late
years has been much infringed, as will hereafter be shown, and which has
ushered in a hundred inconveniences to the no little prejudice of the Crown and
the Subject, as may easily be made to appear.

And the Sheriff that shall not acquit the Debtors of the Moneys which he has
received upon his next Account, Stat. westminster. 1. E. 1. cap.
and be thereof attained, shall pay the Plaintiff thrice as much as he
received, and make Fine at the Kings pleasure.

The writing of this Roll is to be in Great Letters, Lib. Nigr. Scci. Jervas.
Tilbur.
and the Authority of the same is such, That if by chance the Inggrosser
thereof fortune to mistake in writing the same, either in Name, Number or
Cause, wherein the Greatest force of the writing consists, he may not presume
to scrape it out, but by drawing a small line underneath it, Cancel it, and
write in order what is requisite, for the writing of the said Roll has the
same Privilege, with Charters and other Letters Patents, and may not be raised
or scraped.

The aforesaid great Roll has always had a particular Comptroller established
over it, The Comptrolment Roll.
who writes and keeps yearly a Counter Roll or Comptrollment Roll of the
said great Roll, and of every particular Branch of the Revenues therein
charged; And also of all Discharges and Allowances therein made, and writes
forth process from the said Great Roll, every Hillary and Trinity Term yearly,
directed to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of every County and City, and Town made
County, for levying the Revenues therein charged: The Duty of the Ingrosser and
Comptroler.
And the Ingrosser (together with the said Comptroller) attend the Barons at
all Apposals, upon return of process, and urge the speedy answering of the
said Revenues, and enter the Awards of the Court in the said Rolls, charging
the Sheriff in great letters with whatsoever he is to be charged; and
discharging all Farmors and Debtors in the said great Roll, and Comptrolment
Roll, of all such moneys, as Sheriffs answer upon Account, without their
further charges and trouble; And all Debts and Sums of moneys continuing
charged in the great Roll, as not being answered upon the Summons of the
Exchequer, are immediately scheduled to and written out in process of Extent
by the Remembrancers; and also all Debts, Stat. 37. E. 3. cap. 4.
Inquisitions and Seizures of Lands, which were discharged by Judgment of
Court, or Grants from the Crown in the said Remembrancers, offices, are
acquitted in the said great Roll, and the Debts paid and answered in the great
Roll are discharged in the said Remembrancers Offices.

All dead Farms and desperate Debts, Stat. 10. E. 1
whereof there is no hopes, are removed out of the said great Roll, and written
in another Roll for that purpose Ordained, called the Exannual Roll: But are
continued in yearly process to be levied; and such of those Debts as the
Sheriffs answer or become revived, are written again in the said great Roll,
and there paid or discharged.

And it is lawful for the said Comptroller, Lib. nig. Sccii. G. T.
to admonish the said Ingrosser what he ought to amend: But if he persist and
will not alter what is done amiss, he may call him before the Barons, that by
them may be determined what is fitting to be done; for the said great Roll may
not be altered, but by the common consent of all the Barons, whilst the
Exchequer sits.

And agreeable hereunto are these several subsequent Statutes; viz. The Statute
of Westminster 1. 3. E. 1. cap. 19. Statute of Rutland 10 E. 1. The Articles of
the Exchequer, made An. 16 E. 2. The Ordinance of the Exchequer, made An. 19.
E. 2. Stat. 37. E. 3. cap. 4. Stat. 1. R. 2. cap. 5. Stat. 5. R. 2. cap. 14.
Stat. 6. H. 4. cap. 3 Stat. 34 and 35 H. 8 cap. 16. Stat. 2. F. 6. cap. 4.
Stat. 1. Ma. cap. 10. Stat. 21. Jac. cap. 5. and that of 8 Aug. 1649. for the
Customs and Navy Accounts, cum multis aliis.

NOW FOR ANSWER TO THE CASE.
The Gent. Penners of the Auditors and Receivers Case, the better to
countenance some of their former and irregular proceedings, cite 3 Acts of
Parliament. The first of those 3 Acts they cite was Ann. 6. H. 8. (which
expired An. 14. H. 8) they say that in the preamble thereof there is mention of
great pressures upon the Subjects from the Officers of the Pipe: Where in truth
there are no such words in the said preamble, but contrariwise it is there
mentioned that diverse Receivers Accounts which had been take before 24. H. 7.
were then not Engrossed, and others imbeziled and miscarryed; by reason whereof
both the Receivers and Kings Tenants were Subject to great Vexations in the
Exchequer; and therefore and for some other causes, it was provided by that
Act, that all Accounts to be afterward taken of that Revenue, should be yearly
engrossed in Parchment, and delivered to the Barons to be entered with the
Remembrancers, and filed in the Pipe, there (by the express letter of the Act)
to remain of Record perpetually, as well for the Kings security as for the
clear discharge of the Accomptants, their Heirs and Executors for ever, which
was accordingly done, as by the very Accomps so taken (yet remaining of Record
in the Pipe) may appear; and the very like provision was again enacted in the
subsequent Act made Ann. 14. H. 8. touching the Accounts of that Revenue made
before the Surveyors general of the said Kings demiseable lands, for they had
not above 2 or 3 Fee-farm Rents within their Survey.

2. Stat. 7. E. 6.
The second Act cited is 7. E. 6. cap. 1. and 2. which the Auditors say they
have observed all along to this day (which if they had, the Crown had been much
better served, and the Subject freed from Many great Grievances and
Inconveniences as shall be shown; For though the first Chapter of that Act
has a prospect only, providing how and when the Receivers and Bailiffs should
pay their Moneys, and perfect their Accounts, upon pain of forfeiture of their
Offices and Fees: And providing likewise that the Auditors taking the accounts,
shall not refuse, extract or delay the taking their accounts so as they may be
dispatched in due time, upon pain of Forfeiture of their Offices and Fees, also
Inabling the Receivers and Bailiffs to Distrein for the Rents arrear, and
Impowering the Barons to Amerce Sheriffs for neglects and contempts: Yet the
second Chapter of the said Act has not only a Prospect, but likewise a
Retrospect, confirming the Letters Patents made by King H. 8. in the 38. year
of His Reign, and all and every thing and Article therein contained, as if the
same had been done by Act of Parliament; by which he dissolved the Courts of
general Surveyors, and the Court of the Augmentations, and erected thereof one
other new Court, called the Court of Augmentation and Revenues of the Kings
Crown; and thereby did ordain, that the Recievers should account upon Oath
yearly, and that their Accounts should be yearly engrossed in Parchment by the
Auditors; and that the Keeper of the Records of that Court, should have the
keeping thereof after they should be engrossed; and that only the Clerk of the
said Court, should make the Copies and Constats of the same, and that the
Auditors and their Deputies, when, and as often as they should have necessity,
to have access to the Accounts of their Circuit, might make Copies out of the
same, as often, and when necessity required. And furthermmore it was thereby
enacted, That the said King E. 6. might at any time during his life, dissolve
as well the said Courts, as also the Courts of first Fruits and Tenths, and
the Courts of the Duchy of Lancaster.

The third and last Act vouched, St. 1 M. c. 10.
is 1 Ma. But they set not forth the effect thereof, which had they done, they
must have shown that the said Queen was thereby empowered to dissolve and
determine every of the last before mentioned Courts, and to unite and annexe
the the same to any other of her Courts of Record, as if the same had been done
by Act of Parliament; PROVIDED, That if she should annexe the said Courts or
any of them unto her Court of Exchequer, That then all things within the Survey
of the said Courts so annexed, should be ordered in like manner, to all
intents, as the said Court of the Exchequer there, was, or ought to be by the
Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm: By vigor and authority of which Act,
Recited in the St. 1. Eliz. c. 4.
the said Queen by 4 several Letters Patents under the great Seal, whereof 2
dated the 23. the other the 24 days of January in the first year of her Reign,
did not only dissolve the said Courts of Augmentations, and of first Fruits and
Tenths, and the Jurisdiction and authority thereof: But also did annexe the
same Courts so dissolved, to the said Court of Exchequer, there to be and
continue as a Member, and parcel of the said Court of Exchequer, and did
appoint all the Revenues then answerable in the said late Count of
Augmentations, to the Order and Government of the said Court of Exchequer, in
such manner and form as was then used, and had of other her Highness lands
then in the Order and Governance of the said Court of Exchequer. AND
FURTHERMORE it was expressly provided, ordained, and established, by the said
late Queen, in a certain Schedule, signed with her Highness hands to the said
Letters Patents annexed. inter all.

That all Crown Rents, Article. 1.
etc. within the Survey of the Augmentations and Revenues of the Queen, should
be received and levied by the Sheriff of every County, where the same did lie
or by any other person or persons that the Treasurer or the Court should
appoint.

That the Accomptants for the said Augmentation Revenne, Article. 8.
should appear in the Exchequer in every Hillary Term, and be swom to their
Accounts for the year ended at Michaelmas before, and make and finish the same
Accounts before the 24. day of February then next following.

That the Auditors taking the same should deliver the same yearly Accounts
engrossed in Parchment, Article. 9.
authorized and allowed by the hands subscribed of the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, and Barons of the said Exchequer, or by three of
them at the least, whereof the Lord Treasurer or Vice-Treasurer to be one, into
the Office of the Pipe, within the said Court of Exchequer, before the 20 day
of March then next following, SO as further Process might be thereupon made, if
the case should so require.

That the said Accounts should remain in the charge the said Clerk of the Pipe.
ArtIc. 15.


And it was also thereby further established and ordained, Artic. 13.
that all Accounts, and Declarations of Accounts, which then were in the said
dissolved Court of Augmentations, should be and remain in the charge of the
said Clerk of the Pipe in the Exchequer, in such place as the Treasurer and the
said Court should appoint. Artic. 22.


And for that the order, establishment, and uniting of this Court be perfectly
established with exercise, proof, and experience of the same, the Queens
Highness is pleased, that the Lord Treasurer and the said Court of Exchequer
should have full power and authority from time to time, to amend, reform, and
correct any clause or article aforesaid, and to add to, or diminish any thing
that shall be found necessary for the amendment of the same; and to make such
further orders from time to time as to the Court shall be thought expedient.
And upon this weak foundation and pillar is the whole Fabric and
Superstructure of the Auditors erected.

And shortly after, all the Accounts of the said Courts of Augmentation and
General Surveyors, were sent by Writ of Mittimus to the Treasurer and Barons of
the Exchequer, and delivered unto the then Clark of the Pipe; and diverse other
like Accounts of the said Revenue taken by the Auditors of the Exchepuer for
diverse years since, were afterward delivered unto one John Wooly
Eschequer-Clark of the Pipe, to whom the late Queen Elizabeth by her Letters
Pattents under the Great Seal, in or about the 25 year of her Reign, granted
the Office of keeping of all the Accounts, as well of Ministers as of
Receivers, and of all other Accomptants whatsoever in the Exchequer of the said
Queen, her Heirs and Successors accomptable. All which Accounts so delivered
(though few in number to what they ought to be) came by succession to the now
Ingrosser of the said great Roll, and are remaining in his charge and safe
custody, kept by themselves in a large public noted room, as the Law
requires, commonly called, The Augmentation-Office in the Exchequer at
Westminster, by force of the aforesaid Statute and Letters Pattents, Anno
prime Mariae, and of the Articles and Ordinances of Annexation thereupon made,
and also of certain other Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England in
that behalf made and granted by the late King CHARLES to the now Ingrosser.

By all which it plainly appears, that none who were Auditors, either of the
late Court of Augmentations, late Court of General Surveyors of the Kings
Lands, or of the Court of Exchequer, were ever thought fit to be entrusted by
any known Laws with the keeping of any of the Accounts of the Revenues of the
Crown; it being most improper for any to have the custody of Accounts taken in
the Exchequer, who are no Officers of Record, nor can issue out Process, nor
give any Legal Discharge thereupon.

And yet notwithstanding all the said established Laws, The Auditors undue
proceedings.
Ordinances, and Letters Patents, diverse of the former and now Auditors of the
said Exchequer, who took the Accounts of the said Augmentation-Revenues, have
detained above nine parts of ten parts of the engrossed and declared Accounts
of the same Revenue, taken by them and their predecessors since prima Mariae,
with the Tallies thereupon, and refuse, protract, and delay to bring them to
the view of the said Remembrancrs Clark of the Pipe, and Comptroller, and
Deputy Chamberlains, whereby they might be comptrolled, but have and do detain
them in their own private custodies, as if they were their own Evidences, and
have given the Accomptants before their appearing yearly in the Exchequer to be
sworn to their Accounts, or that their said Accounts and Tallies were
comptrolled, insignificant Discharges, and forced them tot ache Duplicates of
their whole Accounts, because they were no way empowered to give them Quietus
ests; and by this usurpation have not only kept many thousands of considerable
Debts for many years together out of Process, until they became pardoned by the
former and the late Acts of General Pardon; but through their neglects diverse
hundreds of Fee-farm Rents, reserved payable to the Bailiff or Receivers (only
accomptable before them) upon sundry Letters Pattents granted since 20 Eliz.
(for all Rents of Monastery Lands from 1 Mar. until about that time, were
reserved payable, ad Receptum Scaccarii tantum, and charged in the great Roll)
have not been, nor are yet put in charge, to the great prejudice of the Crown:
the which their remisness has occasioned many inconveniences; as first, their
not engrossing in Parchment many yearly Accounts, taken of Receivers,
Collectors, and Bailiffs: Secondly, their not declaring diverse of those yearly
Accounts they have engrossed in Parchment before the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, and Barons, as the Articles of Union and Annexation enjoyneth for
many years together, so as no Process could be issued in due time, to recover
the Debts and Supers therein. In every of which particulars they have wilfully
failed, quite contrary to the Articles of Union and Annexation, which by the
Statute of 1 Mar. are of like authority as if the same had bin established by
Act of Parliament) and to the no little dissatisfaction to most people in
England, who have had any urgent occasions to resort for matter of Record,
Evidence, or Satisfaction to the said accounts, which now lie confused and
dispersed, which has been, and may prove, not only hazardous to the Crown,
but to the Subjects, in evidencing their just Title, Contrary to the true
intent and meaning of the common Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and the Tenor
of the aforesaid Letters Patents of Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
and the late King Charles, granted to the successive ingrossers of the great
annual Rolls of the Exchequer.

An Answer to the Objected Mischiefs which will ensue, as to His Majesty's
Advantage, and the Subjects Interest, in case the Bill now under Consideration
should take Effect.
THat the Revenue will be thereby taken from the View and Control of the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, and put into the manegery
of the Pipe, without any Control.

Auditors and Receivers, which consists chiefly of Fee-farm Rents, Tenths,
perpetual Pentions, and other dry Rents, which are no ways improveable, as well
of diverse ancient Demeasn and Escheat Lands of the Crown, and Forrest-Lands,
Bishops Lands, and other Lands gotten by Exchange, and Lands that came by
Attainder or Purchase, that were long time together accounted for in the great
Roll; as also of Monastery and Chantry Lands, shall be charged in the great
Roll, then not only those Rents, but also all other Rents, now charged in the
said great Roll, being once particularly and distinctly charged in the Roll,
within every Hundred and Division out of which they are issuing; and that the
same be declared before the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, and
Barons, and be computed and cast up in one entire sum within every division,
and the Sum Total of the whole certain Revenues in every County be engrossed in
the Roll (which may be exactly performed within the Compass of one year) then
the true state of the said Revenue both in point of charge and discharge, will
come more certainly entirely and readily, to the view and Comptroll of the
aforesaid Supreme Officers of the Court in one account within every County,
then it has at any time heretofore in hundreds of accounts done, and be under
the ancient Comptroll of all the aforesaid chief ministerial Officers of the
said Court, entrusted for and under them, and will be brought in according to
law, and the accounts thereof will be engrossed, heard, and determined in a
judicial way, and no part thereof discharged but by judgment of Court, or by
the Kings Letters Patents or Writs, under the Great or Privy Seal.

That the Summons of the Pipe is a weak process, and that Debts are not
Scheduled in a year or two for stronger process to be thereupon made, and that
the Usage and Course of the Exchequer ever have been and are repugnant to the
Statute 51 H. 3.

there has ever been five times more money yearly levied and answered upon
this process, then upon all other the process of the Court, and it ought to
be the first process for levying the Kings Debts, unless the Supreme Officers
of the Court, do for some extraordinary cause, order that process of extent
should issue; and Debts not answered upon the Summons are forthwith put into
the Schedula Pipe, and sent to the Remembrancer for stronger process.

And the constant usage, practice, and course of the Exchequer, has always
been, and yet is agreeable to the Statute of 51 H. 3. varying in this point,
only that of late years (when the Crown Revenues within the Sheriffs Collection
was much impaired) the Cursitour Baron (who was introduced but in the time of
E. 2. in ease to the other Barons) has performed that Service at the Sheriffs
Proffers, Apposals, and dismission out of Court, which before was Enacted to be
performed before the Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons, and is no ways
repugnant thereunto, as the Auditors have missuggested.

That the Allowance to Sheriffs for levying the Revenue will exceed the present
charge.

etc. which (as the Learned Author Sir Robert Cotton in his Book called Cottoni
Posthuma page 181. amongst other things well observes) amounted to above 12000.
l. per Annum.

The hazard by Failer by Sheriffs cannot be less then by Receivers.

Elizabeth, King James, and the late King Charles, have failed for very great
Sums of money, which were either never paid or else not paid at such a rate per
annum as the Interest amounted unto, but it cannot be proved that ever any one
Sheriff failed in that kind.

That the Crown is like to be at loss by arbitrary allowances subject to no
Comptroll.



An Answer to the Mischefs objected as to the Subject.
THe Sheriff will be at excessive Charge and Trouble in giving Security.

l. will easily be provided for by the wisdom of Parliament: For the Sheriff
being chosen every year per Magnates and Proveres regni, are persons of quality
and solvent Estate, within their own Counties and usually elsewhere. And a
Recognizance (if there were no other security) makes all the Sheriffs Estate
liable: Beside, if provision be made that every Tenant and Farmor that pays
50. l. rent and upwards, may pay his Rent half-yearly into the Receipt, much of
the Security will be taken off.

The taking off the Sheriffs charge will be expensive.



So will the yearly Rentall prescribed by the Act.



The Burden of passing the Sheriffs Account, and Quietus will be insupportable.



It will be a great trouble to the Sheriff to collect so many small Rents
dispersed, within the time of his office.



The Sheriff endangered by entering into Recognisance.



If a proportionable Reward be allowed to the Sheriff for levying the Revenue,
it takes away the Bread from the Auditors and Receivers and casts it to the
Sheriff.

etc.

His Majesty's Farmors and Tenants will be sore vexed and burdened in double
payments for levying, and discharge in the Great Roll.



That the Auditors and Receivers will be divested of their Rights and
Freeholds.



Now to prove that the Sheriffs have always anciently been the only Receivers
of the Crown Revenues and other Receivers avoided as needless and
unprofitable, there needs no other proof to make it unquestionable, but that
one Writ of 16. Hen. 6. directed to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer,
which was seconded by an Act of Council in the time of Queen Mary.

The tenor of the said Writ anno 16. Hen. 6.

Henricus Dei gratia Rex, etc.
These. and Baron. de Scaccar. salutem.
King Hen. 6. Writ.
Cum monstratum sit nobis qualiter dilectus nostr. Robertus Whittingham
Chivaler hab. officium Receptoris generalis omnium terr. etc. que fuerunt
Iohannis nuper Ducis Bedford. Avunc. nostri carissimi defunct. and quod
officium predict. non est ad commodum nostrum, quia vadia and feoda quae ea de
causa de nobis percepta sunt possunt been fore omissa. Et quod Vicecomites
nostri possunt been levare Revenciones in manibus nestris existen prout fuit
ante hoc tempus. Ideo vobis mandamus quod dictum Robertum exoneretis ab officio
predicto, etc.

By which it appears that this one extraordinary Receiver in the time of King
Hen. 6. was deemed a burden and unnecessary charge to the Crown, and therefore
according to the constant course of the Exchequer, thought fit to be discharged
of his Receipts, and the same to be transferred to the Sheriffs, prout fuit
ante hoc tempus, which was so done accordingly.

The like we shall find in the third and fourth year of King Philip and Queen
Mary, in a report made to their Majesty's by the then Lords of the Council,
upon some question (after the annexation of the Court of augmentations to the
Exchequer) whether the Sheriffs or Receivors were the fittest. Ministers for
receiving the Rents and Revenues of the Crown; and whether the Duchy Court of
Lancaster ought not to be annexed to the Exchequer, and all Manors to be
demised in gross with their casualties at a certain Rent, for cutting off all
superfluous expenses.

The Report is as follows.
SVmus in priori opinione, The Report to King Philip and Queen Mary.
quod Vicecomes sit maxim idoneus qui recipiat annuos ridditus vestrarum
Majestatum infra limits suorum officiorum, and de illis respondeat vestris
Majestatibus.

Et ad id quod dicitur Vicecomites male jam respondere de iis quae eorum fidei
committunter putemus id eo fieri, vel quia officiarii Scaccarii non urgeant
neque instent prout eorum officii est, vel quia ab initio male eliguntur: Et
utrique huic malo facillime succuritur si Visecomites been Eligantur.

Et quod Vicecomites sint ad hanc rem maxim idon ei, movemur iis rationibus
quae sequuntur.

Vetera exempla hujus regni cum optime and cum maximo honor regeretur
ostendunt quod omnes annui redditus coram solvebantur per Vicecomites.

Nec putamus quod Vicecomites (presertim si been eligantur) erunt tam tardi in
pecuniis solvendis computisve redaendis, quam Receptores and sunt and semper
hactenus fuerunt.

Vicecomites (quorum officium annuum est) and annuatim computa reddunt, non
possunt celare pecunias vestrarum Majestatum quemadmodum Receptores solent.

Receptores enim (quorum officium perpetuum est) debita prioris anni solvunt ex
redditibus sequentis, quae fraus vitabitur si Vicecomites perficiantur huic
Cure: ac etiam annue expense quae nunc fiunt pro multis officiariis cessabunt.

Visecomites eliguntur de honestioribus, Equitibus, sive Generosis singulorum
Comitatum: Receptores sunt plerunque homines nullius estimationis.

Vicecomites Eliguntur annuatim per vestras Majestates ex consensu Magnatum and
Judicum Regni: Receptores autem assumuntur per privatos favores amicorum.

Sumus etiam in priori opinione quod terrae and possessiones Ducatus
Lancastriae, possunt been reduci ad Scaccarium: Et quod fieri potest salvis
etiam omnibus Colonis sive tenentibus dict. Ducatus, suis libertatibus,
privilegiis and consuetudinibus quibus omnibus frui and gaudere possunt, Coloni
and Tenentes predicti, non minus integre in Scaccario, quam nunc fruuntur in
Curia Ducatus, and ad hanc opinionem movemur iis rationibus.

Annue expense quae fiunt pro multis Officiariis Ducatus cessabunt.

Terrae and possessiones Ducatus Lancastriae, cum sint in multis and seperatis
Comitatibus possunt earum possessionem annui redditus per Com illorum
Vicecometes uno labor colligi simul cum aliis redditibus.

Cum Ducatus Lancastriae jam descenderit ad Reginam unacum Corona, non videmus
quare non debeant ejusdem Ducatus terrae and possession. gubernare in Scaccario
quemadmodum possessiones Principat. Walliae, Ducatus Cornub. Eboraci, and eorum
consilium.

Nobis etiam non videtur praejudiciale sed valde utile vestris Majestatibus
quod Maneria and cum illis omnia casualia locentur ad firmam, reservatis
Boscis, Wardis, Maritagiis, Miner. and Advocationibus Ecclesiarum.

Idem quoque putamus de sylvis ceduis quos subboscos diximus, quos utile
putamus ad firmam dimittere and movemur ad hanc opinionem iis rationibus.

Si locentur Maneria atque omnium aliorium generum terrae and possessiones cum
casualibus and subboscis annui redditus vestrarum Majestatum erunt certi qui
nunc incerti sunt.

Annui sumptus reparationem Senescallorum eorum qui Nemora custodiunt, and
multorum aliorum officiar. cessabunt.

Multi annui redditus, and multa servicia, quae nunc partim, dolo malo, partim,
negligentia Senescallorum Balliorum and aliorum officiar. non exiguntur et ita
paulatim pereunt: semper solventur cum firmarii and propter privatum lucrum
suum, and propter obligationem qua tenebuntur diligentius illa curabunt.

Miseri Coloni, sive pauperiores tenentes quibus variis artibus extorquentur
pecuniae tam per officiarios quam per eorum famulos, honestius tractabuntur si
dicta Maneria cum casualibus and sylve cedue dentur ad Firmam honestis viris.

Lucra etiam illa quae ex casualibus and subboscis proveniunt, and nunc malis
artibus extorquentur per Officiarios, venient direct ad usum vestrarum
Majestatum, atque id sine ullo praejudicio pauperiorum Colonorum qui plus
favoris semper invenient in vicino firmario honesto quam in extraneis
emptoribus, Baliis, vel silvarum custodibus.

Et preterea potest aliis modis satis provideri contra firmariorum avaritiam,
contra Officiariorum vero infinitas frades aliter provideri non potest, idque
longa experientia nimis cognitum est.

As by the said Report remaining in His Majesty's Library at White Hall,
Vernon. p. 67.
amongst other things) may appear.

Whereby it is most evident of what use and estimation Sheriffs (being but for
a year) have always been, for bringing in the Revenues of the Crown;
especially if they be well chosen, and held to the performance of their duties
by the Officers of Exchequer: with (...) ^^^ther observation, How remiss the
Receivers were in those days, and had ever been in paying what they received,
and making their accounts in due time.

And suitable thereunto is the prudent advice of that learned person Sir Robert
Cotton in his book entitled Cottoni Posthuma, printed in 1651. Page 179, Sir
Robert Cotons advice.
in his Treaty of improving the Revenues of the Crown, who writes to this
effect, that in case the demiseable lands of the Crown, per annum 32000 l;
should be passed in Fee-farm they would (one with the other) be advanced to a
treble Rent. And again in these express words (page 181) that if the
Purchaser, or Farmer, pay his rent, into the Receipt himself half-yearly and
strike there his Tally, it will cut off at once, so many unnecessary Receivers,
Auditors, Stewards, Bailiffs, etc. as stand the King in yearly above 12000 l.
And as for other dues or Revenues, which now fall under the charge of these
Officers, the Collection and payment may be (as it has been with the rest from
the time of King Henry 2. until of late days) laid on the Sheriffs of the
Shires; and all the accounts left to the two Auditors of the Prests to draw up,
and Clerk of the Pipe to enter in Magno Rotulo, as in all former time. For
(says the same Author) it must seem strange to all men of Judgment, that it
should be with these Officers (who had their beginning but since the 25. year
of King Henry 8. by addition of his new Revenue of 150000 l. from the
suppressed Monasteries) otherwise then with all things in nature and reason,
cessante causa, cessat effectus, not to be discontinued. When as all
Crown-annexed-lands, that gave them their just employment, are for the most
part passed, from the Sovereign into the Subjects possession. These are the
express words of that learned Author in his book aforesaid. All which is
humbly offered to Consideration, etc.

FINIS.

