AN ANSWER TO THE GENEVA BALLAD.
OF all the Drolsters in the Town,
Of Popish, or of Hobbian Race,
None draggs Religion up and down,
Or does the Gospel such disgrace
As Spruce with Coat Canonical
Whose Conscience eccho's have at all,
Would a fat Benefice but fall.
He whom the Ruder VVitts adore,
And count his vile Lampoons Divine;
Who Pimps in Rhyme for the Old VV^ore.
And fain would patch up Dagon's shrine,
A sacred Proteus one that can,
Blend Gospel with the Alchoran,
And takes Texts from Leviathan.
Yet if he list, this Motley Clark,
Himself as loud as smec can bray,
The Church he slanders in the dark,
But Hectors for her in the day:
Of Late he scoft at Miter'd Peers,
Pulled the old Gray-beards by the ears,
And called them Heavens Overseers.
Yet now he f^"wns on them again,
And grins in rage his foaming chaps,
wishes poor Presbyter in Spain,
And tears his Edifying capps,
So Cowards kill where Hero's spare,
And Renogades always are
More fierce then native Turks by far.
Thus with each Heifer he can plow
A Papist or an Independent,
What point the Gales of profit blow,
He always steers, and there is an end on it,
Was ever syke a Priest among
All Gloucester Cobblers fulsome Throng,
To pawn his Conscience for a Song?
Whilst Presbyter with active fist,
Makes it his work to preach and pray*
This modefi'd Episcopist,
Shows it is to Heaven a Iollier way:
With ^^gans and with Violin,
And Ballad new on merry pin,
He means to VVheedle souls from sin.
Geneva in a huff he kicks,
And sweats by's reverend Cassac-Coat.
The Leaman-Lakes a second styx,
Where none but damned souls do float,
Though wise men think its waters be,
From all such secret venom free,
Nor half so blackish as Romes See.
Perhaps the man has cause to stickle,
Since Interest leads him to complain,
F^aring some Neighboring Conventicle,
His Incomes to Low Ebb should Drain;
But be not, friend! at that dismayed,
Should preaching prove a sorry Trade,
Ballading is not quite decayed.
He varnishes his envious hate
With a pretended loyal zeal,
But would in truth subvert the state;
And all embroil the common-weel;
His business is but to divide,
wound Protestants through Calvin's side
That Popelings once more might us ride.
See how he slyly acts his part,
Commends Queen Mary's bloody days:
And doubtless should we sound his heart,
Such Bonefires here afresh would raise.
But Heaven defend those sad extremes,
We hope to keep unfilled Thames,
Free both from Tweds and Tiburs streams
Cease then impertinently to Rant,
We understand the Stale Intrigue:
Remember the Scotch Covenant,
Was copied from your gall:
Against blew bonnet swagger not,
We know who hatched the powder plot,
Not yet is Irelands blood forgot.
Our Sovereigns pleasure we will obey,
But scorn to Truckle unto thine;
Since Charles does liberty display,
How dare such Phamleteers repine?
Peace, Becket Junior, know your place,
Let no oblivion reach your case,
Who Ciphers make of acts of Grace.
The constant Rules of Heaven we know.
Whose Stars in Various Orbs do move,
Which we may Copy here below,
Whilst several parties live in Love.
Without Yoke of Conformity,
We can keep Christian Unity,
As different Notes make Harmony.
Yet well may each good shepherd cry,
Unto his flocks beware of Rome,
When foreign wolves so often we spy,
Making Domestic broils at home;
And in each corner of the Land,
Perceive those slye sheep-steelers stand,
To give them the Red-Letters brand.
With Holy Beads they teach to chaunt,
Their Ave's and their unknown prayers,
And all the while to Heaven they mount,
Take special care to tell the stairs:
The Kitchin-wench comes into Matin,
And loins her soul with shreds of Latin,
Like greazy Fustion faced with Satin.
Their whole Religion is so Odd,
It seems a Dark Mysterious Trade,
To Disturb Kings, and Worship God,
Only in show and Masquerade:
A Chaos of Deformity,
Made up of blood, hypocrisy,
fraud, treason, and idolatry.
Yet you as soon to Mass would Gad,
Alas! it is all one to thee;
He that Religion never had,
May easily a Papist be,
Where purchased pardons set him free
Beyond a Raners Libertee,
To wallow in Debaucheree.
Though he contrive to hide his Plot,
We yet can apprehend the snare,
Through the sheeps-cloathing he has got,
His foxes Ears do plain appear:
Protestant Drones, look to your lives,
He Would fain be burning of your hives,
And counts the Scriptures dangerous Knives.
We Will not Recriminate the case,
Nor make boast of our Loyalty,
But still with thankful hearts embrace,
Our Gracious princes clemency:
Yet hope to prove our innocence,
And actions void of just offense,
Against this slsanderous Pretense.
When surplice was an useless thing,
And Miter a poor Relic lay,
The preaching Cloak brought back the King,
And turned our Dismal Night to Day:
Mun Calamy, and a few more,
Did then more on their Sovereigns score
Then troops of Railerists before.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year. 1674.


