AN ANSWER To a LATE Ill-natured Libel, ENTITLED, A TRIP to HOLLAND: BEING A
Real Description of the Country; the Bravery, Wisdom and Industry of its
Inhabitants; and the several Virtues which have their Growth and Encouragement
in the SEVEN UNITED PROVINCES.

By a Dutch Merchant.

LONDON, Printed for J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

(...) best of Princes? But Ingratitude is the chief ingredient of a Poet; and
to Lampoon a Patron who has kept him from starving, if he in the least chances
to slacken his Hand, is as common to him, as his wants are familiar, and I need
not tell the Reader how often a Rhiming Fool is in Necessity: Though at the same
time, what our Male-Contented Commonwealth hates, has said in relation to the
Vices of the Hollanders, gives us an opportunity of inspecting their Virtues;
and since he acts the part of so faithless an Historian, as partially to pass
by their Excellencies, the following Discourse shall give as many instances in
their commendation, as his has in their dispraise. Our Author is not unlike to
a Man in the Yellow Jaundice, who thinks every one of the same Complexion with
himself; for how could he heap so many Vices upon so Virtuous a People, unless
he had been a practitioner in those very Vices he would fasten on his
Neighbor? But least the Gentleman should be angry, for he is a little Tasty
Fellow, I Will abstain from railery, and be for once the Reverse of him, as he
says the Dutch are of Humanity. All that I have to urge in the behalf of the
following Paper, is that the decency of Expression, the excellency of the
People it Treats of, the truth of every particular, Instance, and the industry
which is in practice among them, must needs take off from the prejudices which
the Reader may have imbibed from the Paper which this is designed as an Answer
to. And I shall have said enough to ingratiate my self with the Reader, if to
shake of Tyranny and Slavery, to be Lovers of their Country, and to be
Assistants to those that are in Distress, has so near a resemblance of our
English Constitution, that we should give no manner of approbation to our
Actions, should we disallow of the practice of them in theirs; then we have all
the reason in the World to be on their side, unless we would be against our
selves.

AN ANSWER To a LATE Ill-natured Libel, ENTITLED, A TRIP to HOLLAND, etc.
AS the People we are now to treat of are grown to such a prodigious Highth of
Riches and Greatness as to be rendered equal to the most Sovereign Powers, so
the Means by which they have acquired those Honors which are paid only to them
and Crowned Heads, well deserve to be taken notice of.

Solomon tells us ofFour Things that are small, and full of Wisdom; The
Pismire, the Grass-hopper, the Coney, and the Spider.

For Providence, they are the Pismires of the World; and having nothing but
what Grass affords them, are yet for almost all Provisions, the Storehouse of
Christendom, What is it which there may not be found in plenty? They make by
their Industry, all the Fruits of the vast Earth their own. What Land can,
boast a Privilege that they do not partake of? They have not of their own,
enough Materials to compile one Ship; yet how many Nations do they furnish? The
Remoter Angles of the World do, by their Pains, deliver them their Sweets; and
and being of themselves in want, their Diligence has made them both Indies
nearer home.

They are Frugal, to the saving of Egg-shells; and maintain it for a Maxim,
That a Thing lasts longer Mended, than New.

Their Cities are their Mole-Hills; their Schutes and Fly-Boats creep and
return with their Store for Winter: Every one is busy, and carries his Grain;
as if every City were a several Hive, and the Bees not permitting a Drone to
inhabit; for Idle Persons must find some other Mansion. And lest Necessity
bereave Men of Means to set them on work, there are Public Banks, that
(without Use) lend upon Pawns to all the Poor that want.

There is a Season when the Pismires fly; and so each Summer they likewise
swarm abroad with their Armies.

The Ant, says one, is a wise Creature, but a shrewd thing in a Garden or
Orchard. And truly, so are they; for they look upon others too little, and
themselves too much: And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich Soil,
like Suckers and lower Plants, they rob from the Root of that Tree which gives
them Shade and Protection. So their Wisdom is not, indeed, Heroic, or Numnial,
as courting an Universal Good; but rather Narrow and Restrictive, as being a
Wisdom but for themselves; which, to speak plainty, is descending into Craft,
and is but the Sinister Part of that which is really Noble and Celestial.

Nay, in all they hold so true a Proportion with the Emmet, as you shall not
sind they want so much as the Sting.

For dwelling in Rocks, they are Coneys; and while the Spanish Tumbler plays
about them, they rest secure in their own Inaccessible Burrows. Where have you,
under Heaven, such Impregnable Fortifications, where Art beautifies Nature, and
Nature makes Art invincible? Herein, indeed, they differ; the Coneys find
Rocks, and they make them: And, as if they would invert the Miracle of Moses,
they raise them in the Bosom of the Waves: Where, within these few Years, Ships
furrowed in the Pathless Ocean, the Peaceful Plough now unbowels the Fertile
Earth, which at Night is carried home to the fairest Mansions in Holland.

Every Town has its Garrison; and the Keys of the Gates, in the Nightime, are
not trusted but in the Stadt-house. From these Holds they bolt abroad for
Provisions, and then return to their Fastnesses, replenished.

For War, they are Grass-hoppers; and, without a King, go forth in Bands, to
conquer Kings. They have not only defended themselves at their own Home, but
have braved the Spaniard at his. In Anno 1599. under the Command of Vander
Does, was the Grand Canary taken, the Chief City sacked, the King of Spain's
Ensigns taken down, and the Colors of his Excellency set up in their Room. In
the Year 1600, the Battle of Nieuport was a gallant piece, when with the Loss
of a Thousand Men, or little more, they slew Seven Thousand of their Enemies,
took above an hundred Ensigns, the Admiral of Arragon was made Prisoner; the
very Furniture of the Arch-Duke's own Chamber and Cabinet, yea, the Signet that
belonged to his Hand.

In 1607, they assailed the Armada of Spain, in the Bay of Gibraltar, under
Covert of the Castle and Town-Ordnance; and with the Loss only of an Hundred
and Fifty Men, slew above two Thousand, and ruined the whole Fleet. Certainly,
a bolder Attempt has scarce ever been done. The Indian Mastiff never was more
fierce against the angry Lion: Nor can the Cock, in his Crowing Valor, become
more prodigal of his Blood than they.

There hardly is upon Earth such a School of Martial Discipline: It Is the
Christian World's Academy for Arms, whither all the Neighbour-Nations resort to
be instructed; where they may observe how unresistable a Blow many small Grains
of Powder will make, being heaped together; which yet if you separate, can do
nothing but sparkle and die.

Their Recreation is the Practice of Arms, and they learn to be Soldiers sooner
than Men: Nay, as if they placed a Religion in Arms, every Sunday is concluded
with the Train'd-bands marching through their Cities.

For Industry, they are Spiders, and are in the Palaces of Kings. Of old they
were the Guard of the Person of the Roman Emperor; and by the Romans
themselves, declared to be their Friends and Companions. There are none have
the like Intelligence. Their Merchants at this Day are the greatest of the
Universe. What Nation is it, where they have not insinuated; nay, which they
have not almost Anatomis'd, and even discovered the intrinsic Veins on it.

Even among us, they shame us with their Industry, which makes them seem as if
they had a faculty from the World's Creation, out of Water to make dry Land
appear. They win our drowned Grounds, which we cannot recover, and chase back
Neptune to his own old Banks.

All that they do, is by such Labor as it seems extracted out of their own
Bowels; and in their wary Thrift, they hang by such a slender Sustentation of
Life, that one would think their own weight should be enought to crack it.

Want of Idleness keeps them from want; and it is their diligence makes them
Rich.

A fruitful Soil increases the Harvest, a plentiful Sun augments the Store;
and seasonable showers drop fatness on the Crop we reap. But no Rain fructifies
more than the due of Sweat.

You would think, being with them, you were in old Israel; for you find not a
Beggar among them: Nor are they mindful of their own alone, but Strangers also
partake of their Care and Bounty; if they will depart, they have Money for
their Convoy; if they stay, they have Work provided; if unable, they find an
Hospital. Their Providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of
Flies. And lest you lose an Afternoon by fruitless Mourning, by two of the
Clock all Burials must end; wherein to prevent the waste of Ground, they pile
Coffin upon Coffin till the Sepulcher be full.

In all their Manufactures they hold a truth and constancy, for they are as
Fruits from Trees, the same every Year they are at first; not Apples one Year,
and Crabs the next, and so for ever after. In the sale of these they also are
at a word, they will gain rather than exact; and have not that way whereby our
Citizens abuse the Wise, and cozen the Ignorant; and by their infinite
over-asking for Commodities, proclaim to the World, that they would cheat all
if it were in their power.

The depravation of Manners they punish with Contempt; but the Defects of
Nature they favor with Charity. Even their Bedlam is a Place so curious, that
a Lord might live in it: Their Hospital might lodge a Lady. So that safely you
may conclude, amongst them even Poverty and Madness do both inhabit handsomely.
And though Vice makes every thing turn sordid, yet the State will have the very
Correction of it to be neat, as if they would show, that though Obedience fail,
yet Government must be still it self, and descent. To prove this, they that do
but view their Bridewel, will think it may receive a Gentleman though a Gallant:
And so their Prison, a wealthy Citizen; but for a poor Man, it is his best
Policy to be laid there, for he that casts him in must maintain him.

Their Language, though it differ from the higher Germany, yet has it the same
Ground, and is as old as Babel; and albeit harsh, yet so lofty and full a
Tongue, as made Goropius Becanus maintain it for the Speech of Adam in his
Paradise. And surely if there were not other Reasons against it, the
significancy of the Ancient Teutonic might carry it from the primest Dialect.
Steven of Bruges reckons up Two thousand one hundred seventy Monosyllables,
which being compounded, how richly do they grace a Tongue? A Tongue, that for
the general profession, is extended further than any that I know. Through both
the Germanies, Denmark, Norway, Sueden, and sometimes France, England, and
Spain: And still among us, all our Words are Dutch, with yet so little change,
that certainly it is in a manner the same that it was two thousand Years ago,
without the too much mingled Borrowings of their Neighbor Nations.

The Germans are a People, that more than all the World, I think, may boast
Sincerity, as being for some thousand of Years a pure and unmixed People. And
surely, I see not but their Conduction by Tuisco, from the building of Babel,
may pass as unconfuted Story, they yet retaining the Appellation from his Name.

They are a large and numerous People, having ever kept their own, and
transported Colonies into other Nations; in Italy were the Longobards; in Spain
the Goths and Vandals; in France the Franks, or Franconians, in England the
Saxons: having in all these left Reverend Steps of their Antiquity and Language.

It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as Tacitus has left still
extant of them, and Written above fifteen hundred Years ago; Deliberant dum
fingere nesciunt: Constituunt dum errare non possunt. They deliberate when they
cannot Dissemble, and resolve when they cannot err.

Two hundred and ten Years the Romans were in conquering them, in which space
on either side were the losses sad and fatal; so as neither the Samnites, the
Carthagenians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, no nor the Parthians ever troubled
them like the Germans. They slew and took Prisoners several Commanders of the
highest Rank, as Carbo, Cassius, S. Cauras, Aurelius, Cervillius, Cepio, and M.
Manlius. They defeated five Consulary Armies, and Varus with three Legions; yet
after all this he concludes, Triumphati magis quam victi sunt. They were rather
triumphed over than conquered. To confirm this, the keeping of their own
Language is an Argument answerable; the change whereof ever follows upon the
fully vanquished, as we may see it did in Italy, France, Spain, and England.

And this he speaks of the Nation in general: Nor was the Opinion of the Romans
less worthy in particular, concerning these Lower Provinces, which made them
for their Valor and warlike Minds, style them by the Name of Gallia Belgica,
and especially of the Batavians, which were the Hollanders, and part of
Guelders. You may hear in what honorable terms he mentions them, where
speaking of the several People of Germany, he says, Omnium harum Gentium
virtute proecipui Batavi: Nam nec tributis contemnuntur, nec publicanus
atterit: exemptioneribus and collationibus, and tantum in usum proeliorum
sepositi, velut tela atque arma bellis reservantur. Of all these Nations, the
Principal in valiant Virtue are the Batavians; for neither are they become
despicable by paying of Tribute, nor oppressed too much by the Farmer of
public Revenues, but free from Taxes and Contributions for Servility; they are
specially set apart for the Fight, as Armor and Weapons only reserved for War.

All this even at this Day, they seem to make good; for of all they World they
are the People that Thrive and grow Rich by the War, like the Porcipice, that
plays in the Storm, but at other times lies still and sober under the Water.

War, which is the World's Ruin, and ravins upon the Beauty of all, is to them
Prosperity and Ditation. And surely the reason of this is, their strength in
Shipping, the open Sea, their many fortified Towns, and the Country, by reason
of its lowness and plentiful irrigation, becoming impassable for an Army when
the Winter but approaches: Otherwise it is hardly possible, that so small a
parcel of Mankind should brave the most Potent Monarch of Christendom, who in
his own Hands hold the Mines of the Wars Sinews, Money; and has now got a
Command so wide, that out of his Dominions the Sun can neither rise nor set.

The whole Seventeen Provinces are not above a thousand English Miles in
Circuit, and in the States Hands there is not seven of those; yet have they in
the Field sometimes sixty thousand Soldiers, besides those which they always
keep in Garrison, which cannot be but a considerable number, near thirty
thousand; there being in the whole Country above two hundred Walled Towns and
Cities. So that if they have People for the War, one would wonder where they
should get Money to pay them, they being, when they have an Army in the Field,
at a thousnnd pound a Day charge extraordinary.

To maintain this, their Excise is an unwasted Mine, which with the
infiniteness of their Traffic, and their untired industry, is by every part of
the World in something or other contributed to.

The Sea yields them by two sorts of Fish only, Herring, and Cod, sixty
thousand pound per Annum; for which they go out sometimes seven or eight
hundred Boats at once; and for greater Ships, they are able to set out double
the number:

Their Merchandise amounted in Guicciardine's time to Fourteen Millions per
Annum. Whereas England, which is in compass almost as large again, and has the
Ocean as a Ring about her, made not above six Millions yearly; so sedulous are
these Bees to labor and enrich their Hive.

As they on the Sea, so the Women are busy on Land in weaving of Nets, and
helping to add to the heap. And though a Husband's long absence might tempt
them to lacivious ways, yet they hate Adultery, and are resolute in Matrimonial
Chastity. I do not remember that ever I read in Story, of any great Lady of
that Nation, that has been taxed with looseness: And questionless, it is their
ever being busy, makes them have no leisure for Lust.

It Is idleness that is Cnpid's Nurse, but business breaks his Bow, and makes
his Arrows useless.

They are both Merchants and Farmers; an their act parts, which Men can but
discharge with us: As if they would show, thrt the Souls in all are Masculine,
and not varied into weaker Sex, as are the Bodies that they wear about them.

Whether this be from the Nature of their Country, in which, if they be not
laborious, they cannot live; or from an Innate Genius of People, by a superior
Providence adapted to them of such a Situation; from their own Inclinations,
addicted to Pasimony; from Custom in their Way of Breeding; from any
Transcendency of Active Parts, more than other Nations; or from being in their
Country, like People in a City besieged, whereby their own Virtues do more
compact, and fortify, I will not determine. But, certainly, in general, they
are the most painful and diligent People on Earth; and, of all other, the most
truly of Vespacian's Opinion, to think that Ex re qualibet bonus Odor lucri: Be
it raised from what it will, the Smell of Gain is pleasant.

Yet they are, in some sort, Gods; for they set Bounds to the Seas, and when
they list let it pass again. Even their Dwelling is a Miracle; they live lower
than the Fishes, in the very Lap of the Floods, and incircl'd in their Watery
Arms: They are the Israelites, passing through the Red Sea, the Waters wall
them in; and if they set open their Sluices, shall drown their Enemies.

They have struggled long with Spain's Pharaoh, and they have at length
enforced him to let them go. They are a Gideon's Army upon the March again.
They are the Indian Rat, gnawing the Bowels of the Spanish Crocodile, to which
they got when he gaped to swallow them. They are a Serpent, wreathed about the
Legs of that Elephant. They are the little Sword-fish, pricking the Belly of
the Whale. They are the Wane of that Empire which increased under Isabella, and
in Charles V's Time was at full.

They are a Glass, wherein Kings may see, that though they be Sovereigns over
Lives and Goods, yet when they usurp upon God's Part, and will be Kings over
Conscience too, they are sometimes punished with the Loss of that which
lawfully is their own: That Religion too fiercely urged, is to stretch a String
till it not only jars, but cracks; and in the breaking, whips (perhaps) the
Streiner's Eye out.

That an Extreme Taxation is, to take away the Honey while the Bees keep the
Hive; whereas, he that would do that, should first either burn them, or drive
them out: That Tyrants in their Government, are the greatest Traitors to their
own States: That a Desire of being too Absolute, is to walk upon Pinacles and
the Tops of Piramids, where not only the Footing is full of Hazard, but even
the Sharpness of that they tread on may run into their Foot, and wound them:
That too much to regrate on the Patience of but fickle Subjects, is to press a
Thorn till it prick your Finger: That nothing makes a more desperate Rebel,
than a Prerogative enforced too far.

That Liberty in Man is as the Skin to the Body, not to be put off, but
together with Life. That they which will command more than they ought, shall
not at last command so much as is fit.

That Moderate Princes sit faster in their Regalities, than such as being but
Men, would yet have their Power over their Subjects, as the Gods, Unlimited.
That Oppression is an Iron heated till it burns the Hand. That to debar some
States of Ancient Privileges, is, for a Falcon to undertake to beat a Flock of
Wild Geese out of the Fens. That to go about to compel a sullen Reason to
submit to a wilful Peremptoriness, is so long to beat a chained Mastiff into
his Kennel, till at last he turns, and flies at your Throat. That unjust Policy
is to shoot as they did at Ostend, into the Mouth of a charged Cannon, to have
two Bullets returned for one. That he does but endanger himself, that riding
with too weak a Bitt, provokes an Headstrong Horse with a Spur. That it is
safer to meet a valiant Man Weaponless, than almost a Coward in Armor. That
even a weak Cause, with a strong Castle, will boil Solt Blood to a Rebellious
Itch. That it is better keeping a Crazy Body in an equal Temper, than to anger
Humors by too sharp a Physic.

That Admonitions from a dying Man, are too serious to be neglected. That there
is nothing certain, that is not impossible. That a Cobbler of Flushing was one
of the greatest Enemies the greatest Enemies the King of Spain ever had.

The People in it are Jews of the New Testament, that have exchanged nothing
but the Law for the Gospel; and this they rather profess, than practice.
Together, a Man of War, riding at Anchor in the Downs of Germany.

For Foreign Princes to help them, is wise Self-Policy: When they have made
them able to defend themselves against Spain, they are at the Pale; if they
enable them to offend others, they go beyond it. For, questionless, were this
Thorn out of the Spaniard's Side, he might be feared too soon to grasp his
Longintended Monarchy. And were the Spaniard but possessed Lord of the
Low Countries, or had the States but the Wealth and Power of Spain, the rest of
Europe might be like People at Sea in a Ship on fire, that could only choose
whether they would drown or burn. Now, their War is the Peace of their
Neighbors. So Rome, when busied in her Civil Broils, the Parthians lived at
rest; but those concluded once, by Caesar, next are they designed for Conquest.

If any Man wonder at these Contraries, let him look in his own Body for as
many several Humors, in his own Brain for as many different Fancies, in his
own Heart for as various Passions; and from all these he may learn, that there
is not in all the World such another Beast as Man.

OF AMSTERDAM.
AS this famous City was one the first which shook off the Spanish Yoke, so the
Courage it showed, at a Juncture when their Lives and Liberties were in the
utmost Danger, has entitled it more to be the Metropolis of the Seven
Provinces, than the Splendor of its Buildings, the Advantages of its
Situation, and the Abundance of its Riches.

It is to be confessed, (as our Trip-Master will have it,) several Vices are
Inhabitants of this place; but here are Virtues which drown the Appearance of
them: Here is Industry, with-Necessity; Hospitality, without Design; Charity,
without Boasting; Obedience, without Compulsion; Magistracy, without Knavery;
Jnstice, without Bribery; and Frugality, without Covetousness.

The People are Lovers of Freedom, and fearless of Asserting it; wonderful
Cautious, yet Daring to a Miracle; Inimitable in Times of Peace, and
Unconquerable in War; have Immunities above their Neighbors, yet never make
use of them to their Neighbors Disadvantage.

The Story of Japan was forged against them by Stubbs, in the late Dutch War,
when to be Inveterate was to tell Truth, and to invent a plausible Lie was to
be counted a good Patriot. There was something in it, it is true; but nothing
but what savored more of Policy, than Dishonesty. For, how could it be Denying
CHRIST, to write themselves HOLLANDERS? Or, by what Means can they be styled
Heathens, who made such Evasions for the sake of Professing the Gospel without
Disturbance.

If they were so irreligious as our Author would have them, they would never
have Revolted from the Spaniard on Account of their Religion: And if they were
so easily to be persuaded to deny their SAVIOR, certainly they would never
have been so difficult in submitting to a Religion, which, though it differed
from theirs in several Points, yet owned the REDEEMER, who suffered for them.

As to their hatred to the Spanish King, it appears in nothing but their
unwillingness to join in a Communion which was disonant to their Principles,
and impracticable by those of another Profession, and if to relieve him in the
highest extremity, and support him when his whole Kingdom was threatened with
Fire and Sword, be Hatred truly, I shall be to seek for a definition of Love.

And his Catholic Majesty would scarce have an Ambassador there, if they were
not in his Interests.

Their Clergy, though Calvinists, a Title which is their Glory, though our Author
would brand them with it, are mien in their Dispositions, courteous in their
Behavior, without Affectation, without Pride, without Hypocrisy.

They rail at no Religion, though they have made choice of One which they think
to be the Best, and disputes about Religious matters are as rare here as they
are common in London* Every one is suffered to go on in his own way, though if
he be thought to be in the wrong, he has the Prayers of those who think
themselves in the right to convert him.

Here are no Bishops with costly Equipages, no Deans with fifteen hundred
Pounds per Annum, no greasy Prebendaries with their double Chins as big as
their Paunches; but a competency is allowed from the State to each Minister,
which makes them too low to think themselves above their Fellow Creatures, and
too high to be dispis'd by them.

Two hundred Pounds a Year is their respective Salary, and by these means are
kept in a dependence on the States, who has it in their power to discard them,
if they, like the English Clergy, meddle with affairs which belong to the
Supreme Rulers.

Their Churches are large, their Principles not so starched as those of our
English Presbyterians; their Preaching Doctrinal and Persuasive, their lives
Pious and Instructive, and their whole constitution of so exemplary a frame, as
it not only takes off from those odious aspersions which are laid upon them,
but adds to the glory of an Establishment which scarce can suffer any further
increase.

Their Merchants are the greatest in the World, their Magistrates the justest,
and their Laws so strictly put in execution, that to hear of a robbery in
Amsterdam is to be told a thing which increases your Wonder; and to detect
People in dishonest practices there, is less frequent than to see them executed
for dishonesty here.

In short, though all Religions are tolerated, there is none but what may think
the True encouraged; and though Policy in this Place is in its highest
perfection, yet Probity and Equity are not eclipsed by it; and it no more takes
off from the Glory of the Renowned City of Amsterdam, than the De Wits who
were Enemies to his present Majesty of Great Britain were Born here, then that
so many Monarchy-haters have their Residence and Nativity in London.

To conclude, if to be Preservers of their own liberties, and Defenders of that
of others; if to furnish Examples for the security of this and succeeding Ages;
if to have Justice and Mercy to kiss each other, whilst Plenty and Peace walk
Hand in hand together, be Blessings, as instructive as they are valuable, then
had our Author no reason to wish Amsterdam to set Sail, unless Industry,
Goodness, and Justice, be so many Eye-sores to him, and he would be as far from
receiving good Instructions, as he is from giving them.

AND now, OF Land! from whom at first I drew
My Breath; to whom, again, my Breath is due!
If any thing be written, or is done,
Unworthy of a Parent, or a Son:
If I Have forgot the Duties of my Birth;
And Praising, have not praised Thee to thy Worth,
Grant me Thy Pardon, and forgive the Faults
Of unconsider'd Lines, and hasty Thoughts,
Till some bold Pen, to Fame and Merit known,
Shall justify thy Cause, which is its own.
Though Deeds like Thine, and Virtues, are so bright,
They, of themselves, can to themselves do Right:
And though one English Pen has vainly chose
To blame Thy People, and his own expose:
Yet still Thy Arms with English Forces join,
And win their Hearts by Friendship to be Thine.
Then shall Britannia midst the Ocean Reign,
And Neptune yield the Taxes of the Main:
Whilst Belgia's Fleets, with Hers, United Ride,
And Heaven, and Fame, and Conquest's on her Side,
No Harms shall hurt 'em, and no Ills molest,
Whilst One reclines Her Head on to Other's Breast.
So the Tall Oak, the Pride of all the Grove,
Whom Winds insult, and Storms attempt to move,
If it is with the Supporting Ivy Crowned,
Secure it stands, scarce nodding on the Ground:
In vain the Tempests on it blow,
Its Friend, the Ivy, props it from its Foe;
Which whistling through its kind Embraces, wastes
Its Fruitless Strength in Unsuccessful Blasts.
When if on Ida's Yop it stands alone,
Divested of all Coverts but its own,
Up from the Roots (it self a Wood) it is torn,
And Ida's Ecchoing Nymphs the spacious Ruin mourn.
FINIS.

