AN ANSWER of some if not all the CITIZENS of London and Freemen of ENGLAND,
To a Paper entitled An Express from the Knights, and Gentlemen now Engaged
with Sir ^eo^ge Booth, to the City and Citizens of London, and all other
Freemen of ENGLAND.
AS we are Englishmen we are all incorporated into one Body, and though (...)
and different Families, Fortunes and Qua^^^ yet fellow Members and Col^irs of
one and the same Bir^^^g^t, not only by (...), as we are the Sons of ^^en,
((...) obliging all in ^^e Common and equal Bond of Freedom and Unity) but
b^^ce ta^^ sacred Laws and Customs of peculiar and inherent Flight to this
Nation; general; equal and impartial to all (...) without effect of persons,
rank, quality, or degree, de^ved through all successions of Ages by the Blood,
Justice, and prudence of our Fore fathers to us their Posterity, as ours, and
the Right of our Children after us, not (...) it able: though this Age were
wholly made up or Apostates and Traitors to Common Justice and Freedom, and
should make sale of, and deliver up their Children as Slaves and Vassals, yet
English I Right at (...), to wit, our ^^st Laws and Liberties, and may justly
beste-inforced as oporturity may present; Sometimes they sleep, but never die,
their total E^^tingu^^^ment is not to be imagined so long as any Englishman,
or English-blood abides: and whoever undertaketh (though by Arms, or
otherwise) their recovery and Redemption, is justified in that very Action by
the Laws of God, of Nations, Nature, Reason, and by the Laws of the Land; and
within the Bowels of our Nation among our selves no War can be justified, but
upon that score; the contrary is Sedition, Murder, Treason, Tyranny, and what
not? and the Instruments thereof no other in the Eye of English Freedom and
Right, but as Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts of prey.

Now right worthy and noble Citizens, and all other our English Brethren, let
us consider and lay to heart the sad and deplorable condition of our native
Country, Oppression, Injustice, and Tyranny reigns; Division, Discord, and
Dissimulation fomented and fostered; Trade and industry discouraged, our
Land-rent into parties and factions, and the common Band of Unity Cancelled,
our Fundamental Laws supplanted, High Courts of Justice introduced, the blood
of War shed in times of Peace; A bitrary and illegal imprisonments, Pattents,
Monopolies, Excise, and other payments brought upon us, and continued contrary
to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; no form or face of Government of
English Constitution among us; the Name and Authority of the People in
Parliament usurped and abused, and the stamp thereof put upon strange and
prodigious Actions, vexing and oppressing the People with daily changes and
alterations in Government, as the Interest of some few ambitious Grandees alter
and change or (...) advantages one of another, and all under the ^am^ of a
Commonwealth, when as the Nature is not practiced or intended at all, it being
utterly incons^^ent with their very temper and interest: they are wrapped up and
compounded of nothing but guilt, blood, and Tyranny; and Equal and Common
Justice (the Essence of a Common wealth) are utterly repugnant thereto; and
whatsoever they (...), must be planted and maintained by Sword and violence,
against the very Heart and Sense of the Nation; and they know not where; nor
^ow to center an Oligarchy, (...) something they would have to be Masters of
the People, and perpetuate their power and Tyranny, and therefore would amaze
and confound us with their New Debates of a Co-ordinute Power, or Senate for
life, such as our English Laws and Liberties know not of, and of pernicious
Consequence to this Nation; so that from these men that thus handle the Stern
at Westminster, there is no expectation of any just settlement of Peace or
Freedom from Oppression; especially considering the Apostasy, Hypocrisy,
Deceit, and Perjury of those men: their manifold solemn Engagements, Oaths,
Vows, Protestations, Appeals unto Heaven; Promises, Remonstrances,
Declarations, all by them broken again and again; never keeping Faith, Truce or
Oath; being unbounded, unlimitted, certain to nothing, not to be held either by
the Law of God, of Man, of Conscience, or Reason: and from such persons in
Government good Lord deliver (...), and all the good People of England (...)
And that all this is true of them, your own Consciences Noble Citizens, and all
other the Free people of England can witness; there is no tongue, no pen is
able to vindicate them in this point, it is known of all, owned by all, and can
be denied by none; how then can any honest or just man shed any blood in their
Quarrel, of lend them Assistance? surely that blood will be required at their
hands, and we doubt not but you will be careful what you do.

And therefore from those Considerations and just provocations we have taken up
Arms in pursuance of, and Inquisition after our Government, Laws, and
Liberties, that every Englishman may be protected and secured in his Religion,
Liberty, and property: and though it may be suggested, that we intend to
introduce Prosecution for Conscience into the Land again, we do hereby (in the
presence of Almighty God) protest and declare against all Coercive Power in
matter of Religion, and that to the utmost of our strength (through Gods
assistance) we will endeavor (to the hazard of our blood and Fortunes) the
Freedom and protection of all virtuous and religious people, by what name
soever differenced from us, equal with our selves: And that no Foreign or
other Authority (s^ve only the Civil) be exercised in England: That the
practice of the Law be reformed; all corrupt Statute repealed; Annual Elections
of all Officers and Magistrates, with the constant Succession of Parliaments
restored; our Fundamental Laws cleared and asserted, and whatever is contrary
there to be abolished; That no Tayals be admitted in England for Life, Limb,
Liberty, or Estate, but by the good old way of Juries, and that they be
restored to their Original power and purity: That all Extrajudicial and illegal
proceedings by High-Courts of Justice, or otherwise, with all Illegal and
Arbitrary Comittees be strictly provided against: That the Excise and all other
Payments and Taxes such as our Ancestors never knew of, together with all
Monopolies and Patents destructive to Trade and the Comnion good of the Nation
be also abolished: And, that our Parliaments and Magistrates be secured from
all Force and Violence, and utterly cleared from all boundless Prerogative, and
unlimited privilege: That the Right of the Poor in the Commons of England, all
Donations for Charitable Uses, and all Lands formerly belonging to the People
be restored again: And that Mercy and Justice be truly established amongst us.
And for these ends and what else may be of public good to the Nation, we do
desire, and indeed challenge as of English Right the speedy Election of a New
Free, Parliament.

And thus Most noble Citivens, Brethren and fellow Free (...) of England, we
have dealt (...) and plainly with you, and given you the real Grounds and
Reason of our taking up Arms; I ^^king upon you as the most concern (...) this
Nation, and therefore hold our selves, the more obliged to give you this I
only Advice of ou^ Candid and Just Intentions in this Undertaking, that you ^ay
not be deluded or flighted (though ^als^y) into any strange opinion of us,
either through your own mistake, or by the policy of those men, who will leave
no means unatten^^^ed to (...) us as Public Enemies, Rebels and Traitors,
Plunderers, Tyranus and Persecuters, or whatever is odicus and monstrous, to
engage you in Blood.

Were ^e us, Right worthy Citizens, and Freeborn English Brethren, (...) have
no design of Fire or Sword, or of Evil toward you or your City, o^ any part of
the Nation, or any person in it: We know there are thousand amongst you that
are satisfied in us; it may be indeed that (...) the ^a^hoted Separate Churches
may be fearful and jealous of us; and sol may be (...) to Arm: against us; but
we do again and again protest before Almighty God, and the whole World, that we
have no other purpose toward them, but that they with us, and we with them,
may be bound up as Friends and Brethren in the Common (...), that every English
man may have English Freedom and Right; and we do not de^^^e to wrong either
Man; Woman, of Child the worth of a Shooe-^a^cher^ Therefore we hope you will
advise before you proceed in a new War lest you bring not only your own, but
others blood on your heads (for we (...) resolved to prose ^te this to the last
drop of our blood.) The Gaser of England is laid before you our Laws and
Liberties, they are ^ours as well as ours, and for which we have all engaged in
the first War, and not to he so straightly vallued, as to be set at stake
against the private ends of (...) ambitious and corrupt persons: Salus Populi,
Suprema Lex, Let the People live, and their, Enemies perish.

Therefore we beseech you, we conjure you as Englishmen, to stand by your
Native Country, and your Countries Cause: Our voy^e is and it is no other than
the Consent and Voy^e of the People, A new free Parliament, A new free
Parliaments, it is the English man's Birthright, which we are resolved to put
the People in possession of, or to perish with our Swords in our hands. But if
you will not join but degenerate, we hope notwithstanding (by Gods blessing) to
carry on this Work: yet that just and glorious Work we may challange your
concurrence, it being your duty as well as ours to endeavor the procurement
thereof: And therefore to you make it our Proposal, to your Militia, to the
Army, and the whole People, for the prevention of a New War, and the effusion
of English blood, that you would be Instrumental with us for the speedy
Election of a New-Free-Parliament, for the ends aforesaid; and in the near in
all host^^ity to ^e forborne, and that a cay may be appointed, and the People
suffered to go to their free Elections, and we shall quietly submit unto their
Authority; heartily de^^ing that all revenge, division, (...) or, and a^^^osity
of spirit may be for ever buried in one General Act of Oblivion; And that all
Parties, Sects, and Sorts (now ja^^^ng, and making up interests one against
another) may reconcile, cement, and concente in the common Brotherhood of
English Freedom and Right; in and for which we are.

George Booth.

The Answer of some, if not All the Citizens of London and Freemen of England,
to a Paper entitled, An Express from the Knights and Gentlemen now engaged
with Sir George Booth.
Gentlemen,
HAd you declared more for THINGS then MEN, more for GOVERNMENT then
GOVERNORS, we might perhaps have acquiessed, or concurred with you; But to
hope only for CHANGES of Governors, which you your selves acknowledge Vexation
and Oppression, can be but variety of Miseries, not true and certain comfort or
satisfaction.

You Declare against those men That handle the Helm at Westminster. Are we
sure you are better?

You cry up Magna Charta, Fundamental Law, Birthrights, Liberties, Taking off
Taxes: So do they. You swear it: So have they. You will secure Parl. and
Magistrates from violence, and Protect us: so do they. But can you do it
without an Army? And if by an Army, is it not the same thing? Unless you have
gotten the secreet of Dr. Chamberlen's Chimera, to maintain an Army without
Taxes; and the poor without invading Proprieties. But why will you do it now,
and not when you were of the Parliament? Was not Sir George Booth and Sir Tho.
Middleton, and others of you sometimes of this very Parliament? Did you not
Vote and Declare, and Swear with them? Nay, did you not Vote us into Blood,
Oaths and Protestations, and there leave us? And now we en^oy some Peace, would
you engage us into Blood again? It Is you and such as you have occasioned our
Armies, and for that cause are Taxes raised to maintain those Armies, which you
occasioned; And it is suspected, that had not your party used your Cat's Paw
for an Order for Tithes, to diso^lidge the Parliaments friends and grati^^e the
Enemies (your Pulpit Heralds) to embolden them to P^each Sedition by the Hour,
and betray the very Conscience to Rebellion; And for an Act to raise a Militia
to Pay the Army, or at least provoke them to jealousy, contriving the Common
people into a Tribe of Isachar couching between two Burdens; And an Act for
new Assessements one year and three Months before hand; whilst they that
gleaned away the old ones and many Millions more, are secured by an Act of
Indemnity, to incense the whole Nation the more against them you had not so
far advanced in your Rebellion, as to begin a new War.

You hope we will advise before we preceed to a new War, and in the mean time
you Act it: proclaiming you will hazard your Blood, and perish with your
Swords in your hands: And that when no sign of War remained but an Army; An
Army that had nothing to do but to receive Pay. Ought you not first to have
advised with us? Is it so you mean to Protect us, by fighting with us? For you
say, You will Protect us. But can you Protect your selves? Why should you be
our Protectors? Why not we yours? You will Protect us if we submit to you: so
will the Turk or any foreign Prince. We have too lately felt the weight of a
Protector. The Lord Protect us, and then we shall not need you nor any else;
yea He has protected us, for He is our Judge, our Lord, our King, he will ^ave
us.

Your Result is, To give us a Free Parliament. What Is that? To bring us back to
41 or 42? That were to fight over the same lesson again. Why do you not speak
out, and say you would have a King? Or, must we be subject both to Sir George
Booth and a King? For both Proclamations were contemporary. This juggling away
the lives and souls of men is a sad business. A Free Parliament has been
pretended in the several Moods and Figures of the Old Protector, till at last
we came to a Linsy-Woolsy Parliament of English, Scottish and Irish, as being
all alike enslaved to his Will, And the first work was in pure zeal, to enslave
the Conscience of those whom their godly Ministers could not convince: whose
powerful preaching has at last enslaved you into this Bellum Presbyteriale,
Wherein though you challenge us, to be of the same Body of the English Nation;
yet you cannot be ignorant, that if every member of the Body inflame into a
Gangreen, it must be cut off lest the whole perish.

A Free Parliament you fight for secured from Violence: And a Free Parliament
we have already secured from Violence, secured even from your violence that
would invade it. A Parliament freely chosen in the most dangerous of times. A
Parliament confirmed by King and Lords, and owned by all the Counties of the
Nation. A Parl^ament whose Authority God himself has owned, and born witness
to in all the great things he has done in these three Nations: and has
miraculously given them a Resurrection beyond the very design of those that
brought it to pass. And whilst this is printing sends Tidings of Victory in
further confirmation. A Parliament sifted and refined. Would you have it now
filled with dross again and rubbish?

But you despise it because the number is small, Will you despise the day of
small things? You despise it because deserted by so many: Therefore the more
they are to be esteemed, who so long have continued constant. But you could not
Act with them, or some of you were driven away from them; the more unfit such
to be (...) Parliaments, who want eit^e wisdom to argue out a good Cause, it
they (...), or valor to protest against a bad one, o^^dy in the controve (...)
And now at present, had you ^ad reason in your doings, what needed you after
(...) ought ^y force, since Beasts overco^^ by force, and Men by Reason, even
to the engagin, of force against unreasonable and beastly Men.

But why is the spleen against these men? Can you exclude the your New
Parliament, who could not (...) their choice your Inst motley Parliament, nor
outereason their Arguments against you, though (...) under one roof? And why
must you do it in haste and all in ^lood^? Could you not stay till their short
me by themselves Emitted to May next, to have left the without excuse? For
whilst you now find fa^le, you furn (...) them with just excuses and
vindreations, by your frequent and most dangerous interruptions.

We know the Liberty of the Nation is invaded, Treasure wasted, and Trade
decayed, and the poor famished; But is all that to be mended by your Laws, They
are the Laws that cause them. For whilst the Legislative Power remains in
louder ye^s, or nays of Parliament, though many things may be unjust, yet
nothing is illegal, especially being into pre^ed by a gang of Judges and
Lawyers, alwa^es to want is uppermost. And this is the reason why Laws are as
Changeable (...). And (...) prove^^ good; New Lords new Laws. Whereas if the
(...) power be owned by whom Kings Reign, Whereby in King Alfred days Peace and
prosperity rejoiced this whole Nations And in King Solomon's days Silve was as
the Stones in Jerusalem, and all the people dwelt in lafety every man under his
own Vine and under his (...). Then may we ^oyn in peace with joy and gladness,
eating and drinking and making merry, and none to make us afraid. Then shall we
nay Judges as at first, and Counselors as at the beginning. All tears shall he
wiped from our eyes, all sorrows from our hearts. The poor shall be no more
Oppressed, nor honest men Arrested, nor Imprisoned Men shall no more be Pressed
to fight against their Will or Conscience But our Swords shall be bearen into
Plough-shares, and our Spears into pruning hooks; Nor shall there be any
complaint in all the Holy Mountain of the Lord.

Published for general satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by J. Clowes, 1659.


