THE ANSWER TO THE APPEAL, Expounded.

Printed in the Year 1680.

Union Theol. Sem. Library MCALPIN

THE PREFACE.
THis Answerer of the Appeal were his Politics as strong as his Passions, I
should think him a Jesuit; but they are so far from being so, that I should
disgrace that Order, if I should imagine him to be one of them: He is only an
outrageous and over-vehement Papist, and differs from a Jesuit as a Wasp does
from a Hornet, much of the same nature, but not so vigorous; he would pass for
a Member of the Church of England, (I mean) as far as relates to the Crown and
Episcopacy, but furiously rails in effect at the Protestants. But (thanks be to
God) things are not yet come to that pass, as that he dares do it under that
Name; therefore he terms them Presbyterians, Fanatics, Schismatics, Rebels,
etc. and then belyes them freely. Mark through this whole Treatise, and you
shall find his main design is to shift away the real Popish Plot, which the
Justice of our Laws have already found out, and instead thereof would
substitute to the Executioner innocent Protestants; much like the wicked Jews,
who to save the Murderer Barrabas from public Justice, did substitute, and by
false witness condemn Jesus Christ. But not to trouble you with a separate
Confutation of his whole Discourse, wherein he may pretend false Quotation, I
will only annex to his own Text some marginal Notes, and leave them to the
Reader's use, like Salt upon the brims of the Dish.

THE ANSWER to the APPEAL, EXPOUNDED.
THis Appeal has made a mighty noise about the Town; and yet, Heaven knows,
there is neither Good Faith in it, nor Argument: But all things mis-apply'd, or
mis-reported, to bring an Odium upon the Government, and to inflame the
Multitude. The pretended Reasonings of it are no more than fallacies and
non-sequiturs, from the beginning to the end; and yet it serves in a
Coffee-house for a So that either all Honest Men are Mutiniers, or all
Mutiniers Honest Men: which makes him join them together.
Test of Honest Men and Mutiniers. Taking it barely in it self, it is scarce
worth an Answer: But in the circumstances of the Boldness and the Malice, it is
but reasonable to bestow such a Reply upon it, as may give it a Recommendation
to public Justice; Especially Here he shows himself to be an Informer,
having already taken notice of it by the By, in another place.

It is a wonderful thing, the Confidence of this Audacious Pamphlet, in
Addressing it self to the City, after so Fresh, so Loyal, and so Generous an
instance of their scorn, and detestation of any thing that looks like a
seditious practice. Wat Tyler's endeavor was to destroy the Kings Life and
Government, and plunder the City: whereas the Appeal desires to save King, City
and Government, or at least to revenge their sufferings.
Why should a Wat Tyler expect better Quarter from a Lord Mayor under Charles
the Second, than he had from a Lord Mayor under Richard the Second? Nay, that
very Rebellion of This year of 41. is indeed very remarkable for the Massacre
of 250000 poor Irish Protestants, by the Papists.
Forty-one is most injuriously I suppose our Author is the only party that
accuses the Honorable City.
charged upon the City of London; for Gournay, Ricaut, Garraway, and the most
considerable of the Citizens, were not only against it in their Opinions, but
opposed it to the utmost with their Estates and Persons. And that Honorable
Society has not yet forgotten either the Calamities of the War, or the Methods
and Instruments which brought so great a Reproach upon the City. Beside, that
it is as much their Interest as their Duty, and as much their Inclination as
either, to support the Government. Herein I must agree with him, that the City
lost many things by the last Civil War; for they lost the Star Chamber,
High-Commission-Court, Knights-Service, Court of Wards, Privy-Seals, etc.
For by a War they must of necessity suffer doubly: And not only in the loss or
abatement of their Trade, but in the deep proportion of their Taxes toward the
public Charge. So that these are not a sort of people to be Wheedled out of
their Honor and Allegiance. But we shall now take a view of the Pamphlet it
self.

An Appeal from the Country to the City.
IT begins; Most brave and noble Citizens: And a little lower; With you we
stand, and with you we fail; your example directs our Conduct, etc. Now if the
greeting had been to the Club of Subscribers, that which follows would have
been much more Consequent; for it is a great Truth, that the Conspirators of
both sides must expect to stand and fall together; and that the Factions in the
Country can never make any thing on it, without a Tumult in the City, to lead
the Dance; which (God be praised) there is no fear of, and then for the Credit
which this busy Mutineer can pretend to under this present Government, with
the Noble Citizens (as he claws them) I am persuaded, if the Author of the
Appeal were but known to the Court of Aldermen and Common Council, it might
cost him Dear, the very Complement. Not but that in so At first he claws the
City, but here you see his Complement does not hold long, likening some of them
to Horse-turds.
great a body, there may be some few little Fellows a float too, that cry out
with the Horse-turds among the Apples, in the Emblem, How we Apples swim.

In the next clause, the Scriber gives to understand that he has read Hodge
upon the Monument; and writing after that Copy, he follows the fancy of the
Citizens looking about them from the top of the Pyramid. Now to match this
dismal prospect of Imaginary Calamities to come, we shall give you a Parallel
in a brief Summary of what this Nation has really suffered in Fact; and in
Truth brought upon it self, by Here he begins to withdraw you from believing or
fearing a Popish Plot.
believing such stories as these, without either Foundation or Effect.

First ( says he) Imagine you see the whole Town in a flame; occasioned this
second time by the same Popish malice which set it on fire before. This
Parallel is no other but an Harangue for Popery, and against all the
Protestants, under the name of Schismatics
First ( say I) Imagine you see the whole Nation in a Flame, and brought to the
extremities of Fire and Sword, occasioned this second time by the same
Schismatical and Republican Malice which embroiled it before.

At the same instant fancy that amongst the distracted Crowd, you behold
Troops of Papists ravishing your Wives and Daughters, dashing your little
Childrens brains out against the Walls, Plundering your Houses, and cutting
your own Throats, by the name of Heretic Dogs. At the same instant, Fancy
December. 1659, once over again; whole droves of Cobblers, Dray-men, Ostlers, upon
Free Quarter with you, till some of your Wives and Daughters are forced to
Prostitute themselves for Bread; your Councels affronted by Armed Troops, and
your fellow Citizens knocked on the head, like Dogs, at their own doors, for not
so much as barking; your Apprentices discharged of their Indentures by an
Arbitrary Power; your Houses Rifled; your Account-books examined; your As many
times this Fiddler has done.
Servants corrupted to Betray their Masters; your Persons clapped under Hatches,
transplanted or thrown into nasty Dungeons; or (in mercy perhaps) your Throats
cut, by the Name of Popish Dogs and Cavaliers: And all this only for refusing
to Renounce God and your Sovereign.

Then represent to your selves the Tower playing off its Cannon, and battering
down the Houses about your ears Then represent to your selves the
Thimble-maker, once again Lieutenant of the Tower; your Citizens clapped up; St.
Paul's and Gresham-Colledge turned into Garrisons; orders for the demolishing of
your Gates and Chains; and nothing less than Military Execution threatened you,
unless you will redeem your selves with 100000 l. a Given for the Peoples own
servi^e and security, therefore less grievous.
month Contribution, toward the perpetuating of your Slavery.

Also casting your Eye toward Smithfield, Imagine you see your Father, or your
Mother, or some of your nearest and dearest Relations tied to a Stake in the
midst of flames; when with bands and eyes lifted up to Heaven, they scream and
cry out to that God, for whose cause they die; which was a frequent spectacle
the last time Popery Reigned amongst us. Also casting your eye toward
Cheap Side, Cornhil, Charing Cross, Palace-yard, Tower Hill, nay, Whitehall it
self: Imagine you see your Father, or some of your nearest Relations, your
Citizens, the Nobility, Gentry; nay, the King himself, and his best Friends,
under the hand of the Common Executioner, appealing to God, in whose Cause they
died, which was a frequent spectacle, when Rebels and Usurpers, under the title
of Reformers, reigned last amongst us.

Fancy ye behold those Beautiful Churches, erected for the true Worship of
God, abused and turned into Idolatrous Temples, to the dishonor of Christ, and
scandal of Religion: The Ministers of God's Holy Word, torn in pieces before
your eyes, and their best Friends not daring even to speak in their behalf.
Fancy you behold those Beautiful Churches erected for the true Worship of
God, abused and turned into Stables; the Pulpits into Juggling boxes to Hocus
your Wives and Daughters out of their Bodkins and Thimbles; and nothing to be
heard there but Heresy and Sedition, to the dishonor of Christ, and scandal
of Religion. The Ministers of Gods Holy Word cast out of their Livings by
hundreds, and their Children exposed to the wide World to beg their Bread; and
not a Friend that dares open his mouth for them.

Women running with their Hair about their ears; Men covered with Blood, and
Children sprawling under Horses feet, and only the Walls of Houses left
standing. Your Women running with their Hair about their ears, one half to the
Works like Pioniers, the other dancing Attendance at some Merciless Committee,
to put in Bail perhaps for some Malignant Friend or Husband; Men covered with
Blood, lost Limbs, and mangled Bodies, from Edghill, Branford, etc. and with
horror of Conscience over and above; Altars Robbed, Churches Demolished, and
only the Walls left standing.

In Fine, What the Devil himself would do, were he here upon Earth, will in his
absence infallibly be acted by his Agents the Papists: Those who had so much
Ingratitude and Baseness to attempt the Life of a Prince, so Indulgent to them,
will hardly be less cruel to any of his Protestant Subjects. The sum of this
parallel is, that he wrongfully accuses another of stealing an Ox, to justify
his own Theft of a Horse: and since he cannot have the impudence to clear his
own Popish Party of a Plot, yet he hopes at least to extenuate their crime, by
unjustly calumniating the Protestants.
In Fine, What the Devil himself would do, were he here upon Earth, will in his
absence infallibly be acted (if they may have their will) by his Agents, the
Perjurious and Hypocritical Regicides; that Betrayed their Prince and their
Country by the Solemnity of a Covenant, and Poisoned the unwary People in that
very Sacrament. Those who had so much Ingratitude and Baseness, not only to
attempt, but take away the Life of a Prince so Indulgent to them as the late
King was, who denied them nothing but his Crown, and his Blood, which afterward
they took: These, I say again, that are so ungrateful to our present Sovereign,
as after so much Mercy and Bounty to the Murderers of his Father, and of his
Friends, have now entered into fresh attempts upon his Life, his Crown and
Dignity, will hardly be less Cruel to any of his Majesty's obedient Subjects.

Now to show that this was written by a Papist, examine the Catholic Naked
Truth, where you may find their usual way of writing is to set up their own
Doctrine, by making the Protestants and Fanatics fall out.
Now to show you that this way of Incentive, to the Multitude is only the Old
story new furbish'd, and not our Appellants Mother-wit and Contrivance, as he
would have the World imagine. See his Majesty's Declaration of Aug. 12. 1642.
Husbands Collection, page 540.

One day the Tower of London is in danger to be taken; and Information given
that Great Multitudes, at least a Hundred, had that day resorted to visit a
Priest, then a Prisoner there by Order of the Lords: and that about the time of
the Information, about fifty or sixty were then there; and a Warder dispatched
of purpose to give that notice: Upon Inquiry, but four persons were then found
to be There, and but eight all that day, who had visited the Priest. Another
day a Tailor in a Ditch over-hears two passengers to Plot the Death of Mr. Pym,
and of many other Members of Both Houses. Then Libellous Letters found in the
Streets, without Names, (probably contrived by themselves; and by Their Power,
Published, Printed, and Entered in their Journals) and Intimations given of the
Papists Training under ground, and of notable Provision of Ammunition in
Houses; where, upon Examination, a Single Sword, and a Bow and Arrows are
found. A Design of the Inhabitants of Covent Garden to Murder the City of
London News from France, Italy, Spain, Denmark, of Armies ready to come for
England. And again, Page 536. they cause Discourses to be Published, and
Infusions to be made of Incredible Dangers to the City and Kingdom, by that our
coming to the House: ( in the case of the five Members.) An Alarm was given to
the City in the Dead time of the Night, that we were coming with Horse and Foot
thither, and thereupon the whole City put in Arms: And howsoever the Envy
seemed to be cast upon the Designs of the Papists, mention was only made of
Actions of our own. Upon a fair understanding of the whole, Sure this Author is
in the Plot himself, that he makes our present danger and the Plot to be but a
Supposition or Vision, when both King and Parliament have declared it real.
this supposition of his is no more than the Counterpart of the old Story: and
the Declamatory dangers that he foresees in Vision, were outdone by those
sensible Cruelties and Oppressions that this poor Kingdom suffered in very deed.

If it be true, that these and forty times more Cruelties were committed: And
that the People were frighted into these Precipices only by shadows: If it be
true again, that those Glorious Pretenders, when they had the King and his
Papists (as they called his most Orthodox Friends) under foot; that these
People, I say, never looked further after Religion; but fell presently to the As
this Scribler would do our Abbey Lands, were his Religion uppermost.
sharing of the Church and Crown Revenues among themselves, It will concern
every sober man to look well about him, and to make use of his Reason, as well
as of his Faith, for Nor Papists, till just before a Parliaments dissolution.
these Fore-boders seldom Croak but before a Storm.

We in the Country ( says he) have done our parts, in choosing, for the
generality, Good Members to serve in Parliament. But if (as our two last
Parliaments were) they must be Dissolved or Prorogued, when ever they come to
redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may be Pitied, but not Blamed. If the
Plot takes effect, as in all probability it will, our Parliaments are not then
to be Condemned, for that their not being suffered to sit, occasioned it* Fol.
1. There are just as many Affronts put upon the Government in these two
Periods, as (in the Printed Folio) there are Lines in it. First, Upon the House
of Commons; for a Representative constituted, for the generality, of Here he
supposes the best part of the House of Commons would lay the Kingdom in blood,
whereas such men as he calls Good Members would lay the City in ashes.
such men as our Appealer calls Good Members, would lay the Kingdom in Blood,
(which is manifestly the drift of the Libel from the one end of it to the
other.) Secondly, The Appellant Usurps upon the King's Authority; Many things
are lawful, but not expedient; and it is evident by this, he fears nothing more
than a Sessions of Parliament, therefore an enemy to the Government by
Parliament.
as if his Majesty were bound to give an Account to every Libeller, why he
Prorogues or Dissolves his Parliaments (which is a Privilege inseparable from
the Supreme Power) in all forms of Government. Thirdly, Not upon the King, but
such as advise him to it, for we all know that the King can do no wrong.
It is a Tacit Charge of Tyranny upon the King; for it is done (he says)
whenever they come to redress the Grievances of the Subject. And lastly, He
makes the King a Promoter of the Plot; but whether with more Indignity or
Folly, it is hard to determine, either in the Intimation, or in the Supposal of
his Majesty to be Felo de se, and a Party to the Conspiracy against his own
Life. Since the Appeal first came out, has not Dangerfield discovered many new
Plots, in order to the carrying on of the old one?
The Plot (he says) will in all Probability take effect, and he is the occasion
of it, that would not suffer these Parliaments to sit.

The Plot is now got so far out of our Enemies reach, that no subtle Evasion or
Trick can ever hope to extinguish it. Wherefore they must either suffer all to
come out, or begin by force to justify it, which we see they are going to do,
by their endeavoring to get those Worthy and Brave Commanders Banished, who
(as they think) are the most likely Persons to conduct and lead us up against
any Popish Army. Fol 1. The Appellants meaning is, that the Popish Plot is so
notoriously Public, there is no Concealing of it, and so far we are agreed:
Here he disguises himself, and would be thought a Protestant forsooth
For we have had Legal Trials, Proofs, Verdicts, Sentences, and Legal
Executions in the Case. But yet to my thinking, we have had also as Competent
By this I guess he had a hand in the late forged Plot.
Evidences of another Plot under that, as a body would wish. But whoever
crosses the second Plot, is presently Libelled, as a Friend to the former. What
do we hear, what do we read, what do we see, but Seditious Discourses,
Scandalous Invectives, and Mutinous Practices against the Government? Is not
the King's Administration, and his Authority publicly Arraigned? And is not
his Sacred Life struck at in this way of Proceeding? First, None of these
Principles are in the Appeal, therefore not to his purpose.
They expressly tell the World that his Majesty Misgoverns. Secondly, They lay
it down for a Maxim, that the People may call him to Account, in case he does
Misgovern. And this being admitted, the next point is, directly (by an
undeniable Consequence) to Arraign him as a Traitor to the Sovereign People.
But the Faction it self expounds its own meaning. Private malice of some
Relation of that Person, whom the Bishop had hanged after promise of pardon,
revenged his blood upon the Bishop; so as the whole Party is not to be blamed.
What have they to say for that Inhumane and Execrable Murder acted upon the
late Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, and to their Declaration against
the King himself; which was followed with an Open, Actual, and Formed
Rebellion? Because the unarmed Scotch Rabble took up Arms against some few that
oppressed them, and made a declaration of their grievances, therefore he would
have us forget the Popish Plot that is in England.
This is a Plot that, methinks, a Man may see without his Spectacles; and
according to our Appellant's conceit, they began by force to justify it, for
fear all should come out.

To follow him in his Politiques, he tells us further in the passage
above-recited, that to facilitate the Papists work, Not upon that score do we
think him banished, but upon some false furmises suggested to his Majesty by
his Popish Enemies, although they did it with that design.
his Majesty Banishes the Persons most capable of Opposing it. So that he makes
his Majesty evidently a Party to the Plot; or at best, no more than a King upon
a Chess-board, to be turned and carried which way the Gamester pleases: Beside;
the putting of the Illustrious Duke of Monmouth in the head of Popish Troops,
in contradiction to himself.

But ( for all this yet) Gentlemen (says he) be not dismayed; the Lord of Hosts
will be of your sides; for so long as you fight his Cause, he will fight your
Battles: And if God be for you, who dares be against you? Fear nothing, but as
your Interests are United, so let your Resolutions be the same; and the first
hour wherein you hear of the King's Untimely End, let no other noise be heard
among you, but that of Arm, Arm, to Revenge your Sovereign's Death, both upon
his Murderers, and their whole Party, for that there is no such thing as an
English Papist, who is not in the Plot, at least in his good Wishes. Fol 2. And
why [ be not dismaid] Where Is the danger, I beseech you? Witness Willoughby's
Relation: Witness the Priests daily taken. All this is but to lull us asleep,
for them to devour us.
The Popish Plot is Mastered; and there is hardly a Roman Catholic dares show
his head: Nay, and for want of Popish matter to work upon, the Church of
England it self is made Papal and Antichristian. And whoever looks narrowly
into this business, will find these Bugbears to be of the Appellant's own
making. What is all this, but Curse ye Meroz over again: He claps the Rabble on
the backs, and spits in their mouths, and without more ado, turns them loose
upon the Government? The first hour (says he) etc. This is apparently false,
for the words are, The first hour you hear of the King's untimely end, which I
think* supposes the King's Murder, and may be so understood by any but our
Clodpate Author.
Here Is no Supposition of the King's Murder to qualify the matter* but the
thing so Positively pronouns'd, as if he himself were of the Conspiracy. If
King James, when he had secret notice of the Gunpowder-Treason, had seemed to
disbelieve it, this Answerer would have esteemed it the part of a good Subject
to have been quiet, and suffered the King and Parliament to have danced in the
Air, rather than to have been so presumptuous a Presbyterian, as to prevent it
by a clamor for Justice against the Popish Traitors.
So that without any Ifs or Ands, the Murder is given for Granted; and upon
this Instigation, the least Rumor in the world that way, puts the People upon
a General Massacre, which the bare report lately of the French appearing before
the Isle of Purbeck, had like to have done in several places. Now if they
should Arm upon such a mistake, or but an hour too soon, it were enough to put
the whole Nation in Blood again: And then his Orders to the City, to be ready
with their Arms at an hours warning, are as Peremptory, as if he had the
Command of the Militia: Here he tells you his design, which is, That when the
Papists have murdered the King, it may be laid upon the Presbyteriant.
Beside that, if a Fanatique should Murder the King, the Papists are to be
Punished for it. Because (says he) every English Papist is in the Plot, at least
in his good wishes. And it is no less probable on the other side, that Sure as
can be our Author here was to have been one of the Evidences in this feigned
Presbyterian Plot.
every Unrepenting Covenanter is in the Counterplot; for upon that Covenant it
was, that they founded the Destruction, and the Dissolution of the Government:
And it behooves us to beware of King-killers on the one hand, as well as on the
other. Now see how he goes on.

Think not to fare better than the rest, by meddling less; for the Conquerors
Promises are never kept, especially coming from that sort of People, whose
Maxim it is, never to keep their word with Heretics, Fol. 2. What a wonderful
strain of Logic is this? Draw your Swords (says he) and go to the Devil for
Company, for the Papists keep no Faith with Heretics. This was the Song of
41: and he that would see what Faith the Covenanters kept, either with God,
King, Church, or People, has no more to do than to compare their Leagues and
Protestations with their actions.

Now Gentlemen ( says he) left any amongst you should be ignorant, either of
your Enemies, or their Designs, both against the King and Kingdom, -- they are
young Beggarly Officers, Courtiers; over-hot Churchmen, and Papists. The Young
Officer, or Soldiers Interest, makes him wish for a Standing Army; the
Courtier endeavors to advance Taxes, Oppressive and Illegal Impositions. The
over-hot Churchmen wish well to Popery, in hope of a Cardinals Cap, or at least
the Command of some Abbey, Priory, or other Ecclesiastical Preferment, whereof
the Roman Church has so great plenty. These are the men who exclaim against
our Parliaments Proceedings, in relation to the Plot, as too Violent; calling
these times by no other name, but that of Forty or Forty-one, when to amuse his
Sacred Majesty, and his good People, they again threaten us with another
Forty-eight: And all this is done underhand, to Vindicate the Catholic
Party, by throwing a Suspicion on the Fanatiques. These are the Episcopal
Tantivies, who make even the very Scriptures Pimp for the Court; who out of
Urim and Thummim can extort a Sermon to prove the not paying of Tyths and Taxes
to be the Sin against the Holy Ghost: And had rather see the Kingdom run down
with Blood, than part with the least Hem of a Consecrated Frock, which they
themselves made Holy. Here Is a very fair and round distribution of the Cities
Enemies, into I Will lay my life he is painted in some of these Characters, if
not in all; that make him so out of humor with this description.
Younger Brothers, Dependants upon the King; Friends to the Church, and into
Professed Papists: And the Here be pleased to observe, that he divides the
Kingdom but into two parts: the on^ (as he says) consisting of Mutiniers and
Schismatiques, by whom he has all along mean^ no other than Fanatiques: the
other party, of Loyal Servants and Subjects of the Government, into which
Classis he must by consequence design to rank the Papists, for that he ^e^ no
room for them elsewhere.
whole Kingdom it self is again split into Two Parties, the one consisting of
Mutiniers and Schismatiques; the other of the Loyal Servants and Subjects of
the Government, which under the three first Heads, he brands as the Cities
Enemies. These Men he Charges with lessening the Plot, with resembling the
present times to Forty-one, and talking of another Forty-eight. Now how is it
possible but the Positions of Forty-one, should put us in mind of the Rebellion
of Forty-one; and the Regicidal Principles of Seventy-nine, mind us of the
Regicide it self of Forty-eight. For these Principles and Practices are nothing
in the World but the Venom of the Old Cause swallowed and Spewed up again: and
See how bravely he pleads here for our Client the Conclave? any thing for
money: he can Fiddle to all Governments.
all the Treasons of the Consistory are cast upon the Conclave: As if the
Murder of Charles the First, by the Treachery of Mock-Protestants, were ever
the less Detestable, because the Two Harries of France were Assassinated by
Professed Papists. These are the Puritan Jesuits, that turn the Bible into a Nose
of Wax; that make God the Author of Sin; that Depose and Murder Kings by a
Text; and Entitle their Sacrilege and Treason to the Inspirations of the Holy
Ghost. Polemical discourse, Anglice, Scolding, or Billingsgate is the whole
Argument of this Book.
These are the Straight-lac'd Christians, that make less scruple of Robbing the
Altar, than of Kneeling at the Communion: They can swallow the Blood of Widows
and Orphans, and yet Puke at a Surplice. Let me ask the worthy Gentlemen of the
City now, which of the two carried them the easier, the Schismatical and
Sacrilegious, or the Episcopal Tantivy? Or which they take for the more
dangerous Enemies, our Appellants young Beggarly Officers, or their Old
Acquaintances, Pen, Fulks, and their Fellows, who violently thrust out the
gravest and most Substantial of their Citizens, (as the late King has it) and
took in Persons of desperate Fortunes and Opinions, in their places. Let them
compare the Appellants Courtiers too, with the Old Sequestring, Plundring, and
Decimating Committees; with their Court-Marshals, and Major-Generals: when
London was made little better then a Shambles; and their Merchants only
Cash-keepers to the Tyrants at Westminster; and then against his Over-hot
Churchmen, we will set the Mechanique Pulpiteers and Tub-Preachers; that not only
divided the People from their Sovereign, but All against poor Protestants, and
not one censure of the Papists: this is too gross; examine his Faith by his
Works.
Wives from their Husbands, Children from their Parents; and Preached away
Apprentices, by Droves into Rebellion: Carrying the Schism through Church and
State, into private Families. This is the Blessed change that is now
propounded, and laid before us.

Lastly, (says he) the chief and most dangerous of your Enemies are Papists,
who to make sure of their own Game, allure all the three forementioned Parties
to their side, by the Arguments aforesaid. Their design is to bring in Popery,
which they can no ways effect, but either by a Popish Successor, or by the
French Arms. There is no doubt of the danger of the Papists; but still while
the Government has One Enemy in Front, it is good to secure the Flank and Rear,
from another: So that the Cities only safety lies in the mean, betwixt the two
Extremes of Popery, on the One hand, and Libertinism on the Other. The Former
(he says) can never be effected, but by a Popish Successor, or the French Arms.
See now how this hangs together: the same Faction clamoured against the late
King just at this rate; He forgets Secretary Windebank's Orders in savor of
them.
and yet there was no prospect at that time, of a Popish Successor, but yet
Popery was charged (most injuriously, as all the World can witness) upon the
King himself. And then for the French Arms, so far was his Majesty from calling
them in to his assistance, that upon the Scottish Rebellion they were
Solicited and Implored into a Confederacy against him. And yet we remember to
our griefs, that those very Rumors and Apprehensions of Popery, even when
there was not any Danger of it, cast us all into Confusion. And now our
Appellant, to show how good an Englishman he is, as well as a Subject, enters
his Protestation a little lower in the same Paragraph, that he would rather of
the Two, Live under a French Conqueror, then the Duke as Successor.

I must acknowledge (says he in the next clause) that there is some Coherence
between the Beginning of the Late Civil Wars, and this our present Age: For as
well then as now, the Ambitious Papists, and French Faction were the chief, nay
the only Incendiaries, which set us all in flame.

That the French Cardinal did Artificially improve the Turbulent Humor of the
English and Scottish Schismatics, to the advancing of the Interest of France,
and to the Embroyling of these Kingdoms, I make no question: But to call them
the Only in that place signifies no more but that had it not been for Popery,
all had been quiet.
Only Incendiaries, is to give the Lie to the constant current of History, and
the known Certainty of Fact, even within our own remembrance. How were the
Papists and French Factions concerned in the Scottish Uproar of 1637. and a
hundred Sacrilegious Tumults, after that, in the course of the Rebellion? and
to set him right now in his Calculation of his Majesty's French friends, we
shall inform him, that the King's Principal supplies of Men, Arms, Money, and
Ammunition, were furnished from Holland.

He tells us further, that the Catholic Cause, like the Chestnut in the Fable,
has ever since Q. Marys days been in the Fire: and that both then, and now,
the Papists make use of the Episcopal, and Court-parties claw, to take it out;
the First of these, they allure to their assistance, by the Fright of
Presbytery; the Latter by the apprehension of a Republique, though nothing is
less Designed, or more Improbable.

It Is a hard case to have to do with an Adversary that has neither Candor in
his Reports, nor any force of Argument in his Reasonings; and yet it is the
more tolerable here, because it is all that either the Story or the Cause will
bear. Did not Aaron himself the High Priest turn and comply with the Peoples
Idolatry, in helping them to a golden Calf? what has been, may be again.
He makes the Episcopal and Court-Party to be the Passive Instruments of the
Church of Rome, for the advance of Popery, ever since the Reign of Queen Mary:
which is so notorious a mistake, that Queen Elizabeth, and the Hierarchy in Her
Reign opposed the Errors, and the power of that Church, with all possible
constancy, and Resolution. King James made himself famous by his Pen, as well
as by his Practices, upon the same Subject. The Late King lost his Life in the
defense of the Reformed Religion, and his Majesty that now is, has manifested
his affection to the Church of England, (as by Law Established,) in despite of
all Calumnies, and through extreme difficulties, with the highest Acts of
Solemnity Imaginable. And now on the other side, let but any man trace the
History of the Schismatiques, from Queen Mary to this Instant; and the
restlesness of that Faction will appear, through every step of his way; and
that For that the Separatists (as he calls them) were then in most danger.
whenever the Papists pressed upon the Government, on the One hand, the
Separatists never failed of pinching it on the Other. Machiavel (who was
perhaps as old, though not so wise as this Scribler) plainly shows, that
England can never long continue a Republic, by reason of the ^oo great
corruption and scarcity of publitk Spirits in the Nation.
And yet again whereas he talks of the fright of Presbytery, and the
apprehension of a Republique, as neither designed, nor probable, there is no man
of Thirty years of Age, but knows the contrary; and that this Nation was
actually enslaved to that Double Tyranny, under pretense of delivering us from
the danger of Arbitrary Power, and Popery. Nay, and but two lines further, he
charges the Late King for countenancing Papists, no less than This: which to
every honest man is constructively a Vindication of them Both. Nay, he goes so
far toward the owning of a dislike for the Form of our Government it self, that
he says, no Government but Monarchy can in England ever support, or favor
Popery, As who should say, this Author loves Monarchy for Popery's s^ke.
as who should say; A Commonwealth would put us out of fear on it.

He says again, Page 3. that the Parliament Party never Entertained any
Papists, unless under a Disguise; and yet we never heard of any more of them,
than the King's Headsman in a Masque. We could show him several Instances of
the contrary; but no man is so senseless, as to imagine that the King was
Deposed, pursued, robbed, taken, condemned and put to Death, by a hundred
thousand Priests in Visors: we have nothing to say to the Loyalty of the
Papists; but yet Still for the Papists.
the Incongruity of our Appellants charge upon them, we cannot but in Honesty
and common reason, take some notice of, Especially when the Dust of his
Objection flies in his own Eyes.

Their Loyalty and Good service paid to the King ( says he) was merely in
their own defense; well knowing that the Foundation of these Commotions was
only in Opposition to their Party. Not worth God-a-mercy.
Putting the Case now, that they served the King only for their Own Ends: We
have an acknowledgment yet, that there was Loyalty, and good service in it,
however qualified: and we know that there were All this is in behalf of Popery.
many Brave, and Eminent men among them, that lost their Estates and Lives in
that service. If it lies as a reproach upon them, that they did not serve the
King out of Loyalty, that which they did, was yet better than not serving him
at all; and better, in a higher degree still, than fighting against him. But
supposing now that they had no known Papists in their Army, the Case is not one
jot mended; for they were all Schismatiques then; and it is worth the
Observation, that not a man drew his sword in that Cause, who was not a Known
Separatist; and that, on the other side, not one Schismatique ever struck
stroke in the King's Quarrel: The One side contending according to their Duty,
in favor of the Law, and the Other against it.

Our Appellant lies open to another Objection in the clause above-recited. He
says, The consequence extended further than at first designed.
the Commotion was only founded upon an Opposition to that Party. How came it
then, that they seized the Crown, and Church Lands; put the King to Death,
plundered, sequestered, and beheaded his Protestant Friends, if the Opposition
was only to Popery? But we have seen their pretenses, and we have felt the
meaning of them.

He insists upon Dr. Du Moulin will satisfy any in this matter.
the Papists desiring Oliver to accept of the Crown. There^s a little Book that
will inform us better concerning that transaction. It Is called Monarchy
asserted, consisting of a Collection of Speeches upon that debate.

We are at this time (he says) acting the same Play still, though an Old-one
newly Revived; and as Since this Appeal came forth, the late feigned Plot
justifies all this upon the Papists, notwithstanding our impotent Scribler lays
all upon the Fanatiques, to clear himself and his Party.
that which the Papists then Acted, was laid upon the Fanatiques, so was the
like to have been done, in this present Plot. It will be easily granted, that
this is in a high degree the Old-Play Revived, but we are too well acquainted
with the circumstances of the present Plot, to carry the resemblance thorough.
That which the Fanatiques then Acted, was laid on the Papists; and when they
had mastered the King, under the Calumny of a Papist, they Murdered him as a
Protestant. The Question at present is not the Certainty of One Plot, but the
Superfoetation of another: For it is compossible enough, that a Papist may be
before his Majesty with a Dagger, and some rank Enthusiast behind him with a
Pistol.

This Story in the Appeal was unanswerable, and therefore not to his purpose.
He proceeds with a Story of Mr. Claypool, not at all to our purpose; and then
gives us further, an account of the Papists design in Scotland; who first by
their Councels procured the poor Inhabitants to be Oppressed, and then sending
their disguised Priests, and Emissaries amongst them, encouraged the poor silly
Natives to Mutiny against those Oppressions, hoping to cast the Plot upon the
Presbyterians

If the Power, Number, and Industry of these Emissaries be such as our
Appellant would have us believe, As if half a hundred Priests would set
thousands of silly people together by the ears.
a man would think there should hardly be a Rat-trap in the three Kingdoms,
without a Priest in it. Let us but lay together several Circumstances in this
Appeal concerning the Miraculous Influences of these men upon all sorts of
People, and it will be a hard matter to represent any thing more Comical.
First, he says, that the Papists have already made sure of all the Young
Beggarly Officers, or Soldiers, Courtiers, and Over-hot Churchmen; Fol. 2.
Secondly, he makes them to have an Absolute Dominion over the King and his
Council; for they have made him Banish those Officers (he says) that should
lead the people up against the Popish Army. Thirdly, they govern all the
Conventicles in the Kingdom, as our Appellant will have it. And Fourthly, they
procured the Scots to be Oppressed, and after that shifted hands, and made them
rebel; and all this is every man bound to believe, as the Thirteenth Article
of his Faith. Now can any thing be more wonderful, then that these people that
can turn the King and his Council with a Twine thread; that have so absolute a
Command of the Multitude; and can set Governors and Subjects handy-dandy, to
Box one another like Punchinello's Puppets, when they please: It may be policy
requires them to let some few die, rather than discover their Power at present.
is it not a wonderful thing (I say) that these men with all this Interest, are
not yet able to save a Priest from the Gallows; or any single person of the
Party from the Exact Rigor of the Law. Have they only a Power to do the
Government Mischief, and themselves no Good? We insist the more earnestly upon
this Point, because the comfort of Humane Society is totally destroyed, if we
come once to be transported, by these stories, into a Common Diffidence, every
man of his Neighbor; and put into such a condition, by the Entertainment of
these Jealousies, that there will be no longer any Faith, or Confidence in
Mankind; for fear of He makes the Papists invisible and fictitious Evidence,
and defames the Kings Evidence.
these Invisible and undistinguishable Enemies in our daily Conversation.

Now to support, and fortify himself in his Opinion; he says farther, that not
only Dr. Oats mentions this-in his Evidence, but that the Papists themselves
were so well assured of the Scotch Rising, before it happened, that at the
Disbanding of this late Popish Army, many of the Officers and Soldiers had
secret Orders not to sell their Horses, but to be in a readiness, for that they
should have occasion to use them again within a Fortnight, and so it happened;
for within a Fortnight after the Disbanding, the Rebellion brake out in
Scotland: So well acquainted were the Authors of this Mischief, with the time
when it would happen:

With the Appellants leave, Very true, for how could Dr. Oats say they had
done it, before they had? we all agree that he only mentions their design,
which was effected long since he gave in his Evidence.
Dr. Oats only Reports what these Agents Designed to do, and the Hopes of
their succeeding in it; but says nothing positively, that I can find, of what
they had done: and in his Thirty fifth Deposition, expressly makes their Project
to be the weakening of both the Presbyterian, and Episcopal Faction: As to the
casting of the Plot upon the Presbyterians, it was not so well contrived (me
thinks) as it might have been: For it is no Clearing of the Papists from One
Plot upon the Kings Life, the charging of the Presbyterians with another.

Then there is another slip; he will have the Papists privy to the Scotch
Rising, because at the Disbanding of the Popish Army, some Officers were
ordered not to sell their Horses, etc. First, it is not Because not required;
but many can justify it upon Oath.
proved that they had any such Orders: Secondly, he calls it a So called,
because many of the Officers were Papists.
Popish Army; and implies, that these Orders were given to Popish Officers,
which Officers either went upon the service or not: If they went, they
overthrew their own design; for he makes it the Papists Interest to entertain
those Tumults, and these Gentlemen made it their business to suppress them. If
they did not go, their Orders were to no purpose. But why does the Appellant
call it a Popish Army? He should do well to wash his Mouth, after so foul and
scandalous an expression.

But now let us change hands; and see if it be not more probable that the
Fanatics knew beforehand of that Rising, then the Papists. For though we had
at that time greater apprehensions of the French then ever, The Parliament
chiefly desired their disbanding: so as he accuses them for being privy to the
Scotch Insurrection.
yet the importunities of some people were so violent for the immediate
disbanding of the Army, that it looked like a design to remove that Block out of
the Scots way. The next passage is a little mysterious.

He says, that it was likely the Scots would be beaten by the Kings Forces,
that (says he) it might make both Them and Us less apt to Rise upon any account
whatsoever, So that here is a This tacit Confession is as improper an
expression, as exposition.
tacit Confession, that the Appellant found some inconvenience in this
discouragement to a joint Rebellion: And so he goes on, saying, that if this
had been a Fanatical Plot, the same Party would certainly have risen in England
at the same time. But this, under favor, will not hold; for the Scots tumulted
in 37. and appeared in actual Rebellion in 38. whereas their Brethren in
England did not take up arms till 41, though privy to and confederate in the
Tumults of 37. He lays it down for granted in the next Line, that the Papists
Murdered the Late King, and so proceeds in these words.

After the Catholics had thus brought the Fathers head to the Block, and sent
the young Princes into Exile; let us reflect upon their Usage of them in
France, etc. Now to give the Devil his due, Who knows but many of them were
Papists in disguise, like our Author? however, they might like Pontius Pilate,
deliver him up to be crucified, and then wash their hands of his death.
I cannot find so much as One Papist in the whole List of the Regicides; and
yet I have turned over all the Acts and Ordinances; Walkers Independency; and
in one word, the whole History of those times; and can hear no news of them.
Take notice, that it is not the question here whether or no the Papists would
have scrupled it upon a fair Occasion; but whether or no, in the Truth of the
Fact, it was the Papists that did it: and I do not think it Fair, to hang one
Man, or Condemn one party for another fault. This is an Answer to his own
former Parallel, wherein he goes to vindicate the Papists, by accusing the
Fanatics.
Put the case one man steals a Horse, and another robs a Church, it is no
vindication of the Horse-stealer, to discharge him of the Sacrilege; no
vindication of him that robbed the Church, to acquit him of the Horse-stealing;
but it were a high injustice to charge one offender with the crime of another.
Howbeit he here endeavors to justify the French's ill usage of his Majesty,
yet being unable to disprove our Civilities to the French as false, he takes no
notice of it.
His following Reflections upon the Ill-usage the Royal Family received in
France when his Majesty was abroad, and the good Offices which France has
received from hence in requital, are only meant for a sly and invidious
Reproach upon the Government, and there is more of flourish in them then matter
of weight; only he has one speculation not to be past over.

I cannot but ascribe great part of our present Calamities (says he) to his
Highnesses Education in that Arbitrary and Popish Government. Here he pretends
to tell us of our miseries, and from whence in a great measure they proceed;
but The danger of the Kings person', Religion, and Government, by reason of the
Plot; together with the many Jesuitical Fires, loss of Trade, and danger of the
French power, are none of them Calamities to our Author? who would rejoice at
them, as being a Papist, and would therefore have us think them all imaginary
and remote, till they really happen.
it would puzzle a man to find out what these present Calamities are, more then
the froward and fantastical apprehensions of remote and imaginary Evils: Nay,
the very fear it self is counterfeited as well as the danger, and the men that
dress up these goblins to fright the silly multitude, they do but laugh at them
themselves. Our State Empericks do with our Politic, as our Physicians do
with our Natural Bodies (for there are Intoxicating Opinions as well as
Passions) they make their Patients many times stark raving mad with that which
they are not one jot affected withal themselves. Do we not live (or if we
will, at least, we may) in Peace and Plenty, under the protection of a Gracious
and a Protestant Prince, and under the blessing also of so particular a
providence, that when all our Neighbors have been at fire and sword round
about us, this Nation has been yet exempt from the common calamities of
Christendom? And shall we now expose and abandon our present quiet and security
only for future possibilities, and make our selves certainly miserable
beforehand for fear of being miserable hereafter? Whosoever soberly considers
what we enjoy on the one hand, and what we fear on the other, comparing and
examining both parts with their due and reasonable circumstances, he shall find
all attempts and proposals of popular prevention of reformation, to be as wild
a project, All this page is V^x praet^rea n^h^l, nothing but florid nonsense,
wherein he compares the fear of his Majesty's death, to the fear of Corns and
Chilblains.
as if a man should cut off a leg or an arm for fear of corns and chilblains.
But what if our fears were yet juster then they seem to be? how many things may
yet intervene, according to the ordinary course of humane affairs, to
disappoint the danger? as Meaning the Duke's death, the King's surviving, and
the Duke's conversion: as if no man must take care for the future, because
there is a bare possibility of succeeding without it.
Mortality, Survivorship, change of thought, etc. or can the Appellant
prescribe us any Remedy, that is not worse then the disease? shall a man cast
himself from the top of Bow, for fear of tumbling down stairs? shall we destroy
Protestantism for fear of Popery? or a Good Government for fear of a bad One?
shall we run the hazard of Damnation, for fear of Oppression? Nay, what if our
present apprehensions were Gratified? New ones would yet succeed into their
places: For the Rage of Jealousy is boundless and Incurable. And so we found it
Still harping upon the same string, so that this Pamphlet is nothing but
Tautology and Popery. A man would guess that this Author was once so near
hanging, as to have a Presbyterian Rope about his Neck, that makes him so much
inveigh against them.
in the Late Rebellion, which was built upon the same Foundation. Never so mean
and so despicable a slavery, as that which we then brought upon our selves for
fear of slavery. Never was any Papacy so Tyrannical, and so Ridiculous
together, as that Persecuting, and Non-sensical Presbytery, which we had in
Exchange for the best tempered Ecclesiastical Government upon the face of the
Earth. Were not Those blessed days when our Divines had Salesmen, and
Mechaniques for their Tryers; and the Laity a supercilious Company of
Classical, and Congregational Noddies for the Inspectors of our Lives and
Manners: When Tone, and Lungs, without either Learning, or Honesty, were the
distinguishing Marks of a Gifted Brother? Methinks the very Memory of these
servile and profane Indignities should put the bare thought of the Second part
of it out of Countenance.

And he seems as much out in the pretended Cause of our Calamities, as he was
in the Calamities themselves. Did our Pr^nces never live in France?
There were no Princes Educated abroad in the Late Kings time, and yet the same
clamor to a Tittle. But if the Appellant had been so minded, he might have
given us a much more Rational account of our misfortunes, then he has done. He
might have charged them upon those people, who in truth, first sent the young
Princes into Exile, and then kept them there; and have at present a design upon
the Exercise of the same Arbitrary power again, which they would be thought to
fear. They began with a cry against Popery, but they concluded in the Because
one King was (as he says) murdered by Protestants, therefore our Author would
have us fear them more than the Papi^ts, who have murdered many: so partial is
a Pap^st in his own cause.
Murder of the King; the dislution of the Monarchy, and the perpetual
Exclusion of the Royal Family, as may be seen in their Proclamation of Jan.
30.48. for Inhibiting any person to be King. Whereas Charles Stuart King of
England, (say they) being for the Notorious Treasons, Tyrannies, and Murders,
committed by Him in the Late Unnatural and cruel Wars, condemned to Death, etc.
It is remarkable, that though they possessed the people against his Majesty, as a
Papist, there is not one word of Religion in the Reasons, of their putting him
to death.

The Appellant comes now to show his Reading, in two passages out of Philip de
Comines, with an application of his Observations upon them. The former
concerning certain English Pensioners; which Lewis the Eleventh of France kept
in Pay. Now though I cannot agree the hundredth part of those Persons to be
Pensioners, which out of an envy to the Government, the Common people are
instructed to call so; yet I shall never differ with him upon this point, that
the Money of Lewis the Fourteenth may perhaps have been current in England, as
well as that of Lewis the Eleventh was. The other story is that of Lewis the
Eleventh to Charles Duke of Burgundy in the Case of Campobache. The French King
advertizes the Duke of Burgundy (they being then in hostility) that the Count
Campobache was a Traitor to him: But the Duke would not believe it. And there
was one Cifron also, who was of the Plot with Campobache: This same Cifron,
being taken prisoner by the Duke before Nancy, and condemned to dye; gave the
Duke to understand, that he had a most Important secret to communicate to him.
But the Duke neither giving admittance to Cifron, nor credit to the King; lost
his Life afterward, and his Dominions, by being too incredulous. Male dum
recitas, incipit esse tuum: you your self apply it.
The Appellant applies this to his Majesty's Case, in Language so course and
scandalous, that there is no repeating of it. And what does all this amount to,
but that a I wish he had here showed us some example of a Prince ruined by
over-caution; or showed us some Argument why the Duke of Burgundy had come to
the same end, if he had credited the Kings admonition: abund^us cautela non
nocet.
Prince may as well be undone by believing too much, as too little? If he had
Trusted either less to Campobache, or more to the King, it had come all to a
purpose. He will have his Majesty in danger for not believing enough of the
Popish Plot: But his Royal Father was Ruined on the other side, by not
believing enough of the Presbyterian Plot. And God grant that his present
Majesty may only believe so much of that Plot over again, as may stand with his
honor and safety. But it appears in this place, by the coursness of the
Appellants Expressions, and by the bias of the whole Libel throughout, that he
is not so much concerned for the Kings believing or not believing, as Evil to
him that Evil thinks,
to fasten a scandal upon his Majesty, by persuading the People, that the King
does not believe it; and consequently to possess them, that his Majesty is a
favourer of Popery, though never any Prince in Christendom gave more Convincing
and Irrefragable Proofs of the contrary.

This passage of the Duke of Burgundy (he says Fol. 4.) may be very much to our
purpose, to show you, Was it not an old observation of the Ancients, Quos
Jupiter vult perdere hos prius dementa^
that when God designs the destruction of a King or People, he makes them deaf
to all discoveries be they never so obvious. And having Levelled the
Application in particular, he speculates in general terms (toward the bottom of
the leaf) upon the whole matter.

There are four several Arguments (he says) which many times prevail with
Princes to be incredulous of all pretended Conspiracies against themselves. The
First is drawn from their being in, or made privy themselves to Part of the
Plot, but not to the whole. The Second, from their own good nature, and
Clemency. The Third, from the nature of the Evidence. And the Fourth from the
nature and Interest of the pretended Conspirators. To begin then with the
First, when the Prince has been made acquainted with a Design of Introducing a
New Government, or a New Religion, but not with the Design of taking away his
own life, this sometimes has prevailed with him not to believe, that the same
party with whom he himself is in a Conspiracy, should have any such other Plot
against his Life. But this I hope is not Our Case, For etc. -- And then he
Reasons that his Majesty could get nothing by it. Fol. 3. We shall put him
together now, and make English of him, First, he makes the Duke of Burgundies
Case, in his Deafness to Discoveries, to be the Kings. Secondly, He infers from
that Deafness, that God has Designed his Majesty to Destruction. Thirdly, he
takes upon him to Philosophize upon the Reasons of Princes Incredulity in such
Cases; and very fairly represents his Majesty as a Party in-the Conspiracy, and
consenting to the Introduction of a New Government and a New Religion, though
not privy to the Plot of taking away his Own Life. Only he concludes with a [
But this I hope is not Our Case] in such a way of What a way of Reasoning is
this?
Doubting as implies Believing. And so much for the first point.

The Second Motive (he says Fol. 5.) which may incline a Prince to disbelieve
the Report of a Plot, is, from his Own Good Nature, and Clemency; which makes
him not believe any ill of those to whom he has been so kind. But this is a
fallacious way of arguing.

Now by his Favor, This is not so much an Argument from Good Nature, on the
One side, as from the Tie of Gratitude, on the Other: but whether way soever it
be taken, the Late King found it indeed a very fallacious way of arguing: for
almost all his Acts of Grace, and bounty, turned to his mischief, as appears in
his Majesty's Declaration, of Aug. 12. 1642. when after delivering up his
Ministers to Impeachments, his Concessions in the business of the Star Chamber,
High Commission Court, Ship Money, Forest-Laws, Stannery-Courts, Tonnage and
Poundage, Continuance of the Parliament, etc. they improved all these Trusts,
and Condescensions even to the formal taking away his Authority, Revenue, and
Life. And those particularly whom his Late Majesty Obliged to the highest
degree, laid the foundation of his Ruin. Nor is the ingratitude of the same
party to the Son less notorious, then the other was to the Father: None flying
so fiercely in the face of the Kings Authority and person, as those that stand
indebted to the King for their Lives and Estates; who yet act as confidently,
as if one Rebellion might be placed in Justification of another. For they do
now afresh and in public avow the methods and practices of the late Times;
while the true sons and servants both of the English Here he practices that
Popish Doctrine of Merit in Temporals, as well as Spirituals; when vainly
boasting of his own deserts, he does implicitly tax both King, Church and
State with ingratitude.
Church and State, lie in the dust, waiting for the righteous Judgment of the
Lord in want, and patience. Now if according to the Appellants Rule those are
the most dangerous, to whom the King has been most kind, that danger must be
understood of the Fanatiques; for otherwise the Appealer runs the Hazard of a
Praemunire, upon the Act for the safety of the Kings Person, in scandalizing his
Majesty for a favourer of Popery. It is not yet that the general Rule fails,
because of this Exception: For the greater the Obligation, the greater in
reason ought to be the confidence, though the Appellant seems to be of another
opinion.

Who betrays you in your Beds? ( says he) your Friend; for your Enemy is not
admitted to your House. Who betrays you in your Estate? your Friend; for your
Enemy is not made your Trustee. So that nothing is more dangerous then a blind
friendship. This is an admirable fetch of his, to prove his Royal Highness
dangerous to his Majesty, because he is both a Friend and a Brother; and still
the Nearer, the more dangerous: as if the King were safer in the hands of his
Enemies, then of his Friends. But he expounds himself, that they are more
dangerous, in respect of greater Confidence, and fairer Opportunities. There is
no fence against that danger, but utterly to cast off and renounce all the
Bonds, and Dictates of Society and Good Nature. I think any reasonable man will
confess, that a Papist at this time is a dangerous companion.
We must contract no Friendships, and trust no Relations, for fear they should
cut our Throats. How much more wretched then the very Beasts, has our Appealer
at this rate made Mankind, by poisoning the very Fountain of Humane Comforts?
Nor is it a Friend that betrays us; but an Enemy, under that appearance: By
which Rule an Episcopal, a Fanatical, a Popish Friend, are all equally
dangerous: For a Man has no more security of a Friend under one denomination,
then under another. But the Appellant in this place speaks of the danger of a
blind Friendship; that is to say, a kindness that is taken up without any
consideration, or Choice, and runs on without fear or wit: which in this
application, must either be very little respectfull, or altogether
Impertinent.. He produces instances of perfidious Favorites and Relations: as
if there were no other to be found in Nature. By his Argument, because One
Woman poisoned her Husband, all men should destroy their Wives: Because One Son
supplanted his Father, all Parents should drown their Children like Kitlins.
Because One Younger Brother offered violence to his Elder, there should be no
longer any Confidence, or Faith maintained among Brethren.

If little petty Interests ( says he) make one Brother-wish the others Death,
how much more prevalent will the Interest of a Crown be? Nay of two Crowns,
viz. One here, and another hereafter in Heaven, promised him by an Old fellow
with a bald pate, and a spade-beard. As to the Argument, this is only the
Second Part to the same Tune; and a Particular Instance improved into an
Universal Exception. This Argument in the Appeal holds only against such
Friends or Relations who are suspected to have attempted our Lives.
There are Wicked Husbands, Wives, Children; Let there be no more Marrying. Men
have been poisoned in the Sacrament, in their Cups, and Dishes; shall we
therefore never receive the Communion, nor Drink, nor Eat? There have been
Tyrants in all forms of Governments, shall we therefore have no Government at
all? And moreover, as this way of Reasoning Lessens all the Bonds of Humane
Trust, and Concord, and runs us back again into Mr. Hobb's Original State of
War, so does it as little serve the Appellants purpose, even if it were
admitted. First, The Temptation of a Crown does not work upon any Man, either
as a Brother, or as a stranger: but equally upon Both; and more, or less, as
the man is more, or less Conscientious or Ambitious. So that the danger arises
from the And from ^is Religion, if Popery.
Humor of the Person, not from the Relation. Nay Secondly, The Danger is
Greater, from a Popular Faction that has no Right at all to a Crown, than from
a Legal Pretendent to it, upon a Claim of Descent. For the One only waits his
Time, according to the course of Nature, whereas the Other presses his end by
the ways of Blood and Violence, having no other way to compass it: He makes it
yet a stronger argument, where there is but One Life betwixt a Successor and
Three Kingdoms: The gain and expectation which is divided among the populace,
is not of such power, as when united in one single person, who has all by the
others death. Especially at this time they can wish nothing more than the
King's Death, a Papist being to succeed him; for every Englishman ought to
desire the King should live as long as the Duke of York, or any other person:
Now if the King does live as long as the Duke, then the Duke can never be King;
therefore every Englishman ought to desire the Duke may never be their King.
But does not this Argument hold as strong on the other side? There was only
the King's Life betwixt the Faction of 1641, and the Three Kingdoms, which Life
they took away, and so possessed themselves of his Dominions. Their pretense was
only a Reformation of Abuses; with Horrid, and Multiplied Oaths, that they
designed Only the Glory of God, the Honor of the King, the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion His Majesty (they said) was misled by Popish Counsels; and
their Business was no more than to rescue him out of the hands of Papists, and
bring him home to his Parliament. And what was the Event of all? A Gracious
Prince was Murdered, and 500 Tyrants set up in his stead: Our Religion, and
Our Laws were Trampled upon; and the Freeborn Englishmen subjected to a
Bondage, below that of Gaily-slaves: The whole Nation becoming a Scandal, a
Hissing, and a Scorn, to all our Neighbors, round about us.

But what were these People, all this while? If we may credit the Appellant,
they were Priests and Jesuits; Or at least, Papists: But the King tells us,
they were Brownists, Anabaptists, and Other Sectaries; Preaching Coachmen,
Felt-makers, etc. The Act for Indemnity gives us a List of the Regicides: The
Act of Uniformity styles them Schismatiques, and throughout the whole History
of their Acts, and Ordinances, there appear none but Dissenting Protestants:
The Church of England being the Only Sufferer, betwixt the Two Extremes. And
these People had the Interest of the Two Crowns in prospect too; which the
Appellant descants so Jollily upon: Here he takes no notice of the Jesuitical
K^ng-killing Principles; all his design being to render Protestants odious.
Almost every Pulpit promising Salvation to the Fighters of the Lords Battles
against the Lords Anointed, with a Cursed be He (at the End on it,) that does
the work of the Lord Negligently.

Upon the Third Head he says, that most Princes Believe, or Disbelieve the
Information which is given them of a Plot, according to the Nature of the
Evidence, and Credit of the Informants. There is no more in This, than that
most Princes Believe, upon the Common Inducements that move all men of Reason
whatsoever, to Believe; Viz The Probability of the matter in Question, and the
Credit of the Witnesses. Now as to the Popish Plot; we shall give him these Two
Points for Granted, but without discharging a Plot likewise, on the Other hand,
upon the same Principles, and no less pregnant Evidence. But he means it, and
blames nothing in the said Plot, but the ill conduct of it, calling it only
silly, but not impious.
We do not speak here of the Popish Plot, which the Papists would most sillily
have turned upon the Presbyterians; (the shallowest Contrivance certainly that
ever was hatched, and the most palpable Imposture:) But we speak of a Plot that
was Bred and born in the Fanatical party; Witnesses come from St. Omers.
whereof we have as many Witnesses almost as Readers; in Forty Libels of That
Leaven, and Extraction: Beside several Open and Violent attempts upon the
Government, which do unanimously bear Testimony against them. The Following
parts of This Paragraph are wrought into such a Complication of Zeal and
Scandal (one Snap at the King, and another at the Plot) that every period is a
Bait: And whoever touches upon it, is sure of a Hook in his Nostrils. Under
Color of Asserting and making out the Truth of the Plot, (which no sober man
doubts of) he throws Dirt upon his Majesty and his Ministers, for dodging, and
Imposing upon the People, in favor of it. One while too Much comes out,
another while too Little. The Frequent Dissolutions and Prorogations of
Parliaments (he says expressly) It Is not said were, but did prevent their
Trials, and that no man can deny.
were to prevent the Trial of the Lords: And so the Squib runs sputtering on,
from the King to his Privy Council; Thence, to his Courts of Justice; and in
One word, Why? because he printed it.
the whole Story comes to no more than a Political abstract out of Harris's
Domestic Intelligence.

But why these Pamphlets to the Multitude? First, There Is no fear of the
peoples running into Popery: For it is their Horror and Aversion. Secondly,
There Is no need of Convincing Them of the Truth of the Plot: How fearful he is
left a Pope should be burnt; or Papist upon the account of the Plot be
affronted.
But rather to keep them from Extravagances, upon the Jealousies and
apprehensions they conceive of it already. Thirdly, There Is no need neither of
calling Them to our assistance, toward the suppressing of it: For the sifting
and Examining of this Conspiracy, with the bringing of the Confederates to
Public Justice, is a great part of the business of the Government. So that
these Libels cannot be reasonably understood to have any Other than these Two
ends. First, To Teaze and Chafe the Rabble into a Rage, disposing and preparing
them to entertain any occasion for uproar and Tumult. Secondly, When their
Blood is up against It Is to be supposed, he has a dispensation for that word
Detestable.
This Detestable Plot, with the Contrivers, Promoters, and abetters of it; what
does he, but turn the Rancour of That Outrageous Humor upon the King, Privy
Council, Courts of Justice; and Briefly, all his Friends; by marking Them out
for Parties in the Treason: And so rendering his Majesty, and his Government
Odious, by these Malicious Insinuations, and endangering the Peace of the
Public, to the Highest Degree?

The Fourth and Last Argument ( says he) which may sometimes prevail with the
Prince to disbelieve any report of a Conspiracy, is taken from the Nature and
Principles, and from the In^erest, of the Pretended Conspiratours. But neither
of these Motives can pretend to Influence Our Prince into a Disbelief of This
Popish Plot, Fol. 7. The Appellants Observation and Inference is this, that the
Popish Plot is to be Believed, because it squares with the Principles and
Interest of the Party. We are better informed in the History and Doctrine of
Massacres, and Regicides, then to question the Malice of the Jesuitical
Positions, or the credibility of the Plot here in Debate: and so we shall yield
him in the Hellish Tenet, which he insists upon, of Murdering KINGS, and a
Hellish Tenet it is indeed; and as Hellish undoubtedly in a Schismatique, as in
a Jesuit. For his Quarrel otherwise is to the Faction, not to the Maxim, which
is equally Dangerous and detestable in all Factions. Now wheresoever we find
the same Principles, we have the Appellants leave honestly to suspect the same
Designs.

Was not this the Doctrine of the Fanatiques from Forty, to Sixty? And did they
not make good their Doctrine by their Practice? Did they not declare the King
Accountable to the People? And did they not put him to Death, upon that
Foundation? We have the very Journals themselves of those Times, to prove what
we say: beside the Damned Harmony of their best received Authors to that
purpose. He cannot here quote his Authors, because all these Principles were
taken out of the Jesuits Morals, which he here fixes on the Fanatics.
We propound (say the Remonstrants) that the Person of the King may be speedily
brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood and Mischief he is Guilty of. An Act
(says another) agreeing with the Laws of God, Consonant to the Laws of Men, and
the Practices of all Well-ordered States and Kingdoms. Let Justice and Reason
blush (says another) and Traitors and Murderers, Parricides and Patricides put
on white Garments and Rejoice as Innocent ones, if this man (speaking of the
Late King) should escape the hands of Justice and Punishment. The Government of
England (says a Fourth) is a Mixed Monarchy, and Governed by the Major Part of
the Three Estates assembled in Parliament. Whenever a King (says a Fifth) or
other Superior Authority, Creates an Inferior, they invest it with a Legitimacy
of Magistratical Power, to punish themselves also, in case they prove Evil
Doers. It is Lawful (says a Sixth) for any, who have the Power, to call to
account a Tyrant or wicked King; and after due Conviction, to Depose and put
him to Death, if the Ordinary Magistrate have denied to do it. Detrahere
Indigno, etc. It is not for private persons to Depose a wicked Governor; but
that the Universality of the People may Lawfully do it, I think no body
questions.

These Seditious Positions, with many more, (and some worse, perhaps) were
publicly Printed and avowed before his Majesty's Return. And the very same
Principles, with Pestilent Additions to them, have been exposed by the same
Party, in the face of the Sun, since his Majesty's Restoration. And there is
scarce a Pamphlet without something of this Mixture, that comes from any of the
Private and Pragmatical Intermeddlers in the present Controversy. So that the
Principles are the very same, as to the Quality and Ingredients, under several
Colors. And so much for their Principles: Now to their Interests.

In his following way of Reasoning; under the Countenance of proving it to be
the Papists Interest to Murder the King, he does all he can in the world, by a
side-wind, to possess them with the Necessity of doing it; and consequently, to
force them upon it: Only, as good luck is, the Arguments will not bear that
stress. I should not dare to speak his words after him, if it were not, Here he
does the Author of the Appeal no small honor unawares, in making his Book so
generally approved of.
First, that the Libell is already, by several Impressions of it, made as
Public as a News-Book. And Secondly, that his Propositions are erected upon a
false Bottom* Upon which two Considerations, we shall presume to insert only
two Periods of his, upon this Subject.

Their Interest ( says he) does unavoidably excite them to Murder his Sacred
^ajesty; For First, they know he cannot long subsist without a Considerable Sum
of Money, which he must Receive either from the Party, or from the Parliament:
Now for them to supply him with so vast a Sum, is a Charge, that (you may well
imagine) they would desire to get rid of it, if they could, tho by the Kings
Death. On the other side, for the Parliament to supply him with money, that,
they know, cannot be done but by taking off the Heads of their Faction;
excluding their Succession, and consenting to such Laws as must of Necessity
ruin them: Besides, his Majesty has already permitted the Executing so many
of their Party, as they never can or will forgive it. It falls out Happily that
the force of his Argument does not come up to the Drift of it. But the Weakness
of the One, takes off the Edge of the Other. Everyman that has but so litte w^t
as our Author, knew the Papists Interest before: so that I conceive this was
written only to demonstrate the danger his Majesty is in.
He tells the whole world, that the Papists have no way in the Earth to save
themselves, but by the Murder of the King. The One half of this spoken in a
Corner to a Knot of Priests and Jesuits, and fairly proved upon a man, would be
as much as his Head's worth. And is the Crime ever the Less for doing the same
thing in Public, where the Provocation is stronger? These Discourses are not
to pass for Simple Declarations of a man's Opinion; but Artificial
Encouragements rather, and Advises, toward the doing of the thing; especially
coming from the Pen of a Person that calls himself Why might not the Author of
the Appeal, like some of the Popes, take a Name upon him contrary to his Nature.
Junius Brutus, and recommends himself to the City by the Borrowed name of a
King-killer. Though I cannot inform my self of any of that Family that lives near
Richmond.

His First Argument runs thus. The King wants money; and there is none to be
got, but either of the Papists, or of the Parliament. The Parliament, he says,
will give his Majesty none; and therefore the Papists will Murder him to save
Charges. This is a Policy far fetched: The Fathers Head (we know) was set at a
Price, but we hope better of the Sons: Now in his prejudging the Parliament,
upon an Assumption that the King gets not a penny of Money of them, but upon
such and such Terms; You are well acquainted sure with the Author, to know his
thoughts.
he does not so much speak his thought, as vent his Proposition; rather
Desireing, then Foreseeing that the Houss of Commons will hold the King to such
unhappy Conditions. And then he finishes his Contemplation with this
Conclusion, that the Papists will never forgive his Majesty, for what he has
done already. Wherein, First, he Contradicts himself, in supposing the King an
En^my to the Papists, whom he has hitherto insinuated to be their Friend. And
Secondly, instead of proving the Papists Design against the King in this
Particular, he advances One of his Own.

Now if he would have come roundly up to the Point of the Papists Interest, he
should have told us of the Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments that the
Church of Rome has conferred upon their Emissaries into his Majesty's Dominions:
And he should have expounded it to the people, what pains they take, and what
Hazards they run, only in the playing of their Own Game, and making way to
their advantages in Reversion. This is so great a truth, that most of the
serious Catholics themselves reflect familiarly upon these Busy People, as
the common troublers of the Peace of Christendom: But then I should have
opposed an Interest also on the Fanatiques side, to balance this. For they
have their Reversionall prospects too: their sequestered Livings and Estates;
their plundered goods, their profitable Offices and Commissions, Crown and
Church Lands, etc. And they wait for their day again as impatiently as the Jews
do for their Messiah. Nay to keep their title still a foot, they stand fast to
their Old Covenant still, I hope he does not esteem all that are for Magna
Charta, to be Fanatics.
as the Fanatiques Magna Charta; by which they pretend to make out a Religious
claim to all the advantages they got by sacrilege and oppression. So that
their principles and interests lying indifferently against the Established Order
both of Church and State; there will be no need of casting either faults upon
the other.

After a worse then Astrological Determination upon the Kings Fate; he bestows
another Cast of his Cunning upon the City and Citizens of London, I think sad
experience has already justified this hint, which he calls malicious, as if he
thought himself concerned in Firing; it is evident his principles would let him.
which (he says) is in danger to be consumed by Fire. It is a lewd and a
seditious Hint, in both these Cases, the putting of it into the head, as it is
much in the power of any profligate and desperate villain, to verify his
calculation. Besides that in telling the Citizens what they are to expect, he
does at the same time, Counsel the Papists what to do. They will burn London;
(he says) First, as the only United force, able to withstand Arbitrary
Government, and without that, Popery can never prevail,

If Popery cannot come in without Arbitrary Government, if the Jesuits design
the burning of London, as the only United force that can withstand that power:
either there is no fear of Popery and Arbitrary Government, and (consequently)
of such a design taking place in this King's Reign; or the whole calumny falls
directly upon his Majesty himself: or otherwise, if the Appellants prospect
looks forward into the future, what is the meaning of all these Alarms, so
unseasonably, to trouble our present peace with the sickly Visions of things to
come? And he should have done well also to have expounded himself a little upon
the United Force that should withstand, and the Arbitrary Government to be
withstood? For otherwise, it may be taken for the sounding of a Trumpet to a
Rebellion. Here he pleads for Ar^^trary Go^^^nment.
For the Arbitrary Government which he phansies to himself, must be exercised
either by a Lawful Prince, or by an Usurper: If by the Former* his Tyranny is
no Warrant for our opposition; if the Latter, there is no appearance of any
other Usurpation, then (as we shall see presently) of his own setting up.

Secondly, He says that London is the only place where by reason of their
Excellent Preaching and daily instruction in the Protestant Religion, the
people have a lively sense thereof, and doubtless will not part with it, to
pleasure a Prince; but perhaps rather lose their Lives by the Sword in the
Wars, than by Faggots, in Smithfield. The passage now is plain English; and as
many indignities upon the Government, crowded into one sentence, as could well
be brought together. Here is First, an Exhortation to a Rebellion. For the
Prince here in question, against whom the sword is to be drawn, can be no
other, upon his supposition, The Sword is in the Appeal no where bid to be
drawn but against a Popish Successor, and that too when the King is murdered.
So that at the worst it is but Treason by Anticipation, which is not mentioned
in our Law.
than actually the King. And let him take his choice now whether it shall be
intended of his present Majesty, or of his Successor. It is a Rebellion
against the King that now is, in the one Case, and against the Next King in the
other: And Secondly, It is not only a simple Rebellion, but (to the scandal of
the Reformation, and particularly of the Church of England) a Rebellion founded
upon the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion: Thirdly, It is no other then (as
he himself has worded it) the Hellish Tenet of Murdering Kings, in a disguise:
only a Jesuitical Principle in Masquerade. It is, Fourthly, a Condemnation of
the practices and submissions of the Primitive Christians, and the whole story
of our Protestant Martyrology.

He says, Thirdly, that the City is too powerful for any Prince that Governs
not by the love of his people, which no Popish Successor can expect to do.
This is the very Translation of his Namesake, Junius Brutus, in his Vindiciae
Contra Tyrannos. If the Prince fails in his promise (says he) the people are
exempt from their obedience. The contract is made void, and the right of
obligation is of no force. It is therefore permitted to the Officers of a
Kingdom, either all, or some good number of them, to suppress a Tyrant. Here Is
a great deal of virulence in his Discourse, without one word of weight, to
countenance it. For the well-being of this City is so essentially requisite to
the well-being of this Kingdom, that the very charge of the Government is not
to be defrayed without it. So that it is the interest of all Governors to
cherish, and support it. Here he trifles away some half a score lines more
about the Fire; and then, from the danger of the City, advances to the further
danger accruing to the Citizens, as well as to the whole Kingdom, upon the
King's untimely Death.

The greatest danger ( says he) will proceed from a confusion, and want of some
Eminent and Interested persons, whom you may trust to lead you up against a
French and Popish Army. For which purpose no person is fitter then his Grace
the Duke of Monmouth, as well for Quality, Courage and Conduct; as for that his
life and fortune depends upon the same bottom with Yours* He will stand by you,
therefore ought you to stand by him: And remember the old rule is, He who has
the worst Title, ever makes the best King. Does he suppose this confusion upon
the death of the King; or the burning of the City, or before, or after?
Notwithstanding this Authors flattery of his Grace and the City, yet their
wisdom will certainly unmask him; whom if I knew, it is probable I might get a
hundred pound for taking a Jesuit.
Or has he consulted either the Illustrious Person, or the Honorable City
(that he makes so bold with) to know whether or not the one would accept of
such a Commission upon the Appellants terms, or the other offer it? the
Character that he is pleased to bestow upon his Grace, for his Quality,
Courage, and Conduct, is not unknown to any man that ever so much as heard of
his Name. But the Appellant never considers that all these glorious
circumstances are point blank contradictions to his design. How can he imagine
that so brave a Person can ever stoop to so mean a thought; and suffer himself,
by a Prostitute Libell, to be enchanted out of his Honor, reason, and
Allegiance? Or that the most Eminent City of Christendom for purity of
Religion, Loyalty to their Prince, Power, Good Government, Wealth and
Resolution, should be cajoled out of all these blessings and advantages, by the
Jesuitical Fanaticism of a Dark-lanthorn-Pamphlet? But to what end is all this
clutter? the Appellant has a mind (it seems) to I cannot perceive the Author of
the Appeal has any such design against the King, but rather the contrary; since
both by the Title, Arguments against the Plot, and Prayer for the King at last,
he seems to aim at nothing more than his Majesty's preservation, whom I pray
God defend from the hands and counsels of all such evil men 25 this Author.
change his Master. He who has the worst Title (he says) ever makes the best
King; which is a very fair proposition for setting up of a worse Title, in his
Majesty's place. From hence he goes forward, still computing upon his Majesty's
death, as a thing to be taken for granted; and so recommending himself to the
most worthy Citizens, he finishes his Appeal.

FINIS.

