THE ANSWER OF THE Deputy Lieutenants OF THE County of DEVON.

TO THE DECLARATION of Sir RALPH HOPTON and other his traiterous Adherents that
have lately in an hostile manner invaded the said County, and plundered, and
pillaged many of the Inhabitants thereof.



LONDON, Printed by R. Olton and G. Dexter, for Henry Overton, and are to be
sold at his Shop in Popes head Alley. MDCXLII.

THE ANSWER OF The Deputy Lieutenants of the County of Devon. to the
Declaration of Sir RALRH HOPTON and other his traitorous Adherents, that have
lately in an hostile manner invaded the said County, and plundered, and
pillaged many of the Inhabitants thereof.
In the Presence and fear of Almighty GOD the searcher of all Hearts, and
judge of all Men, We thus declare.
1. THat we never did, nor ever will take Arms, but in all true Loyalty to
his Majesty, the Defense of the established Religion, his Majesty's just
Prerogative, and the Liberties of the English Subject, in the Rights of
Parliament.

2. That the occasion of this War is given by those that by injurious
calumniation, and false surmises of the Parliaments intention to lessen, or
abate his Majesty's Royal Prerogative for the future, have withdrawn his
Majesty's person and affection from that his great Counsel.

3. That the Persons of all the Lord Lieutenants were approved by his Majesty;
that most of these Lords and their Deputies were formerly employed in the said
Service.

That the War in Sommersetshire was begun upon those that were peaceably
marching to a Muster in the ordinary way.

4. That some of those that were persecuted for raising that War, were the
men that infested Cornwall and now Devonshire with violence and oppression.

5. That the Sheriffs raising of the power of the County is unjust, because
the Musters by authority of Parliament are no unlawful Assemblies.

6. That the Commission of Array is illegal, because so declared in
Parliament, after it had been presented and petitioned against as a grievance,
by some Counties, amongst the rest this of Devonshire, because it is in many
points opposite to the Liberty of the Subject, and cannot be executed with
equity.

7. That the Commission of Array, and the Sheriffs power now put in execution
against the Parliaments proceedings, are breaches of the Peace, and destructive
to the Kingdom, in raising a Civil War within it; and to Religion, by
hindering the suppression of the Rebellion in Ireland, and by inciting the
Papists to join with the Array Forces in England.

8. That all those that take Arms against the Parliament, and their Defenders,
do falsify their Potestation generally taken, and do cause a breach of his
Majesty's promise, and as we believe his gracious intention, not to make War
against his Parliament.

9. That no Subject can truly keep his Oath of Allegiance, that does not keep
his Protestation, the Oath of Allegiance being made to the King as his Liege or
lawful Lord.

10. That such as make War upon the Parliament, do what in them lies to
destroy all Parliaments, and consequently to change the government of the
Kingdom by Statute Laws, and Courts of Justice, into an Arbitrary Government,
which is no less then Treason.

These grounds thus laid, being infallibly true, and since the person of his
sacred Majesty is as it were made Captive to the wills of those that for
private ends and their impunity for Capital offenses, keep his Majesty from
his great Council: And since these Cavaliers that have fallen into Cornwall
and now into Devonshire, are of the same party and design.

We can do no less then forewarne all his Majesty's loving Subjects, not only
of the illegallity of their proceedings, but also of the dangerous and
inevitable evil consequently falling upon this Kingdom, if they should
prevail. And to invite all such as love his Majesty, and desire to maintain
the hearty affection of his people toward him and his posterity, not to be
allured by their persuasions and insinuations of their loyalty, and our
Rebellion, or by their threats of death, our destruction, to be terrified from
their duties to God, the King, and the public weal, but to stand firm for
the holy truth which they have professed in all loyalty, as they have
protested, not sparing their Purses or their pains, or the hazard of their
lives for the defense thereof.

And whereas diverse of the good Subjects of this Country have been lately
seduced through fear to obey their unlawful and pernicious commands, though
they cannot but see them tending to their own ruin, we do invite them to
return to their first professed Allegiance and duty to the King and
Parliament, and we shall be ready to embrace them in the Arms of Christian
Love and friendship, and be their Mediators to the Parliament for their full
reconciliation, if we find it to be done speedily and really.

And whereas great scandal has been taken, and many fears put into the
people minds, that our Troupers and Dragoneers are Authorized to plunder and
take away the goods of the Inhabitants of this County, we desire that all men
should hereby know, that no Trouper or other Soldier, ever had any other
Authority then to secure the persons of noted opposites or to secure the Arms
and Horses for War, of such as would turn them against us, or cannot keep them
from the adverse party, for all other goods which have or may be taken in that
manner, we disavow the giving of any such Authority, and will do our best to
punish all such as shall be found Delinquents in that kind.

FINIS

