AN ACCOUNT OF THE Nature, Situation, Natural Strength, and Ancient, and Modern
Fortifications, of the several Cities and Garrison-Towns in IRELAND; That are
still Possessed by the Forces of the Late King James; Their Distances from
Dublin, and each from the other: With the several Approaches by which they may
be Attack't.

Also, a Scenographical Description of the Famous River SHANNON, On which
Stands Those Two Strong Places Limmerick, and Athlone: The former of which is
Besieged by His Majesty in Person, the latter by Lieutenant General Douglass.

By an Irish Officer, who served in the Army under the Late Duke of Ormond.

Licensed JAMES FRASER,

LONDON, Printed for W. Bonny, and R. Hayhurst in Little-Britain. 1690.

Price Two Pence.

An Account of the City, Port, Garrison, and Fortifications of LIMERICK.
THIS City is the biggest in Ireland, except Dublin; its Haven lies on the
West Side of Ireland, and South of Galway; It divides the Province of
Connaught from Munster, being of a great length, no less than sixty Miles; for
so far it is from the mouth of the Haven to the City of Limerick, to whose
Walls Merchantmen of great Burden, or Third, and Fourth Rate Frigates may go
up, without meeting with any thing else in all that way, save a number of
little Isles, but not any foul Places, Rocks or Sands.

This Harbor is nothing else but a great Lough (half way its length growing
somewhat narrow, but immediately enlarging it self again into greater breadth)
whereinto the River Shannon, (upon whose Banks Limerick is situated)
discharges it self a little way below the said City; although the English and
the Irish both call it the Shannon, all the way until the Sea, as it were not a
Lough into which the River falls, but the River it self thus enlarged. This
City, as aforesaid, standing on the Banks of the Shannon, which encompasseth it
so about that its a perfect Island, by which means its very strong by Nature;
it is also Fortified with a very high strong Wall, on which are several Bastions
and Redoubts; also, three spacious Gates, well built with curious Stone, viz.
St. John's Gate, St. Peter's Gate, and the Newgate.

These Gates give the Name to the Three Principal Streets in the City, on which
are good Stone-Buildings: It has also a Castle and Bridge, viz. King's Castle,
and Thomand-Bridge, Pieces of great Strength and Beauty, though very Ancient,
being of the Foundation of King John, who was exceedingly delighted with the
Situation. Its distant from Dublin eighty four Miles, from Cork thirty seven
Miles, and from Galway thirty six.

GALWAY.
THE Haven of this City is the most considerable in the Province of Connaught,
being a very great Bay, some Miles broad, and many more long, having in the
Mouth three Islands, (called the Isles of Arran) the which lie North and South
by the side of each other, there remaining the Channels for to come out of the
Sea into this Bay. One Channel runeth betwixt the Land and the Northern Isle,
and called therefore North-Sound: The second between the same Northern Island
and the middle-most; which Channel being the most usual of the Three, is
commonly styled St. Gregory's Sound; and the third between the most Southermost
Island and the Mane, named South-Sound; the Channel betwixt the Southern and
the middle-most Island not being passable, by reason of the Sands and Shelves,
wherefore the Name of Half-Sound has been given unto it.

The whole North-side of this Bay is very foul with Sands and Rocks, so as one
may not approach the Shore in a great way; at the end of which Sand, and in the
innermost part of the Bay, lies a little Island, called Mutton-Island, at the
East Side whereof, one may Anchor in five or six Fathoms of Water; but from
thence Northwards, until the City of Galway, which is the space of two or three
Miles, none but little Vessels and Barks can go, the City standing not on the
Bay it self, but on a broad Water like a River, the which not far from Galway
coming out of a great Lake, called Lough Corbes, discharges it self into the
Bay a little above Mutten-Isle.

This City is the principal of the Province of Connaught, both for Beauty,
Strength and Trade; its environed with a very strong Wall, the best in all
Ireland, on which is a Counterscarp, Bastion, and other Fortifications; and its
no less strong within it self, the Houses being built very regular with Stone,
with Battlements at the top, for Guns to be Planted. Its distant from Dublin
eighty five Miles, and from Athlone thirty six Miles.

ATHLONE.
THIS Town is the greatest Pass from Dublin to Connaught, and so to Leinster:
it is a place that is but small, yet of very great Strength, the River Shannon
running through it, like London and Southwark; its joined by a stately
Stone Bridge, on which are Fortifications, built at the charge of Queen
Elizabeth, and repaired in the Year 1663. On that part of the Town that is in
Connaught stands a great Castle, regularly Fortified according to the modern
way by K. Charles the II. a little after his Restoration, with the addition of
a high mud Wall round that part of the Town, and several other new Works has
been lately made here by the order of King James. Its distant from Dublin forty
nine Miler.

KING-SALE.
THE Haven of this Town is one of the most Famousest of all Ireland; Ships of
great Burden may Sail into it, keeping in the midst of the Channel, without
any danger, either without, or in the Mouth of the Harbor, except a blind Rock
close to the East-Point: Within the Haven, on the West Side, lies a great
Shelf, which shoots a great way off from the Land, but leaving a very large
Passage along by the side of it, in which, as in all the rest of the Harbor,
it is many Fathoms deep. This Haven for some Miles goes in N. N. East, but
afterward turns Westward, until the Key of Kingsale, where Ships may Ride
in 8 or 9 Fathoms of Water, being defended of all Winds: The Town stands upon
the Mouth of the River Bany; and at some distance from it stands a curious
Citadel; (which cost K. Charles the II. 80 Thousand Pound the Erecting;) its
of great Security to the Port so that no Force can attack it, either by Sea or
Land, without great hazard and danger: The Town is well Fortified by Land,
having a Wall, and several Works on it, but its commanded by the adjacent
Hills, particularly by one Hill that is exact against their great Fort, which
renders the place incapable of holding out a Siege. Its distant from Dublin 127
Miles, from Limerik 46.

CORK.
THE Haven of this City stands Ten Miles to the Eastward of Kin-sale, the which
goes in N. N. East, being within large and wide, running a great way into the
Land; for the City (until whose Key this Haven is very clean and deep) is
seated many miled from the Sea, and from the Mouth of the Harbor.

The City is but small, consisting chiefly of one large Street, reaching out in
length, but very populous: It is the only thorough-fare of all English Goods
and Commodities (as they term them) namely, rich Broad Clothes, Stuffs, and
Linen, Fruits, Spices, etc. Sent most commonly this way out of England, for
those two remarkable Port-Towns of Limmerick and Galoway; it is Fortified with
a very good Wall, and curious Stone Bridge, on which are several Works, and
being environed with Water; were it not for the Hills near it, which over looks
the City, (in the same nature as at Kin-sale) it might be made a place
Impregnable, but the Hills has such a command of it, that a Battery from
thence, would Beat the the Town about the Ears of the Garrison: It is distant
from Dublin One Hundred and Sixteen Miles, from Limmerick Thirty Six Miles.

WATERFORD.
THIS Haven is Situated on the Confines of Lenister and Munster, and runs
seven, or eight Miles into the Land, not Winding or Crooked, or with any great
Inlets or Nookes, but almost in a straight Line (extending it self North,
North-West) and in most parts of an equal Breadth, all the way Deep and Clear,
having no Rocks nor Sands: Without the Harbor, it is Eleven, or Twelve Fathoms
Deep; in the Mouth Seven and more; inwards Six Fathoms. Within the Esterly
corner is a good Road, in Four, or Five Fathoms; and on the other, or Westerly
side, Five or Six Miles from the Mouth, is an other good Road, very Commodious,
as well for those Ships that go fourth, as those that will Sail upwards to
Waterford. Upon the East side, about half way the length, lies a very strong
Fort and Castle, called Duncannon, (Built much in the Nature of that at
Tilbury, against Graves-End) and so commands the Harbor, that no Ships can
go up or down against the will of the Fort: This Haven in the end divides it
self into two Arms; both a great deal Inferior to the principal Harbor; The
City is Situated some four or five Miles from that Division, a little below
the place where the River Shoure falls into this Harbor: And tho it stands
at a reasonable good distance off from the Main Sea, yet Ships of the greatest
Burden may safely Sail to, and Ride at Anchor before the Key thereof, the
Fortifycations of this Place are not very considerable, having but an
indifferent Wall round it, with a small Fort, but it is very strong by Sea, on
the account of the Fort of Duncannon.

CLONMEL.
THIS Town is in the County of Typperary, and Situated on the River shou^e
about Twenty Miles above Waterford, from whence it is Passable to it, by Vessels
of small Burden; this Place is Naturally Fortyfied, standing on an
Advantageous ground, very hard to be Attackt; besides, it is Environed with a
very good Wall and Castle of great strength. This Place made a resolute
Defense against Oliver Cromwell, Ano Dom. 1649. who endeavoring to get it by
Storm, the Garrison beat his Soldiers twice from the Breaches, and at last
Surrendered on Honorable Conditions, i'ts Sixty Six Miles from Dublin.

The River SHANNON.
BEsides the excessive number of Brooks, wherewith Ireland is Watered; it has
a great many Rivers, the which being Broader and Deeper then the Brooks, are
consequently navigable; although the Major part are not portable of any great
Ships, but only of small Vessels.

The principalest of all is the Shannon, who taking her original out of Lough-
Allen, and in her course dividing the Province of Connaught from Leinster, and
afterward also from Munster, passes through two other great Loughs, to wit,
Lough- Ree, whereout she comes just above Athlone, and Lough- Dergh, about
halfway betwixt Athlone and Limerick; and a little below the said Town, she
discharges herself again into another Lough, by far the biggest of all, the
which extending it self from Limerick into the Sea, which is 60 Miles. And
above 60 Miles from Athlone it is held by the Irish, as well as the English,
not for a Lough, but for the Shannon it self; so that its whole length is 120
Miles.

This River is wide and deep every where, so as she would be Navigable in her
whole length, not only with small Vessels, but with Ships of large Burden, to
the great advantage of them that inhabit next it, were it not for the
impediment of a certain Rock within 8 Miles of Athlone, the which stands a
cross in the Channel, and the River with great violence falling downwards over
it, all communication of Navigation betwixt the upper and lower parts of it is
thereby absolutely hindered. It was proposed to the Earl of Stafford, when Lord
Deputy, by certain Dutch Ingineers, That for the Sum of 8000 l. Sterling, they
would in that place cut a new Channel, A Sum not very considerable, in
comparison of the great profit which afterward would have accrued from that
Work; but the Rebellion ensuing, it was never taken in hand to this day.

But its now hoped, that upon the happy Settlement of the Kingdom of Ireland,
under the Benign Government of Their August Majesty's, King William and Queen
Mary, this advantageous Work may be performed.

FINIS.
CAtastrophe Galliae, and Hiberniae Restitutio. An Impartial Judgment, Denoting
the Reduction of Ireland this Revolution 90. (ending March the 10th. 1691.)
Also, The Conquering of Lewis the XIV. present King of France, by His Sacred
Majesty King WILLIAM the III. in a few Years. Prophetically deduced from the
Characters of Heaven.

Printed for Tho. Howkins in George-Yard in Lombard Street, and are to be Sold
by R. Baldwin in the Old-Bayly, 1690.


