AN ANSWER To the Character of an Exchange-wench: OR A VINDICATION OF AN
Exchange-woman.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Croskill. 1675.

AN ANSWER TO THE Character of an Exchange-wench.
AN Exchange-Woman does as far exceed a mere Gentlewoman, as a Civil Tradesman
does a common Shark, having a commendable Calling to vouch for her honesty.
She Is one Bow with two strings, being generally born to a compitable Fortune,
she wisely shrowds her self under the safe Covert of a good Trade. To secure
her felicity; her Shop serves her instead of a Nunnery, where being bufied with
the concerns of a laudable calling, she forgets, or neglects the Debauches of
the Town: She Is railed in like an Altar, and secured by a Partition as a thing
that is sacred. She Is as tempting as the forbidden Fruit, and has a Noli me
tangere for her Motto: She needs no other Purgatory, having gone through the
strict Discipline of a severe Mistress, whereby she becomes so accustomed to
Virtue, that at length it grows Natural. She is that politic Hermophrodite,
who acts the part both of Man and Woman, in preserving both her Honor and
Family; a large Book with a little Title, being really worth five times as much
as her Fortune; She Is an En-tail for Life, and whoever has her may reckon he
has purchased above a hundred a Year.

As for her Original she is generally the Honorable offspring of some Country
Gentleman, who being cursed with a multitude of Blessings (I mean Children) and
by ambition made slave to his eldest Son, is forced to piece out his Daughters
fortune with a profitable employ, which is often the Stirrup to sublimer
Fortune.

Her Education is as Gentile as her Birth, and she knows not but she is a
Fortune till she goes to receive it. She is respected according to the noise of
her Fathers Estate, which is generally two hundred a year, and kept as fine in
her Childhood as if she were to enjoy it her self.

Her Virtuous Education breeds in her so sweet an Innocence that she dreads to
look in a Man's face for fear of discovering his desires at his Eyes, and if he
says but 'Faith, she presently corrects him for Swearing. She has such a
propensity to goodness that she acts it unawares, and often surprises both her
self and others with her own Virtue. She is as ignorant of Vice, as of Terra
Incognita and though she designed to be wicked she would not know how to effect
it. She often wonders at the production of mankind, and lives to eleven or
twelve years of Age before she is convinced that she did not spring out of the
Parsly-Bed.

Thus having the advantages of a Gentile Birth, good Education, and virtuous
Inclination; she is designed by her Parents, whose affections are larger then
their ^ags (their Quality obliging them to live up to the height of their
Estate) to be put under the discreet tuition of some honest and able
Exchange-Woman, thereby to obtain an honest and honorable employment, to
secure her from those storms of Fate which are commonly severe on little
Fortunes.

That the Employment is as honorable as any other Inland Trade cannot be
denied, they enjoying the same Privileges, dealing in as Rich Commodities, and
having attained as great Estates, as any other Vocation whatsoever. Which has
induced many noble families distressed by War, or Accidents, to bring up their
Daughters to this Calling wherein some have proved so fortunate as to give a
happy Resurrection to their whole family. And at this day Heaven is so kind to
their commendable endeavors, as to recompense their good designs with
unexpected success, of which, should I give a Catalogue of those young Ladies,
whose unparalled Virtue, and good deportment have tempted Men of
extraordinary Estates to desire them in Marriage; I should write rather a
Volumn then a sheet: But my design in Writing being only to rescue that
honorable Society, from the bitter invectives of that Satirical Character, I
shall forbear particulars, and only acquaint you, That the Exchange it self is
no less than an Academy, and the Youth therein, the dilligent Student of Virtue
and good manners, it is true, there is some Sub graduates, and other Mistresses
of Arts, who like kind and careful Tutoresses take such pains with their
Pupils, that they never leave instructing them till they have made them as
knowing as themselves; If any prove vicious or Irrefectory they are presently
expelled.

So that an Exchange Maid is a refined Vertuosa, one who has sealed her
Gentility, with the Martyrdom of an Apprenticeship, she is as happy in her Shop
as a Miss in a Playhouse: and better pleased with the moderate gains of an
honest Trade, than the other is with the Extravagant Allowance of a Wild
Gallant, she is so far from being a drudge to the world that she sits still and
gets an Estate.

The whole Town's her Labourer, and he that goes finest her greatest slave, who
as if his Money were a bad Commodity foolishly exchanges it for Lace or
Ribbonds; as Bubbles do to Gamesters, he brings her Cash whether she will or
no; He Is her mere subject, and like the French King she imposes a Tax upon
every thing he wears. How then can she be unhappy when even our fancies and
Extravagancies contribute to her welfare.

She Is a Creature ready cut and dried for all preferment, and no less than a
coach and six, can tempt her from her employment, an arrogant Fop that courts
her to a smile, swears he has got her heart, and with himself contrives an
assignation, when she only did it, either in complaisance to his folly or her
own advantage.

A spruce Cit, bristles up to her like a Turky-cock, and would fain be Trading,
but as she has attractions to draw, so she has discretion to slight his Amors,
her facetious discourse, makes him think her easy to come at, when, indeed she
does it as Welshmen on H^ls, who though they (...) near together, are really
likely never to meet.

In short, her smilles are innocent, as sleeping Infants, and she preserves her
self an un-blemish'd Sacrifice for a happy Husband; She has all the
accomplishments of a Gentle Woman, but if she be defective in any thing it is
Vice, being un-acquainted with the Gallants; She Is a Stranger to deceit, and
hating the rattling of a Coach remains untainted with the Pleasures and
Debauches of the Town.

In her Shop she patiently attends both her business and Fate, and when she
marries needs no advice from a Midwife to cheat her Husband into the belief of
a Maidenhead: In fine she is happy as she is, but if she alter her condition,
experience shows us, she may become a Duchess.

To the Exchange Maids.
THus I like you have wasted three hours time,
To hide your wrinkles and to make you fine;
Your sickly Credits I so well restore;
I make you more renowned than before:
The Character you know was something Witty,
And 'Faith to speak the Truth, I think it hit you,
The Author knows your tricks, and spoke the more,
Because he had been bit by you before.
His Passion therefore (Ladies) don't admire,
A Child that is burnt, does always dread the Fire.
(...) with Frowns -- But cast your smiles on him.
Who took this pain to ransom your (...).
The Theme was barren, and did plague me more,
Then any Subject e're I writ before:
'Twas full an hour e're my Muse could raise
A true expression to set out your Praise;
Which that my brooding thoughts did e're impart,
Was more my fancy then your due desert.
Like him who courts a homely Mistress, I
Was forced to give my Conscience the Lie.
And (Heavens forgive me) I know never a Line,
In all the Sheet, but what I think's a sin.
And since you're Sinners too, I only wish
That we may (...) in better Sheets than this.
FINIS.

