AN ANSWER TO THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS ORATION.

The 13. of April, 1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

With your Lordships favor,
IF the subvertion of the fundamentalls of Faith be Heresy, why not as well
the subversion of the fundamental Laws, Treason? Shall it be Treason to
destroy the Kings Minister? and shall that be none that destroys his
protector? For the Law protects the King, as well as the King the Laws: and if
Laws did not subsiduate Princes, Kingdoms would totter as foundationlesse: nay
they are indeed, the very subsistence of Kings.

Let it be supposed, though not granted, that no one particular make it
Treason, may not many and successive Acts amount it to that height? One grain
of poison is not mortal, but many together are. Exportation of Sheep for once
is but a Trespass, but acted a second time is Felony by Statute. Refusal of
the Oath of Supremacy is at first not capital; but refused again, by statute
is made Treason. And to my weak understanding, my Lords, this clearly shows
the mind of the Law: one ill act of waving the Law, may be but out of
rashness, out of Ignorance; but a perpetuated practice, shows a prepensed
malice, and murder thus acted by the 10. H. 7. in Ireland, is Treason.

Be it there be no statute or Common Law in express to make it so, yet
necessary inferences, if they be not certainetyes, are next them; and if the
deputed Judge or Governor has power in the business of the Subject, to make
the sway arbitrary, where Law is possitive, I know not but he may do the same
in the business of the Sovereign; so it may come to pull the Soveraignety
from the Prince, and place it on his substitute, and whether this be Treason or
no, I leave to your Lordships consideration.

It Is true, de non apparentibus, and non existentibus, eadem est Ratio, But my
Lords, to make this Treason, is not unapparant: a partial eye will not find
it, but he that looks, Intuitu ferio, may see even the Triple Gerion of
Treason in it, for it cannot be but there is Laesa Respub. Lex Maiestas, the
Commonwealth is oppressed, the Laws are suppressed, the Prince is scandal'd in
act, and subjected by consequence to his Denious determinations: and therefore
I shall without admiration tell you where this fire has layen those hundred of
years he speaks of, even (my Lords) in the honester behavior of other
Ministers of State, who have not been injurious against the Laws, and there
still had it been buried, if his own nefarious actions had not un-embred it,
and fuel'd it anew.

Nor can your Sentence be before promulgation, since even your renowned
Progenitors have already declared it Treason; though not by a particular
Statute in terms: yet by a demonstrative practice, which if his Lordship
would not have been willingly blind, had been Buoy enough to keep him from
that Anchor of us all, which now must either hurt it self, or else split him,
the Parliament whose Courses left upon Record cannot be taken for under water
works, so that a very easy honesty and common morallity (without Revelation)
might have served as the red Cross and the Bill, to have warned him from this
plague of Legicide.

I shall beg as hard as his Lordship, that you have regard to your selves,
for if upon him (by whose authority, Peers shall be sentenced to be shot,
Nobles, curbed and cooped up, Laws subverted, Freehold disposed of out of the
Courts, Grants under the Royal Seal extrajudicially disanul'd, and what may
be profit of, Monopoliz'd) you set not some everlasting Character, to deter the
like frontlesse attempts; I know not but the next commer, may subjugate your
dearest freedoms, and as remediless you may then complain, as those who now
do suffer, and have not yet found a redress.

My Lords under favor, your providence may be short, if it reach but to
burning of Books: a fire of dead leaves will be too weak a fuel for a
warning Beacon: A living Author made exemplary will afford a Taller flame, and
if there were no other Law, that of Retaliation could not but be just; an
Arbitrary sentence, were but plowing with his own Heyfer; Who striving to
seclude the Laws, would infer a kind of legal Tyranny, from a breast that
is a Libertine. And therefore your Lordships I persuade my self, will think
it mightily fit, to cast this Jonas overboard, who has occasioned all these
storms, endangered all the sacred ship of Government, and by flying the plain
speaking Law, has dared by his Imperious Vote, to outgoe even all the bold
attempts of Ancestry.

It is some comfort to us, that in 240. years, we have had no use of these
venerable (though by him reviled for musty) Records. The Commonwealth has had
the fewer enemies. And if they work now but a merited operation, I hope it may
be 500. years ere any of so bold a brow, shall desperately again adventure to
awake them.

And if his Lordship be not made a president for punishment: I know not but he
may prove a President for example, to animate others of a Vafrous and presuming
brain, to take up the same way from a pleasurable bosom, to doom both
Nobles, and the Commons, into a State of deep calamity. And so your Lordships
lenity to him, may by indulgence wound a future multitude. His many crimes
which you have heard fully proved, will immortallize your Peerage for a noble
Justice. The learned Orator has anciently told us, that Non potest cuiquam male
de Rupub. merenti, iusta esse causa. And though it be severe, it cannot be
unrighteous, for Hoc spectant Leges, Hoc volunt; incolumem esse Civium
Coniunctionem, quam qui dirimunt, eos morte, exilio, vinculis, damno, coercent.

Thus every man will know what channel to steer in, what rocks to avoid, what
he is not to do, what he is not to say for fear of meeting such pains.

Thus men of honest wisdom, will be cautious of keeping in the plain rode of
the Law, and never hazard (by crossing through untroden Thickets) either
Honor, Issue, or fortune, to a loss. What his Majesty may graciously intend
to the pledge of his Saint, will rest in his most Royal heart: Though I hope
the want of a Midwife did not make her one,, nor his marriage within a month
after her decease did ere make him account her so.

And now (my Lords) we shall humbly expect your Honorable Judgments,
beseeching you will be nobly pleased to defend those Laws which have ever
defended you, to have respect to your own future liberty, and the safety of
these flourishing Kingdoms: Then what ever your sentence be, Te Deum laudamus
Cantemus Iehovae, clangamus
te Deum confitemur. Rupibus, salutis nostrae.


FJNIS.

