AN ANSWER TO THE QUESTION Why may not The ENGLISH ASSIST The SVVEDE, As well
as the DUTCH do The DANE.

London, Printed in the Year, 1658.

AN ANSWER TO THE QUESTION, Why may not the ENGLISH ASSIST the SWEDE, as well
as the DUTCH do the DANE.
SIR,
YOU were pleased to ask me lately, Why England might not as well Assist the
King of Sweden, as the United Netherland Provinces did send Succor to the King
of Denmark?

Believing, that it will be acceptable to your self, and other Noble Gentlemen,
and all impartial lovers of the English Nation, that the same Question be
Answered: I do first offer it to your Consideration; Whether it be not
requisite to examine the diverse State and Condition of the Parties, who are
Distressed and stand in need of Succor? and who do suffer Wrong, and of those,
who are the Wrong doers? For Nature, Humanity, Reason, and the Laws of all
Nations, do clearly dictare, that Affliction is not to be added to the
Afflicted; And that no Succor ought to be given to the Oppresiour, against the
Oppressed. Upon which ground, I entreat you Secondly, to Consider, There being,
besides the Swedish Navy, no Ships of War in the Sound, or Baltic Sea, but
some of Denmark, and the United Provinces: Whether the English Succor in those
Parts, could be employed, or made use of with Honor, and a good Conscience,
against Denmark, or against the said United Provinces?

1. Considering that the whole Kingdom of Denmark was surprised and invaded,
and almost totally subdued under the power of the King of Sweden, except only
the City of Coppenhagen, which was not only closely beseged; by a Roial
Swedish Army by Land, but also by a potent Navy of that King by Sea, and daily
assaulted, and no means of fire, and other destructive instruments, and
engines omitted to force that City, and to oppress in the same, the King of
Denmark, with his Royal Family, and the Council of the Kingdom. Whereby it
appears, that the said King of Denmark was in a sad and distressed condition,
having surrendered upon the Treaty of Raskild, mediated by a public Minister of
England, betwixt the two Kings, in February last, 1657. A great part of the
Kingdom of Denmark, together with all the strongest and most considerable
Castles, and Places of Norway. And being in Person with his Queen, and Children
so extremely oppressed, in the said City of Coppenhagen, and with all sorts of
violence by Sea and Land assaulted; having not so much as one Company of
Soldiers in the Field, nor one Ship of War at Sea in all his Kingdom of
Denmark. When on the other side, the King of Sweden bad several Armies round
about the Baltic Sea, in Livonia, and Curland in Prussia, in Pomerania, in the
Dukedom of Br^, and in his Conquered Provinces and strong Places in Jutland,
Skonen, B^ekingen and Halland, besides his Army in Zealand before the said
City. The said King had also a numerous and strong Navy more considerable, then
ever any King of Sweden had brought to Sea before: Wherewith he had made
himself Master of the Sound, and all the other passages out of the Western
Seas, to the East Countries, and exacted there Tolls of all Nations. So you
see, that the King of Sweden was in a Conquering formidable condition,
assaulting and oppressing the King of Denmark, a Protestant Prince, In amity,
and Alliance, with England: And that King, you perceive was in a broken,
distressed and pitiful Estate. The first the invador and oppressor; The last,
the surprised, invaded and oppressed, and almost past relief. So that it seems
strange to more that understand the true State of those affairs, how it can
enter into the thoughts of an honest man, to strengthen and succor the King of
Sweden, against the King, or Kingdom of Denmark.

2. And to the end, that you may know the grounds, whereon the Lords the States
General of the united Provinces have sent a fleet of ships, to assist the said
King of Denmark in this his distressed Condition. It is known and notorious,
that it is the interest of the said United Provinces (if not of all the
Christian Prince;) that the Kingdoms and Territories round about the Baltic
Sea be preserved in Peace and tranquillity, (the Wars and differences, having
always been very prejudicial to the Trade and Commerce, especially of the
Netherlanders in the East Countries) and to maintain the respective Northern
Kings, in their own Kingdoms, and Territories. Therefore they have first
contracted, and established a defensive League and Alliance with Sweden, in the
year 1640. To defend each others Dominions and Territories, as also the
Freedom and liberty of Commerce, and Navigation in the said Baltic Sea. And
have to the same end and purpose since, with the Communication and approbation
of Sweden, made a defensive Alliance, with the King and Kingdom of Denmark in
the year, 1649. Whereby both were obliged to Succor, and assist that
confaederate, who should be assaulted and invaded, or otherwise oppressed:
Which Treaty has likewise been Communicated to the Government of England. And
since that the Queen Christian had resigned the Crown to the present most
potent King Charles Gustave, the said Lords, the States General have used all
possible Endeavors, to renew it with his High Renowned Majesty; And did
assure themselves, that with the Concurrence and Cooperation, of his Late Most
Serene Highness, the said Alliance should have been confirmed, and fully
established. But to their great grief, his Majesty was pleased to wave, or to
delay it upon pretense, that some preliminary Declarations were to be first
made, and assurances given. And in the mean time did on the ninth of August
last past, Stilo veteri, invade with his Royal Army and Navy, the Isle of
Zealand, and assaulted at the same time the Places and Dominions of the King of
Denmark in Holstein under the Roman Empire. At which unhappy accident, the said
Lords, the States General, were very much troubled; And being summoned by the
King of Denmark, in performance of the said defensive Alliance, to succor him
in his oppression and extremity, They were bound in honor and conscience, to
accomplish and to keep honestly the said solemn Treaty. As by the Laws of all
Nations, yea of the Heathen themselves, it is resolved without any
controversy, that public Treaties are to be kept, and National engagements
to be Religiously performed. And Ambrose, Tullius Cicero, and others have
taught: Qui non repellit ininriam a socio cum potest, tamest in vitio, quam
ille qui facit: That is, he that does not repel, and hinder an injury to he
done to his friend, or associate, when it is in his power, is as much in the
fault, as if he did commit it himself. Plato says, that he is to be punished,
who does not interpose, when he sees that wrong is done to another. And the
wise King in the Proverbs teaches as much.

And although the said Lords the States General, were obliged by all the Laws
of God and men, and by the said special Treaty, to succor the said King of
Denmark, (as they must and would have done the King of Sweden, in case of like
necessity) yet they did it not precipitately nor inconsiderately, by themselves
alone, but did Communicate and Confer about it with the Supreme Authority of
England, or the public Ministers of the same, desiring very instantly that
they might know how the said Invasion was apprehended, on the behalf of
England, and what was thought fit in England, should be done thereupon, by or
on the behalf of the said United Provinces: And they did likewise Communicate
sincerely, what Succors and Assistance they were preparing, and sending to his
oppressed Majesty of Denmark. And they not being dissuaded to send it, and
conceiving that it was as much Englands Interest as their own, that the Kingdom
of Denmark, and the whole Dominion of the Baltic Sea, should not be subdued
and brought under the Power of the King of Sweden, have sent a part of their
Fleet to Convoy a supply of some two thousand Soldiers to Coppenhagen. And
their Admiral, finding that the Swedes did oppose and obstruct his passage, was
forced to make it.

Which being the true state of the Case, it is hoped that no Christian will
think that there is any the least Ground, Reason, Justice or Equity, to send
any Succor to the King of Sweden, against Denmark, or the United Provinces,
or their Ships of War in the Sound or Baltic Sea. But that it will be
thought fit to Cooperate by fair means, to re-establish a firm Peace and
Tranquillity betwixt the said two Kings, and the other States and Potentates in
the said East Countries; and to preserve inviolably a true Amity, Union and
Confederation, between England, and the United Provinces; and to secure a Free
Trade and Commerce for all their Subjects indifferently; within the said Sound
or Baltic Sea, under the Ancient, Reasonable Customs and Duties only, and
equally to defend and succor the said two Kings, and all other Princes and
Dominions of those adjacent Countries, against all Invasions and Oppressions of
each other, thereby to strengthen and support the Protestant Interest, as well
as that of Trade and Profit, and to lay a good Foundation of Peace and Honor
for themselves, their Subjects and Posterities, and to weaken and discourage
the designs of all their Enemies, and Religiously to hope for a blessing from
the God of Truth and Peace, upon such their Just and Pious Proceedings.


