AN ANSWER To the several PETITIONS Of late exhibited to the high Court of
PARLIAMENT, And to his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, By the poor
Husbandmen, Farmers, and Tenants in several Counties of England, for the
taking away of Tithes, paid to Priests and Impropriators.

London Printed for I. M. 1652.

An Answer to the several Petitions of late exhibited to the High Court of
Parliament, And to his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, by the poor
Husbandmen, Farmers, and Tenants in several Counties of England, for the
taking away of Tithes paid to Priests and Impropriators.
IT is manifest to all that have searched Records, either in the
Ecclesiastical or Temporal Courts, or have read the Chronicles of this
Nation, that tithes of Corn and Grain were paid to the Clergy in the times of
the Saxons; As also that the tithes of more than the third part of all the
Parishes in England, were, before the Conquest, and within a few ages after,
given, and appropriated to Monasteries and other Religious houses, who quietly
enjoyed them till their dissolution by K. Henry the eighth, who as well by the
several Grants made unto him by the Heads of the said religious houses, as
also by an Act of Parliament holden in 31. year of his reign (to which all the
Commons in England consented). had all the Manors, Lands, Tithes and
Hereditaments belonging to the said Religious houses (being for the most part
the fairest and richest in England) granted and vested in the said King and his
heirs for ever.

Which King, being thereof so lawfully seized, He by his several letters
Patents under the great Seal of England, in consideration of moneys paid him,
tenths and tenures by Knights service reserved, and for rewards for service,
and other valuable considerations, did disperse the Sites of the said
Monasteries, etc. their Manors, Lands, and tithes, etc. amongst the Nobility,
the Gentry, and others his Subjects, well-neer of all degrees and professions.

All which Patentees, their heirs and assigns, have from that time to this
present, quietly enjoyed the same without dispute, the unfortunate
Impropriators of tithes excepted, who notwithstanding their more than 100
years quiet possession, several Descents cast, Fines levied, Recoveries
suffered, and those upon valuable considerations; And besides the former act of
Parliament, and one other excellent Law made in the 21th year of K. James,
called the Statute of Limitations, made for the quieting and settling of men's
Estates; yet by the clamorous importunities of the Petitioners, their titles to
their inheritances have bin blasted, their tithes ill paid, and which is worse,
by many denied to be paid, though the High Court of Parliament have made
several Acts and Ordinances for the due payment thereof: And this the
Petitioners and others of their party have attempted to do, without proposing
any recompense or due satisfaction to be given to the Impropriators in lieu
thereof.

Now how unjust and unconscionable their endeavors and attempts have bin
herein, shall evedently appear to the understanding of the poor tenants and
farmers themselves who are Petitioners, by the reasons and Arguments plainly
expressed in the Articles following, viz.

1 FIrst, many Impropriations are in the hands of such persons as have
faithfully served this Commonwealth, with their persons and estates, in the
late troubles; And now if the Petitioners might obtain their desires, the
Commonwealth whom they have served, shall deprive them of their estates and
livelihoods.

2. The Parliament have had by way of sequestration, the Revenues of many
Impropriations, the owners whereof have lately compounded for their
Delinquencies: And now that the Delinquents have paid the Fines imposed upon
them for their delinquencies, and sued forth their pardons, or by the Act of
Oblivion have their offenses remitted, they shall (those excepted who gave to
the State their Impropriations in lieu of their Fines) be now punished in a
far higher degree than by a review, even to the loss of the inheritance
itself.

3 Many Widows have tithes for their Joyntures, which their parents did
purchase for them, with marriage portions; and Orphans, tithes asigned for the
raising of their portions; and younger Sons have Annuities issuing out of
tithes granted unto them during their lives, and little or nothing else to
maintain them.

4 Others have tithes extended for just debts due unto them; others have tithes
mortgaged unto them for money lent, and the mortgagers stand bound, by Statutes
or Recognizances, or in penal Bonds, to pay the moneys borrowed at the days
limited: In such cases the Mortgagers shall not only lose the tithes mortgaged,
but the bonds for collateral security being laid upon them, they shall (unles
they have other estates) become stark beggars, and perhaps starve in prison.

5 Others have built fair houses, outhouses and barnes upon their Rectories,
and have held their tithes instead of demeans for their provisions, which
tithes being taken from them, their losses (over and above their tithes) in
their buildings will be of considerable value.

6 K. Henry the 8th, to engage all degrees of men and societies in the sharing
of the lands belonging to the Religious houses, and of the Rectories to them
lately appropriated, did (amongst other things) by way of exchange, give to
diverse of the Colleges in both the Universities, a great number of
Impropriations; and the Colleges in the lieu of them gave to the King, fair
Manors, Farms and Lands of the like yearly value, which had bin given unto
them by the Founders and Benefactors to the said Colleges. Now if the tithes be
taken away from those Colleges, then in all justice and equity the Colleges
ought to have all their Manors and Lands restored back again unto them, which
in every exchange, is tacitly implied; and though the mutual assurances
between the King and the Colleges, were not in form of law made by way of
exchange, yet the considerations appear to be so, both in the Kings letters
Patents, and also in the Grants made by the Colleges to the King. Therefore in
all equity, restitution or satisfaction ought to be given unto them, otherwise
those Colleges must in part be dissolved.

7. As the Colleges shall lose their Impropriations, so their Farmers thereof
shall lose their leases which they have purchased for Fines in hand paid for
one and twenty years, or for three lives, and also all hopes of renewing their
Leases hereafter, which they and their predecessors have enjoyed from time to
time, at such constant Rates set to be paid for Fines at the renewing of their
Leases, as such College leases have bin usually sold for one third part more
than Leases held of private persons.

The Petitioners by that which has been already declared may easily discern,
that there will be many sufferers and sad losers, if tithes impropriate shall
be taken away. In the next place it shall be discovered, who they are that
shall be the Gayners, when all Lands are tithe-free.
THe Petitions exhibited are in the behalf of the poor Husbandmen and Tenants;
Alas poor men! they shall have the least share of the profits of tithes, if
their Petitions should be granted. For,

1 First, a great and considerable part of all the Manors and best Farms in
England, and also of petit Farms, and parcells of land, have been bought and
sold within this thirty years last past. The several purchasers whereof, have
not paid one penny for the tithes thereof. For the tithes being an inheritance
separate and distinct from the land, was not in the power of the Vendors to
sell, nor intended by the Purchasers to be bought. Now it is contrary to all
justice and equity, that a purchaser should have the profit of that he neither
bought nor paid for.

2 The purchasers of Manors and Farms, for the most part have been rich
Merchants, wealthy Citizens, great Practicers in the Law, Officers in the
Courts of justice, and other monied men; all these, or the most of these, do
let out their purchased lands to Farmers at improoved rents, which Farmers,
when all lands are made tith-free, shall pay to their landlords the Purchasers,
Rents as well for the value of the tithes, as they shall for the arable land
they hire of them, either by setting the land at a higher rate in regard it is
tith-free, or else a Fine or Income shall be paid in respect had thereto. However
the rich Purchasers when their lands shall be tith-free, will in one way or
other make their profit of them. And thus the tithes shall be taken away from
the Impropriators, the rightful owners of them, and given to the rich
purchasers who have no need of them., nor right unto them. Thus upon the whole
matter, whereas there was but one Impropriator in a Parish, now there will be
(if the Petitioners may obtain their desires) in effect, as many Impropriators
as Purchasers.

3 The like may be said of Noblemen, of principal Gentlemen, and of all
others, who having many Manors and good Farms in several Counties, have their
place of residence but in one County, and do let out to Farm the Sites of their
Manors and the Demeanes thereof, which commonly in country Villages do amount to
the third or fourth part of the Revenue of the whole Parish, and in many
parishes well near all the Farms are theirs; these great men, their lands
being made tith-free, shall have their Estates improoved to their hands with
the ruin of many poor Gentlemen and Freeholders, who have little else but tithes
to maintain them and their familyes.

4 And in like manner also, such Tenants as have Estates for lives in their
Farms, and do upon every change of a life renew their Leases (as generally
they do in the West part England, and in diverse Counties elsewhere) all which
tenants for lives shall make Fines to their Lords, as well for the profits of
the tithes of the Farms they hold, as for the Farms themselves: So that
however the Farmers may have some petty benefit, or rather conveniencie by the
hiring of their Farms in outward appearance tith-free, yet the main profits
will redound to the Landlords, unles the Farmers can procure, that no Landlord
whatsoever shall let his arable lands together with the tithes thereof, at above
a certain rent per annum for every acre: which was in effect one of the
Articles which Wa. Tiler and his rabble demanded of King Richard the second.

5 It has been propounded by some, that Orphans and such as have no other
estate but tithes, shall have some moderate satisfaction in money, and by
others, that the Impropriators shall have 8. or 10. years purchase for their
tithes. Let such consider, that this is in effect to take from the Subjects
their inheritance against their wills for half the value thereof. Such forget
that golden Rule, of doing as they would be done unto. In case the
Impropriators titles were defective, it were a work of Charity to favor the
widows and the fatherles; but if their titles be good and legal (which none
yet have questioned) and that the rich man's right and title is the same with
the Orphans, then the one ought to have the benefit of the law (which is the
subjects birthright) as well as the other.

6 And as to a general sale to be made of tithes at a set rate of so many
years purchase, many difficulties and matters considerable will arise
thereabout. For as some Manors or Farms in some Counties, are as well worth 20
years purchase, as some others elsewhere are worth 15. So in like manner of
tithes, whether the inhabitants be industrious to till the Earth, whether good
or bad husbands, whether Sea-sand, Lyme, Marle, or other Compost may be easily
procured to manure the land, whether the Inhabitants be able owners, or poor
Farmers, whether the soil be fertile or barren, whether lying in the enclosed
Counties, or in the Champaines, etc. these and the like will raise or abate the
sale of tithes.

7 Now concerning those that are to be the sellers, First by an Act of
Parliament made Anno 13. Eliza. If the Masters and the Fellows of Colleges do
alien their Lands or tithes, such Grants are void, nor can they consent to do
it without ah horrible breach of trust, and if they shall be sold for half the
value, then must the Colleges (as before was observed) be in part, and some of
the greatest of them be well-neer dissolved. Some of the Improprietors have
their Estates so fettered by their fathers, or by themselves upon their
marriages, with Entailes called perpetuities, that they have no power to dock
them, but by composition with them in remainder; they being in little better
condition than tenants for lives. Others are simply tenants for lives, others
for years; How shall the monys upon such sales be divided between the particular
tenants, and them in remainder or reversion? others have mortgaged their
tithes, others, and not afew, have their estates in the hands of Trustees,
which trusts cannot be discharged but by the chargeable Decrees in Chancery,
Shall Orphans have their portions, and Creditors their debts abated? Shall the
annuities of younger brothers be in part extinct? Or shall all the loss fall
upon those poor Gent, and Freeholders who have the inheritance of the tithes in
reversion, and none or little present profit?

8 Difficulties will also arise about the persons that are to Purchase; for,
where there is one parishioner that has spare money to buy his tithes, there
are four that are in debt, few of those (well advised) will purchase, because
he that buys land at ten years purchase, runns about the Country to borrow
money, pays brokage and interest, and the charges of assurance by mortgage to
secure either the lender or his sureties, and the payment of taxes (besides the
loss of time and anguish of mind) may put his Gains in his eyes and see never
the worse. Particular tenants, and they in reversion, will hardly join in the
purchase; and who shall undertake for them that are in their minorities? As the
most part of men will want moneys to buy, so others will have no will to buy;
shall an Impropriator be compelled to fell the fairest and best portions of his
Tithes and at under-rates, to those that will buy, and to keep the remain in
his hands? That were to add another prejudice to the Impropriator, who besides
other inconvenience shall be well-neer at as great a charge to inn such
parcels of scattered Tithes, as formerly he was to inn the whole. But if
strangers shall be admitted to buy the tithes of those lands, which the owners
are not able, or not willing to buy, then it will follow, that there must be
Landlords and Tenants, and in effect, as many, or more Impropriators, than are
at this present. Lastly, who shall determine the yearly value of the tithes to
be sold? if the anti-tithemongers, set the value, the purchase no doubt will be
under ten years.

9. Some of the Petitioners, and namely those in the East Riding in Yorkshire,
pray to have the payment of tithes abolished, because they were at the first
given for the advancement of Popery, and for the maintenance of superstitious
and idle persons. For the like reason the Petitioners may (in case they have
good success in this Petition) pray that all the Sites of the Monasteries, and
of all other the Religious houses in England, dissolved by K. Hen. 8. may,
together with all their Manors, Granges, Farms and Lands (which amounted to the
value of 161100. l. per annum, of old Rents, and are worth at this day at
improved Rents, two millions of pounds per annum) be taken from the present
owners, because they were at the first given for the maintenance of idle Monks
and Chanting Cannons, who depended upon the Popes, and were but the Kings half
Subjects; And bestowed upon the Petitioners, because they are poor men, and
take great pains for their livings.

The Petitioners are alike grieved with the Ministers of the Gospel for their
maintenance by tithes, As they are with Impropriators, all must be taken away
from them. It being an easy matter, say they, to order a more honorable
maintenance for them. But in what way they declare not. We shall not say any
thing concerning the Ministers divine right to tithes; Nor of the conveniencie
thereof for their maintenance. We shall proceed in the same way as before, and
show to the Petitioners their mistakes in the Clergies Revenue; And in their
own expectations.
1. ALL that which before has bin declared, concerning the taking away of
tithes from the Impropriators, and giving them to great Landed-men, rich men,
and to purchasors, will be the same to the Ministers of the Gospel, who shall
have the Rents and profits of their tithes taken from them, and put into the
purses of rich Landlords, But with more disadvantage to the Minister than to
the Impropriator, because of the Ministers constant pains in Preaching, His
care of the souls under his charge, with the other duties incident to his
calling. For which our Ancestors in former times held their Ministers so worthy
of tithes, and were so conscientious in the dew payment of them, That they
usually gave their Ministers a Legacy for tithes forgotten to be paid; And
Mortuaries were paid to the parochial Ministers for the same cause.

2. It was in the times of Popery, one of the just grievances which the Cannons
had against the Monasteries, etc. That they received the Rents of the tithes,
and yet lived 100. miles off, and for that many Rectories were appropriated to
Religious houses beyond the Seas, who gave no relief nor assistance to the
Parishes whence they received the profits, nor scarce took notice of them;
whereas the Ministers of the Gospel are resident upon their Cures, and do
spend the Revenues thereof amongst their Parishioners; They set the able poor
on work, and relieve the impotent according to their abilities.

3. If the Minister do let his tithes to the Parishioners (as many of them
do, and more would upon even terms) then the Petitioners, the Farmers, have
as much privilege from their Ministers, as they can expect from their rich
Landlords, after such time as all Lands are made tithe-free. But if the
Minister do keep his tithes in his own hands, then are they a magazin or
storehouse for all the poor people in the Parish. For there the poor man has
straw for his bed, for his Cow, and to heat his Oven, and grist-corn upon
trust, till he have earned money to pay for it; Thither also the petty
husbandman, the badger, the waggonier, and the Carter that lives by doing
works and carriages for other men, resort for Chaff for their horses, which is
a commodity hard to be gotten in those Counties where use is made of it; And
there they have for their money horse-corn ready at hand. But where the Farmers
do inn their own tithes, together with their Crops, they will not part with
any of those commodities unless in a small proportion to the laborers that
depend upon them.

4. Whereas the Petitioners pretend that the Impropriators and the Ministers
do hot pay Assessements answerable to the profits they receive, herein the
Petitioners are much mistaken. For it is a known truth, that all the Judges in
the Courts at Westminster about Anno 1635. did resolve it, That tithes were not
to be assessed at the tenth part of the Assessement laid upon the Parish,
because that way was uncertain and unequal; therefore they resolved, that 100.
l. per annum in tithes, ought to be equally taxed with 100. l. Lands per annum,
And the high Court of Parliament, anno 1649. did enact, That all Assessements
from thenceforth should be by the pound rate: But as for the stock upon the
Land, that was ordered to be taxed by it self, which lawful favor has not in
many places bin allowed neither to the Impropriator, Nor to the Minister,
because that Farms, and the stocks upon them, are in most places taxed
undividedly together.

5. The Minister is equally taxed (in most places) for one hundred pound tithes
per annum, with a foreign Landlord, who receives one hundred pounds Rent per
annum of his Farmer in the same Parish, which is not just: For, the Landlord
is at liberty to live where he pleases, and to follow any calling he best
likes, without any deduction of his Rents, save for taxes; Whereas the
Minister is tied upon great penalty to Residence, and in case of sickness, or
of just cause of absence, must at his charges see the Cure served, whereof
respect ought to be had in all Assessements laid upon the Clergy. Thus it is
plain, tithes are not undertaxed, but rather over-taxed.

6. The Petitioners do farther pretend, That they do pay to the
Tithe-mongers, the third or fourth part of their whole estates. Herein though
the Petitioners tell the truth in part, yet they conceal the whole truth. For
howsoever it is generally true, that if threescore acres of arable Land be let
to Farm for threescore nobles per annum, during That then the tithe thereof is
worth twenty nobles per annum, the time the threescore acres are wholly employed
in tillage, not otherwise. But as the whole Revenue of a Parish does not
consist in arable Lands, so the same arable is not always plowed, and it may
with confidence be affirmed, That the Clergy who receive the tithes of Corn and
Grain, together with the small tithes, Have hardly throughout England the tenth
part of all the Rents and profits of the Lands in their several Parishes; if
some of them receive more than the tenth, others do receive much loss. For in
all those Parishes, where the richest pastures do lie in several, and are
employed in the seeding of fat Oxen, as also in less fertile pastures, where
the profits are raised by the brooding up of horses and store-cattle, nothing
considerable is paid thereout unto the minister.

And where the pastures are stocked with fat sheep, or with Cows for Dayries,
the tenth of the rent of such pastures, is the most that can be expected from a
Forainer, but less from a Parishioner, who also paies no tithes for all the
pastures his plow-horses and Oxen for draught do eat up; nor for the Leyes and
pastures which the flocks of sheep do graze upon, which are folded to manure
the arable lands: Besides the parishioners do commonly blow away all the tithes
due for firewood with a smoke penny. And the owners of usual or coppice Woods
in many places do not pay the tenth; and not a few do let their Underwoods and
Springs of woods grow till they be above twenty years growth, purposely to
defraud the Minister of his tithe. And generally in all places the spires or
young timber trees which are fallen, together with the under-wood (which are a
considerable part of the owners profit) yield nothing to the Minister. Add
hereto that of late years much barren ground, formerly employed in tillage, is
converted to Warren for Conies (and indeed can no ways be better improved for
the benefit of the Commonwealth and the owners profit.) And as for Forests,
Chases, Parkes for Deer, vast moors, great wastes and Commons, (and under
correction the commonable Fens also, till of late drained and in hand to be
drained containing 400000. acres.) As they yield not much to the common good,
so least of all to the Rector-ministers. Furthermore, many Manors and Granges
in England anciently were, and so continue to this day, totally exempted from
the payment of tithes, by Grants, Privileges and prescriptions, and not Farms
only, but whole Parishes do prescribe de modo decimandi, by which the minister
does hardly receive the fortieth part in lieu of his tithe, in many places much
less. Farther,

7. To instance, that the Minister, has but the tenth. There have, upon
complaints made in Chancery, where Towns have been depopulated and converted to
pasture, Decrees made in that Court, That the minister should have in lieu of
his tithes, the tenth acre in the Parish, to hold in severalite, and to be laid
near adjoining to the Parsonage house, or in some other convenient places to
the Ministers content. In which way of exchange the Minister was no loser
(though the Commonwealth be, by such conditions accompanied with
depopulations.) And the cause why the Ministers lost nothing by such
conditions, was, because before that time, about one fourth or fifth part of
all the lands in the Parishes, were pasture grounds held in severalty, or else
were meadow and pasture grounds lying in the Common-fields, in the bottoms or
low places thereof, and in heidons, and in large drifts for cattle, and in the
commons and wastes of the manor, which were commonable all the year; In all
which the minister-rector, before the commission, had little or no considerable
profit, which by the severaltie for all the year were improoved.

8. And whereas the Petitioners pretend much slavery by the Statute made anno 2
Edw. 6. for the setting forth of tithes, and also by the Ordinances made this
Parliament for the dew payments thereof, It is well known, that there were
constitutions made in the Reign of King Edw. the Confessor; As also, in the
Reign of King Edw. first, injoyning the payment both of prediall and personal
tithes. And it is a known truth, that for one action which has for these seven
years last past, been commenced against any person for Foul tithing, there have
bin ten actions brought against those who have refused to set forth their
tithes, openly denying to pay the same, as well to the Minister, as to the
Impropriator, therefore they have just cause humbly to Petition the high Court
of Parliament, that they would be pleased to add costs of Suit to the damages
given by that Statute, because affected Juries will give as little in Damage
as may be; As also that all sales made by the owners of Corn and Grain upon the
ground, to unknown persons, to the intent to defraud the Impropriators and
Ministers of their tithes, and all such like covenous and feigned devices, may
be made void, and the Contrivers of them punished according to their deserts.
And because that Statute does concern prediall tithes only, therefore that
some good Law might be made in the behalf of poor Vicars, for the recovery of
small tithes; which if the Vicar insist upon to have according to the value, he
is clamoured to be contentious, if he accept what is given, his tithes are
converted to Alms; And woeful is the condition of those Ministers whose
maintenance depends upon the benevolence of the people, as also of those
parishes who want fit maintenance for their ministers.

9 There are in England and in Wales nine thousand seven hundred and twenry
five parishes, and although the one half of those Rectories were not
appropriated as to the number of them, yet certainly as to the yearly values,
the Ministers at this day have not the one half of the profits of the tithes
of corn and grain, because (except the Church of Cleve in the vale of Evesham,
and some others) the tithes of all the richest and largest parishes were
appropriated. And if it be farther considered, that not only many of the
greatest of them, but also the middle sort have, by sales, by partitions, and
by other means been divided, and come into several hands.

Then it may be easily demonstrated, that (besides the Patrons losses of their
right of inheritance in the presentations of fit Ministers to their Churches)
above the yearly Revennue of one million of pounds at improoved Rates, and the
Estates of more than ten thousand Families are deeply concerned in this great
mutation by the Petitioners intended. Therefore,

10 For the causes and reasons above recited, the Petitioners have, with too
much boldness, importuned the High Court of Parliament, and His Excellency the
Lord General, after the expense of so much blood and treasure, for the liberty
of the Subjects Persons and Propriety in their Estates, to petition for the
taking away of the inheritance, and the Freehold Estates (for every Incombent
has a freehold Estate in his tithes) from so many thousands of good Subjects,
without propounding due and full recompense or satisfaction to be given unto
them for the same.

FINIS.

