ANTICHRIST Unhooded; OR, An Explanation of the NAMES and TITLES by which the
Scripture exhibits ANTICHRIST to the World.

And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume by the
Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his Coming.

2 Thessalonians. 2.8. London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

Antichrist Unhooded.
Preface Monitory.
THou Antichrist, thou Babylon the Great,
Whose Magnitude is founded on a Cheat;
Thou Armed Beast, with Horns no less than Ten,
Wherewith thou ruinest the sons of men:
Thou whom the Scripture calls a Mystery
(Not of the Truth, but) of Iniquity.
Thou Scarlet Whore, thou wicked Man of Sin,
That think thy Judgment never will begin:
Look in this Glass, behold thine ugly hue,
Common to all the Antichristian Crew.
Now to my work: these Titles I Will explain;
And you must know, the are given not in vain:
In sense and meaning they are not so scant,
As Ceremonies, called significant.
Antichrist, under that Appellation.
HE is against Christ, also in his stead, (...) Gr. Against, for instead of.

And on Christ's Body sets his Beastly Head:
Against him as a Prophet, Priest and Lord,
Against him in his People, Ways and Word;
There is nothing against which he has a spleen,
Like such wherein Christ's Image may be seen.
A holy Church, composed of these two Evils,
Christ's Picture banished, and embraced the Devils.
For Praising Saints, a sort of Bawling Sinners,
In Holiness who never were beginners.
An idle Idol-Shepherd for a Pastor,
For Minister, [well construed] Lord and Master.
For humble Paul, my Lord Arch Bishops Grace
In th'abstract, it is chained to his place.
Linen and Woollen of a Sacred dye
Is put for Holiness, and I know why:
Such Holiness does Antichrist best please,
Because it is put on and off with ease:
For Church, the Clergy, or a heap of Stones,
The lively Emblem of such lifeless Droans.
For Cup, the Chalice, Altar for the Table;
And all to turn the Truth into a Fable.
Now who but Idiots will not think it strange,
That Christ should hold his own in such a change?
His Church thus furnished, you may safely swear
He Is metamorphos'd, if you find him there.
Babylon the Great.
GReat Babylon, From (...) to confound.
whose name implies Confusion,
His decent Order bears the same conclusion.
A His Organ piping, bawling, canting Chanters,
A A man would think him got among the Ranters:
A Now they look one way, then they face about,
A And so Religion's fallen into a rout.
B He Babylon is called, for his Oppression
B Of all that don't subscribe to his profession.
B BABYLONS Cruelty he does exceed,
B In making Bodies and their Souls to bleed:
B Yet if you please, come under his subjection
B The benefit you I have of his protection:
B But when the Holy Watcher makes a fall,
B Then down comes Babylon the Great, and all
B His Champions, Limbs, and flatr'ers, helter skelter,
B Confounded and ashamed of such a shelter.
C It Is Babylon the Great, that does include,
C Like the other Babylon, a Multitude;
C And so it is Catholic in likelihood;
C But seldom go together Great and Good.
Beast with ten Horns.
A But why such Leanred men are called the Beast,
A This seems more mystical than all the rest.
A Yet pause a while, and see the matter tried,
A You Will say the Man-like-Beast is not belied.
b A nasty filthy Beast he is I tro;
b There Is not such filth, but down with him 'twil go.
b Corruptions Sipiritual are no Offenses,
b For he perceives not but by carnal senses.
b A nasty filthy soul, that makes no matter,
b So he can cleanse the outside of the Platter;
b Yet if the outside in the dirt do fall,
b A holy Garment serves to cover all.
b Now guess, I pray you, what this Beast does mean;
b Not a Beast only, but a Beast unclean.
c A greedy Beast, for's belly he does plod,
c The Beast has reason for it, it is his God:
c What is too precious for his belly then?
c The bodies? No, nor yet the souls of men.
Ten Horns.
d These are his Ornaments that make him brave,
d And whilst he wears them, who dares call him knave?
d But if his Dictates one should say he scorns,
d He Will teach him better manners with his Horns.
d A Horn must serve to pour them down by force,
d And so poor man is served like a Horse.
d Yet he is concluded, and by all agreed,
d Without his Horns a silly Beast indeed.
Mystery of Iniquity.
A Mystery! it is somewhat like a Trade,
But that is mechanic, and does much degrade
Those sublime souls fixed in a heavenly Sphere
So high, you need good eyes to spy them there.
But if you doubt their earthly, dirty dealing,
Put out your eyes, you will find it by the feeling.
What means the greatness of his Holiness,
And others, who then Popes are little less?
These sell by wholesale to the petty Clerks
(Whose swallows are as wide as any Sharks)
A flock of Folk, in number more or less,
From a poor Cure to a Diocese:
To some, one Living, and to others ten,
To trade themselves, or by their Journy-men;
But not a Living goes without a Bribe;
It Is vain to plead, Sir I am of your Tribe.
Yet he that can but read a Prayer Book
May catch a Living with a Silver hook.
The retail Clergy being at this cost,
Their Trade must be improved to the most,
And screwed up unto the highest peg,
Of all their Tithe they will bate you not an Egg;
Besides your cost for every petty chare,
A Christning, Burial, or a Churching-Prayer:
Yet what they sell to you they will still retain,
A thousand times you will have the same again.
To pay for one thing twice, is no fair play,
But the Sun shines, and they will make their Hay:
If this will not serve to stuff their stretched skins,
They Will help to fill them with the Peoples sins;
Sins against God come not within their lurch,
But heinous sins, which are against the Church,
Whose Officers as busy are as Bees,
To suck from thence the honey of their Fees.
Such Remedies will cure any Fall;
They Have learned that Proverb, Money answers all.
But to contemn the Church, that is an evil,
Deserves a plague no less than Take him Devil.
Stretch out your Purse, and she will stretch out her Arm,
Make Satan redeliver without harm.
Antichrists Church mysterious was of old;
It Is still a Doubt his Doctors cannot unfold:
Some say the Pope, with his Cardinals say others,
Who are the Conclave, and conjunct as brothers:
Some say the Council (...) she;
Others, the Clergy total it mu^^ (...)
The Church ^^^^tional another ^^^es?
The Roman Catholic will swear he lies.
Well shot of all, yet all the Mark do miss,
That seek it any where, but where it is:
And till the Church is known, he is very quick,
That can tell who is the true Schismatic.
And like her self, in Mystery she is dressed;
(A fashion of a general request,
With all the Kindred of the Romish Whore,
By which you will know them, if I say no more.)
With Crossier, Mitre, and the Friars weeds,
The Staff Pastoral, and the mumbling Beads;
The Rocket, Tippit, Cassock, Cope and Hood,
Lawn sleeves and Surplice, more if you think good.
A Sacred Girdle binds them all together,
Of finer stuff than was John Baptists Leather.
These Mysteries set forth Religious men,
But to the rest, they are not one of ten;
Yet all ordained are to signify
Some Truth or Falsehood in a Mystery.
The WHORE.
A Subtle Whore, a Whore of Impudence,
Whose brazen Forehead is her best defense.
A gaudy Whore, her outside is her best,
Strip her of that, and (...) is all the rest.
A deep-dy'd Who^^ ^o his than Scarlet red,
Her Garmen^ (...) are dip^^^^ (...) bloo^
Yet call her Whore, and she shall (...) rotectors,
The Horns o'th Beast will take her part like Hectors.
A Spotted Whore, and of her spots she is proud;
Against all purity she is sworn and vowed.
A flattring Whore, do but her lusts fulfill,
She Will say both what, and when, and how you will.
A Common Whore, for all men she has room,
But those that hate and will not at her come.
A Whore contagious, I dare avouch her,
You Will be infected if you do but touch her.
A fruitful Whore, a thing that is very rare,
The World's half filled with Harlots she did bear.
And though like Whores they scold one at another,
They are as like as Daughter and the Mother.
You need not then go seek the Whore at Rome,
These Spectacles will find her nearer home.
The Man of Sin.
THe premises my pains have saved here,
Two lines sufficiently bring up the Rear;
He is a Man, but of all men the worst,
Made up of Sin, and above all men cursed.
FINIS.

