An Answer to the Pretended Case, Printed concerning the Navigation of the
River Wye in the County of Surrey, by showing the true state thereof.
SIR Richard Weston many years designed to make the said River Navigable, and
cut part of the same through his own Manor of Sutton as has been proved
before a Committee of this Parliament; where, above 40 Members were present, as
by their Resolves hereunder mentioned does appear; but he being Sequestered for
his fidelity to the late King, agreed in 1651. with one Mr. Pitson a Captain in
the Userpers Army, to solicit the discharge of his Sequestration, and the
passing an Act of that pretended Parliament, to Authorize the making the said
River Navigable, and to cover Sir Richards name, agreed to make use of the name
of the Corporation of Guildford, Pitson, Scotchier. Pitson having solicited and
obtained the pretended Act, agreements were made that Sir Richard Weston should
finish his own design to cut the River: Pitson and the rest being wholly
ignorant in things of that Nature, and that he alone should undertake the work,
and give security by his Estate to do it within a year, unto such as would
adventure any moneys for a share in the benefits of the Navigation.

The profits were agreed to be divided into 24 shares, 12 thereof to be to Sir
Richard, and 12 to such as would adventure 250 l. for a share to raise 3000 l.
which was done principally by Scotchier and one Darnelly.

Sir Richard Weston cut above two parts in three of the said River, but yed
2000 ls. worth of his own Timber, and expended 4000 l. in money, and dyed
within the year, having agreed that 1000 l. more should be raised by
Adventurers for 4 shares more, but he never sold his Moiety to Pitson or any
others, as is untruly alleged in the said Case.

After Sir Richard's death Scotchier and one of Sir Richards younger sons
finished the said cut.

The Heir of Sir Richard, Mr. John Weston being never concerned in any of the
Contracts nor Receipts of Money, and unable to appear, his Estate being sold by
the Userpers, and very often a Prisoner for his Loyalty.

That in Anno 1654. being after the River was totally finished, Accounts being
stated, it did appear that Pitson had received in his soliciting and
transacting amongst adventurers in the said work above 2000 l. more then he had
disbursed toward it, which appears by exhibits proved in the Exchequer.

But the said whole undertaking was without pretense of Authority, the said
pretended Act, providing that it shall not be lawful to cut or dig the Lands of
any person or persons until agreement made with them respectively, which was
never done, in the year 1660, some that had adventured for shares of the hoped
for profits of the said River finding themselves to have no Intrest in Law or
Equity, without agreement with the Land Proprietors, endeavored to bring them
all to agree that the River might be maintained, and most of them joined to
vest their interest legally in Mr. Dickenson, who as Trustee have managed
their cause, and its proved in the Exchequer, that all those joined with the
Land owners have expended about their intrests in the said River above twenty
thousand pounds were in quiet possession of the Navigation in Anno 1666.

But Mr. Sandys that was never concerned in the River, having contracted with
Pitson for the shares of profits intended for the Adventurers, with promises to
get an Act of Parliament, and one Radclife having got a Pattent from his
Majesty to be conservator of the said River; thence many differences arose, and
they procured an Order from the King to suspend the Land-owners receipt of any
profits until the Lord Chief Barron should settle an Issue to be tried in
Michaelmas Term 1666. to determine the intrests of the several pretenders.

Mr. Dickenson, Sir Robert Atkins as Council for the Land-owners, and those
joined with them, attended the Lord Chief Barron many times to settle the said
issue, which could not be done: But his Lordship was afterward pleased to
declare some opinion, that it was fit to be brought into the Exchequer Chamber
by information by the Kings Attorney General against all the pretenders, which
was done accordingly.

Some of the Land-owners and those joined with them, answered to the said
Information, and most of the Defendants never answered, nor never were
subpenaed; those that answered set forth their interests both in Law and
Equity, and have attended his Lordship above these three years, at above 1000
l. expense, and the allegations and proofs offered by Mr. Sandys under Mr.
Pitson and Mr. Radcliffe were heard, but a great part of the proofs and
exhibits on the behalf of the Land-owners that answered have not been heard,
and his Lordship declared that he could make no decree herein, neither indeed
did the cause come before him as between party and party, as Plantiffs and
Defendants.

The Land proprietor with Mr. Weston, eldest son of the said Sir Richard,
humbly offer that the Navigation may be preserved for the public good, by
settling the said River, upon some Gentlemen of the said County, as Trustees to
dispose the first profits of the same to maintayn the same Navigable, and the
residue to the respective persons, who have any right or intrest thereunto,
either in Law or Equity.

And if the wisdom of Parliament shall think fit, that a competent number of
the Gentlemen of the said County who have the advantage of all others by being
on the place, may be empowered to give any competent satisfaction to any that
have adventured moneys about the said River, and are not relieveable in any of
the ordinary Courts of Law or Equity, it is humbly submitted.

Iovis 24. Aprilis 14. Car. 2d.
Resolved that Sir Richard Weston was the designer and promoter of cuting the
River Wye, to make it Navigable.

That the Committee is satisfied, That Mr, Westons Estate was left him
encumbered, by reason of his Fathers undertakings of making Wye River Navigable.

Resolved that the Committee are of opinion, by what does yet appear, That Mr,
Weston has a more Right to a Bill to have the Navigation in the River Wye, then
Mr. Radcliffe.

Those are the Votes which I was to report to the house, truly Coppied. Richard
Onslow.
Note also, that Mr. Sandys and Mr. Pitson upon full hearing, have had two
Bills already dismissed, concerning their pretensions to this River, one thereof
in the House of Lords, and the other in the House of Commons, And that Mr,
Radcliffe, under whom Mr, Cresse's claims has had the like misfortune in both
Houses, where they preferred two Bills also besides 5 or 6 Trials at Common
Law, commenced by the Land proprietors concerning the same and still worsted in
all.




