AN ANSWER UNTO MR. WILLIAM DELL THE RIGHT REFORMER His Epistle Dedicatory TO
THE PARLIAMENT.
SIR, your Epistle, Janus-like, has two faces, one looks toward the
Parliament, to make them yours, the other toward your selves to make yours
theirs; in your Sermon you break their heads, in your Epistle you bind them
up: You flatter them with a seeming voluntary acknowledgement of their power,
and your free submission thereunto; in your assertion of the power of the
Gospel, you utterly enfeeble it: how comes it I pray to pass, that the just
power of Magistracy is not consistent with the Kingdom of Christ? and why may
not the one support the other? seeing that both ought to be held of Divine
Right and institution, Touch not mine anointed, by all the expositions of the
best that ever exposited, is meant of both.

But Mr. Dell, quo ore, with what face durst, you term the Presbyterian
Government (not only here established by Authority of the High Court of
Parliament, but made choice of, erected, constituted, embraced, maintained and
submitted unto, from the very dawning of the Gospel, and departure from Romes
Idolatry, by all the Reformed Churches of Christendom, as, That of France,
Germany, Scotland, the Netherlands, Poland, Sweadland, Geneva, etc. who all Vna
voce, have approved of this Discipline and Government as the most consonant to
the word, and most opposite to the Romish Hierarchy (in that none but Priests
ruling the Roast, this consisting of a mixed temper, of Ministers and
Lay Elders, one poysing and balancing the too much powerful influence of the
other.) How durst you, I say, give the reigns so far unto your Anarchicall
passion, or rather fury, as to call the said Government, The last prop of
Antichrist in this Kingdom? yea, and that to the very face of those that were
by their power, not only the promoters, but only erectors of it: Has the
Parliament, Mr. Dell, no better credit with you, than to be esteemed the
Erectors of the last prop of Popery in this Kingdom, for these six years
space? Tantum sudavit and alsit, in the pulling down of Popery, and of late, in
lieu of recompense have they given it new props?

Truly Sir, I fear me, very few of that honorable House, like no better of
your Epistle then they did of your Sermon: if any do, I must needs confess
that I fear it the more: and whether a man may more wonder at Mr. Dells
impudence or ignorance, I cannot say, who indevoureth to indeare the Parliament
unto him, by scandalizing and disparaging the Government now generally
thorough-out the whole Kingdom established by them, and not that temere and ex
improviso, but after long demurring, serious consultation, deliberate debate,
neither without the advice and counsel of the best and choycest Divines
throughout the Reformed Churches, and especially of the Kirk of Scotland, our
united Brethren; and the better to gain credit unto his design, Mr. Dell does
his utmost to increase the dislike, that some perhaps in the Parliament might
have against this already settled Government, he sticks not to write that it
threatens even the Parliament to dispute its superiority with them, and to make
the supreme Magistracy of the Kingdom to stoop under their lore.

Who would have thought that after so much talk in the Sermon Of the
enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, of the exaltation of the Gospel of Christ; the
Word of Faith, Truth, and many the like good things; he should fall to such a
malicious falsehood, in the Epistle Dedicatory? charging it with an aim at a
power Paramount and predominant over the first Constitutors and Voters of it;
which how far swarving from truth, let all men judge who have either known or
observed the behavior of such, that by election have been interessed in the
Presbytery, whether Ministers or Laics, let their deportment, I say, be duly
considered, in what dutiful respective manners it ever has been toward this
High Assembly, not leaving excepted the Venerable Assembly of Divines, who
never yet concluded any thing to be published concerning Reformation either in
Church matters, or in manners, but in all humility they first presented it to
the view of the Honorable House, attending usually at the House of Commons
door, and in their Theses submitting themselves sometimes to alteration, and
limitation, always unto approbation of the Honorable Houses: which I dare
affirm Mr. Dell, will not avouch that his Independent, and the rest rabble of
Sects that crowd themselves under that name, either have done, or are about to
do, for then I think we should hardly have such diversity of Conventicles and
diversities of Faiths broached in them by approvement of Parliament, as at this
day we have, so notoriously known unto all: That in one street in London every
Child shall lead you to three; And where you shall have such stuff commended
to you, by way of Divine inspiration, to be believed and taken up as dogmatical
points of Faith, and with a tantum non (none of Gods children, not comprehended
in the Buttery scrowle of election in case of refusal) That a man which has
only the usual knowledge of the ordinary principles of Christian Religion, if
not out of mockage, yet out of a feeling compassion, must needs say, having
heard them; Surely the blind leads the blind into the ditch.

Another passage in Mr. Dells Epistle Dedicatorie is this:

He likes not the spiritual power supporting by the temporal; it is
Antichristian he says and Papisticall; Mr Dels assertion smells not much of
antiquity, (as neither his Sect) for he may read in the Annals of the Christian
Primitive Church, long before any point of Popery was hatched, that men notable
for sanctity in those times did passionately implore the aid and intermise of
the sword temporal toward the defense of the true Christian verity, and the
depressing, yea, extirpating of known Heresies, as in the business of that
Arch-Heretick Arius (and some that are of the Independent crew hold the same
damnable tenants, or else they have much wrong) all men know that Constantine
the great interposed his authority more then in any thing else, and not only
his authority but his Pains, in the extinguishing and condemning of that
Heresy, or otherwise it had spread its contagion farther, and with a more
peremptory Vogue: and moreover if there had been nothing worse found among the
late Bishops, then that saying, no Bishop no King, nor more displeasing to God,
or impeaching the progress of the Gospel, for ought I know they might have
stood still, although master Dell may be pleased to be put in mind that he
whose familiar speech it was, (no Bishop no King) was no Bishop but a King, and
a King the very Paragon for learning and wisdom of all those this Island ever
saw: a Prince that was of opinion, that the licentious liberty of Sectaries
would produce as much danger to temporal Monarchy and State Government, as
ever could or would the Pontificiall Tyranny, both agreeing in the pulling
down of civil Magistracy, though differing about the manner: and let Master
Dell be told that the interposition of the civil power, or the requesting the
assistance of the same, in the maintenance of the undoubted faith of Christ, or
an external Ecclesiasticke discipline, consonant to the same (without which it
is imposible for the Orthodox doctrine long to consist, discipline being the
nerves and sinnews by which a Church stands, as the doctrine, the food by which
it is fed and nourished) is neither the head nor the toe of Popery.

And let me be bold to ask Master Dell one question, to what purpose tends his
large invective against the Presbyteriall Government now erected? what, to have
none? I could not be so ill persuaded of the man: whether then? marry to
withdraw the Parliaments countenancing protection from the Presbytery, and to
place it upon them, that is the enlarging of the power of Christ's Kingdom, the
exaltation of the Gospel of Christ, the propagation of the elect people, which
I suppose the good man means: lo then see all well. May it please the
Parliament to Vote down the Presbytery, as the last prop of Popery in this
Kingdom, for interlacing it self with the temporal power, and craving its
aid and succors against those that would bring in anarchicall confusion, first
into the Church, then into the state, and eadem opera, let them be pleased to
Vote Master Dels chosen flock the only Christians, and his Government of Gods
Church, (if he knew first himself what it were or should be) let the
Honorable Houses, I say, but be pleased to do thus, and behold, omnia been,
the power of Christ's Kingdom mightily enlarged, the exaltation of the Gospel
wonderfully furthered, etc. hinc illa lacrymae, now I perceive what makes the
world flock so fast unto Independency; what power or authority soever supports
them, stands for the enlargement of the power of Christ's Kingdom, the
exaltation of the Gospel, the Privileges of Christ's chosen people, for the
beauty of Saints, and what not? but let them beware that seek for supportation,
not only against them, but even by them, they are at least, but the last prop
of Antichrist in this Kingdom: who would wonder if all the world now turn
Independent? feeing that one that depends on them may better steal a horse,
then a man of another mind look over the hedge: but to be more serious, the
baddest actions have ever made show of the best pretensions, the foulest
Heresies have styled themselves by the most specious titles; the Arians would
be called by no other name but Catholic, although their cursed Blasphemy,
impugned the mainest point in all Christianity; it is an old saying, the Devil
does never show his Cloven foot at first; Schism is like the Panther, whose
skin being of a sweet sent, and beautiful spotted color, whereby he draws
many other beasts toward him, which approaching near, are forthwith affrighted
with the ugliness of his head; wherefore the better to be master of his prey,
he discovers not that till he have them in his power; it is a truth infallible,
that Schisms and Faction evermore in their first rising put on the face of
woman, but in their growth that of a lion: the behavior of the Anabaptists at
Magdeburg in Germany, though long since, yet by reason of other Sects in these
our days, not much different in opinions, and less in practice, is a fresh
revived in our memories; good God, what Sanctity, piety, humility, simplicity
did those Juglers show at first? what charity and contempt of worldly mucke? so
that they drew the whole Generality of the City after them, with the self same
saying in their mouths which sometime the Samaritans used toward Simon Magus,
surely these men are the great power of God; at length when their poor
deceived proselites began to grow numerous, they possessed them that the power of
the civil magistrate was Heathenish and Antichristian; that Christ's true
Disciples must be all equal; neither were they defective in alleging
Scripture for this their project, ill understood and worse applied. Christ's
Kingdom is not of this world say they, he that will be the greatest amongst
you, let him be as your servant; the Kings and Princes of the earth bear rule,
and exercise power over them, but with you not so. Do not rich men trouble
you, bringing you into judgment says St. James. What conclusions draw they
from these texts? why surely that all civil Magistracy is Antichristian,
(though those that bare it at that time in that town were known to be zealous
maintainers of the Gospel) it must have nothing to do with Gods chosen; they
that did desire to be supported by it in matter of faith, or for their better
strengthening did request the countenance of the same toward the bearing up of
the Church discipline established in that famous City: from these infusions
what follows? The Comminalty rises against their lawful Magistrates, not
only degrades them, but butchers them; next the Ministers drink of the same
cup, for no other fault, but that fearing the storm approaching, and
advertising the civil Magistracy of its growth and proceeding, they besought
them for the suppressing of this swelling faction, and upholding of the
anciently settled Government in that Church; but because they sought the
maintenance of the lawful Ecclesiastic Government by the civil sword (which
then was a toe or a singer of Antichrist, as it is now) therefore they tasted
of the same sauce with them: but what did the good Antbaptists after this? what
did they not? but to particularise what the History mentions, they fell
afterward upon their own proselites, cut the throats of them, seized not
only the goods of all Citizens, but the state it self, brought a text of
Scripture to warrant it, though themselves would be thereof the expositors, The
meek shall inherit the Earth: This story wants no application. Men must not
look so much upon the words and shows as the practices of raisers of factions;
and as touching Master Dell, although thorough the whole course of his Sermon
there is great talk of the spirit of meekness, the spirit of humility,
obedience, and the like; and in the close of his Epistle Dedicatory, much
assurance offered unto the Parliament of his utmost endeavors, in relation to
obedience to their authority; yet see how Master Dell has thwarted both, in
his practice; he virulently lasheth Master Love, twits him in the teeth, with
his discerning people, charge him with menacing of the Parliament in case of
desertion from them, puts him in the number of the fingers and toes of Anti
Christ: this action of Master Dell naming expressly the party rather rescents of
nature then grace, of gall then meekness, of malice then charity; nay, rather
then Master Dell will miss to lash him, he will hazard the reputation of the
close to his Epistle, and venters the questioning of his obedience to the
Parliament so vehemently and seriously by him protested: for does Mr Dell print
his sermon in obedience to the Honorable House? I am given to understand the
contrary; that the House ordered him neither thanks nor order to print it, but
forbid both: yet Mr. Dell out of an humble obedience, if not to them, yet to
Christ, will print it, and with an Epistle Dedicatory to the House also: to
speak bona side and sublata larva, I think three were the causes that prevailed
with Mr. Dell to print his Sermon, though misliked, though forbidden.

First, that he might be beforehand with Mr. Love in the Press, though he had
had the precedence of him in the Pulpit, and to forestall men's judgments, both
toward him and his Sermon, a thing much practiced in this clashing Age, to cry
whore first. The second reason of the Printing of his Sermon was his zeal, to
show his dislike in the Press, as he had often done before in the Pulpit of
the Presbyterian form and Rule, as a prop of popery, and obstacle to the
enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: desiring rather then that (or any
other should stand) there might be none at all, and so the peculiar people may
do and live as they list, who should control them that have the spirit of
illumination and inspiration ad nutum? yet this puts me in mind of what I read
in one place of Samuel, And th^n there was no King in Israel, what follows?
Vnusquisque fecit quod sibi visum fuerit, Every one did what was right in his
own eyes, and that was wrong enough I believe. The third respect, for which Mr.
Dell published this Sermon, was, I believe, because he was not licensed by the
House to publish it, Nor no thanks returned him for it, Mr. Dell following the
Trade-wind of his Faction, must needs do it the readier for that; and reason
enough he had to put him forward, for his party has never gained more credit
than by crossing Authority: And had Mr. Dells discourse been such that might
have been thought worthy to have been Licensed by the House, it would never
have purchased him that repute amongst his as now it has; for nothing is cried
up amongst them, Nisi quod nititur in vetitum.

But what means Mr. Dell, by that pathetick Latin Theme in the foot of the
frontispiece to his book? Theologum me creed in regno veritatis natum, ero
itaque, etc. What reason had Mr. Dell, tam gravem proferre sententiam in
materia tam levi; Mr. Dell gives the Alarm here, tanquam Annibal ad portas, as
if all were in denger to be lost, true piety trampled under foot, true Religion
banished, Christ's Kingdom vanquished, unless all strike sale unto
Independency, whereof he professes himself an asserter ad mortem and sanguinem
usque I find in all ages that all Innovators are of Bruce his temper, quicquid
volunt valde volunt; rather then they will want their wills, Coelum terra
miscendum.

FINIS.

