A Jury of 12 QUAKERS.
William Penn, Foreman.
Alexander Parker, George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, William Mead, Gerrard
Roberts, William Welsh, Samuel Newton, Thomas Heart, John Osgood, James
Claypoole, Thomas Rudyard, Richard Richardson.
THE Anti-Quaker: OR, A Compendious Answer to a tedious Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Treatise of Oaths, Subscribed By a Jury of 12 Quakers, whose names are prefixed
to it, together with the Foreman of that Jury, the Ringleader of that Tribe,
and Head of that Faction, William Penn, Alleging several Reasons why they (no
cases excepted) refuse to swear, which are refuted, and the Vanity of them
Demonstrated both by Scripture, Reason, and Authority of Ancient, and Modern
Writers.

By MISORCUS, A Professed Adversary of Vain Swearing in common discourse, and
communication.

Fear God and keep his Commandments, For this is the whole duty of man,

Eccles. 12.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God: him shall thou serve, and
cleave unto him, and swear by his Name,

Deuteronomy. 10.20. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1676.

TO The most Judicious View of the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons
Assembled in the High Court of Parliament.
THE unworthy Author most Humbly presents the ensuing Treatise, as the 13
Head-Quakers did of late most boldly dedicate their's, Subscribed by them on
the behalf of the rest of their Friends (they are their own words) with an
earnest supplicate to be freed from the imposition of all Oaths, which for pure
conscience sake (as they say) they cannot take at all, concealing (what is
their main drift) their desire to obtain a free use for the future of their
private Meetings, or Conventicles, the Seed-plots of faction, and seditious
practices, as St. Augustine proves at large in diverse Epistles to the then
Reigning Emperors, against the Donatists (the Quakers Progenitors) commending
to them by way of advice this moderate Statemaxime, Doctrina praecedat,
Disciplina sequatur.

With respect to the former part of it I have (as many of my Brethren in the
Ministry have learnedly done before me) employed my weak endeavors for the
satisfaction of their scrupulous Consciences, referring the execution of the
latter part of it, for severe Corrigi eos cupimus non necari, nee Disciplinam
circa eos negligi. Aug. Ep. 127.
Discipline, to your Honors great Authority, and most Sage Counsels; for a
blessing on which, to the advancement of Gods glory, the good of the Church,
the safety, honor and welfare of our Sovereign and his Kingdoms, with the
public you have the daily private Prayers and Supplications of him who
conceales his Name, not out of a guilty Fear, but a cautious Prudence, not
willing to have it aspersed with reproaches and unjust calumnies, with bitter
railings and Invectives, against which there is no fence from the most
unspotted Innocence, and wherewith they usually bespatter those who dissent
from them in their vain, false, and Antiscriptural opinions, which they cannot
maintain either by Gods holy Word, or any rational Arguments, as I shall (God
assisting me) Prove, and Illustrate in the following Treatise, presented in all
Humility to your Honors for its Patronage, not doubting of your gracious
pardon for the boldness of my Dedication.

THE REFUTER'S Preface.
THERE is a Generation (says Solomon, Prove. 30.12.) that are pure in their own
eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness; a sort of men that walk
after the Flesh in the lust of Uncleanness, and despise Government,
presumptuous, self-willed, and that are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities,
(or those that are set over them by God to be their Rulers and Governors) 2
Pet. 2.10. yet, being swelled with a Tympany of Pride, are admirers of
themselves, even to the contempt of others. I heartily wish, for their Souls
sake, that this Character of St. Peter and Solomon might not justly be
appropriated to some of the People called Quakers, who refuse to Swear, and
will not be tied to the discharge of their Duties by Oaths ministered unto them
by Subordinate Magistrates, whereby they deserve to be move properly called (as
they are indeed) Anabaptists; Quo genere hominum nullum aut pertinacius aut
arrogantius, aut in erroribus aut figmentis feracius, so the judicious Cramerus
in his third Classis of Heretics, cap. 4. Than whom no kind of men are more
pertinacious and arrogant, and more pregnant in the propagating of false and
erroneous Opinions; of which (amongst diverse others) this is one, That it is
not lawful to Swear in any case whatsoever: and this opinion they ground upon
our Saviors Precept or Injunction, Matthew. 5.34. The proper sense and meaning
of which Precept when I have fully demonstrated, both from the occasion of his
delivering it, and from the scope or intention of it; confirming my
Interpretation by the joint consent of the best Interpreters, also by the
strength of diverse weighty Reasons; it will appear to all judicious Readers,
that the foresaid Tenet is both absurd, false, and frivolous; and that all
their numerous Allegations or Testimonies to the contrary (which are no fewer
than 207.) out of the Writings of Gentiles, Jews, and Christians, are to little
or no purpose, of no validity to maintain the Quaker's Thesis or Position, in
regard that most of them only inveigh against Perjury and ordinary or common
Swearing in our familiar Discourses, which was chiefly intended (as it shall be
evidently proved) by our Saviors Prohibition, Swear not at all. Upon the rind
or shell ( i. e. the Letter) of which words the forenamed feed so much, and
gnaw the Bone, that they never come at the Kernel and Marrow, or true meaning
of them.

Before I proceed to the explication of this prohibitive Precept, I must take
leave to commend to the view of the people that go under the name of Quakers,
(or rather to the Penmen of that Treatise) a Saying of a Christian Divine
Philosopher; (...) Athenag. l. de Resurrectione.
There was never any Truth, though ratified by the Authority of God's Word,
which had not a Lie for its Attendant; which must not be so understood, as if
Truth were the natural Parent of a Lie; but in regard of the malice and
perverseness of men who did darken it with their misty Glosses, and corrupt it
by their wresting of it, with false Interpretations. Thus the Scribes and
Pharisees, like many in our Days, had learned this Art of spreading and
maintaining their false Doctrine, by corrupting the Sacred Text. For, whereas
God, commanding us to have in due and awful Reverence his holy Name, forbade
the Jews, and in them us Christians, to take the same in vain, Exodus 20.7. i.
e. to take it into our mouths idly, or to no purpose, without any warrant from
Necessity, and without respect to the advance of his Glory; the Scribes or
Doctors of the Law expounding (...) in vain, by (...) falsely, i. e. to back and
confirm a Lie, which word we find, Levit. 19.12. Thou shall not Swear by my
name falsely; they hereby confounded two distinct Precepts. For, by the later in
Leviticus is forbidden Perjury, which is the confirmation of a Lie by an Oath:
by the former Precept in Exodus all vain, inconsiderate and rash Oaths, which
men commonly use to confirm or ratify the Truth in their private Negotiations,
Contracts, Bargainings, and Discourse.

From this false Gloss of the Scribes interpreting the Third Commandment, as if
only Perjury were forbid by it, and this too only in the abuse of God's Sacred
Name; from this corrupt Spring issued these three perverse and depraved
Doctrines, which in our Savior's time were settled in the minds and hearts of
the deluded Jews.

First, to Swear by the Creature, and to forswear, they affirmed to be no sin.

Secondly, they counted it no breach of the Third Commmandment, if they used in
their ordinary discourse the Name of God, so long as they did what they
promised, and affirmed what was true. With the Scribes and Pharisees in this
Second Opinion agree both Maldonat on Levit. 19. and Socinus with his followers.

Thirdly, from this later impure Stream or Opinion issued another, as corrupt
and unsound; it was this, That whatsoever they had bound themselves to by an
Oath in the Name of God, they were obliged to do it, were the thing never so
unjust and bad.

Our blessed Savior, as it did become so wise a Teacher who came from God, as
Nicodemus witnessed of him, Joh. 3.2. intending and endeavoring to root out of
the peoples minds these Pharisaical Doctrines, or Principles unsound in
themselves, and destructive of an holy Life or good Manners, in his First
Sermon Ad populum on the Mount, gave them all, as it were, their deaths Wound,
stifled and choked them with one general Precept or Prohibition, strengthened
with Divine Authority, the Authority of his own Person, But I say unto you,
Swear not at all; i.e. Swear not at all per ullam rem creatam, Beza in L^c. Ex
proxime sequentibus quas Christus damnat formulis liquet, non ipsum ju^jurandum
reprehendi.
by any thing created, or which is the Workmanship of God, for by so doing you
will attract to your selves the guilt of Idolatry, by ascribing to the
Creature that which is proper and essential to the Creator, i. e. omnisciency,
and omnipotency, as if it knew our hearts and secret intentions, and could
punish us if we should be guilty of Perjury. With the forenamed Beza in the
Margin concurrs his Compatriot, and no less Learned Calvin in his Comment on
the Text, whose assertion is this, Particula omnino non ad jurandi Verbum
refertur, sed ad subject as Sacramentorum formulas, i.e. The Particle At all is
to be referred not to the words which go before Swear not, but to that which
follows, Neither by Heaven -- nor by the Earth -- neither by Jerusalem -- nor
by thy Head -- By this our Savior gave a check to the Scribes first Doctrine,
viz. That to Swear by the Creature was no sin.

Secondly, as this Prohibition, Swear not at all, excludes the Creatures, be
they the holy Evangelists, Saints departed, or Angels, (whom to invocate, as in
Prayer, so in Swearing, is held to be lawful by the Romanists, as it was by the
Manichees:) Epiphan l. 1. c. 19.
so it includes and forbids all vain and superfluous Oaths in use then among
the Jews, and now too frequently used by Christians in their common and
familiar Discourses. That this was likewise our blessed Saviors meaning, may
be evidenced by that which follows by way of Precept after the Prohibition,
Verse. 37.
But let your communication be Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, i.e. In your common talk
and discourse use only a bare Affirmation of what you know to be true, and a
simple Negation of what you are assured is false, without interposing the
dreadful and Sacred Name of God. Let your communication be Yea, Quod dicis
verbo dic opere, quod negas verbo noli confirmare facto. Ugo.
Yea, etc. On which words Vgo thus Glosses, Let not thy actions give thy words
the Lie: what thou have affirmed or promised with thy tongue, ratify the same
by thy action: and what thou have denied in thy words, confirm not the same by
thy deeds. This Gloss is ingenious, and might be embraced, if Christ had said
only, Let your Yea be Yea, etc. but these words, Let your communication --
being prefixed to the Yea, Yea, imply and require another (and that more
proper) interpretation, which may be this, B^za.
Because men usually swear, that, what they affirm or deny, may be fully
credited or believed; our blessed Lord therefore commands us rather to use a
double Affirmation, saying, Yea, Yea; and a double Negation, Nay, Nay, than
rashly swear by Gods holy Name: By which to swear (and that in their familiar
discourses) the Jews in our Saviors time thought it (as was said before)
lawful, (and so they had been taught by the Scribes) in case the thing was true
which they had sworn. And forasmuch as they deemed it not to be Perjury (or
thought they were not perjured) if they had Sworn only by the Creatures and
broke their Oath, misinterpreting that Text, Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths: Our Savior for
these reasons (and this was the scope only, or intent of his Prohibition) said
unto them, Swear not at all; Swear not by the Creature (to do this is
superstitious and idolatrous.) Swear not rashly nor lightly; this is profane
and blasphemous. Swear not falsely; this is to back a Lie with an Oath, upon
which follows the guilt of Perjury. Lastly, Swear not unjustly, bind not your
self by an Oath to do what is against the rule of Justice or Honesty; by this
you make an Oath to be Iniquitatis vinculum, a bond of Iniquity, which is
rather to be broken with repentance and sorrow of heart for taking of it, than
kept. Such was Herod's rash Oath to the wanton Daughter of Herodias, Mark 6.23.
to give unto her whatsoever she should ask: Such was that of the Jews, who
bound themselves under a Curse, saying, That they would neither eat nor drink,
Act. 23.14.
till they had killed Paul.

The Prohibition of Christ being thus explained, (for which I have the consent
of the most and best Interpreters, both modern and ancient, whose names are so
numerous, that the Margin cannot contain them) to that Explication I shall
subjoyn many undeniable and weighty Reasons, to evince and prove the falsity
and absurdity of the Anabaptist's Tenet, or Thesis (which is grounded upon that
general Prohibition) That in any case whatsoever it is not lawful for a
Christian to swear. For the disproving, and refuting of which dangerous
Position (and that I may reconcile Moses to Christ, the Law to the Gospel,
Deuteronomy. 6.13. 10 20. Isa. 65.16. Ierem. 12.16.
many Texts in Deuteronomy, and in the Prophets, which enjoin us to Swear by
the Name of God, to the prohibitive command of our Savior) let me premise this
for an undeniable Maxim or Thesis, That the Precepts of the Gospel are not
repugnant, Praecepta Evangelii non contrariantur praeceptis legis. Aug.
or contrary to the Commands of the Law. This Position is defended and proved
at large by S. Augustine in his Nineteenth Book against Faustus the Heretic,
Cap. 16. What the Law commands, the Gospel does not forbid; and what the one
forbids, the other does not allow: but both meet together in a sweet consent
and harmony of Truth, and (as it were) kiss and embrace each other; so that the
Gospel in a manner bespeaks the Law in the words of that Parasitical Servant in
the Comedy to his Master, Quod ais aio, quod negas nego, what you command I
commend, what you condemn I disallow: and there is no surer or better way of
expounding the Law than by the Gospel, and of the Gospel than by the Law,
according to that known saying of Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 63. Secundum Scripturas
expositio legitima est, and sine periculo, It is the safest course and method
for the ending of Disputes, to expound Scripture by Scripture, one Text by
another, if there be a seeming difference in the former from the later.

Now I must put this Question to a dissenting Quaker, to any one of the People
so called, Do thou imagine, or dare thou say, that Moses and the Prophets
borrowed not their Light of Revelation or Doctrine from Christ the everlasting
Sun of Righteousness (who likewise being the Eternal Word of God, Mal. 4.2.
spoke to them by his Spirit, and dictated to them what we find in their
Writings, as Rules of our Faith and Manners?) I presume thou will not say it;
and unless thou will assert, that they were not true Stars, but only slimie
Meleors colored with shows and pretenses of Truth, and that their Doctrine is
false; unless thou assert this (which is an horrid and heinous crime, even
blasphemy, but to think) and I know thou will not, then thou must set thy Seal
to this undeniable Truth, that in some cases it is not unlawful or sinful to
use an Oath, according to that of the Prophet Jeremiah in his Exhortation to
revolted Israel, Thou shall swear, Ierem. 4. ^.
The Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness. i. e. When thou
make or take an Oath, Iudicio caret juramentum incautum, veritate
juramentum mendax, Iustitia juramentum iniquum and illicitum. Aquin.
thou shall swear by the Eternal Lord of Life, who is a discerner of the mind
and heart, to whom are clearly known the inward motions of it, who will
likewise severely punish us if we be false in our sayings, and unjust in our
doings. This profession we make when we invocate him in taking of an Oath,
being called to it by the Magistrate, and hereby God's name is sanctified, (it
being an extraordinary part of God's worship) but with this proviso, That the
three forenamed Cautions or Circumstances mentioned before by the Prophet do
attend it. They that thus Swear by Gods Name shall be commended, Psalm. 63.12.
i.e. They that swear in weighty matters (when they are urged to it) either for
the confirmation of the Truth, or to maintain their suspected Innocence, and
oblige themselves by an Oath before a Magistrate to do that which is righteous,
just, honest, and good; such men sin not, neither offend against our Savior's,
or S. James his Prohibition, Swear not, chap. 5.12. by which is condemned and
forbid only rash and inconsiderate, false and dishonest Swearing, approved not
of by the Laws of men, and condemned by the Word of God, by which the contrary
is commended, Isa. 65.16. He that Swears in the earth shall Swear by the God
of Truth.

To my former Position and Question proposed to a Scrupulous Quaker (or rather
Anabaptist) I shall add another Quaere, which I desire him to consider; it is
this, Whether Christ's Assertion and Testimony of Himself be not true, Matthew.
5.17. I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. I cannot expect, if I
should talk with him, but that he would say in his proper Language, Yea. This
being granted (as he dares not deny it) then I would reply, and tell him, That
if Christ came not to destroy the Law, then he forbade not what the Law
commands; and if he came to fulfill it, then he must acknowledge that Christ did
that for which he came into the World (for his coming was not in vain, or
fruitless) and that He ( in whom dwells the fullness of tine Godhead, Gal. 2.9
i.e. who is perfect God and man in one person, and in whom there is a fullness
of Wisdom and all heavenly Grace) fulfilled the Law two manner of ways, Aquin.
12.101. Q. 2. Art
opere and ore, by his Works and Words, or Divine Doctrine.

First, by his Works or Deeds, in that, to leave us an Example of a meek heart
and sound obedience, he submitted himself to the Ceremonial Law, being
circumcised the Eighth day, etc. So likewise to satisfy the rigor of God's
Justice, he fully performed the Moral by his Active obedience, doing what the
Lord required of us to be done, thereby to bring us to Heaven; and by his
Passive, suffering for our Sins to redeem us from the pains and torments of
Hell.

Verum legis sensum exptimendo.
Secondly, he fulfilled the Law by his heavenly Doctrine; this he did by
explaining the full scope, the intent or meaning of the Law (as in those two
Cases of Murder and Adultery, Praecepta legis ordinando ut tutius observaretur
quod lex vetuer at. Aquin.
Matthew. 5.21, 27.) and by prescribing Rules for the better observing of the
Laws Affirmative and Negative commands.

Thus because the Law forbids all kinds of Perjury, Thou shall not Swear by my
Name falsely, Lev. 6.5. that this Prohibition might be the better kept and
observed, and men secured from the danger of so great a sin (in regard that men
accustomed to Swearing, account Perjury but a light and frivolous thing) Christ
therefore in his Sermon upon the Mount, gave to his Auditors or Disciples a
safe and wholesome admonition, Swear not at all, i.e. never, nisi in causa
necessitatis (as the Learned Zanchy upon that Text) except in cases of
Necessity, Vbi gloria Domini vindicanda^t fratris aedifcatio promovenda, when
and where the glory of God is to be vindicated by a bold defense of the Truth
opposed, and when our neighbors welfare may thereby be promoted, and either
our own credit or reputation preserved. St. Chrysostom himself (who was a
rigid enemy to Swearing (i.e. to vain and idle Oaths in mutual and private
Conference) and in whose mistaken and wrested Sayings the Penman of the
Treatise against Oaths does much The Author has stuffed two and twenty Pages in
his Treatise with Citations out of that most Eloquent Father, which are nothing
to his purpose; for S. Chrysostom condemn^ not all kind of Swearing.
triumph) he in his Fifth Homily Ad pop. Antioch. does clearly admit of, or
allow an Oath to be taken in a case of Necessity, as is evident by these words,
(cited in English, p. 72. of the treatise) Moreover, this I say, That in the
mean time we may cut off Superfluous Oaths, those I mean, which are made rashly
amongst Friends and Servants without any Necessity, etc. Hence I infer (having
great and weighty Reasons which hereafter I shall produce, and that florid
golden mouth Father's warrant for my Assertion,) Necessitas tollit ferias.
Prove. Heb.
That as Necessity (as we say commonly) has no Law; so to take an Oath when a
man is necessitated or compelled to take it, is not superfluous, vain, or
sinful, and no violation of Christ's Precept, or of Moses his Law, I mean the
Third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain:
For if every Negative Precept does include (which no man will deny) the
contrary to it, which is the Affirmative, we may then infer, and say with
Moses (who spoke from God) Thou shall fear the Lord thy Deuteronomy. 6.13.
God, and serve him, and shall Swear by his Name, not vainly, or to no purpose,
but to justify the Truth, or to give to thy Neighbor (who requires it) an
assurance of thy integrity, or sincerity of thy promise; and in other cases
which are warranted by an inevitable Necessity. Thus if any one should accuse
thee of perfidiousness or slander, as having with the black tooth of Calumny
wounded his reputation, or defrauded him of his goods; If thou, to purge thy
self from this foul aspersion, shall deny the fact by a simple and bare
protestation of thy innocence, and he still suspecting thee to the contrary
shall require an Oath of thee, to confirm his belief of what thou deniest; in
such a case, to vindicate thy credit, and to work out of his mind that
injurious suspicion, thou may use a solemn Attestation, by invocating or
calling God to witness the Truth of thy Assertion. And that in such or the like
case (to settle in another a persuasion of our Integrity) an Oath between
private persons is no sin; we have the examples of God's Saints in the holy
Scriptures to warrant it, Genesis 21.23, 24.
as that of Abraham, who being urged to it by Abimelech King of Gerar, did
Swear unto him that he would not deal falsely with him, etc. The like promissory
Oath passed between Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31.53. and from Boaz to Ruth, Chap.
3.13. Let me annex to these Examples the testimony of Saint Augustine: Aug. l.
10. de Sermon Dom c. 30.
When Christ (says he) enjoined us to use in our common discourse, by way of
Affirmation and Negation, Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay, He said not that whatsoever is
more than this is evil or sin, but proceeds from evil, i.e. from some bad
principle, from the evil of infirmity in him, who requires an Oath, and that is
his incredulity, suspecting the Truth of the others Narration or Report, or his
want of Charity, entertaining in his breast a bad opinion of his Brother, and
perhaps undeservedly; Tu enim non male facis qui been uteris juratione, etc.
For thou do not ill who usest an Oath well (i. e. to a good end) that thou
may beget in another a firm belief of the Truth, and of thy sincerity: He
rather does ill whose diffidence or distrust enforces thee to use an Oath; his
sin shall not be imputed to thee.

For the farther ratification of my former Position concerning an Oath's
legality, in case of an undeniable and inevitable Necessity, I shall propound
one Quaere more to W. P. the Quakers Oracle or Antesignanus of the Anabaptists,
it is this; Suppose a knot of Thieves should assault thee in thy journey, and,
having by force and violence robbed thee of thy money, should urge thee to
Swear that thou will not betray nor prosecute them by raising the Country to a
pursuit of them, in the mean time affrighting thee with execrable dreadful
Oaths, that unless thou secure them by a solemn Oath, they will kill thee; tell
me, W.P. would thou in this case rather lose thy life than Swear, to which by
blasphemous threats they urge thee? I verily believe, that, as thou have a
plentiful Estate, thou would not easily part with it, and thy life at once,
by fondly bogling at an innocent Oath: This persuasion I have of thee, because,
as thou professest thy self, with the rest of thy Gang, to be men of Truth, and
transcendent Sanctity, so I conceive that thou have not wholly forfeited thy
Reason, but by that sparkling Light which still remains in it, thou (being cast
into these streights) wil'st consider, First, that it thou refusest to Swear,
thou shall run upon the rock of a dangerous guilt, which is the breach of the
Sixth Commandment, by which the use of all lawful means for the preservation of
our lives is commanded; and if we may preserve them and will not by such means,
we are self-murderers. Now Swearing is not absolutely forbid neither by Christ
nor his Apostles. Secondly, Thou surely would consider, that by thy refusing
to Swear, thou should be the occasion, or rather the partial cause of the
loss of thy Brother's Soul (a Thief by the bond of Nature is thy Brother) he
being made guilty of Murder by shedding thy blood, which might be kept in thy
veins by thy taking of that harmless Oath, the which being once taken, must be
religiously kept, for that he that is robbed is bound to be silent, and not to
betray a Thief, having Sworn not to do it; so the late most Pious and Learned
Bishop of Norwich determines the Case, Cas. Consc. Resol. Dec. 1. c. 8.
and annexes this saying to his determination, (to deter all men from
Perjury, or breaking their Oaths) When once we have interessed God in any
business, it is dangerous not to be punctual in the performance. With him
concurres in the same opinion the profound Doctor Sanderson in his Fifth
Lecture and Seventeenth Section, Lib. de juram. obligat.
where he disputes the case against Baldwin, once Professor of Divinity at
Wittenberg, and having answered his three Arguments alleged to the contrary,
concludes, That as it is not unlawful for one to Swear to a Thief (supposing
that if he did not, he should certainly be murdered) so there lies a necessity
upon him of keeping that Oath not to discover him to the Magistrate, Si licuit
jurare, licebit and juramentum observare, they are his very words, page 132. So
are not those cited out of his 141. page by the falsifying Penner of the
Treatise; I must therefore be bold to tell that conceited man of Truth that he
is guilty of Forgery, I might rather say in plainer and more express terms, of
a Lie, to which the Thirteen Abettors of the Treatise have subscribed, as they
have to many more comprehended in that Treatise, (as shall hereafter be
evidenced.) The Author (or rather Authors of it, for no doubt many hands and
Jesuited cunning Heads concurred to the composing of it) having asserted every
Oath to be vain and unlawful, Page 20.
(under which notion the Oath of Supremacy. and Allegiance must needs fall in
his opinion) gives this reason of his Assertion, For Christ's Prohibition,
Swear not at all, was not a mere Repetition of what was forbidden under the
Law, but what the Law allowed, as Bishop Sanderson well observes, in these
words, There is not one Syllable to this purpose in that Page 141. of the Book
Printed 1647.
It was not needful that Christ should forbid what was forbidden in it self, or
was always unlawful, which vain Swearing was and is by the Third Commandment,
Thou shall not take, etc. Therefore Christ exceeded the Prohibition of the Law,
i.e. condemned all kind of Swearing. This fallacious way of arguing, by making
Authors speak what they never said nor intended, and by drawing conclusions
from premises misinterpreted, has a great smack and tang of the Jesuit. But to
the whole I answer thus partim, in particular; first I deny the truth of the
Assertion, Every Oath, etc. and the Reason he give for it I affirm to be
invalid and false, For Christ's Prohibition, etc. In opposition to the Reason,
First, I shall lay down this Thesis or Position, That Christ by his Precept or
prohibitive Command repeated (and that he usually did) what was forbid by the
Law, such is vain Swearing, and Swearing by any thing but by the Name of God in
weighty causes, and in cases of Necessity when we are commanded by the
Authority of the Magistrate. Secondly, I affirm that it was needful and very
expedient Christ should do it (as it was for Saint Paul to write the same
things to the Philippians, chap. 3.1.) and that, First, by reason of the
perverseness, dullness, stupidity, and forgetfulness of man's nature, which needs
Line upon Line, Isa. 28.13.
Precept upon Precept, that is, to have the same Commands and Prohibitions often
repeated, and inculcated. Secondly, it was needful and very convenient, that
thereby he might show that there was an amicable harmony or agreement between
the Gospel and the Law, so that what was enjoined and commanded by the former,
is not forbid and condemned by the later. Thirdly, it was needful that so he
might gain an higher estimate to the Law of Moses, by not contradicting or
gainsaying of its Precepts, but ratifying the same by his Commands, he being
greater than Moses, who received those lively Oracles from his mouth on the
Mount. And, Fourthly, he might do it ( i.e. repeat the same Commands which were
delivered by Moses) to refute and give a check to those blasphemous conceits
(which he foresaw would spring up in the Church in after Ages) or to those
gross opinions of the Manichees and of their followers, who maintained that
there were two Deities, the one Author of the Old Law, the other of the New,
which are at large confuted by the Malleus Haereticorum, Tom 6:
Saint Austin in his Tractates against Faustus the Manichean, and his Abettors,
Adimantus, Fortunatus, Secundinus, and others.

From all that has been said, and for these four Reasons I infer, that the
forenamed Author is guilty of no less a sin than Blasphemy by asserting, Page
20.
That Christ forbade what the Law allowed, and in the room of such Oaths and
Vows as were to be performed unto the Lord, he introduced Yea and Nay with a
most absolute Swear not at all. What is this but to make our Blessed Savior
(who spoke by the Prophets) to contradict himself, by commanding one thing in
the Law, and another thing in the Gospel, or by forbidding what he had
commanded; as if he (who is unchangeable, and whose Precepts as well as his
Promises are Yea and Amen, 1 Cor. 1.20.
i. e. immutable) had upon better thoughts altered his mind or judgment? To
think this, much more to say it, is blasphemous. The Author of the Treatise
does in effect say as much, by affirming that all Oaths, in their full compass
and latitude, are by Christ's Swear not at all prohibited: witness his bold
Protestation, which he makes in his own, and in the name of all his Brethren,
Page 155.
We profess our selves in the Fear of Almighty God, to be such, as have thus
learned Jesus Christ, and for the Reverence we bear to his righteous
Commandment, we cannot take an Oath in any Case. He should have said, we will
not take God's Name in vain; for this in part is the sense and meaning of
Christ's command, Swear not at all.

If the Treatist (with his Confederates) bears such a Reverence to God's
Commandments, why then does he (or how dares he) so audaciously and openly
transgress against Three of them at once? I mean the Fifth, Sixth, and the
Ninth, Honor thy Father, etc. Thou shall do no Murder. Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy Neighbor. This he has done by wounding the
reputation of a most righteous and Learned Prelate the late Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, a renowned Father of the Church, now a glorious Saint in Heaven; and
by belying him, and that by attesting he wrote that which he never did (for
that I cannot find any such thing or words in his most elaborate Work De
juramenti Obligatione) and is diametrically opposite, or contrary to his known
opinion, and the whole frame of his Book. The words which the Father of Lies
put into the Treatist's mouth, and from thence dropped into his erring Pen, are
these, Christ exceeded the Prohibition of the Law, i. e. condemned all kind of
Swearing. Can any believe that so wise, so godly, and acute person did ever say
or write this, and thereby contradict himself; who, for the preventing of
Perjury, has prescribed in that golden Book many excellent Rules for the right
taking of an Oath, whether it be Assertory or Promissory, and defines an Oath
thus, Est actus religiosus in quo ad confirmandam rem dubiam Deus testis
invocatur, Page 4.
A religious act in which (or by which) for the confirmation of a thing in
doubt (or called into question, it being uncertain) God is invocated (or called
upon) to be a witness.

That it is a religious Act he proves, First, by the Authority of the
Scriptures, From hence the Schoolmen aver that it is Actu^lat^ae, or of that
worship which is only due to God. Aquin. 22. Q. 89.
Deuter. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and Swear by
his Name. Secondly, from the joint consent of all Nations, who although they
were only led by the dim light of Nature, did account of an Oath as a most
Sacred thing, and so in their Writings is often termed a Sacrament. He proves it,
Thirdly, from most evident and clear Reason, because an Oath tends or conduces
much to God's honor, and to the glory of his Name, by the acknowledgment or
confession of his Truth, Knowledge, Justice, and Almighty Power; all these four
Attributes we acknowledge to be in him, when in taking of an Oath we call upon
him to be out witness, and Judge. What can the Treatist answer to this? how can
he vindicate himself from the guilt of notorious falsity and forgery, by
averring that the Bishop asserted, that Christ by his prohibitive Precept
exceeded the Prohibition of the Law, or Third Commandment, by commanding us not
only not to Swear vainly or falsely, but not to use an Oath in any case
whatsoever. Does not that godly Prelate in his Tenth Section of his Seventh
Praelection lay this down for an undeniable conclusion, Juramenti usus est
licitus, and proves an Oath to be lawful, as by diverse weighty Reasons, drawn
from the use of it in the Old and New Testament, for that the Romans 1.9. Gal.
1.20. Genesis 14.22.26.31.31.53.
Apostle Saint Paul and holy Patriarchs did use it, and all Controversies were
appointed by Moses to be terminated or ended by it, Exodus 2.11. so also from
the Conditions to be observed in Swearing prescribed by the Prophets, as in
that fourth Chapter of Jerem. verse. 2. which I have formerly cited and
illustrated; after all which he challenges any man to give just Reason, why
under the Old Testament it should be lawful for holy men to Swear, and not for
the Faithful under the New, seeing this act of Swearing did not appertain to
the Ceremonial Law, which was abrogated by Christ, as is evident by the end of
it (which is of perpetual use) and that is the confirmation of the Truth, and
ending all litigious Disputes and strifes about it. And will not any prudent
man conclude from all this, that an Oath to its own and proper nature, is not
an evil thing, but lawful and good, when much hurt and many disturbances which
may happen in the transaction of humane affairs, may by it be prevented? This
is attested by Saint Paul, Heb. 6.16. An Oath for confirmation is an end of all
strife, i. e. where there is no end of contradicting, there an Oath is
expedient; when the Plaintiff affirms, and the Defendant stiffly denies, when
there is no other way of finding out the Truth, one part of the contradiction
being confirmed by the interposition of an Oath, the other part ceases, and so
the strife is terminated. Can we imagine then, that the God of peace, unity,
and concord, our Lord Christ, would wholly forbid Swearing, or the use of an
Oath at any time, or in any case, by means whereof, oft-times, as litigious
suits and strifes at Law are ended, so Faith and Justice, the two most firm
bonds and ligaments of humane Society, are preserved, (for he that lies under a
solemn Oath, dares not be unfaithful or unjust.) I am sure our Savior never
did forbid it, but only the light, rash, and vain use of an Oath in our
ordinary and common discourse; this he did, and so our most judicious Praelect.
7. Sect. 11. ad finem.
Bishop expounds those words of our Savior, Matthew. 5.34. and the same repeated
by Saint James, Chap. 5.12. which are the Quakers or Anabaptists only Asylum,
to which they fly for Sanctuary, when they are urged to take an Oath by the
Magistrate; but I hope they will be effectually beaten, or driven from their
Asylum, when their shallow and dark understandings are better enlightened, and
they being convinced, shall acknowledge in their hearts, though they will
hardly confess it with their tongues, that the whole weight of their rotten
Position hangs upon a weak and slender thread, even one word, Omnino, at all,
which is by them misinterpreted: A good construction whereof is that expression
of one Eusebius a Gentile Philosopher in Sermon. 37.
Stobaeus, Many says he there) exhort men to Swear the Truth; but my
exhortation to them is, Ut ne quidem omnino facile jurent, That they Swear not
at all easily; he means familiarly, without great necessity, which is the
principal or prime meaning of our Saviors Prohibition, Swear not at all.

I should here have given a stop to my flying Pen, and taken both it and my
wearied hand on from this Paper, had not my Zeal inflamed with indignation
spurred me on to a just vindication of the honor of another holy and more
ancient Father, most renowned (as the former was) in his generation (which was
422. years after Christ) for his holy life and stupendous knowledge in Divine
and Humane Learning, I mean St. Jerome, Page 11.
whom the Impostor or Treatist challenges as a Patron of his Opinion, saying,
(though most falsely) That he makes this the reason why God indulged the Jews in
the use of Swearing, That they were but in the state of Infancy, and that they
might be kept from Swearing by false Gods. I was amazed when I read this, so
will the judicious Readers be astonished at the boldness, and madness, I may
add Falsity and Folly of the Treatist, inciting the Gloss of St. Jerome upon
that Text, Matthew. 5.34. it being so clearly and wholly against him.

The Father's Gloss is this, which for the benefit of an illiterate Quaker, I
shall translate word for word into English; Hanc per elementa jurandi pessimam
consuetudinem semper habuere Iudaei, etc.
This most ungodly custom of Swearing by the Elements was ever in use amongst
the Jews, for which they are often condemned by the month of the Prophets. He
that swears, either worshippeth or loves him by whom he swears. We are
commanded in the Law to Swear by none but by the Lord our God. The Jews
swearing by the Angels, by the City of Jerusalem, by the Temple, and by the
Elements, gave that honor and worship to the Creatures and carnal things,
which was only due to God. But Let the Author of the Treatife and his Brethren
consider this.
consider that our Savior does not forbid us to Swear by God, but by Heaven,
and Earth, by Jerusalem, and by the Head. Et hoc, quasi parvulis fuerat lege
concessum: and this (subaud. he forbids) as if it had been permitted to the
Jews, as to little Ones; even as they offered Victims unto God, that they might
not sacrifice the same unto Idols; so they should be permitted to Swear in Deum
against God; not that they should do well in so doing, but that it was better
to exhibit that honor to God (viz. by Swearing by his Temple, etc.) than to
Demons. From the later part of this Comment beginning at, Et hoc quasi
parvulis, etc. altogether misconstrued by him, the Treatift (though most
absurdly) inferrs that God indulged (in the opinion of St Jerome) the Jews in
the use of Swearing, they being then in the state of Infancy, that they might
be kept from Swearing by false Gods. For St. Jerome (or to vindicate him) I
appeal to St. Jerome; Does he say any such thing? or do his words sound, or
imply any thing to this purpose? I absolutely deny it. He only says, That
Christ forbade his Disciples to Swear by Heaven and Earth, etc. Et hoc, and
forbade this, quasi, as if it had been permitted to the Jews in their minority
to Swear by them, as it was to offer Victims unto God, that they might not
sacrifice them unto Idols. The Father does not positively affirm that God ever
permitted the Jews to Swear by any Creature, he says only Quasi, as if it had
been permitted. And let the Treatist show me any place in the whole Bible,
where ever it was tolerated. But this is not the Dispute now between us.

I must only ask him this friendly Question, What reason he had to pass by
those words of St. Jerome, Consider that our Savior forbids not us to swear? He
cannot but answer, or I will for him, because it is wholly adverse to his
Position: But like as a man that is drowning, catches at any small twig to keep
him from sinking, so he to uphold his rotten and corrupt opinion, lays hold on
four words of St. Jerome, Concessum fuerat jurare parvulis, He says not
concessum suit.
It had been permitted to little Ones for to Swear; and wilfully omitting what
goes before and follows after, concludes from them (which relate only to
Swearing by the Creature) and from Deuteronomy. 6.13, 14. That God dispensed with the
Jews for Swearing by his Name, that he might take them off from Swearing by
false Gods, because thereby they would acknowledge them, and not the true God,
so that Swearing is only better than Idolatry; Therefore in no case good in its
own Nature. In answer to this, I say, that there is a comparative without a
positive, as it is better (say some) to be drunk than to commit Fornication,
because this is a complicate sin between two, the other a single one of one
individual person. Is it then an evil thing to Swear at all by invocating God's
Name? who dares affirm this but an Anabaptist, it being an act of Religious
Worship, as has been demonstrated? But I demand again, Did God ever say by
Moses, or any of his Prophets, Thou shall not take my Name into thy mouth in
any case, or at any time? said he ever this without any restriction, or
limitation? If he had made this general Proclamation, undoubtedly to take it
into our mouths, would be a great and heinous Sin, and so the Jews could not
have done it lawfully without a special dispensation from God by the mouth of a
Prophet: For God being the Supreme Lawgiver, whose Jurisdiction and Dominion
is over all, and above all, may ad placitum dispense with a Negative Precept
that forbids a sin; but then it must be either by an inspired Prophet, or by a
voice from Heaven. Now God never did absolutely forbid the Jews to Swear by his
Sacred Name, but only vainly or falsely in the Third Commandment. And this
Negative includes an Affirmative, Thou shall (when there is an urgent occasion
for it) Swear by my Name Truly. He therefore that affirms, that, God dispensed
with the Jews for Swearing by his Name, (which is in its proper nature
absolutely good, because it is allowed of, and enjoined by God) does in effect
say, that it is a sin to invocate, or call upon God, and so falls under the
Prophet's curse, Isa. 5.20.
Woe unto him that calls good evil, and evil good. Consider this thou vain
daring man, who do plead for a Dispensation to the Jews, which never came
into any man's head to think of but thine; neither had thou thought of it,
had not thou looked by chance into St. Jerome, who by his Concessum suerat
never intended any such thing as has been clearly evidenced.

Thou may as well assert that God dispensed with the Jews to keep the Sabbath
day, that they should not celebrate the Feasts of the Gentiles, as say, That he
dispensed with Swearing by his Name to keep them from Swearing by Idols, or
from the Idolatrous Worship of the Heathen Gods; the former as well as the
later (though both be frivolous) may be averred. And upon this account it would
be as great a sin for Christians to keep the Sabbath, as to swear in any case,
if God dispensed only with the Jews for either: For, a Dispensation (as it is a
comprehensive term implying a relaxation of an obligation to any command, so
that a man may do what the Law prohibits, or not do what it enjoynes) is in the
opinion of the Treatist a concession or grant to do that which is evil in its
own nature, and not practicable, or to be done but only by the allowance or
approbation of the Legislator, whose will is his Law, as being Supreme.

Now if he can prove by any evidence out of the Gospel or Evangelists, that to
Swear is a sin in its proper nature (with which the Jews, as he falsely asserts,
were dispensed by God) if he can do this (which I know is impossible) I will
recant what I have writ, and exhort all my Friends and good Christians not to
Swear at all.

I am confident that the Author of the Treatise was startled, and put to a
staining blush when he perused St. Jerome's Gloss upon our Savior's words, and
met with his Considera quod hic Salvator per Deum jurare non prohibuerit.
Considera in the middle of it, Consider that our Savior here forbade not
Swearing by the Name of God, but only vain, rash, and impertinent Swearing;
surely he considered it, but being displeased with the Holy Man for his
opinion, and angry at his Exhortation, studied a revenge, which was to blast
him with a Lie, and make him guilty of a Contradiction, by saying in effect,
that what he approved of, was a sin, yet not disproved of in the Jews by means
of God's special Dispensation.

From all that has been said in Vindication of Bishop Sanderson, and the
forenamed Father, may be rightly concluded, That the Treatist has been bred up
in the Jesuits School, in which is taught that Diabolical Arithmetical Art of
Subtraction, Addition and Division, to which may be added that black Art of
Detraction, for that he to the Bishops Book De Juramenti Oblig. has added what
he never writ; to St. Jerome he has subtracted (by dividing the former part of
his Comment from the later) what the Father has plainly published, and is a
refutation of what he endeavors to maintain, which is a great Falsity, and
repugnant to Scripture Truth; and in all, he has by a foul and dirty Pen
detracted from both their reputations and credit.

Thus too he has done by the Reverend Doctor Gawden late Bishop of Gloucester,
and before that of Exeter, whom he has peremptorily listed amongst those who
seem to favor his Opinion (as being an Antijurist) and laid (as I may say)
this Bastard at his door, begot by the Father of Lies, upon an Understanding
darkened with Error, and brought forth by the Midwifry of an unruly malepert
Tongue, and nursed up by the help of a virulent Pen. But what has that holy
Bishop, that righteous man (whom none can read but with amazement or
admiration, both for the floridness of his Style, and Chrysostome-like Tongue,
together with his profundity of Reason, and great variety of Learning, as is
evident by his Printed Works, especially his Ecclesiae Anglicanae Suspiria)
what has he done or said, that they should challenge, or own him for their
Patron? I Will tell you first what he has said of Them, and then what they quote
out of Him. In his Discourse concerning Public Oaths. Page 4.
First he says of Them, That they have a canting or Chemical Divinity, which
bubbles forth many specious Notions, fine fancies, and short-lived Conceptions,
floating a little in an airy and empty brain, but not enduring the firm touch
or breath of any serious Judgment. And Page 7. I profess there appears to me
so nothing of an excellent or Extraordinary Spirit in them, that there is much
of Silliness, and not well-catechis'd Ignorance, set off with a great
Confidence. Again, They generally seem a busy, petulant, and pragmatick sort
of people, measuring themselves by themselves, 2 Cor. 10.12.
admiring each other, even in their ridiculous Affectations, and Falsities; a
kind of Dreamers, Iud. 8. 2 Pet. 3.13.
at once deceiving and being deceived, doting and glorying in their rude and
contemptuous carriage toward all men, that do not either favor, or flatter
them in their rusticity and petulancy, which has in it a great seed of Pride
and Ambition. And in his Suspir. Anglic. page 73. He terms them, The meanest
and short-spirited men, who in religious differences, and in the matter of
Ceremonies, do affect to appear most cruelly Zealous, and uncharitably
pertinacious. This is the Character he gives of them. But what says the
Treatist of him?

Nothing, I confess, derogatory to his person, but he quotes, or cites only a
remarkable saying of his, which makes much against the Anti-Jurists, it is
this, Page 154.
The evil of men's hearts and manners, the jealousies and distrusts, the
dissimulations and frauds of many Christians, their uncharitableness,
unsatisfactions, and insecurities, are such, and so great Diseases, as make the
application of Solemn Oaths and Judicial Swearing necessary by way of
Consequence and Remedy. What replies the Quaker to this? His answer is, That
there is no need of these applications to him or his Fraternity; and why?
Because, forsooth, Page 155
Christ who is the Restorer of Breaches, and builder of Waste-places, has
redeemed them into Truth-speaking, which takes away the Occasion of an Oath,
and such as are the true, humble, and faithful followers of this Worthy, need
no Oath to compel them into Truth, to whom it is natural (My good Friend, I
thought it had been a work of Gods Grace) being freed by it from fraud and
falseness, and consequently from Swearing, which took occasion by it to enter
into the World. To all which he subjoyns this solemn Protestation in the name
of his Friends (as he calls them) i. e. his fellow- Quakers.

Ibid.
Now we profess our selves in the fear of Almighty God to be such, as have thus
learned Jesus Christ, and for the Reverence, and holy Love we bear to his
righteous Command, we cannot take an Oath in any case. In answer to this
Profession, I must, First, tell the Professor, that there is no such command
of Christ, he never forbade us to Swear in any case; this has been
sufficiently illustrated and proved. Secondly, he must give me leave to be his
Instructor and Teacher, and make him understand, that his former Profession is
a Formal Oath, as having the Form or Essence of an Oath in it, which consists
in a Confession of God and his Almighty Power, as this implies an Invocation of
God to be a Witness and Judge of what we speak or affirm; and I am assured that
it is an Untruth what is affirmed by him, viz. That Christ taught us, Not to
Swear in any case. So then, the tantamount or sum of their Profession is this,
In the presence of God, whom we confess and acknowledge to be Almighty and
accordingly fear him, because he is able, and will destroy us if we profess a
Lie -- What is this but a Form of Swearing, even as Saint Paul did, when he
made a Profession of his Sincerity, saying, Before God I Lie not? Gal. 1.20.
So the Quaker by an implicit calling upon God to be a Witness of what he
says, viz. That he has learned of Christ not to Swear at all, does indeed
Swear, Thus a Blasphemer being once rebuked for his Swearing, Swore that he
would Swear no more. Tit. 3.2.
and that too which is false (for he has not been so taught of Christ)
therefore he calls God to witness an Untruth; and what is this but false
Swearing, which another would cloth with an harder (though proper) term? But
as I desire to be gentle showing all meekness to all men, (as Saint Paul
exhorts) so parce loquor, I forbear to name it, as fearing that I should, by
mentioning that, at which my heart trembles, put the poor mistaken man into a
new fit of Quaking.

He protested that he could not Swear, and did it in protesting: It seems the
man of great Reading and pretended Knowledge, was ignorant of the material
parts of a Formal Oath; so was not another grand Professor of Quakerisme in
Ireland, one E. C. who is yet living; sparing his Name, I shall faithfully
relate what was lately reported to me of him a professed Usurer, and Factour
for some Merchants here in London. The story of him is this; There was a Bill
not long since put into the Chancery there against him, in a Money business, to
which he was commanded to give in his Answer upon Oath, the which he refused,
and after some delays addressed himself to a worthy person Dr. W. one of the
Masters of the foresaid Court, proffering him Twenty Pieces in Gold if he would
exempt him from Swearing, and admit of his Yea and Nay to his Answer, and all
Interrogatories that should be proposed unto him; the Doctor, as it became him,
sent him away with a sharp reprehension for his boldness, and wicked attempt to
corrupt him. Upon this he was more bold in petitioning the Lord Deputy that his
Yea, etc. might be admitted, but was likewise with a severe check dismissed
unsatisfied; at last, when he perceived, To this Instance some of his party may
reply, that he was forced Swear against his mind upon necessity, but we say,
that no honest man will against his conscience Swear a falsity.
that unless he made Oath to his Answer he should be nonsuited, he dispensed
with his tender Conscience, and took it; after which, there came in such strong
evidences against him, that he was found guilty of Perjury, and cast in the
Suit between him and the Plaintiff. By this may be collected what credit is to
be given to a Quaker's Yea and Nay, when as, if the man has a false heart,
under the covert of it a Lie may be sheltered.

But leaving him to Christian Pity, and God's mercy, I must return from this
short digression, and from the former false Profession of the Treatist reflect
upon his vain Ostentation, apparent in his Protestation (which goes before it,
Page 155. of the Treatise) viz. That Christ has redeemed him and the rest of
his Combination into Truth-speaking, which takes away the Occasion of an Oath.
What is this but Pharisaisme, or proud boasting, becoming a Thraso or Miles
gloriosus in the Comedy, rather than the mouth of a Christian, being one of the
many marks which Saint Paul fixes upon an unregenerate and carnal man,
Despightful, proud, Boasters.
Romans 1.30. Moreover he says, (and what is it but perfect Pelagianism?) that
Truth is natural unto them; if it be the fruit of Nature, then it is not of
Grace: what could have been said more by Pelagius, or his Disciple Faustus!
Omitting a farther Refutation of his vainglorious and proud. Assertion, I
shall plainly discover unto him the falsity of it by this one direct
Syllogism, They that are redeemed by Christ into Truth-speaking, to whom Truth
is natural, need no Oath to compel them to Truth; but, we the true, humble, and
faithful followers of Christ are such; Ergo, we need not an Oath. I could deny
the Major Proposition, as being false (as I shall prove hereafter;) but for the
present I deny the Assumption or Minor; and to manifest the truth of my denial,
I shall not make use (as I might) of a Sorites by an enumeration of particular
persons among them, and from them whose Lives and Actions have witnessed the
contrary, draw a Negative Conclusion, I will only ask the man of Truth, I mean
the Professing Treatist, this one Question, If Truth-speaking, or Veracity be
natural to him, and all things by Nature ever the same, without any the least
change or alteration (as the Philosopher attests) why then contrary to his
Nature which must argue a perverseness in his Will) and contrary to the Rules
or common moral Honesty (which argues a pravity in his Nature) did he belie two
eminent Fathers or the Church by endeavoring to persuade the world that they
said or writ what they never did? (...). Arist.
And if Christ's Saints be redeemed by him into Truth-speaking, then they that
make no conscience of a Lie, or that love, and make a Lie, are neither Saints
nor redeemed by Christ; I am sure Saint John reckons them amongst those that
shall never enter into Heaven (such are Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Revel. 22.15.
Murderers, and Idolaters) without an high degree or measure of repentance.

Once more, If he be a man of Truth, why walks not he then in the Truth, or as
the Rule of Truth, the Word of God, directs? 2 Ep. Ioh. 4.
This commands us to give honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13.7. and to
honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. This neither he, nor any of his rude Tribe will
do, witness his, and his Associates unmannerliness, and proud demeanor even
toward the King, and great persons of Honor, to whom they measure the same
Omer of respect which they do to their Equals, and Inferiors, witness their
Thouing and Theeing them, and covered heads before them, which betokens no
Humility, but much Pride to be in their hearts, proceeding from a pretense, or
fancy that there is a Diviner Spirit, and a brighter Light in them, than
either Reason or Scripture, or great Reading affords to others, whereby they
think that they have cause to glory in their illuminations, and to despise all
those who have not arrived to the pitch or height of their presumptuous
Phansies. But that unmannerly rudeness might be born with, if they would give
the Lord of Heaven the honor that is due unto him, Hebr. 13 17. Obey them that
etc.
by obeying his commands, in obeying the King's Laws tending to Decency, Order,
and Peace both in State and Church: And because they are resolved to live and
dye in a constant opposition to all Government, they therefore will take no
Oath which may bind them to submit unto it; nay, they will not take an Oath
when it is offered by the Magistrate, when they might thereby determine a
Controversy between man and man, put an end or give a stop to a vexatious Suit
in Law, or promote their Neighbors welfare, by giving thereby a firm Testimony
of his suspected Honesty: and does not this argue a great want of Charity? Nay,
a Quaker will not Swear though he might thereby save his Neighbor's life: and
is not this an high piece of Cruelty? So obstinately unmerciful, so stiffly
uncharitable is this Quaking Tribe, that as they ought to do no evil that good
may come of it; so they will not do that which is in it self good (such is the
taking of a Lawful Oath) to prevent a great evil, damage, or hurt that may or
will befall a Neighbor, be it the losing of an Estate. Are such men governed
and guided by the good Spirit of Christ? I cannot omit here to relate a Story
of a Quakers obstinacy, who could not be invited to Swear the Truth of that
whereof he was an eye witness, it is this. I was my self an Ear witness of this
private Business.
A Mariner going to Sea, and being prepared for a long Voyage, gave a Bill of
Attorney to his Wife, enabling her to receive his Wages in his absence; now
because (as it is ordered by the Commissioners for the Navy) no such moneys
will be paid unless the Bill be attested by a Witness Sworn before a Justice of
Peace, that he was present at the writing of it, it happened that a Neighbor
poisoned with the Quaker's Principles (being one of their Disciples) was only
present when the Seaman writ it, and being desired by his Wife to witness the
same, he refused to appear before the Justice, and could not be persuaded to
take the Oath which was to be ministered unto him, by which means the poor woman
would be deprived of her maintenance, if her husband had been gone to Sea, and
not Transcribed the foresaid Bill in the presence of an honest Man, who thought
it no sin to swear for the benefit of another, being assured that it was not
(as it is not) repugnant to any command of our Savior. Now it is easy to
determine which of these two is the better Christian; there is no wise man but
will give his sentence for the latter, and not think him worthy of the name of
Christian who wants that which is the life and soul of Christianity, and that
is (with Meekness and Humility) an Universal Charity to all men, which is a
diffusive Grace prompting a man to be beneficial even to his enemies, and not
contract his love and kindness only to those who are of his party, and combine
with him in his opinions, though they be repugnant to the truth in the holy
Scriptures. Such is the narrow, and short-breathed Charity of the Anti-Jurists,
whose Opinion (or false conceit) of the unlawfulness, and sinfulness of all
Judicial and State Oaths, is both unchristian, as being uncharitable, in that
as it hinders them from doing good to their Friends and Neighbors, so if it
were embraced by all (as it never will) it would impede in Courts of Judicature
the due administration of Justice; it is likewise destructive and very
dangerous, in regard that the Safety, Peace, and Tranquillity of the King and
Kingdom cannot without Oaths (I mean those of Supremacy and Allegiance) be
secured against the Traitorous plottings, and mischievous designs of domestic
and intestine enemies, Popish Recusants, and others, Antipapists in the points
of some fundamental Doctrines, but Co-papists, as being Adversaries of the
Churches Discipline.

The contrary opinion of the lawfulness and unlawfulness of the forenamed
Public Oaths, is agreeable to the word of God, ratified by the continued
Customs of this and all other Nations, both Ecclesiastical, Civil, or Common;
and approved of by the best of Christians in all ages, by the consonant
unanimous Judgments of the ancient Fathers, and modern Writers of the Reformed
Churches, (together with the most eminent Divines in ours,) it is also
confirmed by the Harmony of their Confessions, both Lutherans, and Calvinists,
by all Canonists, and Casuists, all of them in a just severity condemning the
use of False, idle, and profane Oaths, assert the Authority of lawful
Magistrates (which the Treatist and his Abettors proudly deny) to require and
impose religious Oaths, and declare that it is the duty of Subjects to take
them, as it becomes Christians, with due reverence to the Majesty of God, and
fitting obedience to the commands of Superior and Inferior Magistrates, who
are entrusted with their power from God, and are to use it to his glory and the
welfare of the Church and Commonwealth.

This bright Cloud of Witnesses to the Truth I cannot say that I oppose to the
200 and 7. Authorities mustered up in a Catalogue placed in the front of the
Quaker's Treatise, for, As Chrysostom. Augustine, Jerome, Athanasius, etc.
most of them only inveigh without any limitation, or reserve against men's
easy and ordinary course of Swearing in private conversation, yet holding it
lawful both to give and take an Oath in great and weighty concerns for a
ratification of Truth, and establishing of Justice. As for some others of them
cited in his Catalogue, they were tainted with the Heresies of the
Samosatenians, Pelagians, Massilians, and the Euchites, and of their disciples
or followers in their opinion against Swearing at all, the Albigenses, and
Anabaptists, to whom we may add the Menists in the Netherlands mentioned by the
Treatist, p. 157. for this reason they are not to be held for competent Judges
in the case, neither are their authorities to be admitted; so are the Arguments
drawn from the sayings and practices of a few godly Martyrs to be rejected, to
wit, of Basilides and Polycarpus who only refused Oaths propounded to them
which were in the matter and form of them sinful, as to swear by the Fortune of
Caesar, which Polycarpus denied, or by the Genius of the Emperor, which
Basilides and Speratus refused, Pondere rationis haud Authorum numero est
mensuranda veritas.
as is to be seen in Eusebius. I do therefore conclude, and repeat what I
premised in my Preface that the Treatist's 207 Authorities are to little or no
purpose, rather against, than for him, and his Co-Anti-Jurists. Nay; I add and
say, put case he had produced a thousand move Authorities against all kind of
Swearing, Tert. li. Praescrip. cont. Haer To this saying Tert. let me add thi^
of S. Ambrose, Nolo nobis credatur, recitetur Scriptura.
I would retort to them all with that saying of Tertullian. Non expersonis
fidem, sed ex fide personas metiamur, we must not measure the Truth by the
persons of Men, as to say it is true because such a Learned man said it, but in
so because the Word of God does maintain it; and those persons (though never so
holy in outward appearance) are not to be commended, or imitated, who out of a
scrupulous, nice, erroneous conscience shall refuse to do that which the same
word allows, so is Judicial Swearing. Therefore the poor deceived Quakers
(whose ignorance I pity) are in a dangerous error, being Affirmatively
superstitious, in counting that a duty which is not, and Negatively, in
abstaining from that as sin, which is no sin, (i. e.) from all kind of Swearing.

Psalm. 53.5.
As presumptuous confidences where there is no Divine permission, so erroneous
fears where no fear ought to be, are very dangerous, and cast a snare upon the
Conscience.

I have one thing more (and that material) to propose to the Treatist, that is,
whether he was compos mentis, Page 3.
and not transported by a whim of Fancy, when he was bold to make a Proposal
in the Preface of his Pamphlet dedicated to the King and Parliament, that the
Quakers Yea and Nay (which is the mark in their mouths whereby they are known
and distinguished from others) may stand for an Oath, they being willing if
they should ever be convinced of a Lie (by promising what they performed not,
or asserting an untruth) to sustain the same Penalty that is usually inflicted
on Perjury. What was all this but to desire that the old Forms of State and
Judicial Oaths should be altered and turned into New? I Will instance only in
the Oath of Allegiance (which involves in the body of it that other of
Supremacy) in the propounding of which to W. P. or to any or his Brethren, the
Magistrate must (if the others request be granted) act the part of a Catechist,
in these terms: Do thou W. P. acknowledge the Kings Highness to be the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other His Highnesses Dominions, and
Countries, in all Causes and over all persons whether Ecclesiastical or Civil,
and do you promise that you will bear faith, and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, and defend Him to the utmost of your power against all conspiracies,
and attempts whatsoever against his Crown and Dignity, and do your best
endeavor to declare, and make known to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors
all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which you shall know or hear to be
made against him? To all these interrogations the supposed honest W. P. will
say Yea, and if I break my promise let the Penalty of Perjury be inflicted on
me. I pray what is all this but Canting? cunningness, and craft lies at the
bottom of it: What is the punishment of a Perjured person? It is to lose his
cars in a Pillory, and not to be admitted for a witness in any Court of
Justice, etc. Now consider how favorable a motion the good man has made for
himself and his Brethren! He cannot but know, and be assured of it, that if he
breaks his promise, by joining in a private Conspiracy against the King, or by
open rebellion raising any popular commotion, or tumults, he will be indicted
for Felony or Treason, and so lose his life in an halter instead of his ears.

And what security can the King have from W. P. (or any of his Tribe) for his
own safety and the Kingdoms Peace, or be assured that he will keep his promise,
and not be attached for a Lie in breaking of it, when he (the supposed prime
Penman of the Treatise) makes no conscience to assert or affirm what is most
false, as in the Case of Bishop Sanderson, and Saint Jerome, has been
demonstrated to his great shame. He that shall once baffle me with a bold lie,
I will hardly take his word, or rest in his Yea; and he that has invented, and
publicly vented one out of the Press, it may be suspected he will not keep his
private promise, and that his bare word will not bind him to an exact
performance, which a solemn Oath might do, whereby he calls God to be both a
witness of his promise, Number. 22.31.
and a severe Judge to punish him both in body and soul if he be a
Promissifragus. An Oath like to the Angel with a glittering Sword in his hand,
who stopped Balaam in his way to Balak, is of more force, and energy than a
naked word to bind a man to his duty; and there is no man that has an honest
heart and meaning, and knows the many temptations he is exposed to from his own
corrupt nature, the Fles^, the World, and the Devil, but will chearifully, and
solemnly take an Oath first praying to God that he may have, by his grace,
strength and power to keep it) whereby he may be the more awed by fear of God's
vindicative Justice, to be faithful and just in the discharge of his duty, or
any public office, which will procure to him the peace of a quiet mind or
indistur'd Conscience, which is a great blessing, and is gained many times by
means of a Promissory Oath in Swearing.

There is besides the former Proposal of the Quakers, a Question put by the
Author of the Treatise, whom I find to be in diverse shapes, sometimes acting
the part of a Pelagian in saying, that Truth (which is a grace of God) is
natural to him, next of a perfect Jesuit, as in the point of Dispensation to
the Jews, and his false Citations, and corrupting of the Fathers, and now the
part of a downright audacious Quaker, Page 14.15
Quo te Constringam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? His Quaere is this, Why their
Yea and Nay may not be admitted instead of an Oath, as well as the Lords
Avouchment upon their Honor? by which must be understood Virtue in the sense
of the best and most ancient Philosophers: what does he infer from this,
(though he be mistaken in the proper notion of Virtue, His words are, Virtue
needs not Swear etc.
and belyes too the Philosophers?) This is his Inference (or to this effect) We
are Virtuous persons, therefore we need not Swear, much less have Oaths imposed
upon us to tell the Truth, the only use of Oaths. My good virtuous Friend, I
must tell thee mildly, this is a Thrasonical brag. But to come to the Quaere,
My answer to it in general is, That it is impertinent, and incongruous, For
first the Quaker's Yea is only a simple Affirmation to assert the Truth, or
what has been said or done, a Question to this purpose having been put unto
him; But the Avouchment of a Lord upon his Honor, is a more solemn
Protestation and Asseveration of a Truth, and implies an Option, or wish, (as
an Oath does an Imprecation) and the sense or meaning of it (being but an
abridgment of his This Form was anciently the Lords Protestation.
per Fidem and Allegiantiam meam) is this, As I bear true Faith and Allegiance
to my Sovereign Lord the King, so is that which I say most true, and if I
witness an untruth, or promise what I do not purpose, nor will perform; let
disgrace and reproach fall upon my Honorable person, let me listed amongst
those that are disloyal and not faithful to their King, let me be counted for a
vile person unworthy of any honor, or respect from men, etc. So that by Honor
is not meant Virtue properly so called, as the Treatist fondly imagines, for
Virtue (or virtuous actions) is only the ground of Honor, which is, In
honorante not in honorato (as the Aristot.
Philosopher attests in his Ethics, or Book of Manners, which the Quaker never
studied) It is in the Honourer, not in him that is honored, being nothing else
but an high esteem and outward Reverence which men have of, and exhibit to a
Noble person for his Virtue, for his Piety toward God, and Loyalty to his
King. By this we may collect how the Treatist is mistaken, I will not say for
want of Learning, to which he pretends by citing many Authors, (and it argues a
cripple or lame Cause that needs so many Crutches) I rather impute it to his
Sophistical crafty industry, in laying hold on any thing, though it be but one
word, by which, and that misunderstood, he may gain a little countenance to his
exploded Opinion.

Besides this he cannot be excused for his Malapert rudeness, who dares put
himself into the Scales with the best of the Lords (and those virtuous Persons)
and conclude, that because in some cases they have a privilege to attest only
upon their Honors, therefore he may challenge the same for his Yea and Nay, by
which many credulous and well-meaning men have been deluded, and drawn into
Errors; witness E. B. a late Brewer in Westminster, who is famous, rather
infamous, for cheating all his Creditors to the ruin of many Families.

Moreover I must acquaint him, for a further refutation of his bold Proposal,
with what I have learned from that great Oracle of Law, and Law-Cases, Sir Ed.
Cook in the 12 Part of his Reports, p. 95, 96. There he tells us, that If any
one who is Noble, and a Peer of the Realm be sued in Chancery, he ought to
answer upon his Oath; and, if any Noble person be produced as a witness between
party and party, he ought to be sworn, or otherwise his Testimony is of no
value; in these cases his attestation, or Avouchment upon his Honor will not
be admitted, though in many others it may and ought to be accepted.

Furthermore, I must in lieu of his Proposal to the King and Parliament
propound a Question to him, which is, whether the King, and his Lords both
Spiritual and Temporal committed an heinous sin, when his Majesty at his
Coronation, bound himself (by a gracious condescension) in an Oath to discharge
faithfully that great Trust for the welfare of the Church and State committed
by God unto him, and they likewise obliged themselves by a reciprocal Oath to
be True and Faithful to him, with this close, So help me God, hereby invocating
God to be a Witness and Judge of what they had sworn, and desiring no help or
mercy from him, if they should ever rebel against their King? Dares the
Treatist or his Fellow-Quakers say that they sinned or broke Christ's command
by doing it? I presume they dare not, nay they cannot, without being guilty of
a lie; and to say that it is a sin to invocate or call upon God, is no less
than blasphemy. From hence I infer, that their general Thesis, to wit, That it
is not lawful to Swear in any case, is absurd, false, and ridiculous.

So it is likewise of a dangerous Consequence, as tending to the subversion of
Order, the destruction of good Manners (which they want) in States, Polities,
and Commonwealths, together with the stopping of legal proceedings in Courts
of Judicature (as has been proved) and before Justices of the Peace. In the
foresaid public Courts of Justice, there is a most necessary use of an
Assertory Oath to find out the Truth as to particular facts or actions; of a
Promissory Oath there is not so much need, or use in them: This is necessary in
Public, and Private matters, which are called by the Lawyers Extrajudicial,
the use of it in these is to contain Subjects in their Loyalty and Fidelity to
their King, for this end were framed the Oaths of Supremacy, and Allegiance;
the first in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the last in the
third of King James. It is likewise morally necessary to confirm Leagues and
Covenants contracted between Princes and Commonwealths, To the keeping of the
Laws, and Statutes, and consequently the honor, order, and peace of Colleges,
and Societies; To the binding of all public Officers to an honest and faithful
discharge of their duties, To ratify private bargains between Buyers and
Sellers, when it is required by any one of them, who suspects the others Truth
and Honesty in his dealings; but in this latter case, I could wish, that Oaths
might be forborne, and rather other means used, with less hazard to Conscience,
such are Pawns, and Witnesses, Bonds, and Handwritings.

To the former Wish, I shall add another; That all profane and blaspheming
Rabsheka's would in this one thing imitate the (so called) Quakers, (and for
which they cannot but be commended) who have so great a fear of an Oath as they
pretend) that out of a timorous jealousy of Swearing amiss they will not Swear
at all, by them the other may learn to have a just abhorrence of the sin of
easy, trivial, familiar, inconsiderate, and vain Swearing, which brings a
curse upon a man, Iurandi facilitate in perjurium labimur. Aug.
and his family, and disposes men to that horrid Sin, a sin of the first
magnitude, that is Perjury, or false Swearing, of which a Lie (most abominable
to God) is the Ingredient, besides the affront, irreverence, and dishonor done
to God, by calling upon him to witness an untruth.

I have a third Option, it is my hearty with and desire that the Treatist and
his Confederates would enter their names in the School of Wisdom, Eccies. 7.16.
and learn of Solomon this wholesome lesson of moderation, Be not righteous
overmuch, neither make thy self overwise, why should thou destroy thy self?
This Precept is of a great extent and latitude, Mercerus.
but the learned Professor of the Hebrew Tongue in Paris impales, and confines
it within the compass of these three Words, Ne sis justus nimium, Be not
over-righteous, (i.e.) Be not Severe, Leges moderandas docet nec severius
exigendas.. ibid.
be not Superstitious, be not Perverse. First, Be not Severe, so it concerns
the Judge, exhorting him by a mild interpretation to mitigate the rigor or the
Laws, and not tourge and press the bare letter of them against Offenders, that
break them either out of weakness, or ignorance. Secondly, Be not
Superstitious, so it reaches the Romanists, Iusti nimium sunt (i.e) videri
volunt, qui in suis operibus Iustificationem collocant Idem.
and condemns their works of Supererrogation, their going on Pilgrimage, their
tedious and long journeys to visit the shrines of Saints whom they worship,
also their self-castigations, their whipping and scourging of themselves,
conceiving vainly that these acts are meritorious, and fancying that they shall
be justified, and saved by their works. Thirdly, Be not Perverse, this founds
an alarm to the Separatists, the rigid Antidisciplinarians, whom this long Name
well befits, having continued a long time for many years in their opinions, for
which they have neither God's Word, nor right reason for their Defendants, and
from whom there is little or no hope that they will be reclaimed, so long as
they are guided by their obstinate wills, which they palliate with the specious
and abused name of Conscience. Their Sons begot by them, and their Scholars,
the poor Quakers, first learned of them the Trade of Separatism, and are (in
this of the same Temper with them) stiffned in perverseness. Of this opinion is
S Ambrose l 2. Apol. pro Davide. with others of the Fathers. Jude 19. Exodus
22.11.
Solomon, who died a Convert, and repented of his vanities, bespeaks them both
(though he be dead) by his lively precept, O vain men, Be not overmuch
righteous, neither in doing that which the Laws of the Church forbid,
(agreeable to the word) Do not separate, neither in not doing what God allows
in his Word, Do not refuse to take an Oath, when there is a great need of it,
and when it is required of thee by the Magistrate who is the Kings Deputy, Heb.
13.17.
as he is God's vicegerent who commands you to obey them that have the rule
over you, in things lawful, and so you obey them in the Lord, both in respect
of the Commander and the things Commanded.

To that exquisite gloss of Mercerus, I cannot omit to subjoyn another of the
great Scripturist Deodatus (once Professor of Geneva) upon the forecited Text
of Ecclesiastes, which in my opinion comes home to an obstinate Quaker, or any
other Dissenter, his numerical words are these. Be not bent too much upon a
thing which in thy opinion is just, without yielding any way either in Charity,
or wise integrity to the opinion of others, to the necessity of times, and
humane frailty. Surely this holy man would have told an Anti-jurist if he had
discoursed with him, that he was overmuch righteous by his refusing to swear at
all, and maintaining it to be sinful in others to swear in any case, when the
suspicions, jealousies, frauds, and falsities of men require an Oath, or make
it necessary in Judicial proceedings. The same Commentator, who had an
extraordinary gift from God (as his name imports) in expounding the Sacred
word, says thus in his Comment upon Mat. 5.34. (The Text which is
mis-interpreted by the Anabaptists) Seeing that an Oath is a means, and an help
to Truth, and to proof, appointed by God, and oftentimes very necessary, we
must restrain this command of Christ ( to wit, Swear not at all) to voluntary
Oaths, not required by them who have Authority, vain, frivolous and vicious
Oaths, seeing those things which are set down here have relation only to such.

Be not righteous overmuch (perverse Separatist) for why should thou destroy
thy self, (i.e.) (as Tremelius upon the Text) By thy pride and arrogance run
headlong into destruction, Col 1.18. Ephesians. 4.15.
by undergoing the penalties of the Laws here, and endangering the salvation of
thy soul hereafter. Separation from the Church his mystical Body, is a dividing
from Christ the Head.

In the last place, and for a close of all, I do earnestly desire the Heads and
Abettors of the Quaking party to afford me so much Charity, as to believe, that
I had no other design in undertaking the Refutation of their Treatise (put into
my hands by a most religious knowing person) but only their Conviction, and
Conversion. For when I had read, what is the sixth of eleven things which they
desire to be considered, viz. Page 155, 156, 157.
That their Refusal to Swear in all cases, is a matter of Faith, and whatsoever
is not of Faith is Sin, I pitied their mistake, (as to the former part of their
Position) and conceived it my duty (with others of the Clergy) to undeceive
them poor mistaken souls, by demonstrating that as it is usual with God, to
send men (as the Apostle speaks) strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These.
10.11.
because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; so
They believe that to be true which is apparently false, and that it is a sin to
do, what they (though falsely) believe ought not to be done, (i. e.) To Swear by
the Name of God, although it may be for God's glory in the vindication of the
Truth, or to promote a Neighbors good.

My next design was (which is every man's duty) to prevent the Contagion which
might spread amongst the poor people from their 2 Timothy 2.17. Their word will
eat as does a Canker.
Gangreen-Opinion; for whilst they profess Conscience for their disobedience,
and alledg Scripture (though misconstrued) for their Conscience, and color all
with an appearance of outward Sanctity in their lives, not usually tainted with
debauchery, and drunnkeness, it may be justly feared that the Populacy, if not
fortified by pregnant demonstrations of Truth against their spreading errors
and Opinions, will cry up their Piety (they appearing for a great part of them
morally Just, and civilly Innocent, as were some of the refined Heathens) and
by degrees join with them in their Confederacy against the Laws of the
Kingdoms, and the Church's Constitutions, there being sown in the hearts of
the people the seeds of Rebellion, Faction, and Sedition, which are ofttimes
sad effects of Conventicles, or private Meetings, called by alearned Greek
Father (from the sad experience he found of them) Denns of Thieves or Robbers,
(...), Epiphan.
for that the Meeting-Masters steal the hearts of Subjects from their King and
Governors, of Wives from their Husbands, and of these from their Wives, of
Children from their Parents, of Servants from their Masters; for there can be
no true love or affection, where there is a difference of Opinion, and
Practice, whilst two or three of a Family go to Conventicles, and the rest to
open Churches to join with Gods Saints, and Servants in the public Service of
God, as it is enjoined by the fourth Commandment. He likewise terms them (...),
The Receptacles of evil Spirits, such as filled and possessed the hearts of
Judas, and Simon Magus, and may possess the hearts of many of the Leaders and
Teachers in them.

For a Coronis or superpondium of all has been writ in the defense of the
Legality of a Judicial, and in some cases of a private Oath, I desire the
Treatist once more to consider what he has said Page 27. of his Treatise. Take
away lying and there remains no more ground for Swearing; He should have said,
there will be no ground for Perjury; For suppose a man never told a Lie, yet if
an Oath should be required of him by the Magistrate to vindicate his own, or
another suspected Honesty and Truth, he would have a good ground for his
Swearing in this Case, he being commanded to do it; so that the Treatist's
Proposal is vain, as it is likewise of a thing that is impossible. 1 Cor. 11 19.
For as there must be Heresies (i. e. they cannot be hindered) so there will be
(as long as the world lasts) lying, or false-speaking, with dissimulation
amongst men, Ergo, by the Quakers own concession, there will be a necessity of
Swearing. Thus I may retort and say, the Anti-Jurist is (as the Giant Goliath
was) wounded with his own weapon, 1 Samuel 17.51.
refuted by his own Argument.

But I shall not (out of my tender pity and regard to his Soul, and to the
deluded Souls of his Disciples) leave him gasping and bleeding under his wound,
but as I formerly praised him, and them for their pretended awful reverence to
Gods holy Name, so (as it becomes a merciful Soul-Physician, and as the good
Samaritan did to the wounded Traveller, Luke 10.) I shall pour the oil of my
prayers into his wound, beseeching God the Father of mercyes so to open his,
and the eye of their understandings (as he did the eyes of Balaam) and the door
of their hearts (as he did open Lydia's) that they may (laying aside all
prejudice) attend to those saving Truths which have been delivered in this
Anti-Treatise, Number. 21.31. Act. 16.14.
and (being convinced of their errors) submit with a due, and humble obedience
(according to the will of God) to the wholesome Laws of the Realm, and to the
Churches laudable constitutions, that so they and we may meet now together in
love, unity and concord, and hereafter in the great Congregation of Heaven
above, into which none shall be admitted but only those, who are the true and
lively members of Christ their Head, who are animated, quickened, and guided by
his good Spirit the spirit of love, and unity, (which rests not in the breast
of a perverse malicious Schismatic) and the spirit of Truth, where with the
soul of a proud obstinate Heretic (who maintains and propagates opinions
repugnant to the word of God) is not enlightened. From that Venom of Schism, and
this Pest of Heresy, Lord preserve and defend thy Church: And so sanctify the
Hearts, and govern the Tongues of all profane Swearers, that (being awed by a
trembling fear of those dreadful Judgments, which have in all ages fallen upon
such miscreants) they may with thankful lips, and by the holiness of their
lives advance thy glory, and publish thy praises. O let thy mercy be glorified
in their Conversion, and not thy Justice magnified in their Confusion. This I
humbly beg in the behalf of them, and all Dissenters from the Orthodox
Professors of thy Truth, and sound Religion, for thy mercies sake and alone
merits of thy beloved Son our Lord and only Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

