ANTI-COTTON ANSWERED. Who comes with five hundred Questions against two and
twenty of the Examiner Examind, and yet leaves it out of Question, That the
Magistrate ought to suppress IDOLATRY, etc.

JOB 31.28. This also were an Iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I
should have denied the God that is above.

ROMANS 13.3, 4. The Magistrate ought to be a terror to evil workers.

1 PET. 4.3. But Idolatry is an evil work [per eminentiam] Therefore the
Magistrate ought to be a terror to Idolatry.

London, Printed for John Wright, dwelling at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley
1653.

To the READER.
SInce the Question is come down the Stairs, and delivered over by him that
first awakt it to a second; The Author of the Examiner Examind may think it a
just reason for himself to do the like.

Accordingly I have taken upon me as a second to answer that second; though in
truth there is very little in his discourse that has need of answering, the
chiefest of his matters having been already foild in New England, and the rest
being but frothy words and impertinent divagations, mistakes of the Questioner,
frivolous Questions, and full of contradictions.

His words would better become a Play, then sober Truth, who contents her self
within a modest comely habit; nay she had rather be Nuda then fucata. And
though she speaks plain English, yet abhors scurrilousnesse and railings.

How many long-land digressions does this Author make in his Book. He must go
out of his way to meet Tithes, and to fall upon the Ministry etc. Indeed I
think he is never out of his way, for I am of opinion that he never proposed
any to himself, not knowing whither his unruly fancy would lead him when he
puts pen to Paper.

His mistakings of those short Questions are gross and frequent, sometimes
adding to them, sometimes diminishing them, and grounds many of his Questions
upon his own mistakes, as you have instanced in this ensuing discourse.
Besides, he is mistaken in his whole discourse; there being nothing in the
Question that puts Magistrates upon forcing of consciences; and punishing
misbeliefe or unbelief, but external acts as Idolatry and Blaspemy, and
infection by communicating of Heresy.

Neither is there any thing in the Questions to put the Magistrate upon waging
war with Turks or Jews upon the account of Religion. And for the Magistrates
judgeing of Heresy, the first Question of the second Examiner does tax it by
way of supposall. That the Magistrate does know the saving truth and his
judgment right in it, and then whether it is not his duty to cause it to be
propogated by Laws, Page 41.
by maintenance, and suppressing the outward Acts that are contrary: Here is no
occasion given for suspending of Magistrates, or for Pagans or Turks to act in
Religious matters; for the Questioner speaks of only such as know the truth.
How many frivolous Questions, as what would we do if Christ should be born
again amongst us, etc. I am loath to cast about how to order things that are
impossible to be, Page 53.
I leave this work to idle melancholy brains. But I think if this Author had
lived when Christ was borne, he would not have owned him, because he little
respects Moses and the Prophets. His Contradictions are many, and such as
destroy his own Tenet. He confesses all Kings, Queens, Judges in the World
ought to be nursing Fathers and Mothers to Christ and his Followers; Page 3.
and yet this must be no truth when it is spoken by another, but he will question
it; Is not this to be guilty of a Spirit of Contradiction.

I shall no longer Epistolize the Reader, keeping him from the perusal of the
ensuing Discourse, only I desire him to take notice, that this Defendant of
the first Examiner being much given to repetitions in his book. His clamorous
Arguments do occur almost in every Page, yet though the Defendant speak four
times the same thing, I answer the same thing but once; after once Answering
esteeming his Arguments when I meet them not to be alive again, but only
apparitions or Ghosts of Reason walking in a vain shadow.

If any thing seem doubtful in the Replies, some following question or oath
will help to explain it, so that by the help of comparing one place with
another the Reader may be satisfied.

Anti-Cotton Answered.
THIS Defendant goes out top-gallant with his Rhetorical Sails hoisted up; as
soon as he comes to the maine, I Will encounter him, in the Interim I Will busy
my self in questioning his setting forth.

I ask,

Qu. 1. Whether he thinks that the Army fought for liberty in Idolatry, Pa. 4.
Heresy and Blasphemy, and did prosper for this.

Q. 2. Whether such a Soul-freedome being granted to every man as he points out
Page 5. would be a means to preserve the Commonwealth; Pa. 5.
or not rather kindle a desire and an endeavor in the Commonalty after the
obtaining of such a liberty for their Bodies and Estates as is granted them for
their Souls, viz. that they might maintain whom they pleased to rule them
according to their abilities and consciences; which being granted in a short
time Actum erit de Rep.

Q. Whether he can militate for a toleration of the two great evils, Idolatry
and Heresy; and hang out a Flag with this Motto, Soule-freedome. Whereas
liberty in whatsoever is evil the Scripture terms bondage.

Now he is come forth: let us hear what he can say against these maine
Questions; I Will first propose the questions in their order, and then give a
brief yet full sum of his several Answers; and then subjoyne a Reply,
vindicating those serious Questions from his trivial Questionings.

Question 1.
Whether a Magistrate that knows the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ Jesus,
do fulfill the Office of a Nursing Father, if he do not cause this saving
Food to be given to his Children; and Poison, that is a contrary Doctrine to be
kept from them?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Pa. 7.8.10.
Whether this Prophecy ( If. 49.23.) is not fixed to the distinct Nation of the
Jews, by (verse. 22) of this Chapter.

2. Whether these Kings and Queens must needs be such spiritual Fathers as
Paul was.

These two Questions joining issue make up his sixth Question.

3. Pa. 8.
Whether Magistrates be not as essentially civil as the Master of a Ship.

4. Pa. 9.11.
Whether Pagan Magistrates be not as truly Magistrates as the best Christians;
and whether Pagans converted receive any addition to their Magistracy.

5. Pa. 12.20 21.
Whether Magistrates have not often been mistaken and given poison for food,
and whether this Doctrine of Kings and Queens being Nursing Fathers cost not
the late King Charles his head.

Reply.
Ad. 1. This Answerer interprets ( Isa. 49.23.) to be a Prophecy pecaliar to
the Jews, and fixes this interpretation from (verse 23.) Yet for all this his
Spirit is not fixed, but he enclines rather to another interpretation as
appears from his own words int he later end of this page, viz. whether here
is not promised to this People, or rather (says he) to these Saints whether
literal or spiritual Jews. Thus he enervates the strength of his first
Answer by choosing another interpretation; but he is so unconstant that in the
tenth Page he seems to be out of love with his choice, saying that some Kings
were thus empowered by God, but what is this to all Kings and Queens and
Magistrates in the world.

To thesE words of his I subjoyne his own confession in the third page, and
desire to know what Harmony there is bet wixt them; page 3. (says he) I
confess that all Nations, all Peoples, Kings and Judges ought to be nursing
Fathers and Mothers to Christ and his followers.

Ad. 2. 1. It is not asserted that Kings and Qneenes should be such spiritual
Fathers as Paul was, for then they should give Food to their Children, but the
words in the Question are that they should cause this Food to be given. This
word (cause) carefully inserted in the Question carelessly omitted by this
Answerer perhaps carefully and of set purpose) takes off this needless
question.

2. I ask whether Magistrates countenancing and maintaining such as Paul for
to nurture up their People in the fear of the Lord may not be called nursing
Fathers. This Answerer in his next words allows them to be Shepherds of the
People, as Poets (says he) use to call them; he might have said as Scripture
calls them. Ezekiel. 34.23.


Now a Shepherd ought to provide for his Sheep and to drive away the Wolves
from the Flocks. How much comes this short of a nursing Father.

3. It is said (verse 23.) that Kings and Queens should bow down to the
Saints; yet from these words there cannot be necessarily drawn this inference,
viz. that Magistrates should be so far from challenging this Title of being
nursing Fathers, as that they should bow down and acknowledge the Saints to be
their Superiors; for I desire to know, if I bring up a Kings son whom I
honor above my self, whether I may not challenge the Office of a nursing
Father without degrading the Infant by setting my self above him.

Ad. 3. 1. A Magistrate differs much from a Master of a Ship, in regard that
those in the Commonwealth are the Magistrates subjects, but the Passengers in
a Ship are not the Masters Subjects, neither was he constituted by them.

2. Notwithstanding this vast difference the Magistrate is desired to do no
more then this answerer allows to a Master of a Ship, viz. that he show
kindness and countenance according to the quality and temper of his own
belief and conscience. Upon this concession the Question will follow, viz.
that a Magistrate, etc.

Ad. 4. 1. It is granted that Pagan Magistrates are as truly Magistrates; for
by God they rule as well as Christians; but they cannot discharge this their
Office so well as Christians; so likewise Pagans are as truly Fathers, but
cannot fully discharge their duties till they be Christians, viz. to bring up
their Children in the fear of the Lord.

2 A Pagan converted receives no new addition of power to his Magistracy, but
only is enabled to manage this power which he received from God to a right
end, viz. for God.

Ad. 5. 1. What follows upon this that Magistrates pretending to be nursing
Fathers have mistaken Poison for Food; he cannot draw this conclusion that
Magistrates ought to take no more care for their Subjects in matters of
Religion; by the same Logic I Will argue that Parents having been mistaken
grossly in the education of their Children: Fathers are not to look after the
bringing up of their Children. What a petious Arguments is this?

2. The true consequence will be this, that seeing Magistrates have been often
mistaken, therefore they ought to take the greater care and to do nothing
rashly but be well advised.

3. This Doctrine did not cost King Charles his Life, he was far from being a
nursing Father; for he hugged in his bosom that stinging Serpent Idolatry.

4. King Charles was cut off for miscarriages in civil affairs, for not
mannaging his power for the good of his Subjects; yet this example should not
deter men from taking the Magistracy upon them, but should rather stir them
up to remove the Idols of their Fathers, and to give heed that they rule with
diligence and Justice.

Question 2.3.
Whether the Doctrine of Grace that brings Salvation, do not teach men to
live Godly, Righteously and soberly; and more particularly, to obey
Magistrates, and to live in Love and peace among themselves; and whether such a
Doctrine do not advance the peace and prosperity of a Nation; and
consequently, whether a Magistrate be not bound to advance this Doctrine, which
does advance the peace and prosperity of a Nation?

Whether Godliness has not the promise of this life and that to come? And
whether these promises do not contain in them all good and happiness? and if
so whether the Magistrate be not bound, to his power, to advance that
godliness which gives all good and happiness to a Nation.

The Sum of the several answers.
1. Pa. 13.19.
Whether the Magistrate receiving his power from the People can have any power
in Spirituals.

2. Pa. 14.
Whether there be any such thing as a National Church.

3. Pa. 17.
Whether there be not flourishing States that are Pagans; and whether the godly
are not persecuted; and whether Gods people have any other peace then
spiritual peace.

4. Mercy to the persecuted is the upholder of a State, P. 17.18.19.
and has raisd Amsterdam.

Reply.
1. Ad. 1.
Whether the Magistrate being styled a Minister of God for his Peoples good, is
not to defend the true Religion as well as keep the civil peace.

2. Whether a Magistrate in making Laws about Spirituals does exceed the bounds
of his calling, seeing that such laws are for the good of his Subjects, and
his Subjexts have given him power to do what is for their good.

3. Whether Christians may not give power about Spirituals to their
Magistrates, seeing in some cases it is allowd them to make Ministers.

4. Whether we read in Scripture of any punished for not reforming Idolatry in
the reign of the Kings, besides the Kings themselves, which clearly shows that
it is the Magistrates duty to punish Idolatry.

5. Whether the People gave the Magistrate power to give liverty to Idolatry
and Heresy. Ad. 2.


1. The Answerers three utrums against National Churches are besides the
question; for the words in the question viz. that the Magistrate is bound to
advance the Doctrine of grace and godliness, do only denote that the
Magistrate is bound to encourage men to preach this Doctrine and to keep out
of the Pulpit Idolatry and Heresy. I cannot perceive that this question does
erect a National Church; for a Magistrate may do thus much where the Churches
are Congregationall. There is a difference between advancing this Doctrine in a
Nation, and making a National Church.

2. I desire to know whether those Presbiterians that admit but one of twenty
to be of their Church, or those Independents that are stricter in their
admission (whom the Author mentions) deny that the Magistrate is bound to
advance the Doctrine of Grace. I am sure the late proposals of diverse reverent
Divines manifests the contrary, and the Author can assure us what New England
holds in this case.

It is granted that there are many flourishing Nations amongst whom the
doctrine of Grace has not been advanced, Ad. 3.
but I ask:

1. Whether their peace and happiness shall be so permanent as the peace of
those amongst whom this Doctrine is advanced, and I refer the Answerer for a
resolution of this question to the 37. Psalm: and whether there may not be a
peace in wrath.

2. It is granted that the Godly frequently suffer persecution; what will the
Author infer hence? If he will infer any thing against the question, It
must be this, viz. that the advancement of godliness hinders the peace of a
Nation, and therefore the Magistrate should not advance godliness in a Nation
for fear of Persecution. What an Heathenish Argument is this. Let the great
ones of the Earth take heed of being offended at the Cross of Christ. Christ
says, Blessed are you when men persecute you for my names sake, and rejoice
that you are counted worthy.

3. This Answerer says that all outward peace promised upon the condition of
holiness is vanished. Unto the falsity of this tenet, let these Scriptures
witness, Prove. 16.7. Revel. 6.14.

Nav; Peace is given upon this condition, that we might serve God in holiness,
Luke 1.74, 75.

I'ts true that mercy upholdeth a Throne, but I ask:

1. Whether such a mercy as to spare where the Lord bids to destroy will not
rent a Kingdom from the Magestrates; 1 Samuel 15
as the sparing of Agag rent the Kingdom from Saul.

2. Whether it is not cruelty to tolerate infected persons to the infection of
others. Here the Answerer brings in Ansterdam for an instance; which (says he)
has flourished many years by being a receptacle of all Fugitives whatsoever.

1. He might as well from the flourishing of Rome have pleaded for the erecting
of an Asylum for Thieves and Robbers.

2. Has not Genevah flourisht many years, though that City has sheltered no
Malefactors, who escapting the hands of Justice have fled thither. But all such
have been tried and executed according to Law.

3. Is New England ever the worse for casting out some scismaticall Heretics.

This Answerer having a sting in his tail closes with an Invective against
Tithes; diverse men of such kind of spirits with their Invectives stir up the
People, bid them cry, and then bawle out upon the Magistrate for not appeasing
them; if such men were kept from writing we should have few of these outcries.

Question 4.
Whether the Magistrate be not bound to love God with all his might, and
accordingly to advance his Glory with all his might? And whether he do so, if
he do not put forth all his might in advancing Gods true worship and service,
and the chief good of Gods People committed to his care?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Pa. 20.21.
The weapons of Christians are not carnal but spiritual, 2 Cor. 10. and these
are sufficient to batter all strong holds, and the carnal can effect nothing
but a storming the Nations into Hipocrisy.

2. Pa. 10.20.
Whether in the New Testament Christ has appointed the civil Sword to be
desendor of his Religion.

3. Pa. 21.
Whether Religion did even so flourish as under persecution.

Reply.
1. Ad. 1.
Whether the spirts intent in (2 Cor. 10. is not to set out the spiritual
might of Ministers against those who disgraced their personal weaknesses. Q.
D. though some amongst you say that Paul Evangelist powerfully Manu and Penna,
but his bodily pesence is weak, his speech is contemptable; yet I do not
approve of this saying, for though Paul walks in the flesh, that is in this
Body, yet he wars not after the Flesh, that is the strength of our warsare
consists not in Rhetorical words and pronunciation, we put not the stresse of
our warfare upon these, for they are carnal weapons, but ours are spiritual;
the result of the whole is. That Ministers who have no good utterance are not
to be condemned, or their Ministry thought weak; for they come not in Word but
in Spirit.

Thus it clearly appears that by carnal weapons is not meant the civil Sword.

2. Spiritual weapons are sufficient, only sufficient to bring down the high
thoughts of the heart, and Idolatry, Heresy, and Murders in the heart are only
batterd by these weapons, but if Heresy, etc. break forth into external acts,
they may be reached and punished by the civil Sword; and questionless this
outward punishment of Idolatry etc. might truly convert many, as the erecting
of the Gallows for Murderers has brought many to true repentance, and
amendment; yet I do not deny but this rigor might make many Hipocrites, dor
fear Wolves might cover themselves in Lambs clothing be outwardly Lambs: Yet I
ask,

1. Whether such Hipocrites are not better for society, then Ravenous Wolves.

2. Whether Idolatry, Heresy, Murder, pent up in the heart, not daring to
break forth for fear of Laws, be not less displeasing to God, then when for
want of restraint they break forth into the members, and become reigning sins;
for sins of this latter sort God usually punishes a Nation; therefore the
Magistrate is to restrain such sins: further, if such coercive power of the
Magistrates be to be omitted because it makes Hipocrites: I ask,

Why the Preaching of the Word is not to be omitted, seeing that thereby many
have stormed into Hypocrisy.

Ad. 2. 1. God has appointed the civil Sword to defend Religion, Romans 13.34.

2. The Author might as well ask, why God appoining in the old time Kings to
be defenders of Religion, suffered so many of them to be Idolators. Take heed
of upbraiding God.

3. If the Revelation be not Apocripha with this Author, he has cause to
believe that Kings shall burn the Whore with Fire.

Ad. 3. 1. Whether the flourishing of Religion under Persecution, will excuse
the Magistrate from not defending of the true Religion; though the Israelites
encrese under the Egyptian bondage, yet Pharaoh goes not unpunisht.

2. I ask, whether the Church is not also increased by peace, viz. Act. 2.47.
Act. 9.31.

Question 5.
The People being bound to pray for Magistrates, that under them they may had a
peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. Whether the Magistrate
be not bound to do that which the People are bound to pray that he may do?
And whether he be not also bound to give himself up to God to be his Servant
and Instument, when he grants this Prayer?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether these words godliness and honesty be rightly translited.

2. That Saints should imagine that the civil Sword should defend their
godliness, and suppress ungodliness implies a twofold contradiction.

1. That they must imagine the Magistrate, to have a clearer sight in judging
of godliness then themselves.

2. It Is a Parodoxe that they should not be able to live in godliness without
the help of the Magistrate.

3. Whether the Scope of the place be not this, that God would direct the
Magistrates to keep their States in peace; that in the Peace of those Nations
the Saints might have Peace.

4. Whether the blessed Spirit that is in all Gods people be not sufficient to
preserve them in godliness without the help of the Magistrate.

5. Whether in these divisions we may pray, that the Magistrate would judge
(whose worship and godliness is true, and defend that) and prohibit all
others as Heretical, etc.

Reply.
Ad. The Vulgar Latin renders it ut quietam vivam agamus in omni pietate. 2
Bazd: cum omni pietate
1. This Answerer carps at the translation, yet gives no better, neither a
reason of the falsity of this translation. I'ts easy to carpe and multiply
questions without a wherefore.

Carpere vel cesses nostra, vel ede tua. If (...) must not be translated
godliness, we shall have little godliness in our Translation. Most
translations translate it godliness; for the Readers satisfaction let him read
the marginall Notes.

Ad. 2. It Is a most nuchristan speech that the Apostle should exhort to any
duty, that implies unchristian Paradoxes; The duty does not imply these
Paradoxes.

1. Christians may defire the Magistrate to defend them, and yet need not
imagine the Magistrate to have a clearer discerning in godliness then
themselves; may not a Carnal man defend a Spiritual man.

2. Cannot the Parliament make a General, for the defense of their cause, but
they must imagine the General to have a clearer discerning of the cause then
themselves.

3. I'ts not denied but that they might live a godly life without the
Magistrate, yet they could not live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness
without the Magistrate.

Ad. 3. The Author comes far short of the Scope of the place.

1. For in the former chapter Paul had delivered Hymeneus to Satan, that others
might learn not to blaspheme, and he begins his Chapter with this exhort. I
exhort therefore that Prayers be made for all in Authority, that we may live,
etc. Q. d. that they may put forth their power against such Disturbers of the
Church, that we may live quietly; this appears further from the reason that
inforces this exhort, (verse. 4.) for God would have all men to be saved and
come to the truth.

If the Scope of the place had been that God would direct the Magistrates to
keep their States in peace, that so in the peace thereof, the Saints might
have peace: The Author needed not have added this reason in (verse. 4.) for
Carnal men without coming to the truth might have kept the State in peace;
and so the Author have had his end.

2. If the Author gives the true Scop of the place, the Author should rather
have exhorted tem to pray, that the States (wherein) they lived might have had
War; for then they would not have been at leisure to torment Saints; for when
the Persecutors had War with other Nations, then the Srs. were free from
Persecution, and when they had Peace, then they made War against the Saints.
In the Peace of the States the Saints had seldom Peace.

Ad. 4 The Spirit is able to keep Gods people, though they should want nursing
Fathers and Teachers, which as this Answerer says, are respectively necessary,
yet all helps are with Humility to be used, where they may be had, (we have no
warrant to cast away means) and are respectively necessary, as this Author
speaks.

Ad. 5. I'ts not defired that the Magistrate would so judge of one worship (as
Prebytery or the like) as to set it up, and condemn all others as Alasphemy,
etc. But that he would prohibit Blasphemy and Idolatry, and those that are
Blasphemers: and I ask,

Why we may not as safely pray such a Prayer though diverse be of a contrary
mind, as we prayed for the Parliament, when diverse were of a contrary mind.

Question 6.
Whether Abraham and the Heads of other Families before the Law, where not
Magistrates in their Families? And whether Abraham did not command his Family
to keep the way of the Lord? Genesis 18.19.
And whether God did not commend him for doing so? And whether Jacob did not
purge his House from Idols, Genesis 34.2.
and caused his Household to go up to Bethel to worspip the true God? Sect. 10.
And whether Abraham and Jacob were merely Fellow Servant with there Servants
(as this Examiner says) and their Household might command Abraham and Jacob, as
well as Abraham and Jacob command their Household?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether the Questioner deals fairly with the Examiner, in saying that the
Examiner says Abraham's Household might command him as well as he them.

2. Whether any consequence can be gathered from Abraham, and Jacob (who purged
his House from Idols) for Masters now a days to follow, seeing that they were
typical.

3. Whether it be not Gods design to choose men of low degree, and whether it be
not against Gods declared Will that we should expect many Christian Magistrates.

4. Whether a Christian that Participates more of the Spirit of Christ, has
not more power in Religion, then the highest Magistrate.

5. Whether a Subject may not reprove a Magistrate for Sin.

Reply.
Ad. 1. The Questioner does not at all slander the Examiner laying this
assertion to his charge, for that it is his own child, this Answerer himself
bears witness; for this Answerer confesses that its an assertion of the
Examiner, viz. Page 26.
That in Religious matters the Magistrate and Subjects are Fellow Servants; I
ask then, why this Answerer cavels thus, seeing that the Questioner speaks
not of Abraham or Jacob in a civil respect, but only in a Religious?

Ad. 2. Whether Masters of Families may not draw from Abraham's example, this
consequence of causing their Family to keep the way of the Lord, seeing that
they draw the consequence of baptizing their children from Abraham.

2. Whether in this case Abraham was Typical.

Ad. 3. Though there should not be many Christian Magistrates, yet those few
that are, ought the rather to advance the Christian Religion.

2. Whether if God choose men of low degree and make them Magistrates, i'ts not
Gods will that they should advance godliness.

Ad. 4. He that has most of the Spirit is not highest in Religious matters:
for in the Church militant, order is to be kept, and the valiantestman is not
always Captain. Abilities without a calling does not give a man Power and
Authority.

2. Pari ratione I ask, whether a Subject that participates more of Policy,
has not more power in State matters then the highest Statesman.

3. I ask, whether Magistrates may not be high in the Spirit.

Ad. 5. The Subject may reprove a Magistrate, Nathan may reprove David; yet it
does not follow that Nathan may as well command in Religious matters as David.

Question 7.
Whether Artaxerxes did well in making a Decree for the advancement of the true
wership of the true God, and in causing Ezra to teach them the law of God? Ezra
7.
And whether the King of Nineveh did well to command his People to keep a
general Fast, and to turn from their evil ways, whereby he saved that great
City? Or whether he might not have done better to have left them to a careless
liberty, and so to destruction?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether these two Instances be not ill coupled, for Artaxerxes gave free
liberty of conscience to the Jews, whereas the King of Nineveh forced his
People to Fast.

2. Did Artaxerxes compel the Jews to his Religion, or the Persians to the
Jews, or the Jews to go to Jerusalem.

3. What can be gathered hence; but that it pleases God sometimes to affect
the hearts of Idolatrous Kings with kindness to his People.

4. Whether this Instance makes not for Soul-freedome in that the Jews were
not forced to their own Jerusalem.

As to the King of Nineveh.

1. Whether examples in Scripture bind our consciences in worship.

2. Whether this Example of the King of Nineveh be fit for all Nations to
imitate, seeing that men's consciences differ as much as the Climates in which
they live.

Reply.
Ad. 1. The Answerer give us in his book the Sum of this Question, after
this manner. Whether Artaxerxes and the King of Nineveh did well in making
there decrees, he puts these two instances under one utrum, whereas the
Questioner makes two utrums of them.

Now I ask, who is to be blamed for coupling of these two distinct Instances
together.

Ad. 2. There is no such thing asserted, but the Question only is, whether he
did well in what he did do, or no.

Ad. 3. With a little Logic this conclusion may be gathered, viz. If
Artaxerxes did well in making this decree (which empowered Ezra to set Judges,
which may judge all the people that know the Law of God, and to execute
Judgment upon them that would not do them) a Christian Magistrate would do
well in Countenancing and Encourage those that teach the law of the Lord, and
in punishing those that would not obey it.

Ad. 1. All the liberty that is granted them is, that they might choose whether
they would go to Jerusalem or no, but those that went to Jerusalem were not
left free to what worship they pleased, for verse. 26. whosoever will not do
the Law, let judgment be executed upon him, etc. So noe Christians are desired
to come out of Babylon, but those that are willing. Yet if they come out of
Babylon, and dwell under the Christian Magistracy, and will not do the Law of
the Lord, let Judgment be executed upon them.

Ad. 1. Whether those things that were writ aforetime, were not writ for our
learning.

Ad. 2. Pari ratione, I Will argue the Alcoran is fitter to be followed then the
Bible. Why did not Christ make a particular Bible to suit with the Climates
according to the elevation of the People.

Question 8.
Whether any of the Prophets, Apostles, yea our Savior himself did ever
except at the Mngistrates Authority, for questioning them in matters of
Religion?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. The Prophets and Christ are ill coupled in this Question, because the Law
and the Prophets were until John, and so their Actions cannot be brought in as
witnesses with Christ.

2. Whether Christ did not except against the Magistrates power in Religion, in
that distinction, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. was not
giving Caesar his due, a giving God his due, what difference can there be
between Gods due and Caesar's due, but only that of matter of conscience
Spiritual and Religious which Caesar had no power over.

3. The Apostles not only refused to obey ungodly commands, but even to own
the Courts of the highest in matters of Religion, Act. 4.5.

4. If Christ's Followers should own any Trybunall questioning them by
Authority, but Christ's in matters of Religion, it would be Blasphemy.

Reply.
Ad. 1. 1. Its true the Prophets Prophesied of Christ's coming until John,
Mat. 11.13. but the substance of their Doctrine is not antiquated by Christ's
coming, Mat. 5.17.

2. I ask, why the Prophets Testimony may not be coupled with Christ's, seeing
that the same Spirit that was in Christ, was in the Prophets, 1. Pet. 1.11.

Ad. 2. I cannot conceive what objection against the Magistrates Power can be
gathered out of Mat. 22.21. the scope of the place is no more then that the
maintaining of Gods service, must not excuse them from maintaining the civil
power, for they were Caesar's Subjects, and therefore must pay Tribute to
Caesar: And though in giving Caesar his due, in some sense they gave God his
due (because Magistracy is an ordinance of God) yet this was not Gods whole due
(for the Ministry is likewise an ordinance of God) and I think the payments
toward the maintaining of Gods service were easily to be discerned from
Caesar's Tribute, and might be called Gods due in a peculiar manner. But none so
blind as those that will not see.

Ad. 3.1. I ask, whether the Apostles were not often accuse of Heresy before
the Magistrates, did they ever plead the Magistrates had no power to judge of
such cases.

Nay, is not Gallio branded for his indifferency and carelessness in such cases.

2. I'es false that the Apostles Act. 4.5. refused to own the Court, for they
pleaded Non-guilty, and made a defense for them selves which is a full owning
of a Court.

Ad. 4. Whether the Apostles by Answering to Courts that questioned them
concerning their Religion were guilty of Blasphemy.

Whether Paul counting himself happy in that he should Answer before Agrippa
counted it a happy thing to speak Blasphemy.

Question 9.10.11.12.
If a believing Magistrate, as a nursing Father, recommend to his Children the
wholesome Food of the Word, that is able to save their Souls, and encourage
those that disperse and dispense it; and withal, forbid others to give abroad
the Poison, contrary to it? Whether the Examiner has just cause to say, that
this is a Ground for another Magistrate to command the giving abroad of Poison,
and to forbid the delivering of the wholesome Food that may save his peoples
Souls?

Authority being given by God to Asa to advance true Religion and suppress
Idolatry (which he did to deposing of his Mother) Whether this were a ground
for Manasseh, (one of his successors) to set up Idolatry, and a principle of
Persecution, whereupon he might kill those that would not worship his Idols?

When God made a Law, that Blaspemy proved by two Witnesses, should be punished
with Death: Whether he therein did lay a principle of Persecution or Murder,
whereby Jesabel by two false Witnesses might unjustly put Naboth to death?

Whether Paul commanding Christian Fathers to bring up their Children in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, do hereby lay a Principle whereupon
Idolatrous Parents may bring up their Children in the nurture and Doctrine of
Idolatry; that is, in the Doctrine of Devils?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. The Examiner is not so void of reason as to imagine that corruptions and
abuses are sufficient ground to overthrow a truly Christian constitution.

2. Whether Parents may not do that which Paul exhorts them to ( Ephesians. 5.)
except they force their Children to their own worship.

3. By this rule the Child coming to be Magistrate must force his Father
according to that Typical example of Asa.

By this rule King Edward did well in forbidding his Sister Mary her
conscience; and Mary could do no other then forbid her Sister Elizabeth the
use of her conscience.

Reply.
Ad. 1. This Answerer that cannot imagine a Man so void of reason is so
Irrational himself; for he brings the Magistrates frequent mistakes in
Religion as an argument to overthrow his power about Spirituals.

2 Abuses are to be taken away, or else they will overthrow a Christian Society;
but Idolatry, Superstition etc. are abuses of Gods works, according to this
Authors Catalogue; therefore Idolatry is to be taken away.

Ad. 2. 1. If a Father have Children that be Idolators; he cannot fulfill the
command of Paul, except he bring them to the worship of the true God.

2. What is this to the Question, the Question is whether this command of Paul
lays a principle for the brining up of Children in Idolatry.

The strength of this Question lies in the Connection against which nothing is
said by this Answerer.

Ad. 3. I ask, whether a Child coming to be Father over his Country may not
judge his own Father.

2. King Edward did well in forbidding Mary the use of her conscience because
she was an Idolator; but this act of Edward to Mary does not justify Mary's
Act to Elizabeth: For though it be good to be Zealous in a good cause, yet not
in a bad cause. Zeal makes a good cause better. Zeal makes a bad cause worse.

3. I ask, wherher Edwards forbidding Mary forced Mary to forbid Elizabeth the
use of her conscience. I ask whether the Shepherd driving Wolves from his
Flock forces the Wolves to devour his Sheep? I believe if the Shepherd
should consent to make no use of his Dogs for the keeping of his Sheep, the
Wolves would not desist from devouring his Sheep.

4. I ask, whether it be lawful to cease acting vigorously for God, because
we would not have the wicked act vigorously for the Devil and their Idols. And
whether upon such a cessation of the godly, the wicked would be less wicked.
And whether this were not to make an agreement with iniquities?

Question 13.
Idolatry being against the light of Nature, Romans 3.28. Romans 1.
and therefore punishable under the Law of Nature, and so acknowledged by Job,
who lived before the Law of Moses; Whether the Magistrate under the Gospel
(which gives more light to the discovery of the sinfulness and guilt of
Idolatry) may not also restrain and punish that sin?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether there be not diverse interpretations of this place, 1. the
Septuagint renders it thus, viz. this would have been judged a very great
iniquity.

2. Some interpret beholding the Sun and Moon, etc. Metaphorically for being
pust up with Prosperity and Success.

2. Shall we follow Jobs example and erect New lands of Canaan?

3. Gods People are commanded to disobey the civil power in Spirituals, Col.
2.16.

4. Is there not two sorts of Idolatry, 1. Religious worshipping false gods, 2.
Moral, as Covetousness.

5. Is there not a fallacy in the term Light of Nature.

6. In Jobs time corporal now spiritual judgments re only proper.

7. Where lies the Harmony between these two Scirptures, Romans 2.1 Cor. 1.

8. Whether natural wisdom can attain to a true and saving knowledge of God.

9. The civil Sword is to cut off all incivilities though masked under
religious pretenses, and when Idolatry breaks forth into Whoredom and Murder
i'ts to be punished.

Hence I honor that noble act of Augustus against Ovid, and doubtless it is
the duty of the civil Sword to cut off long Hair.

10. If God had conceald the old Test. from us, I ask, in what place of the
New Testament he has commanded the Sword to be drawn in his quarrel.

11. Whether such Nations as were wholly Idolatrous were punished by David.

12. Whether Christ has not locked up the Magistrates hands; saying, let the
Tares alone until the Harvest.

Reply.
Ad. 1. 1. I ask, whether the Septuagint being a translation be any further to
be credited then it agrees with the Original.

2. Whether we may not justly suspect the Septuagints translation of verse 28.
of this Chapter, seeing that in verse. 11. they omit wholly what they translate
in verse. 28. what they omit in one place we have ground to think they will
safely translate in another place where it cannot be omitted.

3. Whether Job 31.26. beholding the Sun is to be interpreted Metaphorically
for being puffed up with prosperity and success: It Is directly opposite to the
scope of the place; for 1. this Iniquity was not to be punished by the Judges.

2. This Sentence, ( viz. an iniquity to be punished by the Judges) is annexed,
verse. 11. unto the heinous crime of Adultery, and is not annexed to any one sin
besides in the whole Chapter, but only to this sin mentioned in this six and
twentieth verse.

Therefore I Argue that beholding the Sun, must be an iniquity of greater
magnitude then to be puffed up with success.

4. That this iniquity which was to be punished by the Judges is Idolatry, I
thus argue:

1. Beholding the Sun and kissing the hand is interpreted to be a Religious
worshipping the Sun: For it was a custom in worshipping the gods to kiss
them, as appears from 1 King 19.18. Now the Sun being two far distant they
kissed their hands, diverse Authors witness that this was the manner of
worshipping the Sun.

2. Iniquity in the twenty eighth verse may be well put for Idolatry which is
iniquity per eminentiam: we have Iniquity put for Idolatry, Josh. 22.17. Numb.
25.4.

That Iniquity is to be thus taken in this place appears from the reason that
is immediately subjoyned, viz. for I should deny the God that is above.

Ad. 2. Whether the Magistrates in Jobs time (who was by the concession of this
Author before Moses) punishing Idolatry did erect such a Canaan as that which
the Jews erected in Moses time.

Ad. 3. Col. 2.16. is spoken of the Ceremonial uncleanness that some did put
between Meats and Drinks etc. which were indifferent in themselves: compare
this place with Romans 14.2.3. 1 Timothy 4.3.4, 5. and it will appear that there is
no such command given as to disobey the civil power commanding a right about
Spirituals: Again, nothing at all is spoken concerning the Magistrate in that
place.

Ad. 4. This division of Idolatry is not very acurat, for Covetousness is
Religious Idolatry as well as the worshipping of false gods.

I shall not further discuss this Question of the Answerers in this place, for
(he says) he has spoken it before, and afterward he speaks it again; indeed
most thing, he speaks have two or three Echoes.

Ad. 5. 1. I think this Answerer means fallacia extra dictionem, for there is
no fallacy used at all.

2. This Answerer himself knows there is no fallacy used at all in that term
light of Nature. For in page 66. of his book he uses this term in the same
sense that it is used in the Question, his own words are these, viz. Nations
may attain to (by the light of Nature) many convictions of a Godhead.

Ad. 6. This Answerer will never be able to prove, that under the Law corporal
Judgments, and under the Gospel Spiritual Judgments are proper 40. modo. Is
not Pharaoh punished with hardness of heart a Spiritual Judgment, besides
all his Corporal punishments, and are not Corporal punishment spoken of in
the Gospel, when it is said the Kings shall burn the Whore with Fire.

Ad. 7. There is a blessed Harmony between those two Scriptures Romans 1.1 Cor.
1.21.

The Scope of Romans 1. is, that though they know God to be invisible, yet they
gave the glory of the Creator to the Creature. That of 1 Cor. 1.21. asserts
that by the Creation, the world could have no saving knowledge of God;
therefore it pleased God to reveal by preaching.

I ask, what discord there is between these two Scriptures.

Ad. 8. What this Author says against the light of Nature attaining to a
saving knowledge of God, I pass by, as Impertinencies; for the Question
asserts no such thing.

Ad. 9. This Answerer grants that if Idolatry breaks forth into Murder and
other incivilities, the Magistrate is to suppress these wicked practices and
the principles of them. Now I ask,

Whether Idolatry being the principle of wicked practices (as this Author
confesses, and Paul proves Romans 2.) be not to be suppressed.

2. If the civil Sword ought to cut off Women's hair from men's heads as being
an incivility, I ask, whether the Magistrates ought not to make an Act against
the Perewigs about the Chin, and whether this Answerer would honor the Civil
Sword, if it should correct Anamolus Beards, and bring them within rule:
whether he would not suffer a Nazarite to live.

3. Let the Reader observe the Pharisaical Zeal of this Answerer, who strains
at a Gnat and swallows a Camel: It Is a Charracter of a rotten Zeal to be
careful in the less, and carelessely to pretermit the weightier matters of
the Law.

Ad. 10. God has commanded the Sword to be drawn against evil doers, Romans
13. in Rev. It is said the Kings shall burn the Whore with Fire, and 1 Timothy 2.

Ad. 1 1. It Is granted David did not punish those Nations that were wholly
Idolatrous as the Ammonites, neither were the Israelites punished for Idolatry,
when they wholly turned to Idols, viz. 1 Samuel 7.2.3, 4.2 King. 23.9. 1 Kin.
18.39. neither could they be punished, it is like the case of the Sons of
Serviah.

2. If Strangers did sojourne in the land of Canaan, they might be compeld from
public and scandalous breaking of the Moral Law, Neh. 13.16. Exodus 20.10.

Ad. 12. I ask, whether by Tares is meant Idolators and Blasphemers.

Question 14.
Idolatry by the testimony of Paul, drawing down heavy plagues upon a People,
Rom 1.18. and seq.
and delivering them up to a grievous and abominable sins, the worst of
Plagues, whereof he gives a Catalogue; and actually causing the Land of Canaan
to spue out the Inhabitants; Levit. 20.2.3, 22, 23.
Whether it do not concern the Magistrate to deliver his People from those
Plagues, by taking away Idols, the cause of them, and to cast out Idolatry,
rather then it should cast out the People from the Land where he governs?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether Covetousness be not as truly Idolatry as worshipping of false gods,
how then can we cry out against Idolators; the greatest Idolator cries out
against the less.

2. Does Idolatry with out other Sins bring Plagues upon a Land; and was there
not a remedy for the Idolatry of Gods People (1 Chronicles. 36.) until they mocked
and despised the Messengers of God?

1. Is it not better to instruct Idolators and Blasphemers then knock them in
the Heads?

3. If the Protestants should conquer France, what should they do with all the
Papists?

4. Was not the Land of Canaan and all the People of it Tipicall?

5. Whether all violence in Religion be not for some sinister interest; Jehu
pretends Zeal to God, yet having got the Throne of Jeroboam to maintain that
Throne he keeps up the worship of the Calves.

6. Whether any man can profess to be a Minister of Christ, and by the rules
of Christ depend on that for maintenance to him and his.

7. By this Tenet many of the Servants of Christ have been hunted as the
greatest Heretics.

Reply.
Ad. 1. It Is true that in the Gospel there is a clearer discovery of the
Idolatry of the heart then in the Law; and i's also true that in the fifth of
Matthew, Christ makes a clearer discovery of the Murder and Adultery of the
heart. But I ask, Whether since this discovery of the Idolatry Murder and
Adultery of the heart religious Idolatry (as this Author styles it) may plead
non-guilty; the Reader for his further satisfaction in this case may read the
eighteenth Question of the worthy Questionist.

2. I ask, whether Covetousness is worse Idolatry then Religious worshipping
of a false god; many interpret the place, Covetuousnesse is as Idolatry, it
being the wont of Scripture, when it would set out the heinousness of any sin
to compare it to this great sin Idolatry; Covetousness is Idolatry by by
reduction, the other direct Idolatry.

Ad. 2.1. Idolatry is usually accompanied with other sins.

2. If Idolatry was added to the many crying Sins of this Nation it might
make us ripe for Judgment.

3. Its not asserted that the committing of a Sin shuts a man out of the
Church, but it is obstinacy and pertinacy in his fault that makes him liable to
censures; and the Magistrate is to try by fair means to reduce such as are
out of the way, but if they will not be reclaimed but despise the Messengers
and go on perverting others, the Magistrate is to inflict punishments upon
them.

Cuncta prius tentanda, sed Immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Ad. 3. If the Protestants should be Masters of an Idolatrous Country; none
holds that they should kill all the Idolators, but they might take the Prophets
of Baal (1 Kin. 18.40.) and cause them to be taught otherwise, and not permit
carrying of the Idols about streets, etc. The Magistrate in such a case is not
to compel men to become Christians, yet he is to punish them for their
Blaspheming 1 King. 20.23.

Ad. 4. Suppose the Jews to be Tipicall, yet this argument is of no force, for
Idolatry was punishable by the moral Law.

Ad. 5. 1. Such reformers as Jehu have their zeal biased with interest, and
that is the reason that they are not thorough-reformers, and that they take not
heed with all their heart; but having got the Throne of Jeroboam their maine
end, they care not for pulling down the Calves. But God will visit the blood
of such.

2. I ask, Whether there have not been Reformers that have pulled down Idols
and not for any sinister end, and whether this Author would submit to such
reformers.

Ad. 6. This Question is besides our present discourse, yet because this
Answerer desires to be corrected of his error in it, for the correction of his
error I refer him to 1 Cor. 9.14.

Ad. 7. Its not this Tenet, but the abuse of it that has caused persecution
against the Saints: so likewise that Tenet of punishing Murderers by death,
has taken out of the Land of the living many an Innocent: But these abuses
cannot be brought as an Argument to destroy the things themselves; for this
Answerer confesses in the thirty ninth page of his Books, that no man can be
so void of reason as from Abuses and Corruptions to destroy a true Christian
constitution.

Question 15.
Whether this Examiner do not directly set himself to confute the Apostle;
Sect. 9.
Paul for the Examiner argues that it is not easy to find that the Heathen
should not make a graven Image, nor any marvel that they should by the form
of some Creature represent the invisible Being, and worship him in the form of
such a representation. But Paul just on the contrary proves, That by the
things that are made and seen, Romans 1.
the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and Godhead are so
manifest, that they are without excuse who knowing God do not justify him as
God, but change the glory of the Incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible Man, and to Birds and four footed Beasts. But this brings to mind
that saying concerning Idols; That have eyes and see not, and they that worship
them are like them, and so are those that plead for them?

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. The Examiner is unchrstianly dealt withal in this question.

2. If it be so easy to escape Idolatry how comes it to pass that there are
so many Idolators, and that Gods People have so often fallen into Idolatry?

3. Since there are may ways of worship in this Nation, as Presbiters and
Independency, etc. and all of them are carved Images except that which Christ
has appointed, and yet Gods People have an hand in erecting them: I ask,
Whether it be not easier for the Indians to erect Images of Gold.

Reply.
Ad. 1. If the Examiner pursues a Tenet that thwarts the Scripture, it is
Christian to deal plainly with him, and tell him that he sets himself against
the Scripture: rebuke them sharply that they may be sound in the faith.

Ad. 2. 1. The Questioner does not say its easy to escape Idolatry, but that
its easy to find out that the Heathen should not make Idols. There is great
difference betwixt finding out a vice, and escaping a vice: Many a Thief can
easily find out that theft is a vice; yet cannot so easily escape it.

By this it plainly appears that the diverse Questions urged to prove that it is
not easy for the Nations to escape Idolatry, are nothing to the purpose, but
heaps of cowardly Sophistry, changing the Question because he cannot Answer.

2. I grant, it is more easy to be an Idolator then a true worshipper of God,
for it is difficult to worship in Spirit and truth: Hence it is (because Idolatry
is easy and carnal) that there are so many Idolators.

3. It Is easy to find out Murder is a Sin; yet (according to this Authors
Logic) Iaske, how it came to pass that David fell into this Sin?

Ad. 3. Iaske, whether Presbitery Indep. etc. which destroy no fundamentals be
so gross as Idolatry; or be so easily to be discerned for true or false, as
Idolatry which is contrary to the light of Nature.

Question 16.17.18.
Whether Idolatry may not be punished; Sect. 5.
because the Magistrate does not know the heart of the Idolators? And whether
this reason do not directly oppose that Law of God which punished Idolatry, and
the execution agreeable to that Law; when those that worshipped the Calfe were
slain by the command of Moses; and the worshippers of Baal by Jehu; and the
Prophets of Baal by Elias.

17. Whether Idolaters may not be convicted by outward actions, professions and
confessions; Sect. 5.
and thereby the heart of an Idolator discovered, as well as the heart of a
Man-killer? For such a one is condemned behause of Malice in his heart; without
which it were not Murder nor he a Murderer?

18. If two sins be of a heinous Nature and both deserve punishment, Sect. 5.
Whether one that can be discerned should be spared, because the other is not
punished for want of discerning; yea, whether of both may be discerned and
punishable, yet neither should be punished, because both are not.

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. Whether those examples of punishing the worshippers of the Calfe are
presidentiall; if these example be presidentiall, Its the duty of the
Magistrate to destroy the greatest part of the world.

2. As to the instance of Murder there is a threefold difference between
civil crimes against the State and spiritual crimes against God.

1. There were never any in the world but by the dark light of Nature they
have condemned these four Sins, Murder, Adultery, Theft, Lying.

2. Those four are easily convinced and ashamed, they cannot but confess
themselves sinners.

3. Without punishing the four former it is impossible men should live as men.

4. To the punishing of Idolatry is the tow edged sword of no estirnation is
the delivering up of the Nations to unnatural lusts, Romans 1. no terror with us.

Reply.
Ad. 1. 1. The alleged examples (suppose them to be Tipicall) are sufficient
to prove that an Idolator may be punished though a magistrate knows not his
heart, and the Examples are alleged to no other purpose.

2. Let the Reader observe how this Answerer nibbles about the sides of these
Questions and dares not meddle with the body of them. And indeed it is his
usual course to speak against some one part of the Question, and he seldom
meddles with the connection that ties the parts of the Question together,
wherein lies the strength of most of the Questions, for as much as they are
Hypotheticall.

3. That it is the duty of the Magistrate to destroy the greatest part of the
world cannot be gathered from the former Examples: For we read (1 King. 18.39.)
in that general defection of the People, all were not destroyed but only the
Ringleaders: and I ask,

How consequence can be gathered hence for the punishing of such Nations, as
the Moabites; for this is contrary to David's practice, which this Answerer
urges before.

Ad. 2. 1. In Answer to the first difference alleged, I say he contradicts
himself in saying, that all Nations in the World condemn Murder, for in page
51. of his book he says that the Mexicans murder many thousand Infants to
their Dieties, etc. What are not the Mexicans in the World: Again, sure this
Author never heard of Man-eaters, nor of Duellers: farther, if no crime should
be punished by the Magistrate, but what has been condemned by all Nations,
It Is plain Murder should not be punished.

2. In answer to his second difference, I ask, whether many resolute Thieves
have not been hanged in England, that would not confess their fault: I believe
if Idolatry was punished as Murder is, many Idolators and Heretics would
recant, yet I do not deny but that some Idolators in their gallantry might
give their Bodies to be burnt.

3. In Answer to his third I say, without punishing Idolatry and Heresy, it is
as impossible men should live as Christians, 1 Timothy 2.2.

Ad. 3. 1. That of the two edged Swords is formerly answered.

2. I ask, whether adding Adultery to Murder, ought to free that Murderer
from the civil Sword: Gods punishing with spiritual judgments should rather
awaken the Judges of the Earth to execute Judgment.

Question 19.
Whether Asa did well in forbidding Idolatrous worship, and bringing the People
into a Covenant with God; Sect. 22.
since (as the Examiner says) he might thereby have made many to turn
Hipocrits: when yet the Scripture says, that they swear with all their heart
and sought God with their whole desire? 2 Chr 15
And though Hypocrisy should follow such boly commands, whether the fault of
Hypocrisy be not from the Corruption of the Hypocrite, Romans 7.12.13
and not at all from a holy and good Command.

The Sum of the several Answers.
1. It was no guilt of Hypocrisy in Asa to compel that whole Nation, but now
to force thousands to a Religion their Fathers knew not; fills a Nation with
Hypocrisy.

There is a twofold Hypocrisy, that which is more hidden and secret as
Achitophels with David; that which is more open, as that of the ten Tribes
professing the name of the God of Israel, and yet with all the worship of the
Calves; Is not this the state of a thousand named Christians professing Christ
in word but in works denying him, overspread with Abominations and I
dolatries.

2. To force the Ignorant profane Nations into a pretended holy fellowship
with God, is more then to force into the Beds of men of Honor impudent Whores.

Reply.
Ad. 1. 1. It was no guilt of Hypocrisy in Asa for it is said the People swore
with all their heart: but I ask this Answerer, Whether Josiah was guilty of
Hypocrisy of the People that turned fainedly unto the Lord, whether if the
Magistrate (Gods vicegerent) and the good Laws he makes and execute be the
cause of Hypocrisy, God and his Law may not be said to be guilty of
Hypocrisy? whether good commands be not to be executed, notwithstanding the
Hypocrisy that may follow, in regard that some men only yield outward
conformity: whether God for the outward reforming of some Magistrates has not
spared a Nation for their time, and afterward punished the Nation for their
Hypocrisy: which clearly shows that if the heart of a Magistrate be upright in
reforming, he is not guilty of Hypocrisy, though his people hipocrititally
conform, etc.

2. Its not desired that men should be forced to a Religion their Fathers, knew
not, but that they might be kept from Idolatry and Heresy.

3. The Magistrate may prevent this open Hypocrisy of denying God in their
work by punishing those Abominations: Iaske,

Whether a Magistrate punishing these Abominations would by that means fill a
Nation with Hypocrisy of this latter sort; whether Asa his forbidding
Idolatrous worship filled the Nation with the worship of the Calves: I think
Nations are filled with Hypocrisy of this latter sort be the Magistrate not
exercising his power to restrain them.

4. In that first Chapter of Titus quoted by this Answerer, the reason is given
why so many Professors denied God in their works, and it was, because the
mouths of Seducers were not stopped, and ordained Elders set up amongst the
Cretians; so that the Magistrates setting up an able Ministry and stopping the
mouths of Seducers need not fear the filling of his Nation with Hypocrisy.

Ad. 2. 1. I ask, Who pleads for the forcing of Ignorant profane men into
fellowship with God; It Is only desired that they may be taugh the Law of the
Lord; I hope this is no defiling the bed of Christ.

2. Whether he that pleads for the permitting of Spiritual whoredoms and
abominations amongst Christians is not guilty of this crime?

Question 20.
Whether the parts and portions of Scripture that contain Principles necessary
to Salvation, Sect. 9.
deserve to be called merely by the Name of Forms, and much less to be
despised under that Name? And consequently whether the Examiner think it fit
upon the title of Forms to despise the Pinciples of the Doctrine of Christ
mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews? Heb. 6.1.


The Sum of the several Answers.
1. The words of the Examiner are only these ( viz. do you yet make so much of
Forms as to force men to bow down to them) from which words cannot be gathered
that he calls any principle of Salvation a Form or despises it under that
name: His words seem to note that there are many forms of worship, and that
every Sect is apt to force others to bow down to his Form.

2. Papist and Protestant talk of Principles necessary to Salvation, and yet
bind up all in one, To believe as the Church believes.

3. Diverse reckon up many fundamentals, yet I ask what we think of the short
word the Lord Jesus, and howsoever some grant that a distinct knowledge of
Christ is necessary to Salvation; yet we know what is extant of a possibility
of Salvation without a distinct knowledge of Christ. I ask, Whether it be not
dangerous to set a bound of so much knowledge (as to the degrees of it) without
which there is no Salvation.

4. Forms of worship are usually without the power of godliness; yet I
acknowledge there have been encreasings of light in National reformings; and I
am far from imagining that people should hold nothing and do nothing, but I
desire men should examine the Scripture and hold fast to the death that which
they have received from the Father of lights; And yet better sit still, then
still rise and fall.

Have all the Spirit, the calling, the presence of God with them as the
Apostles had; were it not better for us to acknowledge how naked and blind we
are, and to listen to the council of Christ.

5. What Christanity is that which commands that no Doctrine be Preached but
what the civil sword shall say is true and Orthodox.

Reply.
Ad. 1. 1. I ask whether, if Idolatry and Heresy be directly against the
fundamentals or principles of Salvation, the Examiner speaking the fore quoted
words in behalf of Idolators and Heretics, does not call the principles of
Salvation Forms and despise them under that name.

2. Though there be many forms of worship, as Presbiters, Independents, etc.
yet I hope Idolatry cannot be called a form of worship, for it is placed in
direct opposition to worship by the Apostle, viz. they turned from Idols to
serve the true and living God.

Ad. 2. I ask, whether it be not one maine point wherein the Protestant
differs from the Papist, viz. not to believe as the Church believes.

Ad. 3. 1. I do not know what this Author thinks of this one name, Christ
Jesus; for he does not know himself whether to make it a fundamental or no;
as appears from his doubtful speeches.

But the Scripture says there is no other name given under Heaven whereby we
must be saved, and no man can lay any other foundation.

3. It Is very dangerous to limit saving knowledge as to the degrees of it: but
as to limit this knowledge as to the heads or parts of it, there is no danger.
Now when we speak of principles of Salvation, we speak merely of the heads or
parts of saving knowledge, but not at all of the degrees of these parts.

Ad. 4.2. If there have been several encreasings of light in Reforming, why
should the Children of the light hinder Reformation? This should rather be a
work of the Children of darkness, who cannot abide the Light because their
works are evil.

2. This Author seems to be in a good mind, he would have the People hold
something, and do something, but he is of another mind quikly, aliud stans,
aliud sedens cogitat, for in the next words he thinks it better to sit still
then still to rise and fall: I am not of this man's mind, I should rather choose
to go halting and stumble now and then, then not to go at all. And further, I
think every man is bound to act according to his light; and though he have not
the Spirit, to act as far as the light of Nature and Reason will carry him, Its
but a proud Tenet to be no body or else the best; and again, a man may be
illighted by the spirit though no saving work which light may further him in
actions of such a Nature.

But more particularly I ask,

1. Whether Magistrates have not a calling, and also the presence of God
amongst them.

2. Whether God has not promised to be with the Ministry to the end of the
world.

3. This is good council, we desire that no man's Inventions might be set up
but that Christ and his Word might be the only Counselors.

Ad. 5. This is false, no such thing asserted but the contrary, viz. that the
Magistrate take care that no Doctrine be preached but what the Scripture shall
say is true.

Question 22.
If God was to be Blessed, Ezr. 7.27.
for putting into the Heart of a Heathen Magistrate to make Laws for the
advancement of true Religion; Whether he does not come near to a curse that
would take out of the Heart oj a Christian Magistrate the advancement of true
Religion, and persuade him to give a Toleration to the chief Enemies of
Religion, Idolatry and Heresy.

This Answerer says, that the Proposer highly esteems this example of Ezra 7.
for he is not content to mention it in the seventh Question, but he brings it
in again at last. I wonder this man is given so much to cavilling; let the
Reader judge whether Ezra 7. be not brought in here to another purpose then its
in the seventh Question.

And let the Reader observe how highly this man esteems 1 Cor. 10. Col. 2.
indeed every thing he says, for he has scarce an Argument in his Book, but
he babbles it over and over again, and when he has no way left to bring in
his old Traind-Band of Arguments, you shall have them with an omitto usherd in,
etc. or not to respect what has been said before, or the like, and then he
tells all his old tail.

But he tells us that to this Question he will add some new Queres, but he makes
a false Mustam, for these are but old ones fetched up again for to make up a
number.

For, as for his first Quere that he says he will add, we have this Quere
before in Page 74. and again in Page 78. and else where: His second Quere by
way of addition, we have before in Page 31. His third we have often before in
his book, etc.

I shall make an end desiring God, that he would stir up thr Magistrate to
put forth his power for encouragement of the true Religion; for as long as
People are kept at this pass, that they will have no King nor Ruler in Israel,
every man will do what is good in his own eyes.

And those that cut off the Magistrate from acting in Ecclesiastics, will at
last suspect the Magistrates power in Civils: This Author seems to become so
far as to suspect a Murtherous snare in the Law against Thieves and Whores,
seeing that these Laws fall often upon honest chaste Persons.

FINIS.

