Ape-Gentle-vvoman, OR THE CHARACTER OF AN Exchange-wench.

London, Printed for (...). 1673

THE Character OF AN EXCHANGE-WENCH.
She Is a Huffing piece of Puff past or a bit extraordinary those queasie
Stomachs which can^t digest a Bawdy House A Crycodile stuffed with Rubbish, or
the Scene in, Macb^^^ reverss'd, viz. a Beast in a Woman's S^n, A Whore
Masquarade, or a trick the Devil intended to out upon the City. She Is but one
Story above a common Harlot, and when ever she falls from her Shop, drops into
a Brothel-house. Her carriage is so equally divided betwixt a natural Levity,
and forced Modesty, that one would take her for a kind of Motly'd Christian, or
a new interposition betwixt Lust and Chastity, she is haunted with lascivious
thoughts as with Ghosts, and never dresses her self without an absolute design
on her own virtue, her greatest Ingenuity consists in curling up her Tower, and
her chiefest care in putting it on, for to make it fit right she so bedaubs her
Brow with Gum, and Powder that it glisters like a Woods^rie^ Cake, or ^ee
dreg'd with Snow. Being an Apprentice she is confined to a civil Garb in which
she looks like a Friar in a Peruke, or as the Devil would in a Monks-hood. When
she is ready for her Shop, she is so for a Tavern; whither she is a^ easily
invited a^ a Barber to a Bawdy house, or a Country Parson to a Sundays Dinner.
She Is as fond of a Treat, as the Devil is of a Qua^er and squeezing her Bubble
by the hand thinks she has got him as sure. If you miss on her at her Shop, you
may find her at the Tavern; but if you suspect her Cully to be either poor or
wise, you shall not fail to find her at the Bracket-house.

She Is a critical thing to deal in; having more Rises and Falls then Popper or
Indico's: She Is one Comodity at several Rates, partially dispensing those
favors to one for a Bottle of Claret, which shall cost another a pair of silk
Stockings, and a treat to boot. She holds the same League with Oyl-Men and
Vintners, as the City Constables do with the Counter Turnekeys, or as Subburb
Head-boroughs do with the Justices of Peaces Clars, who receive a snack for
brin^ing them custom, she is so great an Epicure, that she sells her honesty
to feed her Luxury, and pawns her very Soul to satisfy her Letchery. A
Town-crack that Kisses for her Bread, and might starve but for her Buttocks, is
a Saint to her; Both her habitation and her apparel like two friendly
Sea-marks, forewarn us of our Shipwracks if we sail in that Channel: But an
Exchange Wench like a fatal Rock hid under a mild superficies, Ruins a Man
before he can say, Lord have mercy upon us.

But to rake up those Dunghils from whence these Serpents do proceed; the first
you must know is from an Alehouse, and she owns her Original as the Poets say
Venus does, from froth, not of the Sea, but the tap, which being tunn'd up in
the musty Vessel of some gouty Hostess, lives there 1 Sack upon Carrion; Withal
receiving additional nourishment from the aequous humors of her soul body in
ten Months time comes to be drawn off (but leaves such Le^ behind, out of which
the Devil, were he turned Chemist could extract nothing but poison) The Lump of
Distempers being thus produced at eleven or twelve years of Age it is sent to
Hackney, where she stays no longer then till she has attained in the
accomplishments of gather your Rose-buds, and offering at a Coopee, and then is
called home again to learn the necessary ingredients of confidence and
impudence, which intermixed with her Hackney imbellishments will sufficiently
accomplish her for a, What do you want Sir, Bands or Cravats.

^he second springs from a lean Vicaridge, whose small Benefice and the fear of
Widdow-hood, prove such prevalent Padlocks to obstruct enjoyment that the good
folks are fain to lie as quiet in Bed as Statues on tomb-stones, till they have
contracted a raging lust which scorns Oppositions, then they eagerly fall to,
never desisting till they beget a perfect Inherirtix of those Veneriall
Delights. She is spritely beyond immagination, and scorns the little Artifices
of Boarding, or Dancing School should teach her impudence, being naturally
adicted to that Air and Gayetie, which others cannot attain without the expense
of time and Money: By a particular prerogative derived from her Parents, she
anticipates her age, and becomes full fledged before her contemporary can get
Pen feathered; her Father studying her inclinations, finding them light, being
willing to put her to a Trade agreeable to her humor, wisely designs her for
the Exchange.

^he third Dunghill which helps to populate this famous Academy, is the broken
Phanatic, and she who comes from hence is a thing sprung up by Providence, her
Father being busied in the late Civil War, her Mother made bold with the
brethren; If they were but Phanaticks she was for them, let them be
Independants, and Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy or Quakers. She had more
Religions in her Belly than would furnish a Library, of which should her
daughter retain but a Tenet for every Father, I would defy any Language to
give her Herisie a Name. She was intended for a Gentle woman, but now her
Father being stripped of his Bishops Lands, and knowing her too stout for a
Chambermaid, resolves to send her to the Exchange.

Thus having acquainted you with their Etymology, I will jumble them together,
(for I think there is not a T -- to choose) and give you their description in
general.

An Exchange-Wench is a kind of standing Harlot, whom you may as certainly have
at her Shop as a Porter at a Corner, and as willing they are to be employed, if
they follow either their Parents example, or their own Education, you see they
have no antipathy to any Vice; but as for Whoring they go to it Cum Privilegio,
and esteem it one of the necessariest Utensils of their trade. A little before
they are bound, the Mistress gives out to all her Merchant Customers that she
has a fresh Face a coming, which makes them floc to her Shop, as to an
East India Sale, and bid as fast for her Apprentices Maiden head as if it were
to be sold by Inch of Candle, and indeed it is little less, he always carrying
it that bids most for it, whether he be Tur or Jew. When the bargains concluded
on, she tells the Girl she must study to be obliging to all her Customers,
especially to Mr. -- (meaning him with whom she has contracted for her
Maidenhead) acquaints her that he is a Person of great Worth, and of so sweet a
disposition! that if he does but fancy her, it is twenty to one but he will mae her
a Woman (a Whore she means) for ever; and withal tells her she must carry his
Linen to his Chamber tomorrow morning, the silly Girl makes her a Country
Courtesy, and promises her to be complaysant to all his civil desires. But he
soon spoils her exception, for having laid an Ambush of two or three Bottles of
Wine, a Neats tongue, and a little good Language, raising her desires with a
little ob-Scene description of the sweets of enjoyment, he tells her the
craving Bed invites them to action; where after he has enjoyed her in half an
hours time sends her home as honest as her Neighbors.

After she has been used so often, that she is relinquished by the Masters, she
begins to grow subtle, and resolves to revenge her self on their Prentices; of
whose company she is as fond as a Gamester of Bubble, and with lie cruelty
debauches and ruins him at the same time. When he visits her at her Shop, she
commends(...) rf Play Houses, Spring-Garden, and the Par, and evern desist^s
(...) has got the Cully to coach her to one of them. Whilee^^^ are abroad, she
admits hands and Lips fair play, and only (...) the last favor for his ruin,
if she lays hold of his Waterd gufesha cobus, she taes it in jest, and keeps it
in earnest, (...), but as an earnest for that dear bought pleasure he intends
to pthease, in this Jollity she forgets not to enquire whether he rehs Cash,
which if she find he do, she computer to her self how ponit will last She
exceed, a (...) in policy as a much as a upod Husband does a flaunting
Prodigal, ever calculating the properi^^y, and protracting the destruction of
her Bubble, till she is assooed of another to supply his place, and then as if
she repented her unrmer mildness, like a Lion arrived at his cruel Age, she
falls on, and devours the Puppy she hut played with before.

In short her smiles are more treacherous then a Crocodiles tears, and her
dalliances more dangerous then the embraces of a Serpent. She has as many
Gallants as acquaintance, and whilst she prostitutes her body to one of them
swears by her Soul she was never concern^d with the rest, which the Bubble
believes, till meeting with some of his Brother- Starlings (for by this time
she has ruined most of them) and comparing Notes, they are fully convinced she
has been equally perfidious to them all. This discovery renders her notorious
and totally diverse her of her City acquaintance, so that wanting the
convenience of her former Jnn ets, and being by an accustomated le^dness
rendered incapable of confining to the stricter method of a civil Life, her
Rigging too beginning to be scandalous she quite the City to seek relief in the
Fields, where she petitions the (...) so their Letters of commendation to Moll
-- who thereupon most graciously receive her into the Society of her Hac neys,
where like a (...) she blazest (...) consumed and (...) turned out of Doors
carrie^ such (...) along with her, one may small her from (...)

The Apology.
As in tart Prologues, Poets show their Wit,
In r^^ling Gen'rally at all the pit,
Although they know their's some of such esteem
They would not speak an evil word of them.
So Ladies when I writ this character
As for the Virtuous I designed not her
I only aimed at the Lasciviou^ Jilt;
So she that takes Exceptions shows her guilt
But you would all be modest, -- pray to be
For thou ^' m^ sure your unconcerned with me.
FINIS.

