An Answer to WILD. OR, A POEM, Upon the Imprisonment of Robert Wild D. D. in
Cripplegate.
By a Brother of the same Congregation.
DEar Friend and Brother in the flesh this page
I send thee lying, in the Cripple's Cage:
Not that I Envy, but Rejoice that we
Are Fellow-feelers of one Misery.
Old Bishop Gout, by's Officer Old Ale,
Has sent thee limping to the Black pot Goal:
But ( fie, that Saints each other should abuse
So much in the thing they all so often use?)
As I was Preaching on the secret point
Of Venery, I did but slip a joint
Too far, when straight old Bishop pox, cried cease,
You do encroach upon my Diocese,
Since which I have so rattled in the Nose,
That all the disaffected do suppose
It, as a scandal to the Brethren, and say
The Presbyterian Tone first came that way:
Some call me Popish Prelat, and protest,
My No-nose is the only mark of the beast.
Dear brother, thus our punishments agree;
There is more difference 'twixt Calamy
And you: some Doctors hold ours be the same,
And that the Pox as well as Gout you claim.
But I am silent; though you roar your Gout;
Saints should be wiser then to bring all out.
Yet why should we rail at the Bishops? Can
You blame the Ingenuous Husbandman,
For weeding his Corn, for driving to Pound
The Cattle which do trespass on his ground?
Had we not meddled with forbidden things,
Nor broke the just Commandment of Kings,
But stickled for the Churches settlement,
As much as we did for the Covenant,
We made to break it; then your State, our Name
Of Saints had shined with eternal same,
Baxter should then have been the burning light,
For men to see to pray by, not to fight.
Could we disgarison the Scottish Devil,
Be Nonconformists only unto Evil;
Repent of false Oaths, lies, Rebellion, swear
Conformity to God, and's House of Prayer;
Then Calamy should never be the fixed Star
In New gate Hell, but in the Hemisphere;
Nor Wild a poor Erratick finding no place
For's Family, nor yet it seems for Grace:
Thou Gouty Goal-bird, could thy red-fac'd-Muse
No other stuff into thy Pate infuse,
Than Libelling? Can Nonconformists be
So Conformable to iniquity?
Well have thou said, These Presbyterian Kis-sl-aves
Will never leave backbiting, though in their Graves:
Their Preaching is no better, and their Prayers
Do naught but set's together by the ears:
Pull down, set up, set up, pull down's the cry.
Which flows still from never still Presbytery.
Let Egypt's plagues be mentioned no more,
One Presbyter's more mischief than a score;
If Puritans instead of Frogs had fell,
Pharaoh at first had let go Israel.
Like Satan's It is written, they can bring
A Text of Scripture for the greatest Sin.
But prithee what Wild fancy made thee rhyme,
That lurching of a Sermon is the Crime
Canonical? Alas, did ever know,
The Gospel-fighting Ministers do so?
The Lords Prayer and the Common Prayer they hate,
Because not forged in a Presbyterian pate:
So have I seen Bears lick their Whelps and roar
At purer Beasts; thus Babylons old Whore,
Swaddling her Bastard-children, does deny
An Entertainment to chaste honesty.
Is Preaching down, and silenced because
The Presbyters may not bawl against the Laws?
Nor rail at Church and State, nor bait the King
With Pulpit-bulls, like Dogs a Bear-baiting.
So Wranglers, Cheats, and Cozeners may say,
'Cause they shut out, fair Gamesters do not play:
So Quacksalvers and Mountebanks proclaim,
No Physick's like to theirs, though of the same,
Once come to hear and they shall understand,
There never was better Preaching in the Land,
Nor Prayers so well composed with words and matter,
(Not like unto the Puritanick Chatter)
Where Hum, ha, and Oh bear all the sway,
And true Devotion is a Castaway.
But cease my Muse, the Presbyterian See
Will fall with weight of it is own Villainy:
FINIS.

