AN APOLOGY FOR LOVERS.

OR A Discourse of the Antiquity and Lawfulness of LOVE.

By Erastophil, no Proselyte, but a native of that Religion.

Faelices ter and amplius
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malia
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvet amor die.
Horat. ad Lydiam. Ode, 13. London, Printed in the year, 1651.

TO My Dearest Sister, Mrs. M. VV.
My Dearest Sister,
WHat I long since promised I now perform, if a thing imperfectly flubber'd
over, and in have, may merit the name of a performance: but for that as I
acknowledge the debt, so I look upon you as an easy Creditress, and not so
scrupulous as to refuse payment, because it comes in clipped and broken money.
It Is true, I have sometimes heretofore thought of it, but those thoughts
perished almost in the very conception without producing any thing, unless it
were some few rude lineaments, and which I should call the rough draught of
this discourse, but that I should be injurious to it as it is now, by robbing
the thing of its apellation; although I am persuaded the conceptions concerning
this subject, being so exceeding fine, and having so little commerce with
sense, are not to be expressed to the life by the most curious Pencil, much less
by so uneven an hand as mine, but are like to those which Apelles is said to
have drawn when he contended with Protogenes, Lineas visum effugientes: however
deliniated, it is yours by a double relation; both because I know you to be
(and me thinks there should be no one of so little humanity as not to be) a
friend to lovers; and next because it is a task which I had not undertaken but
upon your assignment, and so in both respects most properly belonging to you.
For a conclusion, I wish you all the joys of Love, of Youth, and Health, and
what ever Happiness else is to be found in this World, and in the next,
eternal and ever lasting Felicity.

Your most affectionate Brother and Servant. Erastophil.

To my worthy friend the Author on his Apology for Lovers.
I Have seen thy fair Design, and I approve
Thy each part, like the first great Act of Love,
When fire pursued, and water stood at Bay,
Heat fought with cold, and darkness with the day:
When Nature was all tempest, when no Cheek
Had smiles, nor were there lips to kiss or speak:
When unfledged Cupid had no wings to fly,
Nor were his shafts placed in the killing eye,
Love calmed the Chaos, and reduced the brawl,
Into a good, a great, and glorious ALL.
Thus friend thy p^^ transcribes his draughts above.
And every line runs parallel with Jove.
Something alike in both my fancy finds,
He worked on matter, thou do work on minds.
Love was his creature, but thy ward: nay thou
Ar't more then Guardian to that passion now.
He in a larger volumn did express
His admired flame, thou do it in a less:
And though thy narrow Trace may not contend
With his vast course, yet both conspire in the end;
To the same point of union thou do run,
As Heliosropes do imitate their Sun.
Me thinks I see the soul like some course fire
Allied to Coal, enslaved with a defire
Of pelf and stock, so that her noble flame
Feeds on cheap chips, and stuff beneath her name.
Health to thy brave design, that would translate
Our Spirits from this durty Kitchin-state,
And fix them in a heaven, where eyes with eyes,
And beams with beams may twist and eternize.
Why should we dote on trash? and so misplace
That on the Fan, which is due to the face?
Stars mix with stars, and trouble not the earth,
Least st should interpose and soi the Birth.
I would fright the Mother, did the Child's aspect
But figure that, most fathers do affect,
And well she might mistake her self a Mint,
Did stamp Philippo's, and bring forth in Print
We should have children faced like Duckatoons,
And like George riding too, out of the Wombs.
Such indirect affections I can pity,
And justly may bequeath them to the City:
There without Love, Gold only has the Name
They have the Fuel, but they want a Flame.
Eugenius Philalethes.

To my dear Brother, upon the publishing of his Apology for Lovers.
I Thank thee for this Credit, thou have done
A Stock of super-erogation:
Now I may run upon the score, and say,
My Younger Brother will the reckoning pay;
Thou make up what I want; I now may play
The Fool, and Elder-Brother every day,
And yet be born with; for though my Scale's light,
It well may pass, because thine's over-weight.
But is it impossible I should be screwed
T'a higher pitch more near thee? Am I mewed
Unto a Ne plus ultra, nor can find
Some way to Elevate my sluggish mind?
Am I so sottish, or so little kin
To Thee, that Emulation cannot win
Upon my Genius, nor resemble it,
In some proportion to thy lofty wit?
It will not be: Nor can a man invite
(On any terms) an Aethiop to look white.
Where did thou get (my dear Evastophil)
This huge advantage? I did climb the Hill
Of Nature first: but now (in all beside)
Thou have out stripped me the whole Heaven-wide.
Sure there is a different stuff in Thee and Me;
Or is it the Fate of firstlings, that they be
Essays and rough casts, which the following draughts
Exceed far more then do the second Thoughts.
I Am but thy Hench boy, and thy Harbinger,
The Prologue to thy day, thy morning star;
Nay to speak truth, thou art so much alone,
That there is between us no comparison.
Nor can my verse commend more then the Gown
On Horseback did that Otacousticon,
That would demonstrate his new taken degree
To his admiring friends in the country.
Yet fear not, thou shall have thy due applause.
The great Eugenius, who knows natures laws,
And can tie love knots there, he who held forth
A candle to the world, approves thy worth,
And Deigns to Usher in thy Virgin muse*
So did the noble generous Romans use
To grace their friends, as Scipio for his brother,
Wore a blew coat, for his own son another.
F. W.

AN APOLOGY FOR LOVERS.
Genesis 29. verse. 20. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to
him but a few days, for the love he had unto her.
CErtainly, if man could ever have brocked Solitude, or been happy in
himself, without the Society of another, it was the in the state of his
Innocence, when his understanding was clear and unclouded, his will indifferent
and unbyassed, his affections regular and obedient, and in a word, all the
faculties and powers of his soul healthful and undiseased; for having so
absolute a command over himself, so vast a Seigniory and unlimited Empire over
the creatures, it was not to be expected, that his condition should be more
independent than then it was or himself better able to subsist without supply
from any other: yet even then, amidst all these perfections he was imperfect,
amidst all these riches he was in poverty, there was something wanting to
complete his happiness, for so God himself, his Creator, (who made him of the
dust, and formed him of the Clay, and must therefore best know his temper and
composition, and what was most requisite and best for him) pronounced, and that
after a most deliberate Consultation held there by the Unity, as in the Chapter
before, when he created him by the Trinity, not improbably to shadow forth and
adumbrate allegorically that Unity and self-samenesse, (as I may so term it)
that ought to be in this great and near Relation; God I say himself pronounced
of him, Non est bonum, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make
him an help meet for him.

Some out of Curiosity of Wit may perhaps conceit that the remedy here proposed
might have produced some inconveniences, for it is evident will they say, That
had man continued in his first Innocence, his Obedience had been rewarded with
an Immortality here, which being granted, as it cannot be denied, then there
may arise this Question, How this small Globe of Earth, which as Astronomers
not only say, but unanswerably demonstrate to be no bigger then a little
Punctum est in quo vivitis, in quo regna desponitis, in quo bella geritis.
Seneca in Praefat. ad Not. Hist,
Point, compared to the Universal Globe of the World (as the most ignorant
themselves would confess, were they but capable of conceiving the reason)
should have been ever able to have held and contained so many infinite
millions, and vast numbers of people, as we must necessarily imagine, would
have been, had the propagation of mankind run still on, exempted from the
stroke of merciless death, and unbrie'd Laws of Mortality; or if we suppose
it might have held them, because we see a few Acres will contain a multitude of
persons, yet how they should ever have been able to have lived one by another,
we do not see: Again whether there might not have bin a cure more apt and
apposite found out against the want of company, then the Ceeation of woman;
perhaps if there had been such a set and definite number of men only formed, as
would have served to have peopled the whole earth, which would have remedied
the inconvenience beforementioned; Furthermore, which might likewise not
unfitly, will they say, and without violence be drawn into question, Whether
friendship betwixt man and man, or conjugall Love betwixt man and wife be more
agreeable and grateful to humane Nature, or better satisfy the intention for
which Woman was created, which is here expressed to be for a remedy against
solitude; but these are subjects fitter for the anxious enquiries of
Philosophers, then the humble belief and credulity of Christians; leaving them
therefore, and other the like quaeries to Disputants and Polemicks; let it
suffice us that we have here God Almighties Probatum est annexed to this cure,
and no other, and ought therefore to conclude it of all other the best and most
sovereign. But I pass on to the Text it self, in which we have these parts
considerable.

First, here is the Lover, or after our modern phrase, the servant Jacob.

Secondly, here is the penance served.

Thirdly, here is the aggravation of the penance from the length of time, viz.
Seven years.

Fourthly, here is the object of his love and affections, or according to the
mode of Lovers, his Mistress, Rachel.

Fifthly, here is the wonder, and they seemed to him but a few days.

Sixthly and lastly, here is the cause rendered, which being once known, the
wonder vanishes, and cease to be any longer a wonder, viz. He loved her. And
Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few days, for
the love he had unto her.

I shall take a view of the parts severally as they lie in order, and first
therefore of the first Branch of the Text, the Lover Jacob, brought in here by
way of connection with the story precedent, viz. And Jacob served seven years
for Rachel, etc.

They that have taken upon them to pass Censures, and make Observations upon
the various and uncertain dispositions of mankind, affirm that such minds as
are not either Religious, or Philosophical, or Amorous, are sordid and earthy
dispositions, altogether unworthy, as having nothing of nobleness or
generosity in them; but here we have a concatenation of them in this our
Amourist, they are all three linkt together: for his Piety and Religion it is
throughout this whole book of Genesis conspicuous; and for his learning and
deep knowledge in Philosophy, we have amongst others a notable instance in that
politic invention which he used to enrich himself, and impoverish Laban, upon
the contract which he made with him, which shows that he was no superficial,
and mere notionall Philosopher, but had conjoined experiment with reason, and
that of the most abstruse and highest nature, for such is the knowledge of the
strange power and miraculous effects that are, and may be wrought by
imagination: but omitting him in both these capacities, of a Divine and a
Scholar, I shall only consider him in the quality of a Lover, for with that
aspect only he looks upon me in this text, And Jacob served seven years for
Rachel, and they seemed to Him but a few days for the Love he had unto her.

Every Breast is not an Altar fit for Love to sacrifice upon, nor every Soul a
Shrine worthy of so great a Saint: No, the Altar must be first consecrate, and
the Shrine hallowed and purified before this Deity be there Lodged. There are
to make a Lover, peculiar conditions required, of which every one is not
capable of the performance. Love is not an Artifice, or a Disguise that can be
assumed and left off at pleasure, but like Virtue cease to be, when it is
once dissembled. It is Nature that must mould a disposition for a Lover; and
that you may not mistake him, he has usually (as Artists tell us) these Marks
whereby you may know him.

First, he is mild and gentle expressing in his very countenance, modesty and
simple virtue. It may beget wonder in any one that shall seriously and
attentively consider, how exceedingly much nature is delighted with variety,
how she plays and sports her self in it, hence it is, that amidst so many
thousand faces of men and women (not to mention the disparities which are in
other creatures) there is so great and strauge diversities outwardly expressed in
their countenances and yet the inward discrepancy and disagreement of their
minds is far greater, and this is the reason, that one and the same thing
enters men's minds clothed in a different habit, and is represented with so
much advantage by some, and disadvantage by others, as may be seen for example
amongst others, in a Covetous man, and a Prodigal; before whom do but set a sum
of money, and presently you shall see one of them with his eyes fixed and
immovable, as if he were wonder-struck, eagerly gaze upon the beauty of so
beloved an object, with which his very soul seems to be ravished; the
prodigal on the other side, he looks upon it with no such eyes, it appears to
him no other then a Mass of cold, pallid, ponderous earth, and is so far from
being in love with it, that he thinks the very sight of it will contaminate him,
but is so far assured, that he dare swear the touch of it would defile him:
betwixt these two extremes is the Provident and frugal man placed, who looks
upon it neither so carelessly as the one, nor so greedily as the other. So we
have here one and the same thing yielding a different relish, according to the
diversity of the tasters palates. Instances of this nature are infinite, but to
resume our discourse, I say with Charron in his Book of Wisdom, That for the
most part, the face is the soul abreviated; her very pattern and image, in
which is placed her Escutcheon, with many quarters, representing al her titles
of honor, being set in the gate and forefront, to the end men may know, that
this is her abode and her Palace. And although this Rule is sometimes
fallible, yet it holds generally true, and therefore it was well answered by
Socrates, and like a Philosopher, who when his friends (that were well
acquainted with his Virtues, and greatly had them in admiration) were angry
with a certain Physiognomist, for saying he was blockish, given to Wine; and
to all manner of vices, It Is very true (says he) what he speaks; for such a
one I was by nature, and should have been, had not the study of Philosophy and
good letters weeded out and eradicated those vicious inclinations. But to fit
the garment to the body, and the Dyal to the Meridian, to apply what has been
spoken in general, to our lover in particular, we read in the history of his
nativity, that Jacob was a smooth man, and as his complexion was, such was his
disposition, calm and serene, smooth and even, as there was no tempest in his
looks, so neither was there in his breast, all was quiet there and in
tranquillity: contrary to him in all things was his Brother Esau being of body
hairy and rugged, and of mind sierce and violent, a man of an untamed beat, and
every way unfit to make a Lover; neither do I find that he was ever guilty of
so much humanity; indeed I read that he was a Polygamist, and had more wives
then one, as namely Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the
daughter of Elon the Hittite, which were as the text says, a grief of mind
unto Isaac and to Rebekah, and afterward a third Malahath daughter to Ishmael,
when he saw the others were nothing pleasing to his father and mother; but you
will say, if this were his crime, yet he had that comfort of miserable persons,
company, and which does greatly alleviate his brothers too, whom herein you
shall find as faulty as himself: but do you think in good earnest, to do a
thing voluntarily with election and premeditation, and to be enforced to it by
affection the strongest motive in the world having been by Laban so notoriously
deluded, after so many years service and sufferings makes no alteration in the
case? nay what will you say after all this, if I make it appear, that he had no
other wife besides Rachel? for of this opinion are the Casuists, who say, that
the consent which proceeds so from error, that the error gives cause to the
consent (whether it be error personae of the person, as in this case, or
Conditionis aut qualitatis ad essentiam conjugij pertinentis, of the condition
or quality belonging to the essence of Wedlock, such as is mentioned Deuteronomy. 22.
20. and which Joseph suspected of the blessed Virgin such consent say they is
void and to be accounted for none, and consequently no marriage, for in that,
as in all other contracts the consent of both parties must precede and go
before: and this consent must be voluntary or else it is not Consensus Humanus,
the consent of a rational creature; if it be asked, why he retained Leah
afterward? I answer, as his concubine, and not as his wife, which that age
then dispensed with, for I cannot think but that herein he would imitate, the
pious example of Abraham and Isaac, who were both Monogamists, the latter not
having so much as a concubine. But whether am I digrest, while I pursue the
(...)ing notions too far? I shall only add thus much further and return.
These two brothers so different in their dispositions, me thinks are no unfit
allegory of reason and passion, or policy and strength, in which we see the
great advantage that reason and policy has over passion and brutish strength;
for indeed therein beasts properly excel: and therefore it was foretold by God
at their nativity, that the elder should serve the younger; for passion is in
every man elder then reason, for he is first a slave to passion, before he
comes to be a subject to reason, and though Kingdoms and Dominions are usually
gained by the sword, yet they could never subsist without good laws and
administration, the nerves and ligaments of all Commonwealths, which proceed
from that supreme and sovereign part of man his intellect and under standing,
to which only the Throne is due, and to which all the other faculties ought to
be subordinate. But I proceed to the second Symptom whereby nature discovers a
Lover, and that is, that he is of a great, but withal a merciful spirit,
herein resembling God Almighty himself, who as he has the greatest power to
punish, so he has the greatest mercy to forgive, which as it proceeds from God
out of his infinite love and goodness to his creatures, so it does likewise
from a Lover out of that natural and innate Sympathy, which he bears to his
fellow creatures; for indeed the lover is the only person of humanity, all
others are but Lycanthropoi, mere Wolves one to another, for the proud man he
looks upon others as his footstools and vassals, the ambitious man as his
ladders, the covetous man as his prey and booty, the fearful man starts and
looks upon others as bug-bears, the envious person he looks upon others too,
but it is a squint, and as upon his tormentors, only the lover looks upon
others with an eye os compassion, acknowledging even in the basest and poorest
persons, the communion of minds and mortality.

The third mark which nature gives of a Lover, is that he is impatient of
idleness and all occasions of sloth. But upon the very mention of this, me
thinks I hear some cry out, A Paradox, and that I sin against experience, and
the old verse, Otia si tollas, they allege that idleness is the oil which
maintains and feeds the flames of affections, and that were it once
subtracted, Love would instantly go out, perish, and die of it self. But I
pray you what a kind of Love do these men ideate and fancy to themselves? will
you know? why truly nothing else but some loose extravagant and wanton heats,
to attribute to which the name of this most pure and unspotted flame, were an
impiety altogether unpardonable; no, when Love has once taken possession of
the soul, when affection has once inspired it, it presently sets all the
faculties and powers of it on work, there is no room then, no place for
idleness, every corner is filled, every angle is replenished, every recesse is
taken up. How many from mere beasts and savages in a sort (to instance in
adventitious and acquired love, of which we have examples as well as of
natural) has it restored to reason and humanity? How many proud and ambitious
men has it taught humility and obsequiousness? How many fierce and cruel
minds has it made affable and gentle? How many ignorant and blockish persons
have become great Scholars, Fools Philosophers, and Cowards valiant, being
instructed by Love, then which there is not a more excellent Schoolmaster in
the World? Away then ye morose Rigid Satyrists, and supercilious Antiamorists,
with your long Beards and starcht faces; you that can personate Virtue with
such a counterfeit and seeming Gravity, and like the Philosopher in Lucian,
have taught your brows the knack to bend at the mention of Vice, when indeed
for all your dissembling and hypocritical Vizards none are more rotten and
corrupt at the bottom then your selves. Most excellently and truly is Love
described and vindicated from those most false and unjust Aspersions ye have
cast upon him, by Barelay in his Icon* a^^morum.
one whose Knowledge is greater the^ your Ignorance. Unjustly (says he) do
severe men accuse Love, and paint him in a loose and feeble Figure, when there
is nothing more sincere amongst mankind, provided that he burn in just limits,
and those raised by Virtue, and fire not with an unlawful Flame, where he is
forbidden. And in another place, says he, This Flame is kindled even in
children, in whom their innocence may be a sufficient Apology for the purity of
it; Nay (says he, elsewhere) you shall see many of the honest est kind of men
tormented with a care (or to call it rightly) a love of some Youngmen. And this
Love is a certain tie of Benevolence more but and violent then to be called.
Friendship. How solicitous are they? how fearful lest they should do any
thing amiss or unworthy of those thoughts and cares they bestow upon them,
that you may know that Love is planted in Worthy Breasts? I will conclude
therefore, that so far forth is Love from making men to become effeminate and
slothful, that there is not in the World a greater spur or sharper Incentive
to Noble and Heroical Actions. Lastly I might note in our Lover one thing
more, and that is that he was a Younger Brother, and from thence infer (if I
shall not be thought too much to strain for this Inference) that Younger
Brothers, as it should seem, are more fitted and better disposed for Lovers
then Elder, whether it be that Nature takes the better aim from her first
Aberrations, correcting these Younger Copies by the Errata's of the former, or
that Custom which is a second Nature gives them this Privilege and Advantage;
for being for the most part habituated to sufferance and hardship, there minds
become thereby, as more gallant and resolute, so withal more humble, pliant,
and tender, and fitter for Love to make his Noble Impressions in: whereas on
the contrary side, Elder brothers being bred up with hopes and expectations of
estates and fortunes (though by their favor, to speak the truth in behalf of
all Younger brothers, neither by the Laws of God nor Man have they any so
absolute a Birthright, but that the Inheritance may at any time with the
consent of Parents, be as lawfully and as justly disposed to any Younger son,
as to them, or any of them. And that this is no idle or vain Assertion, be
pleased but to read over a Book entitled, The Younger Brothers Apology, a most
excellent Discourse, and very well worthy the perusal of al Owners of estates of
Inheritace to rectify their judgments by, wherein what I say is fully and
evidently demonstrated, and clear satisfaction given in the point; whereto I
might likewise add, that throughout the whole Book of GOD, you shall not find
any to whom he expressed a more peculiar favor to, then to younger Brothers, as
were easy to instance in Abel, in Jacob here, in Judah, in Joseph, in Ephraim,
in Moses, in David, in Solomon, and in many others, which I cannot now call to
mind, all Younger Brothers) I say Elder Brothers being for the most part
delicately and wantonly educated, and not with that rigor and severity which
the Younger are, by that means their minds become more haughty and imperious,
and that suits not with a Lover, for he must be of a disposition, though not
servile, yet obsequious and willing to suffer and endure any thing whatsoever
for his Mistress sake; which brings me to the next branch of the Text, The
Penance served, And Jacob served.

All men by nature were born free, Servitude and Bondage was first brought into
the world by Sin, and is by the Civilians defined to be a Constitution of the
Law of Nations, by which, contrary to nature, one is subjected to another
power; for Sin first inslaving his mind, his body soon after came to be
captivated, for by sin entered death, and all other miseries, both precedent,
concomitant, and subsequent; and indeed, it was but just with Almighty God,
that since man would not be obedient to, but deviated and deflected from the
rule of his most sacred and perfect Will, whose service is perfect Freedom,
that he should be made a slave to the unjust and tyrannical Will of his
Fellow Creature, which heretofore has been so large and so far extended, that
they had Vitae and potestatis necem, absolute power over life and death, to
save and kill at pleasure, (and afterward had a very unlimited Authority and
Jurisdiction, until such time as Justinian the Emperor in favor of Liberty,
abrogated the Law styled Lex Fusia Caninia, which was very rigorous and severe,
even in the formalities of Manumission) though now it be utterly ceast and
quite grown out of fashion throughout all Christian Commonwealths, and indeed
it might be truly called what Sennertus does in another case of being born
deaf and dumb, Miserandum malum; for herein the condition of man was more
miserable then that of Beasts, for we do not see that they serve one another,
only if they contend, as it sometimes happens, the more impotent and weaker
gives place to the stronger and more excellent, for herein their excellency
consists as properly as in any thing else; but the misery of servitude in man
received agravation, from his having reason to be sensible of it, in all the
circumstances which might exasperate and heighten it. For first, the original
of it proceeded not from any Victory obtained by one man over the reason of
another, which might justly challenge a superiority, since therein the
excellency of man consists, as being thereby distinguished from a beast, but
from that wherein he is by beasts exceeded; strength and ability of body and
limbs; for he upon whom nature had bestowed the more sinewy and brawny arms,
making use of this advantage, fell upon another that was weaker then himself,
vanquished and overcame him, and so by this means he became his captive and his
slave; afterward in process of time, it may be this property thus acquired
which he challenged in him, might either by gift, or sale, or contract, or some
way or another, be transferred to one possibly every way inferior to himself,
and even in this, which was the first cause of his captivity. I do not
discommend valor: I deny not but that it is a great ornament to any man, and
of great use too, for that by it, he is able to protect himself in the doing of
his duty, to countenance virtue, and to add authority to it likewise: neither
will I deny but that nature may have seemed to have marked out some persons for
Sovereignty and command, and again others for servitude and slavery, by induing
the former with Brave, Noble, Heroic dispositions, and the others with Low,
Servile, and Sordid; for indeed there are millions and multitudes of people,
that have nothing of man in them, but only the outward aspect, being otherwise
little superior or better then beasts, insomuch that they may seem to have
begot that question, whether beasts differed from men specifically, or only
gradually? I say not to deny but to acknowledge all this, yet we cannot grant
valor a Prerogative above reason, being, without this to govern it and appoint
it its limits, nothing else but a rebellious and stubborn heat, for did beasts
but equal men in reason, as they exceed them in strength, they would quickly
be masters of the world, and turn man out of that dominion which he pretends as
Lord over the creatures, in despite of all his walled Towns, strong Castles,
and fortifications. But not to expatiate further, I say liberty being accounted
so precious, and so highly valued by every one, that Jacob quite contrary,
being born free, should voluntarily prefer servitude before this so esteemed,
happy condition, may seem to most people very strange and wonderful; but I
perceive these Wonderers are ignorant what it is to Love, or else they might
have read, that even Jupiter himself, Rex superum, the King of the Gods, was
not ashamed, as the Poets fable, to assume the shape of a beast, and bellow
like a Bull amidst the fields, for the love of the fair Europa; and that
Hercules too, after all his Labors and Conquests, refused not, even with those
victorious hands with which he had performed such Wonders, to hold a Distaffe,
and spin at the command of Iole his Mistress. Such is the efficacy and power of
all-powerfull Love that there is no Office so mean, no Danger so great, no
Hazard so apparent, no Peril so imminent, that a Lover will stick at, and
refuse to undergo: And therefore, what that great Adva^cer of Learning says in
the beginning of those excellent Precepts which he gives about moulding a man's
own Fortunes, namely, that it is as hard and severe a thing to be a true
Politic, as to be truly Moral; I might transfer, and say, That it is as
difficult a matter to be a true Lover as either, and that Love lays as heavy
Impositions as either Virtue or Fortune: And indeed, what is there that we
highly prize, that is easily obtained? Do not we see that men commit themselves
to the Sea, to Death, and to a thousand dangers to gain a little wealth and
riches, and shall a Lover sit still and do nothing to obtain a prize so
excellent as an Heart, a treasure so far beyond all treasures, if we will
believe Solomon (and he was no unwise man) who says, that Cantie^^, 8. v. 7.
if a man would give all the substance of his house for it, that it would be
utterly contemned. Were there no difficulty in the obtaining, there would be no
pleasure in the enjoyment, for it is that which renders the fruition so much
the sweeter, so miserable is our Lot here, that we cannot relish the least
contentment, unless it be seasoned with the bitterness and acerbity of
misery, Pleasure and Pain being by Jupiter, as the Fable has it, inseparably
linkt together, not by any means to be parted asunder. But I come in the next
place, to the Aggravation of the Penance from the length of Time, viz. Seven
Years. And Jacob served Seven years.

There are some who are of Opinion, that there is a certain hidden and secret
Magic in Number, and in some more especially then in others; this conceit
seems to be first deduc't from the Pythagoreans, who were great and Religious
Admirers of the Virtues and Powers of Number. Amongst the rest, or rather above
the rest, has this Number of Seven been celebrated, as to any one who shall
take the pains to read the many Comments upon that famous place in Virgil,
Oterque quaterque beati, will evidently appear. Frequent mention is likewise
made of it in the sacred Scriptures, especially in Amos, where we have it
repeated no less than eight times in the two first Chapters, where we read so
often these words, For three Transgressions, and for four, etc. But I shall not
make so superstitious a scrutiny into the words, only from the number of the
Years, which make up one complete Climacterick, in which they say there are so
many great Changes and Mutations in Dispositions and Affections. I shall
observe the Constancy of our Amorist, and commend it to the Imitation and
Practice of all Lovers; for indeed, this is that which Crowns all actions: and
is the very Touchstone to discern a sincere and loyal, from a masked and
pretending Lover. Whosoever thou art therefore, that intendest to enter these
lists, be sure to come well Fortified and Armed against all Dangers and
Difficulties whatsoever, and resolve either to Die or Conquer; for know, that
many may please themselves with the Thoughts of being Lovers, till they come to
suffer, and then their Inconstancy betrays the Weakness of their Resolution,
and discovers the Sandiness of the Foundation upon which they were built: for,
how many do we read of, that have been Candidates and Probationers, whom yet
the strictness of the Discipline has deterred and frighted from becoming
professed Lovers? How many that have proceeded further, yea, so far, that they
have attained even within sight of the Haven, and yet there, by an ill Fate,
have been shipwrackt and cast away? that have escaped the ninth Wave, and yet
have been absorpt and overwhelmed by the tenth? unfortunately quitting the
Siege, then when if they had continued never so little longer, the Fort had
been yielded up, and delivered into their Possession? If thou would
therefore steer a right Course, in the midst of a Sea so tempestuous, so
beset with Rocks, with Shelves, and Quicksands, be sure thou aavoid
Presumption on the one hand, and Despair on the other, both alike Enemies to
this Virtue of Constancy; and though thou do wait long, yet consider, that
thy Patience will at last be Crowned with Victory and Conquest. The Angler,
though he sit long in silence and expectation by the Brook-side, yet at last
draws up the Fish. The Husbandman, though he take so much pains to plow and
sow, forcing the stubbernness of the barren Earth, to make it fertile, yet at
last receives a plentiful Crop, which pays him for all the labor and toil
that he has taken: So thou, if thou continuest Constant and Patient, though
thou may meet with some hinderance in thy passage, some difficulties and
obstructions in the way, yet thou will assuredly at the last arrive at the
Haven of thy Desires and Wishes. Come we in the next place, to the Object of
all this Love and Affection, his Mistress Rachel. And Jacob served seven years
for Rachel.

It was the opinion of Aristotle, that the first Monarchs; and those to whom
others yielded Subjection, were such as were most beautiful, by this
Submission acknowledging that Nature had indulged and bestowed upon them a
Privilege and Prerogative extraordinary above and beyond others; for
certainly, there is in Beauty an awfulness and Sovereignty, that forces every
one to stoop to it: for even very Beasts are sensible of the power of it; and
without all question, it is most usually an Index and symptom of a virtuous
and well disposed soul, and therefore it is said, that Mores saepe sequuntur
temperamentum corporis, the conditions oftentimes follow the temperament and
crasis of the body: This that judicious and excellent Poet Homer well knew, for
he makes Thersites who was deformed in mind to be alike deformed and misshapen
in body; Now whether Beauty consists in a certain pleasing Harmony and
Symmetry of Parts, which they call good features, or in a perfect mixture of
Colors and Complexion; or lastly, which seems to be a more immediate efflux of
the Soul, in a certain Air and taking Garb of the whole, which renders all
the actions graceful and becoming, is not easy to define, Men disagree so
much about it; neither can we allow them for competent Judges in this case; so
much does natural prejudice corrupt the judgment of every one: for as several
humors are predominant in every body (which though they be reduced to four
Heads, yet are infinite in degree and mixture) so are the Fantasies and
Conceits severally framed and effected accordingly; hence it is that what one
man loves, another hates, and again what is disliked by him, is affected by
another; for why else do the Chinoses esteem great powting lips, and flat
noses, such as we call saddle noses, to be the only Beauty, when amongst us it
is held and accounted so great a deformity? notwithstanding this incertainty of
opinion (if I might be admitted to give in my Conjecturall suffrage) I should
assign the first place to that which we called the Air or garb, the next to
the countenance, and the last to the complexion, and indeed so great is the
force of Beauty to beget Love, and that with so much ardency and violence, that
we read of many that have died for love, because they were denied the enjoyment
of those they so passiouately affected, so we read that Iphis died for the love
of Anaxarete, Dido for Aeneas, and a great many more that I will not now
insta^ce in; and yet alas without Virtue, how admirable and excellent soever
Beauty be, it is nothing, so much does a vicious soul within deform the most
beautiful form and outward appearance of the fairest body; for certainly, if
according to the conceit of that famous Opti^ Vitruvius, Nature had windowed
every breast, the deformity of the mind would appear greater and fouler then
that of the body; and Virtue, as Cicero has it, Mirandos sui excitaret amores,
would ravish all eyes with the sweetness and luster of its Beauties, and
therefore we read of Socrates, that though he was very deformed, and extremely
crooked, and bunchbackt, yet his eyes were irradiated with a certain sweet and
amiable splendor raised from his virtuous soul, wherewith the beholders were
marvellously delighted. Seeing then that Jacob had such a Mistress endued as
well with all virtuous qualities as beautiful perfections, being as virtuous
as she was fair, and most fair and beautiful amidst so many virtues, it is
no wonder if to gain a jewel so inestimable (for so Solomon says in the
beginning of that large Encomium which he makes in praise of a good wife, where
he interrogates and asks the question * Who Prove. cap. 31. 10.
can find a virtuous Woman, for her price is far above Rubies) he despised his
liberty and all the injuries of the Climate and inclemency of the weather,
which by the way let me tell you, was much more rigorous and extreme in Syria
(as Geographers will inform us) then it is any where with us. Now that she was
virtuous I need not prove being every where so fully demonstrated, and that she
was beautiful we have Divine testimony for our Authority, which can neither
err nor be deceived. Indeed Lovers that see only through the mists and clouds
of their passion, do many times hyperbolize, setting out their Mistresses
elaborately with borrowed and feigned Metaphors and Titles impoverishing every
thing to enrich them: but of Rachel here, though we have no particular
Description, yet we have her set down Beautiful and wellfavoured in general,
and one insta^ce for all in particular, even in that which is held to be the
chiefest Prerogative of Beauty, the Eye, the Sun that inlightens this little
world, the window of the soul, from whence she takes her fairest and most
immediate prospect, so much we may by Consequence gather out of the Text it
self, which we read thus, Genesis 29. 17.
Now Leah was tender-ey'd, but Rachel was beautiful and well-favoured; we do
not find any other defect of Beauty here, wherewith Leah is charged, but only
this, that she was tender Eyed, and yet this one single Blemish is opposed to
being beautiful and wellfavoured, as if because she wanted good Eyes, she were
neither beautiful nor well-favoured, the whole beauty or deformity of the Face
(as it should seem) consisting in the having or wanting this principal part of
beauty. But leaving this, I come in the next place to the Wonder, And they
seemed to him but a few days. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they
seemed to him but a few days.

There is no one that by nature loves or desires that which feems Evil to
him, but flies from it, and avoideth it, and this out of principles of
self-preservation ingrafted into every one; for as St. Paul says, Ephesians. cap.
5. ver. 26.
No one ever yet hated his own flesh. To take away the Malignity of a thing,
and to render it privatively good, is much; but, that that which every one
abhors as evil, by a strange Metamorphosis, should not only disappear to be
so, but likewise become amiable and pleasing, is the greatest Wonder, and must
needs proceed from some strange and excellent Cause. Had Jacob spent these
seven years of Service with as much pleasure and contentment as ever he did
when he was free, and at his own disposing, why this had been strange, seeing
it involves in it a Paradox, so universally contradicted, viz. That Servitude
is as much to be desired as Liberty; for, if there be that Content and
Satisfaction to be found in it that is in Liberty, why should it not be alike
desired? but that there should be in it a great deal more sweetness then in
Liberty, cannot but beget a world of admiration; for this is analogically in
effect, as if Gall should not only leave and forsake its bitterness, but
become sweeter then Honey or Sugar: For do not we see, how many Recreations, and
those many of them sinful too, are daily invented and found out, as Antidotes
and divertisements against Melancholy, merely to pass away and beguile the
time; for the truth is, time seems so tedious to us, that we know not what to
do with it, we are a weary of it, and it lies upon our hands, like a
Merchandise or Commodity that we would fain utter, but cannot tell how, and
therefore to be rid of it some way or other, we do not only suffer others to
steal it from us, but we rob our selves, and are those fures temporis, which
Seneca says that Friends are, when notwithstanding our disestimation, as he
himself tells Lucilius in his first Epistle, The thing is so precious, quod ne
gratus quidem, potest reddere, He that studies Gratitude never so much, can
never be sufficiently Grateful; whereas on the contrary side, to a busy
Lover, the time seems short, and the Years fews, Seven years time appears to
Jacob but a little time, and two thousand five hundred fifty and six Days
seem but a few Days (for so many upon computation you will find them, allowing
the Intercalation of one day for a Bissextile, though I am not ignorant that
the Julian account was many hundred years after) a ^ot computed the years by
the Sun, but by the Moon (as some say the years of those lo^g-liv'd fathers
before the Flood were) or if by the Sun, ^a^^er, as it should seem, by his
Diurnall then his Annual Motion, this is wonderful indeed and strange, and
something like to that Prerogative of Gods, of which Saint Peter speaks, 2
Peter c. 3. v. 8.
when he says, that a thousand years to him are but as one day, for with him
all things, past, present, and to come, stand and remain in the same station
and consistency perpetually, without any manner of flux or alteration. Come
hither then all ye that think the time slow, and the wheels of his Chariot
heavy, that like the mother of Sisera Judges 5. chap. ver. 28.
look out of the window, and cry through the lattess, why is his Chariot so long
in coming? why tarry the wheels of his Chariot? would you have not only a
lawful and honest, but a most sweet and pleasing diversion to beguile the time
withal, (if I may call that a diversion, which is the noblest and the greatest
business) why learn to love, retire your selves into your selves, learn to know
your selves, to which nothing in the world conduces better then love, being
the best comment that was ever writ upon that text of r(...), and that by which
it is most illustrated, enter into your chamber which is your heart, for so St.
Augustine calls it. Cubiculum tuum, est Cor tuum, and shut the door after you,
and make fast the Lattess, for as long as ye look out at the windows, as long
as ye look out of your selves to see what faults ye can spy in others, ye may
cry long enough, Why so long? and Why tarries? ye may oscitate and gape, ye
may stretch out first the one hand, and then the other, but ye are like to find
but little ease or satisfaction, but rather perpetual lassitude and weariness
of spirit. But I hasten to the last part of the Text, viz. the cause of all
this wonder, which we have here rendered in these words, viz. for the love he
had unto her, And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him
but a few days, for the love he had unto her.

All wonder and admiration is begot by ignorance, and is the child thereof; for
that which we know we do not admire, but only that which we are ignorant of.
Hence likewise proceeded Fortune, being as Iuvenall speaks excellently, a
Goddess of our own making.

Te facimus fortuna Deam, caeloque locamus. For when any thing happened that was
strange and wonderful, and for which they could assign no reason, that they
forthwith attributed to Fortune; then Altars must be built and erected to her,
and Sacrifices offered, and because her distributions were so very unequal,
she must be figured and painted blind, when indeed the blindness was their
own, for Fortune is nothing else but that serpentine or crooked line of
Providence, as Dr. Brown in his Religio Medici.
one Metaphorically defines, or rather describes it; the other being drawn
straight and eve^n, and so obvious to every eye: or as the Schoolmen more
Logically, Fortune is an Accidental cause in Voluntary Agents, whereby such
events do follow our Actions as were neither foreseen nor intended by us; for
in other actions (as I said) the line of providence is straight and easy to be
seen of all, but in this more tortuous and winding, as we know if we lock
straight along a level of a great length, we may easily see to the end of it
because there is no rising in the midst to interrupt and obstruct the sight,
and therefore Mathematicians say, Linea recta est brevissima, but in any thing
which is crooked, it is otherwise, by reason that the eye is intercepted by the
tumor and unevenness of it; but leaving these digressions, let us now lastly
come a little seriously to consider and examine the cause which instead of
satisfying our wonder as we expected, ministers to us fresh cause of a
stonishment and admiration. For now me thinks my Heart wants thoughts to
conceive, and my tongue words to utter any thing in the least measure suitable
to the dignity and excellency of this subject; I must therefore with the
Painter that was to picture Agamemnon, a father beholding the sacrificing of
his own daughter Iphigenia, who because he was not able to express a sorrow so
unconceivable drew him only with a Veil over his face, thereby better
acquitting himself, then if he had made a rash venture, at that which he knew
all his art came so far short of performing, so I presume my best Sanctuary and
Refuge here would be Silence, seeing that whatsoever I shall be able to say or
speak, will be nothing else; for what should this be that has so strange a
power and efficacy, as to render the bitterness of Servitude sweet? to make the
tediousness of time seem short? that is able to trample upon all extremities of
heat and cold, and set the Wind and Weather at defiance? Certainly, whatsoever
it be, it has occasioned a great deal of wrangling amongst Philosophers, and
some of them, as Tul. de not. Deorum. Li^. 1.
Cicero says of Velleius Epicurus, de nullo magis dubitans, quam ne de aliqua
re dubitare videretur, doubting of nothing more then least they should seem to
doubt of any thing, and fearing least their silence should seem to confess and
acknowledge their Ignorance, have given us a Definition of it, such as it is,
Love, say they, is an Appetition of a Good which is present, if there be an
Appetition when the Good is absent, it is then called Desire: If there be a
possibility of obtaining this absent Good, why then it is Hope: but how far
short this comes of giving us any true knowledge what Love is, I leave every
one to judge: For the truth of it is, the Essence of it is not capable of a
definition, neither is it demonstrable a priori, but we must content our selves
with such a rude Description of it as we are able to gather from the Effects,
taking an imperfect and short View from thence.

And here me thinks Xenophon gives us some little light (who as my Lord of St.
Albans says in his Advancement of Learning) observes truly; That all other
affections, though they raise the Mind, yet they do it by distorting and
uncomlinesse of ecstasies and Excesses; only Love does exalt the mind, and
nevertheless, at the same instant, does settle and compose it; strange, that
so different and repugnant Effects should proceed and flow from one and the
same Cause; and therefore it is elegantly said by Menander (says the same Lord
of St. Albans elsewhere) Amor, melior, Sophista lavo, ad humanum vitam; That
Love teaches a man to carry himself better then the Sophist or Preceptor,
which he calls left handed, because with all his Rules and Preceptions he
cannot form a man so Dexterously, nor with that facility to carry and govern
himself, as Love can do. Let us give a guess then at the Cause by the Effects,
(for that is all we are able to do) and from these graceful and amiable
Operations, imagine and conjecture, how much more excellent and beautiful that
must necessarily be, from whence all these beauties and excellencies proceed
and are derived; For we know the Old Maxim, Quod efficit tale, illud est magis
tale, That which makes a thing to be so, be it good or bad, must needs be more,
and in a far greater measure so it self. Now some have undertaken to discover
and find out the intricacie of this involved and hidden Mystery, by several
Symptoms, some by one, and some by another, as by the Eye, the Pulse, etc.
Concerning the Eye there have been great questions moved, which are the
amourous or the loving Eyes? Whether the dying, or the smiling, or the wild,
such as Aristotle calls, in sani, the mad eyes? for all of these have found
their assertors, who have took up the Gauntlet in maintenance and defense of
them; or again, whether it be true, what some of the Platonists held, That the
Spirits of the Lover do pass by the Eye into the Spirits of the Person loved,
which causes the desire of return into the body whence they were emitted?
whereupon (say they) follows that Appetite of Union which is in Lovers. So
likewise about the Pulse, Whether there be not a love-Pulse, or a Pulse proper
and peculiar to discover Love by? as we read in Plutarch, of Erasistratus the
Physician, that found out that young Antiochus the son of Seleucus was in love
with the fair Stratonica, his fathers Wife, by the unusual beating of his
Pulse; and then again, what kind of motion it causes, whether, great or
little, quick or slow, or rather quite irregular, and altogether confused, like
to that which is observed to be at the point of death, at which time the Heart
does so palpitate and tremble, that the Systole and Diastole are in a manner
confounded. This I only mention, to show how hard a matter it is, amidst so
many difficulties and diversities of Opinion, to state any thing aright
concerning this subject: Give me leave therefore to draw over the Curtain
again, and to leave it here, seeing we may be rather said to admire, then know
it, as long as we are here upon Earth, where we see but only in Aenigmate, and
tanquam per speculum, darkly and in much obscurity.

To conclude then, I say, that even God Almighty himself is most happy in that
he is most loving, infinitely loving, or rather 1 Ioh. 4. v. 8^
Love it self) as St. John speaks) and the Devil is most unhappy in that he is
not capable of this excellency and Divine perfection. Having therefore the
example and pattern of so great a Patriarch before us, let no Lover hereafter
be ashamed to imitate it, or write after so excellent a Copy, when he reads
that Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed to him but a few
days, for the love he had unto her.

I have now done with the literal and Historical parts of the Text, I shall a
little touch upon the allegorical and so make an end; This indeed is the
kernel and the marrow, the other is but the bone and the shell; this is the
spirit that quickneth and gives life, the other is but a dead letter; for so
Saint Paul says, Litera occidit spiritus autem vivificat; By Jacob therefore
is here meant every Christian Militant upon earth, by the service which he
indures, the afflictions and crosses which he must abide and undergo in this
world; by Rachel the Kingdom of Heaven: By Seven Years, the whole time of his
life, which will then seem short and pleasing to him, when his Heart is
kindled and inflamed with Love toward God, and Charity toward his Neighbor.
Let us but a little consider the vast and infinite disparity and disproportion,
betwixt these things; and surely we shall be ashamed to have made the
Comparison: For what, shall Jacob undergo so much sufferance and hardship, and
that with so great delight and pleasure, for a temporal Remand? and should not
every Christian ^^dure much more (...) nall and far more (...) weight of Glory?
For (...) is this life, but a Stage and (...) of Misery and Discontent, whereon
every one acts a sad and sorrowful part, some more, some less, but every one
has a share. Man is born to Misery (says Job) as the Sparks fly upwards, and
how natural it is for light bodies to ascend, such as sparks are, every one
knows. What is this life, but a Repetition of the same things over and over, or
(as Dr Brown in his Religio medici
one elegantly says) a Dull retaining to the Sun and Moon, we eat, we drink,
we sleep, that we may eat, and drink, and sleep again; and thus the Year runs
round: And as the same seasons return which were before, so do we reiterate the
same follies again and again, and yet for all gain no experience from thence,
or grow a whit the wiser; for, as if we had not work enough to do at home, we
live out of our selves, and leaving our own Houses, as we imagine, clean swept
and garnished, we are prying into the Dirt and Imperfections of others; for
indeed, most men's whole lives are in a manner from first to last, nothing but a
lying at the catch and advantage, how they may undermine, surprise and destroy
others. Then this man must be ince^sed to that man's Spleen, another sacrificed
to his Lust, a third Holocausted to his Ambition, and what is the reason of all
this? but because there is no love in the World, ( 1 John c. 5. v. 19*
totus Mundus positus est in maligno, as St. John says) nor scarcely so much
as Humanity; Would men but vivere secundam naturam, live according to Nature,
which is that which Seneca so often inculcates in his Epistles, it were no hard
matter to satisfy them.

Vivitur exiguo melius, Natura beatis
Omnibm esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti.
Says Claudian. Nature is content with a little, but men's ambitious desires
think it a confinement and constraint to be bounded within the narrow limits of
one world, as it was said of Alexander,

Aestuat infaelix angusto limite Mundi. This little, scant, diminutive world,
did so crowd and crib up the young gallant, that he was not able to turn
himself, but did sweat again for want of elbow-room; what a Monster had this
been, if his body had been but of the same tumid and swelling bulk with his
mind? Certainly Garagantua had been a mere Pigmie to him. It is the least part
of men's business now a days to live, but as Pompey answered those that
dissuaded him from putting to sea in a storm, by telling him, that thereby he
would endanger and run the hazard of his life, What tell ye me of life, says
he? Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam, There is a Necessity that I should go,
but there is no necessity that I should live; that is no part of their
concernment: when they have got the whole world in their possession, then
perhaps they will bethink of living, as Pyrrhus King of Epirus told Cineas, who
seeing him so eagerly bent to make war against the Romans, took occasion one
time when he was at leisure, to ask him, what benefit they should reap from the
victory, in case they were so fortunate as to obtain it, why (says Pyrrhus)
do thou not see that the Romans being once overcome, there is an open and an
easy way then to such and such, and so great conquests? and so run on from
country to country, and place to place, and Cineas still persisting to know
what the better they should be when all was done, at the last when he could go
no farther; Why then good Cineas (quoth he) we will be quiet and take our ease,
and make feasts every day, and be as merry as we can possibly devise, Cineas
(that had been Demosthenes scholar and was a sober and wise man as well as an
eloquent) having brought him to this point, said again to him. My Lord, what
lets us now to be quiet and merry together, since we enjoy that already
without further travel and trouble, which we will now go seek for abroad with
such shedding of blood, and so manifest danger? and yet we know not whether we
shall ever attain unto it, atter we have both suffered, and caused others to
suffer such infinite sorrows and trouble. But to all this Pyrrhus was deaf, and
would on, till at last after many conquests, he was knocked on the head in the
City of Argos, by a tyle thrown by a woman from the top of an house. But to
proceed I say, that Nature (as one well observes) has made one world, and Art
another, and the paint and adulteries of this latter, have quite spoiled the
real and solid beauties of the former, it is this that has undone the good
old world, and left us nothing now but an hearsay, that there was ever such a
time, which for its happiness was called the Golden Age, for this that we now
live in is so wretched, so full of miseries, that certainly, did but men
foreknow them, or could they but foresee them, they would choose rather to
return into their mothers wombs again, as Pliny relates of an infant of the
City of Saguntum, that year that it was taken by Hanibal, then venture to come
forth into so miserable a place; and therefore man is not unfitly said to be,
animal (...), a weeping, or according to the word, a tear-loving creature, (as
it is elegantly expressed in that Epigram) set down by Caussinus in his Symbols.

(...);
(...)*
(...)!
Sum natus lachrymans, lachrymans moriorque, peregi
In lachrymis vitae tempora longa meae.
O Genus humanum miserum and lachrymabile!
Let us consider again, that although Love be the most excellent thing in this
World, yet here it is but imperfect, being subject to a thousand hopes and
fears and discontents; and likewise Beauty, to how many casualties is it
obnoxious? how soon does a little sickness blast it, and the pride and luster
of it is gone, and the flower withered? Or suppose it exempted from these
misfortunes, yet at last comes old Age, and quite consumes it, not leaving so
much as a ruin to tell that Beauty had there once her habitation:

(...) Theoerit, Eidyll. 25.
(...). But in the World to come as our Savior told the Sadduces: (albeit
Matthew. chap. 22. ver. 30.
they neither marry there, not are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of
God,) there Love is eternal, and Beauty ever youthful, always young, and
perpetually green, (as the Poets sancied the Elizian fields to be,) and
therefore the Apostle, when he comes to speak of those joys, and that place,
he give us but a negative description, which 1 Cor. chap. 2. ver. 9.
neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor has it entered into the Heart
of man to conceive; for of an affirmative one we were not capable. No (may some
say?) why what is there that has any thing of beauty or delight in it, that
the Eye has not seen? has it not beheld such and such most ravishing and
beautiful objects, as lovely and beautiful persons, fair and goodly
prospects, stately and magnificent buildings, pleasant Orchards and Gardens,
flowrie fields, shady Groves, clear Fountains, soft gliding Rivers, murmuring
Brooks, the Heavens spangled and beset with twinkling-Starres, sweet Evenings,
blushing and rosy Mornings, and a thousand other most glorious and pleasing
sights, and is Heaven like none of these? I answer, no; it falls not within the
prospect of this sense, Eye has not seen it, nor any thing, that resembles it.
Yea, but notwithstanding it comes not within the view of this sense of seeing,
yet possibly the Ear, that has heard such exquisite variety of all sorts of
Music, such sublime and deep learned discourses, that has had derived and
conveyed to it, so many primitive and ancient traditions, may have met with
some strain something like it, or at least may have heard some tidings of it.
No, it falls not under the latitude of this sense neither, Ear has not heard
it: yea, but yet notwithstanding it falls not within the knowledge of the
senses which are corporeal, yet surely the Understanding, which is inorganical
and incorporeal, and which needs not the support of these Crutches, but is able
to subsist and act without them, may be able to find out and discover what kind
of place this is; for we see we are able to conceive a great many things which
never were, nor shall be, much more then (as one would think) this, which we
are as certain is, as we are uncertain what it is; by this we are able to move
from the Center to the Circumference, and back again in a moment, we can dig as
deep and low as Hell, and immediately soar again above the Stars: and although
there be in every thing that we have seen or heard, something that displeases
us, for even the sweetest Music is not without some discord, and the most
excellent Beauty has its naevos, and its blemishes, and (as the Optists tell
us in their Maxim, that Omnis visio fit per Pyramidem, that every thing that
we see enters into the eye by a sharp angle, like the Cuspis of a Pyramid (the
object making the Basis) so that it may seem to prick as it enters, as
Alexander said the beauty of the Persian Ladies did the Macedonians, so that it
made their Eyes sore again; so me thinks, every object has in it really
something of that figure, something that is sharp and pungent, something that
pricketh, and is distasteful and ingrate; and yet nevertheless, we are able by
our Understanding to sever and abstract whatsoever dislikes us, and to retain
only so much as pleases Us. I say, by our Understanding we are able to do
this; sure then, although we never saw nor heard of them, yet we may be able to
conceive the joys and pleasures that are there. Why no, not thus neither; it
has not entered into the Heart of man to conceive. Why then let us be
satisfied, and rest assured, that they are beyond the perception of our senses,
and beyond the fancy of our imagination, and apprehension of our Understanding.
Seeing therefore then, that we have so excellent a Reward proposed and set
before us, let us with all humble earnestness, contend thither, qua non
passibus itur sed affectibus, whither with our feet we cannot come, they are
too slow, and too heavy, neither is the way at all pervious to them; it must
be the wings of devout and pious Affections that must bear us thither; it must
be Love by which we must be carried thither, love to God, and love to our
Neighbor; for no man (says St. John) loves God, and hates his Brother: and
he gives an excellent Reason for it, for 1 John chap. 4. ver. 20.
how (says he) can he love God whom he has not seen, and hate his Brother
whom he has seen?

O Lord, which art the true and perfect Love, kindle in our Hearts, we beseech
thee, the love of thy self, and thy perfections. Let our souls ascend thither
upon the wings of Faith and Charity, whither otherwise we cannot come; let us
die unto this World, that we may live unto Thee; let it seem bitter unto us,
that we may taste no sweetness but in thee. O Lord, we have had abundant
experience of the Vanity and Falsenesse of it, we have sought for contentment
and satisfaction in it, but we have not found it, we have wandered up and down
in the ways of Wickedness, but we have found no rest for the soles of our
feet; and now at last, that we are weatherbeaten, and weary, now we are
forsaken of every thing, we come unto Thee. As long as any thing would receive
or entertain us, we cared not, we would not return, and therefore thou might
justly now deny us admission; but yet, O receive us, for his sake who is our
Peacemaker, and has parchased it at so dear a rate, even with the effusion of
his own most precious Blood, Jesus Christ the righteous, our blessed Lord and
only Savior. AMEN.

FINIS.

