AN ANSWER TO THE SATYR Upon the French KING.
WHY all this Rage, Jack? Whence this sad disaster?
What makes thee thus abuse thy Royal Master!
Why all this Passion for Italian Molly,
That thou could wish to Firk a Bumm with Holly?
Had thou no other way to show thy Folly?
And is it not monstrous thus to shift thy Sails,
And Ridicule the virtuous Prince of Wales?
The feeble Prop of Abdicated Right;
The Hope of each expiring Jacobite.
But why the Devil, must the Turks and Tartars,
Lamented be as Confessors, and Martyrs?
Is it to let us understand your mind,
And know, to what Religion you're inclined?
If so, I Will Swear You are the fittest Man
To write a Comment on the Alcoran;
For if the Fable will not with Reason chime,
You Will make Amends; and Daub it over in Rhyme.
Lord! What strange Times must we expect to Come,
When each Non-juror turns a Whipping Tom?
Faith it is high time the Whiggs should all be jogging:
If once the Tory Poets talk of Flogging;
Or send their brawny Buttocks to the Tanners,
Since Oates's Penance cannot Reform their Manners.
Forsake thy Muse, Jack; take a School; it is better
To Flogg Boys Arses, than pay Scores with Meeter.
As once you in a merry Frollick told one,
A young Bum-fiddle's better than an old one.
Then, stead of Tythe-Piggs, Quarter Pay comes in,
To furnish out your now dismantled Chin.
By help of this you may Restore your Nose,
Retrieve your Pimples, and Repair your Clothes,
Know where to Dine when your Intestines croke,
And not be forced to Stuff your Gutts with Smoke;
Constrained no more, by Nodding and by Beckening,
To Intimate the Bar must Score the Reckoning;
Have always ready Coin your Club to pay:
And Sheppard will Rejoice to see the day,
When he no more shall count his Sums on Tick,
Nor you complain that Public Faith is sick.
Then, take a Friend's Advice, and Change betimes
To Penitential Prose your Mungrel Rhimes.
WILLIAM and LEWIS mount a nobler Pitch,
Than your enfeebled Malice e're can reach.
The glorious Beams of their concentring Light,
Contracts your Power, and Disdains your Spite.
Your Haggard Muse has chose a Theme too high:
The Eagle's not a Quarry for the Fly,
LONDON, Printed for E^ Whitlock, near Station^^^^^dly 1697.


