AN ANSWER To this Quodlibetical QUESTION.

Whether the Bishops make a Fundamental, and Essential part of the English
PARLIAMENT: COLLECTED Out of some Memorials in a larger Treatise, for the
Information of some, the Confirmation of others, and the satisfaction of all.

De Legib. and ^onga Consuet. Si de interpretatione Legis quaeritur, imprimis
inspiciendum est, pro jure civitas retro, in hujusmodi casibus, usa fuit:
Consuetudo enim optima interpretatio legis est. LONDON, Printed for A. Seile,
over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1661.

AN ANSWER To this Quodlibetical QUESTION. viz. Whether the Bishops be a
Fundamental, and Essential part of the English Parliaments?
WHereas a great Question has been raised of late, and but lately neither;
Whether the Bishops make a Fundamental, and Essential part of the English
Parliament? I hope to put it out of question by two sorts of Arguments, of
which the one shall be de jure, and the other de facto The one derived from
that original right which is vested in them, the other from the constant
exercise and continual practice, by which that right has been enjoyed in all
times foregoing.

And first we shall begin with the proofs de jure, and therein first with that
which does occur in the Laws of King Athelston, one of the first Monarchs of
the English Saxons. Among which there is a Chapter (it is chap. 11.) entitled
De officio Episcopi and quid pertinet ad officium ejus; that is to say,
Touching the office of a Bishop, and that which does of right belong unto it.
In which Chapter it is thus declared, viz. Episcopo jure pertinet omnem
rectitudinem promovere, Dei scilicet and seculi etc. Spelm. Counsel. p. 402.
and convenit ut per consilium and testimonium ejus omne Legis scitum, and
Burgi mensura, and omne pondus sit secundum dictionem ejus institutum; that is
to say, it belongs of right unto the Bishop, to promote Justice in matters
which concern both the Church and State, and unto him it appertains, that by
his Counsel and award, all Laws, and Weights, and Measures, be ordained
throughout the Kingdom.

2ly. Next, we will have recourse to the old Record entitled, Modus tenendi
Parliamentum; In which it is affirmed, ad Parliamentum Summoniri and venire
debere Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, and alios majores Cleri,
qui tenent per Comitatum aut Baroniam ratione hujusmodi tenurae; Modus tenendi
Parliamentum.
That all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates of the
Church, who hold their Lands either by an Earls Fee, or a Barons Fee, were to
be summoned, and come to Parliament in regard of their Tenure.

3ly. Next, look we on the Chartularies of King Henry the first, recognized in
full Parliament at Clarendon, under Henry the second, where they are called
Avitas consuetudines, which declare it thus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and
universae Personae qui de Rege tenent in capite, habeant possessiones suas de
Rege sic ut Baroniam, etc. Et sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judicijs
Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, quosque pervenierat ad dimmutionem membrorum vel ad
mortem Math. Paris in Hen. 2.
The meaning is in brief, that Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
Ecclesiastical persons which hold in Capite of the King, are to have and hold
their Lands in Barony, and that they ought as Barons to be present in all
Judgments with the other Barons in the Court of Parliament, until the very
Sentence of Death or Mutilation (which was very common in those times) was to
be pronounced. And then they commonly did use to withdraw themselves, not out
of any incapacity supposed to be in them by the Law of England, but out of a
restraint imposed upon them by the Canons of the Church of Rome.

4ly. In the Great Charter made by King John, in the last of his Reign, we have
the form of summoning a Parliament, and calling those together who have Votes
therein, thus expressed at large. And Habendum commune concilium Regni de
auxilio assidendo, etc. Et de scutagijs assidendis, faciemus summoneri
Archiepiscopos, Abbates, Comites, and majores Barons Regni sigillatim per
litter as nostras: and preteria summoneri faciemus in generali per Vice-Comites
and Ballivos nostros omnes alios qui in Capite tenent ad certum diem, scil. ad
terminum 40 dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, etc. Id in Job.
In which we have not only a most evident proof, that the Bishops are of right
to be called to Parliament, for granting Subsidies and Escuage, and treating of
the great Affairs which concern the Kingdom, but that they are to be summoned
by particular Letters, as well as the Earls and Barons or either of them; A
form or copy of which Summons issued in the time of the said King John, is
extant on Record, and put in Print not many years since in the Titles of
Honor. P. 1.20.5.


5ly. We have it thus in the Magna Charta of King Henry the 3d. the birthright
of the English Subject, according as it stands translated in the book of
Statutes. First we have granted to God, and by this our present Charters have
confirmed for us, and our Heirs for ever, That the Church of England, shall be
free, and shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable, Magna
Charta cap. 1,
But it is a known Right and Liberty of the Church of England, that all the
Bishops, and many of the greater Clergy (and peradventure also the Inferior
Clergy in the said Kings time) had their Votes in Parliament; and therefore is
to be preserved inviolable by the Kings of England, their Heirs, and Successors
for ever. Which Charter, as it was confirmed by a solemn Curse denounced on all
the Infringers of it, by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Math. Paris in
Hen. 3.
and ratified in no fewer, then 80. succeeding Parliaments: So was it Enacted
in the reign of Edward the first, That it should be sent under the great Seal
of England, to all the Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom, to be read twice a
year before the people; 28. Edw. 1. c. 1.
That they should be ready four times every year in a full County Court, 28
Edw. 1. c. 2.
and finally that all Judgments given against it should be void and null; 28.
Edw. 1. c. 3.
the application or which last clause I refer to those, to whom the rectifying
of the Error (which to the contrary thereof has been committed) does of right
belong.

6ly. We have the protestation of John Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury, in
the time of King Edward the 3d. who being in disfavour with the King, and
denied entrance in to the House of Peers, Challenged his place, and suffrage
there, as the first Peer of the Realm, and One that ought to have the first
voice in Parliament, in right of his See.

But hear him speak his own words, which are these that follow, Amici (for he
spoke to those that took witness of it) Rex me ad hoc Parliamentum scripto suo
vocavit, and ego tanquam major par Regni post Regem, and primam vocem habere
debens in Parliamento, jura Ecclesiae meae Cantuarensis vendico, and ideo
ingressum in Parliamentum pero Antiqui, Britan in Gati. Stratford.
which makes it plain enough, that the Archbishop did not challenge a place in
Parliament, as the first Peer of the Realm, either by way of favor, or of
custom only, but as a power and privelege as he ought to have ( habere debens
are the words) in the Right of his See.

7ly. And lastly, there is the protestation on Record of all the Bishops in the
reign of King Richard the 2d. at what time William Courtney was Archbishop of
Canterbury: who being to withdraw themselves from the house of Peers, at the
pronouncing of the sentence of death on some guilty Lords, first made their
Procurators to supply their rooms, and then put up their protestations to
preserve their Rights; the sum whereof, for as much as does concern this
business in their own words thus. De jure, and consuetudine Regni Angliae ad
Archiepiscopum Cantuarensem, qui pro tempore fuerit, nec non cateros
Suffraganos, confratres, and compatres, Abbates and Priores, Aliosque Prelatos
quoscunque per Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes, Pertinet, in Parliamentis
Regis quibuscunque, ut Par^s Regni predidi personaliter interesse ibidemque de
Regni negotiis, ac aliis tradari consuetis cum caeteris didi Regni patibus, and
aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus Consulere, and Tradare, Ordinare,
Statuere, and Diffinire, ac caetera facere quae Parliamento ibidem iminent
facionda. In vita Gu. Courtney.
It appertains say they, both by Right and Custom to the Archbishop of
Canterbury for the time being. As also unto all the rest of his Compeers, as
well the Suffragan Bishops, as to the Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates
whatsoever, which hold their Land by Barony of our Lord the King, to be
personally present at all Parliaments as Peers of the Realm, and three together
with the rest of the Peers, and all other which have Right to be therein
present to Consult, Treat of, and Ordain, and finally to determine and
establish all such things, and matters, as are accustomably handled, and
ordained in Parliaments. Which sets the matter as I take it beyond all dispute,
as to the first of these two heads, or sorts of Arguments, whereby I was to
prove this point, which were those de jure.

Let us next see whether this Right of theirs be confirmed, and countenanced by
continual practice, and that they have not lost it by Discontinuance; which is
my second kind of Argument, those I mean de facto. And in this way of proof, we
can go as high, as the first preaching of the Gospel to the English Saxons,
and so descend unto those last times without interruption. By which it will
appear, that Christianity in this Nation, and the Bishops Votes in Parliaments,
and Common Councils, are of like Antiquity.

For first, no sooner had King Ethelbert received the Gospel, but presently we
read, that as well the Clergy, as the Laity, were summoned to the Common
Council: which the Saxons sometimes called Mycell Synoth, the great Assembly,
and sometimes Wittenegemote, the Counsel or Assembly of the Wise men of the
Realm. Anno 605. Ethelbertus Rex in fide corroboratus Catholica etc. Cantuariae
convocavit Commune Consilium tam Cleri, quam popusi; King H. Spelmon in Council.
p. 116.
Ethelbert as my Author has it, being confirmed in the Faith in the year 605.
(which was but nine years after his Conversion) together with Berha his Queen,
their Son Thalbald, the reverend Archbishop Augustine, and all the rest of the
Nobility, did solemnize the Feast of Christ's Nativity in the City of
Canterbury; and did there cause to be assembled on the 9th. of January, the
Common Council of his Kingdom; as well the Clergy, as the Lay-Subject, by
whose Consent, and Approbation, he caused the Monastery by him built to be
dedicated to the honor of God Almighty, by the hand of Augustine.

And though no question other examples of this kind may be found amongst the
Saxon Heptarches, yet being the West Saxon Kingdom did in fine prevail, and
united all the rest into one Monarchy; We shall apply our selves unto that more
punctually, and with greater care.

I. And first we read of Egbert, who first united the seven Kingdoms of the
Saxons under the common name of England, that he caused to be convened at
London his Bishops, and the Peers of the highest rank, pro consilio capiendo
adversus Danicos Pyratas, Charta whitlagi^ mercyo^um Regis ap. Ingulph.
to advise upon some course against the Danish Pirates, who infested the
Seacoast of England.

II. Another Parliament or Council (call it which you will) called at Ringbury,
Anno 855. in the time of Ethelwolph, the Son of Egbert, pro negotiis Regni,
Charta Bertult mer. Regis ap. Ingulf.
to treat of the affairs of the Kingdom: the Acts whereof are ratified and
subscribed by the Bishops, Abbats, and other great men of the Realm.

III. We find that the same King Ethelwolph in a Parliament, or Assembly of his
States at Winchester, Anno 855. Cum consilio Episcoporum, and Principum, Ingulf
Croyland hist.
by the Advice and Council of the Bishops, and Nobility, confirmed unto the
Clergy the tenth part of all men's Goods; and ordered that the Tithe so
confirmed unto them should be free ab omnibus Secularibus Servitutibus, from
all secular Services, and Impositions.

IV. The two Charters were issued out by Athelstone, above mentioned, Consilio
Wifelmi Archiepiscopi mei, and aliorum Episcoporum meorum, Ap Eund. p. 402, 403.
by the advice of Wifelme his Archbishop, and his other Bishops.

And 5ly. That Ina in the year 902. caused the great Council of his Realm to be
Assembled, consisting ex Episcopis, Principibus, Proceribus, etc. of Bishops,
Princes, Nobles, Earls, and of all the wise men, Elders, and people of the
whole Kingdom, and there Enacted diverse Laws for the Weal of his Realm. ap.
cund. p. 219.
We also read this in the Reign of Edrid, Anno 948. viz. In festo igitur
nativitatis Beatae Mariae cum universi Magnates Regni per Regium edictum
summoniri, tam Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi, ac Abbates, quam caeteri totius
Regni proceres and optimates Londiniis convenissent ad tractandum de negotijs
publicis totius Regni; Id ibid. p. 497. edit. Lon.
That in the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, the great men of the
Realm, that is to say Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, Peers, were
summoned by the Kings Writ to appear at London, to handle, and conclude about
the public Affairs of the Kingdom. Mention of which Assembly is made again at
the foundation and endowment of the Abbey of Crowland; M. id p. 500.
and afterward a confirmation of the same by Edgar, Anno. 966. Praesentibus
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, and optimatibus Regni; Id p. 5. p. 1.50.
In the presence of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Peers of the Realm. The
like Convention of Estates we find to have been called by Canutus the Dane,
after the death of Edmund Ironside, for the settling the Crown on his own head,
of which thus the Author Rog. Heveden Annal. page prior p. 250.
Cujus post mortem Rex Canutus omnes Episcopos, and Duces, nec non and
Principes, cunctosque optimates gentis Angliae, Londoniae congregari jussit.
Where we still find the Bishops to be called to Parliament, as well as the
Dukes, Princes, and the rest of the Nobility; and to be ranked and marshalled
first, (which clearly shows that they were always reckoned for the first
Estate) before the greatest, and most eminent of the secular Peers. And so we
find it also in a Charter of King Edward the Confessor, the last King of the
Saxon Race) by which he granted certain Lands, and Privileges to the Church of
Westminster, Anno 1066. Cum Concilio, and deereto Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Comitum aliorumque optimatum; ap. H. Spel. in Council. p. 630.
with the Counsel and Decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and others of
his Nobles. And all this while the Bishops and other Prelates of the Church did
hold by no other Tenure, than in puro and perpetuo Eleemosyna; Camden in Brit.
or frank Almoigne, as our Lawyers call it: and therefore sat in Parliament in
no other capacity than as spiritual persons merely; who by their extraordinary
knowledge in the Word of God, and in such other parts of Learning, as the world
then knew, were thought best able to direct and advise their Princes in all
points of difficulty. But when the Norman Conqueror had possessed the State,
then the case was altered. The Prelates of the Church were no longer suffered
to hold their Land in frank Almoigne, as before they did, or to be free from
secular services and commands, as before they were. Although they kept their
Lands, yet they changed their Tenure, and by the Conqueror were ordained to
hold their Lands, sub militari servitute, Mat. Patis in will. 1. An. 1070.
either in Capite, or by Baronage, or some such military hold, and thereby were
compellable to aid the Kings in all times of War, with Men, Arms, and Horses,
as the Lay-Subjects of the same Tenures were required to do.

Which though it were conceived to be a great disfranchisement at the first,
and an heavy burden to the Prelacy; yet it conduced at last to their greater
honor, in giving them a further title to their place in Parliament, than that
which formerly they could pretend to. Before, they claimed a place therein,
ratione Officij, only by reason of their Offices, or Spiritual Dignities; But
after this, by reason also of those Baronies which were erected, and annexed to
their several Dignities; En respect de lour possessions L' ancient Baronies
annexes a lour dignities Stanford Pleas. l. 3.
as our Lawyers have it. From this time forwards we must look upon them in the
House of Parliament, not as Bishops only, but as Peers and Barons of the Realm
also; and so themselves affirmed to the Tempotal Lords in the Parliament holden
at Northampton, under Henry the second. Non sedimus hic Episcopi, sed Barons
Pares hic sumus; Seldom titles of hon. p. 2.18.
We sit not here say they, as Bishops only, but as Barons; we are Barons, and
you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is also verified terminis, by
the words of a Statute, or Act of Parliament, wherein the Bishops are
acknowledged to be Peers of the Land.

But to proceed more particularly to our proofs de facto, after the alteration
of their Tenures by the Norman Conqueror, we find a Parliament assembled in the
fifth year of that King wherein are present Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, and
primats totius Angliae, Math. Paris in willielmo 1.
the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and the rest of the Baronage of England.

And 3ly. In the ninth year of William Rufus, an old Author tells us, de
regni statu acturus, Episcopos, Abbates, and quoscunque regni proceres in unum
praecepti sui sanctione egit, that being to consult of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, he called together by his Writ the Bishops, Abbots, and all the Peers
of the Realm, Eadmer hist. Nov. l. ^.


And 3ly. During the reign of King Henry the first (for we will take but one
example out of each Kings reign, though each Kings reign would yield us more) a
Parliament was called at London, wherein were many things dispatched, as well
of Ecclesiastical, as Secular nature, the Bishops, and Abbots being present
with the other Lords; Coact^ apud Londoniam Magno Episcoporum, and Procerum,
Abbatumque consilio, multa Ecclesiasticarum, and Secubarium rerum ordinata
negotia, dieisa Litigia, says the Monk of Malmsbury Mal^b. Hist. Reg. Ang. l.
5.
And of this Parliament it is, I take it, that Edmor speaks Hist. Novel. l.
4. p. 91.

Proceed we 4ly. to King Henry the second (for King Stephens Reign was so full
of Wars and Tumults, that there is very little to be found of Parliaments) and
there we find the Bishops with the other Peers, convened in Parliament for the
determination of the points in controversy between Alphonso King of Castile
and Sancho King of Navarre, referred by compromise to the King of England, and
here determined by King Henry amongst other things, Habito cum Episcopis,
Comitibus and Baronibus cum deliberatione Consilio, as in Roger Hoveden.
Hoveden Annal. pac. Rose in H n. 2.


5ly. Next time comes Richard the first, his Son; during whose Imprisonment by
the D. of Austria, his Brother John then Earl of Moriton, endeavored by force
and cunning in Normandy to set the Crown on his own head: which caused Hubert
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to call a Parliament ( Convocatis coram eo
Episcopis, Comitibus and Baronibus Regni, Id. in I^h.
wherein the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, did with one consent agree to seize on
his Estate, and suppress his power, the better to preserve the Kingdom in
Wealth, Peace, and Safety.

6ly. After succeeded John and he calls a Parliament, wherein were certain Laws
made for the defense of this Kingdom, Communi ascensu Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum and omnium fidelium suorum Angliae, by the Common
Counsel and Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the rest of
his Lieges. (Remember what was said before touching the Writ of Summons in the
said Kings time) from this time till the last Parliament of King Charles, there
is no Kings Reign of which we have not many, (though not all) the Acts of
Parliament still in Print amongst us. Nor is there any Act of Parliament in the
Printed Books, to the Enacting of which the Bishops Approbation and Consent is
not plainly specified, either in the general Proeme set before the Acts, or in
the body of the Acts themselves, as by the Books themselves does at large
appear.

7ly. And to this kind of proof may be further added the Form and Manner of the
Writ, by which the Prelates in all times have been called to Parliament, being
the very Law Verbatim, with that which is directed to the Temporal Barons, save
that the Spiritual Lords are commanded to attend the Service, in fide and
dilectione, the Temporal in fide and Homagio, and of late times in fide and
Ligeantia quibus nobis tenemini. A Form or Copy of which Summons as ancient as
King John's time, is still reserved upon Record, directed Nominatim to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; Titles of Hon. part 2. cap. 1.
and then a scriptum est similiter to the residue of the Bishops, Abbates,
Earls, and Barons. Then add the Privilege of Parliament for themselves and
their Servants, during the time of the Sessions; the Liberty to kill, and take
one or two of the Kings Deer, as they pass by any of his Forests in coming to
Parliament upon his Commandment, Charta de foresta cap.
their enjoying of the same immunities, which are and have been heretofore
enjoyed by the Temporal Barons; Camden in Britania.
and tell me if the Bishops did not sit in Parliament by as good a Title as the
Temporal Lords, and therefore certainly Essential, Fundamental parts of the
Court of Parliament.

By this discourse it may appear, that the Bishops Sit and Vote in Parliament
by a double capacity; as Bishops first in reference to their several Sees, and
secondly as Peers in regard of their Baronies. In both respects accounted one
of the three Estates, and the first also of the three, as from the Premises may
be gathered without any great trouble. But in so nice a point as this, we shall
not only build upon general Inferences, but particular Evidences.

And first it is affirmed by Titus Livius, in his relation of the Life and
Reign of King Henry the 5th. That when his Funerals were ended, the 3 Estates
of the Realm of England did assemble together, and declare his Son King Henry
the 6th. being an Infant of 8 Months old, to be their Sovereign Lord, Tit. Live.
M. S. in Bibl. Bodl.
as his Heir and Successor. And three Estates there could not be to perform
that service, unless the Bishops were acknowledged to be one of the number.

2ly. In the Parliament Roles of King Richard the third, there is mention of a
Bill, or Parchment presented to that Prince, being then Duke of Gloucester, on
the behalf, and in the name of the 3 Estates of the Realm of England, that is
to wit, of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and of the Commons by name: which
for as much as neither the said 3 Estates, nor the persous which delivered it
on their behalf, were then assembled in form of Parliament, was afterward in
the first Parliament of that King, by the same three Estates, assembled in this
present Parliament (I speak the very words of the Act it self) and by Authority
of the same enrolled, recorded, and approved; An. Speed in K. Rich. 3.
And at the request and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm, that
is to say, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land
Assembled in this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same it be
pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign Lord the King was,
and is the very and undoubted Heir of this Realm of England, etc.

And 3ly. So it is acknowledged in a 1 Eliz. Cap. 3.
Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in that Parliament Assembled, being said expressly and in terminis to
represent the three Estates of the Realm of England, did recognize the Queens
Majesty to be their true, Lawful and Undoubted Sovereign Leig'd Lady and
Queen. And in a Statute of the 8th. year of the said Queens Reign, the Bishops
and Clergy are declared to be the greatest Estates of the Realm; and called the
High Estate of Prelacy, in another place.

It may perhaps be thought unnecessary, or impertinent to add the Testimony
and Authority of a private person, to that which has been said by our Laws and
Statutes. But being it is such a Person as was accounted for the Oracle of Law
when he served in Parliament his Judgment may be taken for a creditable and
sufficient Evidence in the present Case. It is the Testimony and Authority of
Sir Edward Coke, successively Chief Justice of either Bench; who in his book
concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts, speaks thus of Parliaments, Coke of
Parl. Fol. 1.
This Court (says he) consists of the Kings Majesty sitting there as in his
Royal Politic Capacity, and of the three Estates of the Realm, viz. of the
Lords Spiritual, Archbishops, and Bishops, who sit there by Succession in
respect of their Counties, Baronies, parcel of their Bishoprics which they
hold also in their Politic Capacity; And every one of these when any
Parliament is to be holden, ought ex debito Justitiae to have a Writ of
Summons. Secondly, the Lords Temporal, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, who sit there by reason of their dignities, which they hold by Descent
or Creation, and likewise every one of these being of full age, ought to have a
Writ of Summons Ex debito Justitiae. The 3d. Estate is the Commons of the
Realm, whereof there be Knights of Shires or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and
Burgesses of Burghes. All which are respectively Elected by the Shires or
Counties, Cities and Boroughs, by force of the Kings Writ ex debito Justitiae,
and none of them ought to be omitted: And these represent all the Commons of
the whole Realm, and are trusted for them. So He, and this is plain enough
beyond all exception.

Add hereunto ex abundanti, that in all Christian Kingdoms of the Gothic
Model, there are no more nor fewer than three estates, convented at the will
and pleasure of the Supreme Prince, for their assistance and advice in Affairs
of consequence; that is to say, the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons
who are always one, the Nobles for themselves, and the Commissioners for the
Commons of their several Provinces; For so we find it in the Constitution of
the Roman Empire and the Realms of Spain, the Kingdoms of France, Poland
Hungary, together with those of Dane mark, Sweden, and the Realm of Scotland.
And it were strange if in the Constitution of the English Parliaments, or
conventus ordinum, the Bishops should have been left out and none at all
elected to present the Clergy. But being admitted with the rest in those
public meetings, and being looked on as the first Estate in the Style of that
Court; it must needs be, that their exclusion shakes the very fundamentals of
the said Assemblies, and makes the whole Body to be maimed and mutilated for
want of such a principal Member, so necessary to the making up of the whole
Compositum.

But against all this it is objected, first, that some Acts have passed in
Parliament, to which the Prelates did not Vote, nor could be present in the
House when the Bill was passed; as in the sentencing to death, or mutilation of
a guilty person: as does appear both by the Laws and Constitutions recognized
at Clarendon, and the following practice. This has been touched upon before,
and we told you then, that this restraint was laid upon them, not by the common
Law of England, or any Act or Ordinance of the House of Peers, by which they
were disabled to attend that service. It was their own voluntary Act, none
compelled them to it, but only out of a conformity to some former Canons, ad
Sanctorum Canonum instituta, Antiqui. Britan. in Gul. Courtney.
as their own words are) by which it was not lawful for the Clergy men, to be
either Judges or Assessors in causa sanguinis Constitut. Oth^lb^n. Fol. 45.
. And yet they took such care to preserve their Interests that they did not
only give their Proxies for the representing of their persons but did put up
their protestations, with a salvo jure, for the preserving of their Rights for
the time to come: Jure Paritatis and interessendi in dicto Parliamento Antiqu.
Britan. in Gul. Courtaey.
quoad omnia and singula ibi exercenda in omnibus semper salvo, as the manner
was. Examples of the which are as full and frequent, as their withdrawing
themselves on the said occasions.

But then the main Objection is, that as some Acts have passed in Parliamen,
absentibus Prelatis, when the Bishops did absent themselves of their own
accord; so many things have been transacted in the Parliament Excluso Clero,
when the Clergy have been excluded or put out of the House by some Act or
Ordinance. A President for this has been sound and published by such as envied
that poor remnant of the Churches honor: though possibly they will find
themselves deceived in their greatest hopes, and yet the evidence will not
serve to evince the cause. The Author of the Pamphlet entitled, the
Prerogative and practice of Parliaments, first lays this Tenet for his ground,
that many good Acts of Parliament may be made, though the Archbishops, and
Bishops should not consent unto them Printed at London, 1628 p. 31.
(which is a point that no man doubts of, considering how easily their Negative
may be overruled by the far greater number of the secular Peers.) Then he adds
that in a Parliament holden at St. Edmunsbury, 1196. in the Reign of Edward the
first, a Statute was made by the King, the Barons, and the Commons, excluso
Clero, and for the proof hereof referres us unto Bishop Jewill.

Now Bishop Jewill says indeed, That in a Parliament holden at St. Edmunsbury
by King Edward the first, Anno 1296. the Archbishops and Bishops were quite
shut forth, and yet the Parliament holden, and good and wholesome Laws were
there Enacted, the departing or absence of the Lords Spiritual notwithstanding.
Defense of the Apolog. part 6. c. 2. S. 1.
In the Records whereof it is written thus, Habito Rex cum Baronibus suis
Parliamento, and Clero excluso, statutum est, etc. The King keeping the
Parliament with his Barons, the Clergy, (that is to say, the Archbishops, and
Bishops,) being shut forth, it was enacted, etc. Wherein who does not see, if
he has any eyes, that by this reason, (if the proof be good) many good Acts of
Parliament may be made, though the Commons either out of absence or opposition
should not consent unto the same: of whose consent unto that Statute (whosoever
it was) there is as little to be found in that Record, as the concurrence of
the Bishops. But for answer unto so much of this Reeord so often spoke of, and
applauded, as concerns the Bishops, we say, that this (if it be truly senced,
as I think it is not) was the particular Act of an Angry and offended King
against his Clergy, not to be drawn into example as a proof or argument against
a most clear, known, and undoubted Right.

The cause stood thus, A Constitution had been made by Boniface the eighth: Ne
aliqua collecta ex ecclesiastic is proventibus Regi, aut cuivis alij Principi
concedatur; Math. westminster. in Edw. 1.
that Clergy men should not pay any Tax or Tallage unto Kings or Princes out
of their Spiritual preferments, without the leave of the Pope. Under pretense
whereof, the Clergy at this Parliament at St. Edmunsbury, refused to be
contributory to the Kings occasions, when the Lay-Members of the House had been
forwards in it. The King being herewith much offended, gives them a further day
to consider on it, Adjourning the Parliament to London, there to begin on the
morrow after St. Hilaries day; and in the mean time commanded all their Barnes
to be fast sealed up. The day being come, and the Clergy still persisting in
their former obstinacy, Excluso and Parliamento Clero Consilium Rex cum solis
Baronibus and populo habuit, totumque statim Clerum protectione sua privavit
Antiqu. Brit. in R. Winchels^y.
the King (says the Historian) excluding the Clergy out of the Parliament,
advised with his Barons, and his people only, what was best to be done, by
whose advice he put the Clergy out of his protection, and thereby forced them
to conform to his will and pleasure.

This is the summa totalis of the business, and comes unto no more but this,
that a particular course was advised in Parliament on a particular displeasure
taken by the King against the body of his Clergy then convened together, for
their particular refusal to contribute to his wants and Wars, the better to
reduce them to their natural duty. Which makes not any thing at all against the
right of Bishops in the House of Peers, or for excluding them that House, or
for the validity of such Acts as are made in Parliament during the time of such
exclusion; especially considering that the King shortly after called his States
together, and did excuse himself for many extravagant Act which he had
committed Wolsingh. in Edw. the 1. Anno 1297.
against the Liberties of the Subject (whereof this was one) laying the blame
thereof on his great occasions, and the necessity which the Wars which he had
abroad did impose upon him.

And so much as in answer unto that Record, supposing that the words thereof be
rightly senced, as I think they are not, and that by Clerus there we are to
understand Archbishops and Bishops, as I think we be not, there being no record
(I dare boldly say it) either of History or Law, in which the word Clerus
serves to signify the Archbishops and Bishops, exclusive of the other Clergy;
or any writing whatsoever, wherein it does not either signify the whole Clergy
generally, or the inferior Clergy only exclusive of the Archbishops Bishops,
and other Prelates. Therefore in answer unto that so much applauded Cavil of
Excluso Clero, from what Record soever it either has been hitherto, or shall
hereafter be produced, I shall propose it to the consideration of the sober
Reader, whether by Clerus in that place or in any other of that kind and time,
we must not understand the Inferior Clergy, as they stand distinguished in the
Laws from my Lords the Bishops.

For howsoever it be true that Clerus in the Ecclesiastical notion of the word
does signify the whole Clergy generally, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons: Yet in the Legal notion of it, it stands distinguished from the
Prelates, and signifies only the inferior Clergy. Thus do we find the
Ecclesiastics of this Realm divided into Prelates, men of Religion, and other
Clerks, 3 Edw. 1. cap. 1. the Seculars either into Prelates and Clerks, 9 Edw.
2. cap. 3. 1 Rich. 2. cap. 3. or Prelates, and Clerks beneficed, 18 Edw. 3.
cap. 2. or generally into the Prelates and the Clergy, 9 Edw. 2. cap. 15. 14
Edw. 3. cap. 1. and 3. 18 Edw. 3.2.7. and 25 Edw. 3.2.4. and 8 of Hen. 6. cap.
1. And in all Acts and grants of Subsidies made by the Clergy to the Kings or
Queens of England since the 32 of Hen. 8. (when the Clergy Subsidies first
began to be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

So also in the Latin Idiom, which comes nearest home, Nos Prelati and Clerus,
in the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eighth, Regist. Watham.
and in the sentence of divorse against Anne of Clear, Regist. Cranmer.
and in the Instrument of the grant of the Clergy Subsidies presented to the
Kings of England ever since the 27th. of Queen Eliz. and in the form of the
Certificates ( per Stat. 8. Eliz. c. 17. and ever fince
Praelatos and Clerum) returned by every Bishop, to the Lord High Treasurer,
and finally, Nos Episcopi, and Clerus Cantuatiensis Provinciae in hac Synodo
more nostro solito, dum Regni Parliamentum celebratur, Congregati. Stat. 1.
Phil. and Mary c. 8.
in the Petition to K: K. Phillip and Mary, about the confirmation of the Abbey
Lands to the Patentees; So that though many Statutes have been made in these
latter times, Excluso Clero, the Clergy, that is to say, the inferior Clergy
(who anciently had their place in Parliaments) being quite shut out, and
utterly excluded from those public Councils; Yet this proves nothing to the
point, that any Act of Parliament has been counted good, to which the Bishops
were not called, or at the making of which Act, they either were shut out by
Force, or excluded by Cunning.

But then besides the so much celebrated Argument of Excluso Clero, the Author
of the Pamphlet before remembered, has told us somewhat on the credit of
Kilbancies book; In which the Justices are made to say 7 Hen. 8. That our
Sovereign Lord the King, may well hold his Parliament by him, and his Temporal
Lords, and by the Commons also, without the Spiritual Lords, for that the
Spiritual Lords, have not any place in the Parliament Chamber, by reason of
their Spiritualties, but by reason of their Temporal possessions. But first,
this is but the opinion of a private man, of no Authority or Esteem (for ought
we can find) in the Realm of England, and therefore not concluding in so great
a business. And 2ly. admitting him to be a man of more note and credit than
perhaps he was, yet he must needs fall short in all respects, both for
abilities and reputation, of Chief Justice Coke, whose Judgment to the contrary
we have seen before. But 3ly. it runs cross to the ancient practice of the
Saxon times, in which the Bishops sat in Parliament as Spiritual persons,
without relation, to their Temporal possessions, or their Barons Fees, as
afterward in the reign of the Norman Kings. And finally admitting that
Kilbancies plea were of weight enough, to keep the Bishops down from rising to
their place in Parliament, it must be strong enough to exclude all the Temporal
Lords; The Temporal Lords being called to Parliament on no other ground, than
for the Temporal possessions which they hold by Barony. Adeo argumenta ab
absurdo petita, ineptos habent exitus, said Lactantius truly, It is the Fate
(said he) of ill chosen Premises, that they produce ridiculous and absurd
Conclusions.

There remains one Objection more, and indeed the greatest, not extant in the
Pamphlet before remembered, though possibly promoted and occasioned by it; that
is to say, that the Bishops are excluded from their Place and Vote by Act of
Parliament, deliberately made and passed by the Kings consent. For answer
whereunto, it will be necessary first to state this Question, viz. Whether that
any two of the three Estates: confirming or agreeing together, may conclude any
thing which tends to the Subversion of the third. Bodinus that renowned
Statesman, has resolved it negatively, and determined thus; Nihil a duobus
ordinibus discerni posse, quo uni ex tribus incommodum inferatur, etc. Bodin de
Rep. l. 3. s. 7.
That nothing can be done by two of the three Estates, to the disprofit of the
third, in case the point proposed be such as concerns them severally, And he
resolved thus in favor of the Commons of the Realm of France, who were upon
the point of being excluded from the Parliament, or Convention of the three
Estates, if he had not notably bestirred himself in their behalf (he being then
a Delegate or Commissioner for one of the Provinces) and by his diligence and
care preserved their Interests; And to preserve their Interest, he insisted
chiefly on the ancient customs of the Realm of France, as also of the Realms
of Spain and England, and the Roman Empire; In each of which it was received
for a ruled Case, Nihil a duobus ordinibus statui posse, quo uni ex tribus
prejudicium crearetur, That nothing could be done by any of the two Estates,
unto the prejudice of the third.

And if it were a ruled Case, then in the English Parliaments, there is no
reason why it should be otherwise in the present times, the Equity and Justice
of it being still the same, and the same reasons for it now as forcible as they
could be then. Had it been otherwise resolved of in the former ages, wherein
the Clergy were so prevalent in all public Counsels, how easy a matter had
it been for them, either by joining with all the Nobility to exclude the
Commons, or by joining with the Comonalty to exclude the Nobles? Or having too
much Conscience to venture in so great a change, and alteration, so
Incompatible, Inconsistent with the Constitution of a Parliament; how easily
might they have suppressed the Potency, and impair the Priveleges of either of
the other two, by working on the humors or affections of the one to keep down
the other?

Nor does it help the matter in the least degree to say that the Exclusion of
the Bishops from the House of Peers, was not done merely by the procurement of
some of the other two Estates, but by the Assent of the King, of whom the Laws
say He can do no wrong, And by an Act of Parliament whereof our Lawyers say,
que null doit imaginer chose dishonorable, Plowden in Commentar.
that no man is to think dishonorable. For we know well in what condition the
King was when he passed that Act, to what extremities he was reduced, on what
terms he stood, how he was forced to withdraw from his City of London, to part
with his dear Wife and Children, and in a word, so over-powred by the
prevailing Party in the two Houses of Parliament, that it was not safe for him
(as his Case then was) to deny them any thing. And for the Act of Parliament
thus insisted on, besides that the Bill had been rejected when it was first
brought unto the Lords, and that the greater part of the Lords were frighted
out of the House, when contrary unto the course of Parliament it was brought
again; it is a point resolved both in Law and Reason, that the Parliament can
do nothing to the destruction of it self, and that such Acts as are under a
constraint, are not good and valid, whereof we have a fair example in the book
of Statutes. 15 Ed. 3.


For whereas the King had granted certain Articles pretended to be granted in
the Form of a Statute, expressly contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and his own
Prerogative and Rights Royal (mark it for this is just the case) which he had
yielded to escue the dangers, which by denying of the same were like to follow
in the same Parliament, it was repealed in these following words; It seemed
good to the said Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the Statute did
not proceed of our free Will, the same be void; and ought not to have the name
nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their Counsel and Assent we have
decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. Or if it should not be repealed in a
Formal manner, yet is this Act however gotten, void in effect already by a
former Statute, in which it was enacted in full Parliament, and at the self
same place where this Act was gained, That the Great Charter (by which, and
many other Titles, the Bishops held their place in Parliament) should be kept
in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden
for none. 42 Ed. 3. c. 1.


More Arguments than these against the Bishops Place and Vote in Parliament I
have no where found. And these being answered and refelled, I hope the point in
question has been fairly proved, viz. That the Bishops make a Fundamental and
Essential part of our English Parliaments.

FINIS.

