An Answerable REMONSTRANCE OF HIS MAJESTY'S ^ingdomes of England, Scotland,
Jreland, and the paincipality of Wales To the Parliament.



LONDON, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. May 31.

An Answerable Remonstrance of His Majesty's Kingdom of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and the Principality of Wales To the Parliament.
HIs Majesty receiving two Remonstrances from both Houses of Parliament, both
concurring to the same effect, though different in the composition, viz. to the
peace and security of all Britain; but something being therein expressed,
concerning his Ma^estie (to be expounded rather a supplication to desire His
Majesty to comply with his Parliament then to have any other construction made
thereof) he is therefore, or at least seem to have been highly incensed, and
displeased (though any cause thereof be too obscure to be justly seen or
perceived at the said Remonstrances. Wherefore my sole intent is now to
delineate the perfect State, and Estate of all these Kingdoms of Britain, in
a real demonstration from what precedent dangers they have been delivered,
and in what present condition they do remain by the assiduous care and
indulgency of the Parliament, And first to begin with the Affairs of England.
I think it not incongruent, if J should first iterate some old passages acted
long since for the better remembrance thereof, and what Gods singular mercies
toward this Nation may not be forgotten, Let us then consider of the heavy
misery, under which this Land groaned before this happy Parliament was
assemblep, how Tirany and extortion rashned, how Eclesiast^call Courts
triumphed, especially the Starchamber, and the high Commission, how the abusive
add Calumnious Prolect of ship money was maintained, how Lordly Bishops ^ate in
their Episcopal hrone, how nefarious Monoplies were imposed on the Subjact,
how Arm nian^sme was diffused every where yea the Univer^^^ies themselves were
corr^pted with the same, how Justice was blinded with Bribery; How this who^e
Kingdom did swarm with so many various imminent dangers, and with a multitude
of so many distempers impositions, fears, and distu^bances, that if God had
not i^fused it into the Kings heart to call a Parliament both the lives of
honest men would have been endangered their Estates ru^^ated, or at least
miserably was^ed, and they and the whole Kingdom toheahe^ buried in the s^ne
sepulcher of ^^^amity, but by the industrious care of this Parliament, all
these impious instruments of mi^ery have been dispa^ced an^ sub^erred. all
these mali^^ant P^ots have been confounded, and the burden of all these
grievances have been eased^ the Prime Authors hereof, and incendiaties, have
been duly punished and questioned, and all their private Stratagems were
blasted before they came to maturity. The Bishops have been suspended from
their Votes, from the House of Peers, and (...) Praelaticall Usurpations
exstenuated. The Monopol^es for Wine, Salt, Buttet, Soap, Coals, etc. with all
other unlawful Impositions have been confounded And besides all this: We have
had civil Mutineyes and Combu^tions since amongst our selves concerning
Re^igion in ^^mee^e Antipathyi and strange opposition of as several opinions,
as several men, and as several Religions, as opinions.

Thus the Church has been variously distracted and distorted, but (I hope) it
is now ^artly cleansed, and (I trust in God) will be suddenly thoroughly purged
from Schism, Fiction and Heretical division. There have been diverse
Subsidies granted besides Poll-money, which amounted to an incogitable sum,
most part whereof was sent to the North. And since many Memorable things have
been performed by the Parliament, but I will not continue in these ambages and
deviations from these present times, but strive rather to express those in a
l^vely Character. Since his Majesty's last return from Scotland, none would
have fomented any other thought in his Breast, but that the Noble Tryuniph
wherewith the City of London Royally entertained His Majesty, might have wooed
him to continue ^eater them; but he has absented himself a long time from the
City, and his parliament to the great grief of the one, to the Fears and
Jealousies of the other. The parliament have o^tentimes sent Messages to his
Majesty earnestly beseeching him in all ardency of affection, and respective
se^uri^y of his Royal person, that he would graciously concur with them in
their serious and weighty consultations, but his Majesty has r^^^ed to answer
them in that expectation. There has been since many differences between them:
and fears. and Jealousies fomented on both sides to the great amazement of the
Subject. His Majesty has continued at York a long time^ and intended diverse
times to enter Hull, but was d^nyed Sir John Hotham to enter therein, whom the
parliament had there entrusted, whereupon the King proclaimed him ^raytor about
the Walls, but the parliament defended him, and confirmed that Act so be a high
Breach of the privileges of parliament but his Majesty now lately, as has
been against his Parliament, but both Houses have unanimously Voted.

1. That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach
of the trust reposed in him by the People, and against his Oath, and tending to
the dissolution of this Government.

2. Whosoever (...) serve, or assist the King in such war are Traitors, and
ought to suffer the punishment as Traitors, ^^^rding to (...) Statutes of 11.
Richard 2 1. Henry 4.

The Mi^^ia of the Kingdom the Parliament are intended to dispose God grant
that his Ma^e^^y and they may concur together in Unity and coherence to the
future peace of the Realm.

In this expension and the affairs of Scotland I chinke it not impertinent to
begin with the^^ first rising: after the Scots perceived the Laws to be
corrupted by a malignant party, and many superstitious innovations in Religion
being thrust upon them, that rose in Arms for the Liberty of their conscience,
an English Army was likewise raised against them, but when their cause was
fully perceived to be so good, a Parliament was called and an absolute
Pacification concluded, but an excessive sum of money given them withal.
After all which a Parliament was called there, and his Majesty went himself,
where he continued until peace and tranquillity, as well as the Government of
their Church were confirmed, and then his Majesty returned to London again,
with the Tryumphant Congratulation of all his Subjects.

The Scottish rising in Arms was a happy Prologue to our ensuing Comedy but
praise God these distracted and preposterous times do invert it to a bloody
Tragedy. And peace has reigned there a long time, while distraction ^reep^th
in amongst us. But they hearing of these manifold variances, and differences
between the King and the Parliament, are (as si credibly supposed) intended to
take rather the Parliaments part.

But Ireland perceiving the Scots fared so well in their War, broke out into
open Rebellion, were not ashamed to write themselves the Queen's Army, and have
heretofore killed and slain and massacred the Protestants, sparing neither
man, woman nor Child, Sex or degree, Age or Quality, so cruelly and inhumanely,
that no Christian eye can read the same without a tear, and no ear can hear
relate with Christian Patiene, but since the English and Scottish Army is gone
over, they have been somewhat qualified, and many Towns and Castles have
been relieved, as Drogheda, VVickloe, Kiltrugh, Clogham, Kingsaill, etc. The
Castles of Tippar, Catherl^ugh, Clouthgrenan, Sir George Greshams Castle,
called Ballirenon, the Duke of Buckinghams Castle called Burros Ball^nek^ll
etc. Our Army proceeds with happy fortune and success, and by the auxiliary
directions of Almighty God, but theirs decreaseth daily lesser and lesser, the
Rebels have some Towns still in possession, as Carr Dogmoe, Arckeloe, Kilkeny,
Kildare with certain others, but they have lost many of late, and are daily
extenuated in Number, for the English follow them with such undanted Spirits,
and so courageously, that they commonly terrify them at the first Skirmish,
and put them to flight very often, so that we hope the Fire of their Rebellion
will be quickly quenched.

Wales have great cause of suspicion, for there are daily tumults and
insurrections in most Counties there, and they greatly suspect fortaigne Forces.

The 17. day of this present month was presented to the House of Commons a
Petition from the Count of Monmouth in Wales, wherein they complained of
their fears of ensuing misery, by reason of the multiplicite of Papists in
those parts who make daily provision of that County to withstand them:
Wherefore they prayed that the Magazine of Arms might be removed to Newport,
and thereby put into a posture of defense, and that the Recusants might be
sudd^inly disarmed, which being read, Answer was returned, That the House would
take speedy care therein.

But God banish these fears of danger, and settle Peace, quietness, and
prosperous security in these Kingdoms of Britain.

FINIS.

