AN ANTI-REMONSTRANCE, TO THE LATE HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE TO THE HIGH COURT OF
PARLIAMENT.

The second Edition, enlarged.

Printed Anno 1641.

AN ANTI-RENONSTRANCE TO THE LATE HVMBLE REMONSTRANCE to the High Court of
Parliament.
THese few Leaves of Paper break on through, after the humble remonstrance,
with less noyle, because of less bulk; and not stuffed with the husks of a
bare pleasing speech, but presented to your view with more substance then
Rethorique, and with more things then words, and such as I hope will pluck off
the vizard of dutiful Son from the Author of the Remonstrance, or make his
Mother little beholding to him for his advise. Ye are not ignorant of the
great distractions, oppositions, and of the diversity of affections and fears
of the people of the whole land about the event of the Churches reformation in
hand: for indeed some out of a zeal, somewhat inconsiderate do cry down
Episcopacy as Antichristian. Others very moderate crave and wish earnestly,
Episcopacy were reformed and purged from the Romish and Tyrannical government
that incumbers it, and which since the last reformation in King Edward the
sixth days, no free Parliament yet was so happy as to redress: Again, a
third kind of men carried by a contrary wind, maintain Episcopacy to be by
Divine right, not so much as naming that apple of discord, nor mentioning the
maine thing which is so much stood upon, which is not that Episcopacie is
either of Divine right or not, for if (as the Author of the remonstrance
acknowledges,) a Church may stand without Episcopacie, it matters not much,
which of these two opinions is held: but the maine point debated lies in this
assertion, that Episcopal government, as it is established in England is most
disagreeable to Christ and the Apostles institution, and to the rites and
constitutions of the primitive Church, and makes a part of the mystery of
iniquity, which the Roman Church for many hundred years in England has had
the greatest share in. Likewise the favorers of the humble remonstrance
traduce as libellers the opposers of that tenet of Episcopacie by Divine right,
and of the corruptions that attend Episcopacie, as it is established in
England. These distractions and oppositions being such; may it please the
Honorable Court seriously to ponder that there is as great a latitude between
having no Bishops at all, and having them with the tendered limitations by those
they call libellers; as there is between retaining a limited power in Bishops,
and confirming the Bishops in the exorbitant authority and greatness of
Government as it is established in England: which Government God forbid it were
retained, being as it is conceived by the most learned, pious, and judicious of
the land most Antichristian, and attended with more evil then the quire
abolishing of Episcopacie can prove hurtful, and of dangerous consequence; and
that for these reasons and grounds following.

I. Episcopal Government as it is established in England, is a continuation of
the height of power and jurisdiction, which in the darkest times of Popery the
Pope has usurped by his Bishops and Abbots far beyond the footing, he ever
took in France, Spain, or Germany. Therefore what the Author of the
remo^strance alleges of the ancientnesse of Episcopacie, and of its
continuance hitherto 1500. years is vain and frivalous, for the Roman Church
upon the same ground or pleading of antitiquitie makes her heresies and
abominations warantable.

II. The Bishops institution and inthronising is altogether repugnant and
contrary to the laws and customs of the Primitive Church, and against the
constitutions of the Prime Christian Emperors, who ordained that the people
jointly with the inferior Clergy should present to the Emperor a catalogue
of the most pious and learned men of the Diocese, and the man that the
Emperor was to pitch upon, be invested with the function of a Bishop: for
proof thereof read the constitutions of Charles the great; Lewis the godly,
Gregory the great, Gelasius and others.

III. The height and superiority of place that Bishops hold, is one of the
greatest relics of the Popish tyranny in England, which is most unfit in
Ministers of the Gospel, repugnant to the customs of other Nations, and to the
distance, yea rather nearenesse of Office and dignity, that ought to be
between. Bishops and Ministers. It is not heard but in England that
Chancellors or Lord Keepers take place after Archbishops, while other
Ministers are so far inferior and distant from them, as a Prince from a
poor tenant or a high sumptuous palace from a poor thatcht cottage.

IIII. The Bishops sole exercise of Jurisdiction is such, as the like was never
heard in any Court of justice, and is repugnant to reason and natural equity,
and cannot be but an appendice derived from the son of perdition, that
arrogates to himself an unerring sole power: The Kings Bench, Common Pleas,
and Exchequer, are benches of a certain number of Judges; The Chancellor of
England has an assistance of 12. Masters. I would feign know when Christ said
dic Ecclesiae, if he understood that a Bishop should be a sole ludge within his
Diocese in deciding any litigious cause.

V. Also the exercising of any Jurisdiction by deputies, which is the
prerogative of Kings, is a monstrous usurpation in the Bishops of England; a
strange bird hatched in no court but theirs, every judge in any other Court
discharging his judicial function in his own person. It Is no marvel if they
that Preach by deputies observe the like practice in keeping of Courts.

VI. The Bishops jurisdiction entrenching upon the civil Magistrate or Judge
by their jus Pontificium or Canon law, which the Pope left them for a legacy,
such are the causes testamentary and matrimonial, is an usurpation no less
bad then the former, and derogates from the holy power of Ecclesiastical
keys, which Bishops assumed in the prime pure times of the Church.

VII. It were not so much to usurper jurisdiction, if the (...) laws were but
sound, and their legal proceeding just: But their High Commission, the oath ^x
officio, the horrible abuse of excommunication, the commutations of bodily
penance into pecuniary, their hindrances of prohibitions, stopping the course
of law, their determining of tithes and possessions of livings by a Quare imped
it, are as many pockie eye-sores, which deface the holy calling of Bishops, and
make them, though their first institution had been of Divine right, to be now
less then of humane institution.

VIII. Their not depending on any free Ecclesisticall assembly is as much or
more then the Papists ascribe to the Pope, who by many of them is thought
inferior to the council and censurable by it.

IX. Their Visitations are apish and counterfeit imitations of the ancient
Synods, which are degenerated into receipts of Custom, as paying for Licenses,
Procurations, Benevolences, Synodalls, and the like. Nihil est quod curia
Episcoporum non vendat, etc.

X. Their Convocations or Synods are little better; where deputati sunt
deputantes, the deputies are deputing; where in most of the members of it,
there is no free choice of election; but Bishops, Deanes, and Archdeacons have
right to sit by their place and office: where those of the lower House are like
so many stocks, that have no motion, but as they are carried by the members
of the sphere of the higher house.

Who ever shall read Matthaeus Paris and Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis; and
view the disfigured face of the Church of England under Henry the second, John,
and Henry the third, Kings of England, will acknowledge that the Pope had more
power and jurisdiction in England in the persons of his Bishops and Abbots,
then in any other Kingdom, and will not wonder, if Bishops have hitherto kept
possession, though they hold no more of the Pope; nor will he easily be
persuaded, that that government is of Divine or Apostolical institution,
which has ever been contrary to the constitutions of the ancient Church, and
to Imperial laws, and repugnant to the proceedings of all Courts of Justice,
and common equity and sense.

These ten grounds or reasons which are rockie for upholding this assertion,
that Episcopal English government is Antichristian: are sandy under the
superstructure of the Author of the Remonstrance, for who doubts but an
Ecclesiastical Government that is such, cannot be pleaded to be unalterable,
and not to be removed, though it were never so ancient, since there is no
prescription against Christ and the Apostles institution, and that the number
of years cannot make a lie to be a truth; yea rather many things are worse by
age, and an old man has no more the being of man, then a young man; and a
commonwealth no more then a Church is nothing the better for to be of an
ancienter standing. But as it is vain and out of the question, to prove
Episcopacie to be of Divine right, and to have continued so many hundred
years, and to call unjust and weak the clamours of those that cry down
Episcopacie; likewise it is no less lost labor to go about to persuade the
Honorable House with such earnestness not to give way to the change of
Episcopacy, which has its pedigree from the Apostles: for I know none of them
that cry down such an Episcopacie, or gives his conscent to pull it up, few
or none of them believing that the Episcopal government as it is established
in England is derived from the Apostles, who ever affirms, that Priests are by
Divine right, will not consequently evince Divine right in the function of the
Romish Priests: The like may I say of Episcopal government of these times, in
reference to that in the times of the Primitive Church:

As the Remonstrancers superstructure is like to be tottering, if it be
grounded upon that supposition, that English Episcopal government is
Apostolical, so will it be like to fall, having no better ground then he
lays down, viz. That Episcopacy, or the eminent superiority of Bishops above
their fellow Presbyters in the power of ordination and jurisdiction is of
Divine institution, and that that spiritual power has been by Apostolical
authority delegated unto Timothy and Titus, and to the Angels of the Church
of Asia; Touching Timothy, it is a wonder that Saint Paul writing to the
Ephesians does not so much as once make mention of him; far is he to enjoyne
him to keep residence in his Diocese, where it is like he made no great
residence, being upon every occasion sent from place to place by the
appointment of Saint Paul, and it appears by Ireneus, Nicephorus, and
Eusebius, that John the Apostle immediately after the council of the Apostles,
Act the 15 did govern the Church of Ephesus, until the days of Trajan the
Emperor: I might also wonder that S. Paul, who had a cooperatour in most
things he did or wrote, would ordain Elders in Ephesus, when they had at hand
their Diocesan Bishop appointed for that work, neither by the Angels of the
seven Asian Churches are meant seven several Diocesan Bishops; for the things
spoken to a single Angel are said to him under that title, in the name of all
the flock, within the precinct of one particular Church or congregation. Thus
the Angels Genes. 32. v. 1. who met Jacob, are in the 46. chap. verse 16.
included in one Angel. And it is the exposition of Calvin Psalm. 43. v. 7. that
by a single Angel pitching his camp for the defense of the faithful, more
then one, yea all the good Angels are understood: I say more that it is very
likely that by the Angel of one Church, not only the Elders of that one
Church are understood, but also the whole Church it self; else it will follow
that for the sin of one Bishop or a few Ministers, if they had not repented
the whole congregation had deserved to be bereaved of the light of the Gospel,
and the words some of you, in the 2. chap. verse 10. whether they insinuate the
whole Church, or the Pastors of the Church, do show, they cannot be understood
of one single Angel or Minister.

In the next place, the Author of the Remonstrance says in derision of the
French discipline, that Lay Elders till this age had never any footing in the
Christian Church, I will not stand reasoning what great need there is of
Laymen to be sharers with the Pastors in the administration of the Churches
discipline: only to make good, that such Lay Presbyters are grounded upon
Scripture, it is clear out of the words of the Acts chap. 15. verse 22. It
pleases the Apostles, the Elders, with the whole Church. By the whole Church
either the whole company of Elders, or the chief of the people, if not the
whole Christian congregation present at Jerusalem is understood. The former
cannot be, else by an uncouth tautologie in one little verse, the Elders were
said to have met with Elders. It follows then, that by the whole Church others
be meant besides Bishops and Elders; It matters not much whether they be
called Lay-Presbyters or not, as long as the thing intended is granted, viz.
that the Laicke congregation may meddle in Churches affairs, and give council
and assistance to the Pastors and be as well as they arbiters and censurers of
errors and disorders. For further proof thereof in the 14 of the Acts verse
23. though the English version has, When they had ordained Elders, the Greek
(...) bears as much, as that Elders were ordained by the advice of the
congregation. Again in the 6. of the Acts, the whole multitude of Disciples is
said to have chosen the seven Deacons of whom Saint Steven was one. That by the
multitude of the Disciples others are meant then the company of the Elders, it
is manifest by the ninth of the Acts, verse 39. where Tabitha a woman is called
an ancient Disciple: And by the eleventh chap. verse 26. where it is said that
the Disciples were first called Christians in Antioch; The appellations of
Disciples and Christians being promiscuously used; besides we see in the
election of the Apostle Matthias, not only the Apostles, but the whole
congregation which was of 120. had vote and voice. Good Lord shall one of few
Bishops in our days vindicate more to themselves then the Apostles themselves
did; though the least of the Apostles were better gifted, and endowed with more
power, then all the Bishops of the Christian World put together. Now adays the
greatest part of the Church is counted no Church, and it remains that men's
souls should be pinned up within three or four men's Lawne-sleeves. But which
is most strange, those that quarrel so much about Lay Elders, see not or will
not see, that what they except against the reformed Churches out of England, is
even practiced in England in the offices of Chancellors, Commissaries,
Officials, Registers, Apparitors, and such like Grasshoppers, with that only
difference, that these make a sale of holy things, and rend in two the
seamelesse coat of Christ, they often drawing it one way, and the Bishops
another way. But the Lay-Presbyters so much jeered at by the Remonstrancer both
live in good amity with the Pastors, and discharge their places gratis. I say
more, it was never heard in France or in the Low Countries, that Lay Elders did
vindicate so much to themselves of the power of the Ecclesiastical keys, as
the Bishops Chancellors have of late usurped in pronouncing sentence of
excommunication and absolution without the knowledge, and against the intent of
the Bishop. It is also a great wounding of the Kings authority to debar
Laymen from meddling in Churches affairs; for who is it that does not know,
that our dreadful King is a Layman, and that the Christian Magistrate cannot
be kept from having a hand in the administration of the Church without
implicitly wounding through their side, the head of the Christian Magistrate.

To support more strongly the government of the Church in England by Bishops,
he brings the assent and testimony of Spanhemius a learned Profession in
Geneva. I expected the testimony of many more Divines. To which I answer, that
Spanhemius and many more as Moulin, Rivet, Chamier, had likewise in reverend
esteem Episcopacy in the Church of God, and therefore had no reason to
condemn Episcopacie, or to fall out with the pious and learned men that were
invested with it, such are those yet living Morton, Davenant, Hall, Williams,
Potter, and the incomparable Primate of Ireland, who do not stretch their power
to the extent of their high Jurisdiction as it is established in England, which
I make no question is avowed by all the orthodoxe Pastors out of England to be
a branch of that kingdom of Antichrist, that had taken so deep root in
England: This man make Spanhemius more insensible then a stone, had he
approved the uncharitableness and the bitter venim and foul aspersions that
were cast upon the reformed French Churches and particularly upon Geneva by
those Bishops, and others who lately sat at the stern of the Churches
government. The Archbishop Laud has more then once called Calvin a rascal,
and the Geneuian lay Presbiters, a new fangled devise of Calvin, leaving to
speak how he vilifies with base terms, other Reverend French Divines; in his
Epistle to the King before the opuscula posthuma of Bishop Andrews, he gives
that report of Peter Moulin that he is Theol gus non indoctus and acutus
satis. A Divine not unlearned and reasonable acute. Neither does he spare his
own, as Cranmer, and Latimer, calling them the Zelotes of Queen Mary's days.
Bishop Mountague in his Apparatus and else where, calls the Geneuians by no
other name then Jnnovators, and traduceth them and their followers, such as
Scaliger, Paraeus and Caluisius, as a pack of Shismatickes, and bramelesse
rascals: The like dealing have they with Bishop Wren, Pierce, Manwaring,
Heylin, Pocklington, Cousin, and the like; what charitable encertainement judge
ye, may Genevas Church find among such men, since one of the best Bishops of
England is reported to have given that judgment of their discipline, that it
is fit only for tradesmen and beggars: In that the charity of Spanhemius and
others reformed Divines beyond the seas is to be commended, that they have not
reviled again those that reviled them, and following the example of God saying
to Abraham, he would not destroy the whole city for tens sake; they have for
the inchoate reformation sake in the Church of England, and for the respect
they bear to a little number of well deserving Bishops and others, passed over
the invectives and insolences of that great stream of corrupt men, that went
current under the name of the English Church, and as they have heartily pitied
their rage, so have they forgiven them their uncharitableness. Other men that
have not been so much interessed in our Churches, have not dissembled what they
thought of our English Episcopal government. The words of Padre Paulo Sarpio
venetian in his Epistle to James Leschasserius Counselor at Paris in the year
1609. are wonderful remarkable, and the more, because they are a prediction of
what came to pass in England; J am afraid in the behalf of the English of
that great power of Bishops, though under a King, J have it in suspicion, when
they shall meet with a King, of that goodness as they will think it easy to
work upon him, or shall have an Archbishop of an high spirit, the Royal
authority shall be wounded, and Bishops will aspire to an absolute domination:
Me thinks I see a horse sadled in England, and J guess that the old rider
shall get on his back: But all these things depend on the Divine Providence.

Next our Remonstrancer exhorts with more modesty then reason, the high
Court not to publish the offenses and scandalls of the inferior Clergy,
leaving off very discreetly to speak, off the monstrous enormities of which
the superior Clergy is guilty. Good Lord sir, you will give leave to a man
that has been unjustly gagged long, at the first liberty given, to cry out
and complain of the wrong he has received: or if some sins of their nature
are crying, would you have them kept under ashes, that they may afterward
break with fiercer violence: or how can the malady be cured till it be laid
open and searched to the bottom; That the body of this Church is very crasie
and sick, we that are the members smart for it. To begin at the head, our
Remonstrancer says: it is no marvel, if among 12 Apostles there be one
Judas; but rather may we expostulate to our great hearts grief, that of 12
rulers of the Church there is hardly one that is right and sound: And no wonder
if an Antichristian Discipline as I proved before, brings up men, whose inside,
doctrine and life is suitable to the outside. The greatest part of Deanes,
Archdeacons, and all those that are comprised under the, etc. of the oath are
gone out of the way: The fountains of learning are poisoned with heresies and
infected with Popery: of late no other Doctrine but Popish and Arminian was
licensed to see light, no body durst call the Pope Antichrist, or the Romish
Church the false Church, and the writings of the Archbishop of Canterbury, of
Bishop Mountagu, the Sermons of Manwaring, the books of Heylin, Pocklington,
Cousin, and the like, are flat Popery. And no wonder therefore if they maintain
stiffely that the English Church is not separated from the Roman, and that they
both agree in the fundamental points of Religion. The power of Preaching has
been of late reduced to outward gestures and bowings toward the East or
Altar, and the mystery of inquiry, which is the good work in hand of Heylin
had got already to a great progress: These being the great maladies of the
Church, far be it from that high and just Court not to hear or to smother
the grievances of the Church, and by a cruel kindness, rather let a man be
drowned, then to take him by the hairs for fear of hurting him.

FINIS.

