Answers to the Reasons against passing the Earl of CLEVELANDS Bill as to the
Manors of Stepney and Hackney in the County of Middlesex.
TO the first. The Earl of Cleveland has not a proper remedy in Chancery more
than 20. years being past since many of the forfeitures, and admit the
suggestion be true, it cannot be reasonable that the surplusage of Equity
should abate the Remedy, and whether it is not better that a Cause of so great
consequence as this, should be decided in a short time by one Bill in
Parliament, than to continue some years in Chancery upon hundreds of Bills
which must be, there being hundreds who have several interests (and no decree
can be made against any not parties to the Suite) let Reason decide. The answer
to the latter part of this Reason is included in the Answer to the Third Reason.

To the Second and Sixth. The Second admits the Earls cause equitable, by
acknowledging a power of redemption once in him, which if lost at all, it was
by his constant, and faithful attending of the late King CHARLES the First, and
his Majesty that now is, so that what is offered gives a disloyal badge to the
Author of the Reasons plainly asserting, That serving King CHARLES the First,
and his Majesty that now is, shall be so far from suppo^ting, as it shall
destroy the Earls power of Redemption.

Then to say, This will go to all persons that were of the same side with the
Earl, is as Irrational as Factious, for the Equity of Redemption to all
person; who served the KING, does not appear as the Earls does upon Record in
the House of Lords, to which Records all persons might resort.

Then consider the absurd partiality couched in the pretended Reasons; by the
Sixth it is urged, That because many Martiners are beyond Sea, who are concerned
in the Settlements, therefore the Earl should not be releived; yet in the
Second the Earl's service to the KING, which as has been said, was the cause
he lost his opportunity of Redeeming, is thought insufficient to preserve his
Equity, the consequence whereof will be, That the meanest person who goes
beyond Sea for his own private gain, shall be more regarded than a Loyal Peer,
who to his present loss, hazzards his life to assist the KING; besides if he
who has Right to the Manors of Stepney and Hackney must have no relief, till
all the Tenants are in England, he shall never have any.

To the third. That the encumbrances upon the Manors contracted by the Earl,
began in 1631. viz. a Statute of 10000 l. July the 11th 1631. to the Lady Weld
for payment of 5000 l. with interest, and diverse other great sums, as by the
Schedule annexed to the Bill appears; So that of necessity the Bill must look
back to take in the first encumbrance, else a clear Estate cannot be settled in
the Trustees, to make a good sale.

The Earl desires not to avoid his own acts, but to secure the Purchasers: for
finding that some acts of his were done after great Debts contracted, and
Statutes and Judgments given for securities, and that Purchasers might lose
their Purchase Money, (if the precedent encumbrances (as by Law they may and
will) should be laid upon such purchased Estates, Not above three (...)
(...)bran^^^ before 164^ and in 1639 the times were unquiet.
) desires by his Bill that such Purchasers may be satisfied their Purchase
Money and Interest, as if their Money had been lent upon Mortgage. And if a
Proviso be admitted, that the Bill shall not extend to such Purchases, then
every Creditor, who has a precedent encumbrance by Statute, Judgment, etc.
will be debarred of his debt, which the Law gives him.

To the Fourth and Fifth. The legal possession in the whole Estate was in Sir
John Weld (till the pretended Act for Sale of Delinquents Lands) by virtue of a
Statute of 10000 l. entered into 1631. which ought still to remain in him; yet
he is contented to wave his legal possession, that all Creditors may be
satisfied, therefore those who never had any legal possession have no just
cause to complain.

To the Seventh. Either they came in by Drury-house, and so have no title legal
nor equitable, and then the consequence of the Seventh Reason will be, that
building upon another Ground, destroys the Owners right; or else they claim
under some forfeited mortgages and then the Chancery will not allow them for
such building, judging it against Equity to clogge an Estate with such an
encumbrance as will make it beyond the power of the Mortgageor to redeem, and
the noise of being Purchasers and in possession, and of 100 Families undone if
this Bill passes, is made only by those who are not Creditors but Purchasers,
(as themselves confess by their own Petition) under the order of April, 1641.
or by Drury-house title, which if set aside (as in all justice they ought,) all
those Purchases are at a period. Others who are the true Creditors (yet
purchased under Drury-house) petition that the Bill may pass, and would be
glad to receive their Money accordingly, and others, viz. Coll. Smith and his
adherents have swallowed an Estate worth above 200000 l. for 10000 l. principal
Money.

To the eighth. For the Trustees to receive the Rents and therewith to pay
Creditors as they are in priority till sales made, is but reasonable, and no
more than the Law gives to every Creditor, who has the precedence of others,
and by this Bill the Trustees may dispose upon stating the first Creditors
debt, and not stay till all are examined preut by the seventh reason is
alleged.

A Reply to the Answers to the Arguments, etc.
TO the two first Answers. That the Lord Bannings debt, and the Lady Homes
debt, and the money (if any) deposited for discharging precedent encumbrances,
shall be satisfied, and other debts which will never be paid (unless this
Bill passes) will be truly discharged.

To that concerning the Earl of Manchester under whom Mr. George Montague
claims, the Earl of Cleveland is contented, that Mr. Montague shall not only
receive the Principal and Interest deposited by the Earl of Manchester; but
also all moneys expended by the Earl of Manchester, or himself in building, or
otherwise improving the Estate.

The Earl of Clevelands defires are, that this Case, being of great consequence
to many of his ancient, and principal Creditors, and Sureties (who Petition the
House of Commons that this Bill may pass) may be committed, and the equity of
it examined by such persons as the House shall appoint, and that he may not be
forejudged in this business, but that this Bill which after long debate passed
the House of Lords, may in the House of Commons receive a candid audience, the
endeavors to prevent the same, arguing more of Interest and Animosity, than of
Justice or Equity; that being the most just sentence which passes after the
fairest hearing.


