ARGUMENTS Against the COMMON COUNCELS ENGAGEMENT.

AS ALSO, Against a PERSONAL TREATY with the KING.

Printed, Anno Domini, 1648.

ARGVMENTS Against the COMMON-COVNCELS Engagement, etc.
THe mercies of God toward the people of this City, in preserving them (like
the Israelites in Goshen) in the midst of those heavy judgments, that have
overspread the Land, have been so great and wonderful, as were sufficient, to
have wrought a most thankful acknowledgment, in the hearts of the most
obdurate people in the World, but mercies have had a most unnatural effect,
the cares of this life, and the deceitfulness of riches, choakt, and stifled,
the voice and cry of mercies.

The hearts of the great ones growing fat as brawn, and because they have been
spared, are puffed up with pride, and haughtiness of mind, imputing their
exemptions from afflictions and judgments, to the multitude of the people, to
their wealth and policy; and are now come to that ripeness of presumption
(though God has lately plucked them out of the very fire) as by an unlawful
ensnaring Engagement once more to number their people, purposely to fit them
for a new War; against those whom God has hitherto honored in their
preservations: but God we trust will yet turn away his wrath, which those men
would hasten upon this City, having already stirred up multitudes, who in
thankfulness, for former Mercies, boldly show themselves in opposition to their
pernicious Engagement, and to their poisonous though gilded bait, a personal
Treaty; their Arguments against both being as follows.

ARGVMENTS Against the Common-Councels Engagement.
1.
It is against the Covenant, in that it is against the privileges of
Parliament, to publish in print a debate had between a Commi^tee of Parliament
and Common Council, before any report made thereof, much less any result made
thereupon by the houses of Parliament, and to endeavor the obtaining of
subscriptions to that, and to engage persons in that, before the Parliament had
done any thing upon that.

2.
There is one branch in that expressly against an Ordinance of Parliament,
enabling Major General Skippon to inlist and raise volunteirs, viz. in that it
is voted by the Common Council, that no other Forces shall be raised or made
use of within the City and late Lines of Communication, but by the authority of
the Militia, by the consent of Common Council.

3.
It is the taking of all power from all other but that Court, to raise or make
use of any Forces within the City, or Lines of Communication, yea, even from
the Parliament it self, during the time of the Treaty.

4.
They have voted to have power to raise what Forces they think fit, and the
Parliament not to have power to contradict or restrain them, though they shall
think fit to raise an Army.

5.
They go about by taking subscriptions to engage the inhabitants of the City
of London, to pay whatsoever Forces they shall think fit to raise, during the
time of the Treaty, and then to refer them to the King and Parliament.

6.
It is not long since such an enagement was endeavored, which was ill resented
by the Parliament, and by them declared to be a treasonable engagement.

Thursday night, the 13 of July, the Engagement came forth in print, Friday the
afternoon, the 14 of July, a report of that was made in the house and not
before, but no resolution nor debate upon.

Here might be unmasked the desperate hypocrisy coucht in the Engagement, as
in their equivocating Answer to the Committee of Parliament, concerning the
disposal of the Kings person (in case he should not consent and agree to such
things as should be propounded for a safe and wel-grounded peace) but the
fallacy is so perspicuous, as its hoped every ingenious person does see
through it: so that present I shall forbear any further proceedings upon it.

Arguments against a Personal Treaty.
For the Parliament that represents the whole body of the people, to admit a
Treaty with the King, that is but one public Officer, of the Kingdom, though
the chiefest, is most conequall, as putting one single person, (their own
officer, and as the case stands, one that has raised and prosecuted, a most
bloody War, contrary to the duty of his Office,) into a balance or competition
with the people, then with what can be more unreasonable, or opposite to their
Freedoms. And for the Common Council or any other as the case is to be
importunate with the Parliament to admit of a personal Treaty with him in
London, or thereabouts, in a time of such general rising, and that for him,
and so inclinable to Commotions and Tumults which they have neither suppressed
nor opposed, but rather countenanc'st, as in admitting Gorings forces so long
at Bow, manifests that the ruling party in the Common Council are really for
him, and consequently that all those amongst them who have officiously, without
authority of Parliament promoted the Engagement, deserves to be severely
punished, as principal promoters of that grand and long sought for dangerous
design, of the Kings, and which appeared to be so, when his forwardness to
come to London, their personally to treat, occasioned the Parliament to vote,
that he should not come until satisfaction were given, for all the innocent
blood, that had been spirt, and that that offer of his tended to divide and
distemper the people here, and to alienate their hearts from the Parliaments
just, as now it proves, and therefore as most dangerous and destructive is to
be avoided.

FINIS.

