A true Copy of a Speech delivered in the Parliament in Scotland, by the Earl
of Argile, concerning the Government of the Church.

Together with the Kings going to Parliament August 19. 1641.

London, printed. 164^.

THE EARL OF ARGILE His Speech to the PARLIAMENT IN SCOTLAND.
GEntlemen, and you the Burgesses of the House of COMMONS; I am commanded by
the Lords to let you know, that they have taken serious deliberation of the
Propositions made by you the other day at a Conference concerning the
Church Government in this Kingdom.

First, I am commanded to put you in mind what have passed already upon this
Occasion before in the maintenance of the Church Government of this Kingdom,
wherein the House of Commons have showed such great affections to the good of
the Church and of the State therein for the maintenance of it.

First, that the Church Government in both Kingdoms, is that which were so be
wished, but no alteration or innovation msust be of that which is settled by
the Laws of each Kingdom, and enacted by them.

Secondly, that the Government of the Church of England is settled and
established by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom to the uniting of a
brotherly love and Government in both Kingdoms under his Majesty's Dominion.

Secondly, I am commanded to let you know their Lordships pleasure in this, or
in any thing else that may conduce to the honor of Almighty God, the service
of our King, and the good of our Kingdom, and will be very ready to give such
assistance as you shall propound, or upon debate with them, think fit to
advance the work you were pleased to deliver unto them.

And finding also that there have been, and having great cause to suspect that
there still are, even during this present sitting in Parliament, endeavors to
subvert the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom and of England, whereby they may
introduce the exercise of a tyrannical Government by most pernicious and
wicked Counsels, Plots, and Conspiracies, that has been taught against this
Kingdom, and the Kingdom of England, with diverse innovations and superstitions,
that have been brought into this Church, multitudes driven out of his Majesty's
Dominions, with the great suppressing of them by the Bishops and their
tyrannical Government over the Church, and the good religious Ministers
therein.

And therefore because the Government of the Church does remain as properly to
proceed from you, as from us, therefore if you shall think fit that any thing
else shall be propounded by you, that may be effected for the Government of the
Church and Kingdom, or if you do not propound, their Lordships will then let
you know their Propositions; if you be not now provided to confer about it, we
shall when you please debate the same, and give you such reasons for it, as you
shall think fit of, to the honor and praise of God, and the good of our King
and Kingdom.

FINIS.
The Kings arrival in Edinborough, with the manner of his going to Parliament.
THere was one appointed to go before him to make room, for the multitude came
in throngs to see his Majesty, all crying, as he passed by them, in their own
language, God save King Charles, God save our King. Next to him which made room
came our King, my Lord Humes going on his right hand, and my Lord of Argile on
his left hand, the rest of the Nobility, and those which were of the
Parliament House, followed according to their degrees, but much ado they had to
go to the House, the desire of the People was so great to see their Sovereign.

When they were come to the Parliament House, there stood a Noble-mans Son, who
as yet goes to school, and saluted his Majesty with a Latin Oration, which he
took most graciously, and thanked them all for their kindness, and goodwill;
then they entered into the Parliament House, and when they were seated, the
Earl of Argile made a Speech unto him.


