AN APROVED ANSWER TO THE PARTIAL AND VNLIKT OF Lord DIGBIES Speech to the
Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford.

WHICH WAS FIRST TORN in pieces, and afterward disgracefully burnt by the
Hangman in Smithfield,Cheapside, Westminster, upon Friday being the 15. day of
July, 1641.

Written by a worthy Gentleman.

Printed in the year, 1641.

AN APROVED ANSWER TO THE PARTIAL AND VNLIKT OF Lord DIGBIES Speech to the
Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford.
THe sandge, that is the incoherent self-dividing and self-forsaking speech,
that endevor to show how the same man, might both condemn and acquit the same
man (the Earl of Strafford) does not so much call for the stroke of an hammer,
to batter it, as a puff of wind to blow it away, to encounter it with the
Votes of the two Houses of Parliament, with the united opinion of the Judges,
with the learned Argument in Westminster Hall (before the Committees of both
Houses) were to kill a Fly with an Axe, and to honor, rather then to overthrow
it. For certainly the strength of it is only great in the kindness (that I say
not the weakness) of the Reader, stealing away the affection, not convincing
the Judgment; if Arguments be raised from it; they are such as need an
Hospital, being blind and lame, if Arguments be raised against it the speech
falls before them, like grass before the Mower.

Will you see an Argument of this paper, and indeed a paper Argument:

If it does not appear to him by two Testimonies, that the Army of Ireland was
to be brought over to reduce this Kingdom then the Earl of Strafford is not
guilty of high treason.

Now does he believe himself in this proposition, when he sees diverse other
charges of treason besides laid against him; if 3. or 4. Treasons be objected
and proved, is it a sufficient cause of clearing if 1. be not proved to his
mind, and as he says but by a single testimony, though the other by more; if
the Author cannot be drawn to a better belief by the cords of reason. I
think he would certainly be drawn to it, by the cords of a comparison. If
himself were tied with three or four cords, and a friend had freed him from
one, would he tell his Friend, let me alone for I am free enough, though I am
bound by the rest; surely I think the other cords (after some stay at least)
would persuade him to change his mind by his inability to change his place.

But Faults in this paper do not go alone; For is he not wilingly blind when
he sees not the Iery clause* of reducing this Kingdom by an Irish Army
manifestly appearing in the former and as it were looking him in the Face; For
a former testimony of 2. witnesses says, that his Majesty is absolved from all
rules of government and may do what power will admit: certainly most besides
himself do see what power will admit the use of an Irish Army and any other
that the same power can purchase, or command. So that where he quarrels for
want of an Irish Army, he has gotten now about his ears, Irish, English,
Dutch, etc.

But yet again he multiplies and is fruitful in absurdities. He says, that
he has no notion of subverting law treasonable but only by force; certainly
this Argument then will never subvert the Law, for it has no force in it, it
is an Argument taken only from his own ignorance, and runs, or rather halts
thus, he knows no other, therefore there is no other; to frame this right it
should run thus.

There is no way of subverting the Law, but that which I know, but I know no
way of subverting the Law, but by force. Now in the first of these is too much
knowledge, and in the latter too much ignorance.

But who says this, Is it some ancient Judge or Father of the Law, that has
swallowed and digested the great volumes of that judicious and weighty
profession, or is it the Speech of one that looks more into the Court then the
Innes of Court, I pray behold an Engine strongly framed to lift up and
overpoise the trust and belief of a whole Kingdom in point of Law, A young
Gentleman knows it not.

But if he be not skillful in Common Law, he may be somewhat skillful in common
Reason, and that may tell him, that if nothing but can subvert Law, then Judges
cannot subvert Law upon the seats of Justice; for though they will fully
pronounce judgment contrary to law; stop lawful defenses, and rob the subject
of the benefit of law; and let loose the Prerogative upon the Law to destroy
it, except they drive the Subjects away from Courts of justice by Halberds and
Guns; they may take the Law from them by false judgments, denying prohibitions
habeas corpus, and all legal Remedies and yet not subvert the Law. If this
Authors estate should be lost by this way of injustice, he may comfort himself
(and let it be his comfort alone) that it is not lost by subverting the Law. O
unhappy Tresillian that thou did not live in the times, when such patronages
might have been given thee, for then might thou have lived out thy time,
since thou could not commit Treason by subverting the Iron Laws, but only
by Iron.

And now I am fallen upon Tresillian, I may not forget this Authors argument,
to which this Tresillian will give an unhappy conclusion.

He argues thus:

The Earl of Straffords practices have bin as high, as tyrannical, as ever
any* But the practices of Tresilian and others have bin as high as high
Treason. Therefore the Earl of Straffords practices have been as high Treason.

Thus you see how this Author with the help of Tresilian has prononced
sentence against the E. of Strafford, So that if he had no other Judge this one
thus assisted would condemn him, when he goes about to save him.

But that is nothing to the purpose, that he is condemned, for though he be
condemned, and so condemned, that he can never be absolved till he be dispatched
into another world, yet this Author will not have a hand in this dispatch.

A merciful Inference and most unsuitable to the premises, especially if it come
out of the mouth of a Judge. Mark how it sounds in such a mouth, I being a
Judge condemn you as guilty of murder or of as high a treason as any, but I
will have no hand in your sentence or dispatch. If Judges should ride their
circuits and end their Assies in this Logic, granting the premises, and
denying the conclusion, were it not most vain and a mere mockery of Justice?
For it were only to find faults, and not to correct them, and to turn Justice
into mere words. It would shortly make a Kingdom a den of Thieves, murderers
and Traitors, and safe for none to dwell in, no not for those that teach this
doctrine, though they may be thought by teaching to deserve it. Nec enim Lex
equiar ulla, etc.

Lastly, who can believe this man's suspicions rather then Sr. Henry Vanes oath
upon advised Recollection? and oath that gets an addition of belief from the
speeches going before (jointly testified by the truly Noble Earl of
Northumberland) and backed by a memorial written the same day when the words
were spoken: which words called venomous by this paper, had their venom from the
speaker, not the hearer, and bebeing recorded the same day wherein they were
spoken, did arise thereby to such a pregnance of Testimony, that it became very
great, and might in a wise man's eye (be it Mr. Pym or any other) look very
near as big, as two.

But though the Testimonies be big or many, and the charges many also; and the
Earl of Strafford as high and tyrannical in practices as ever any (by the
Authors confession) yet he must at once be both condemned, and saved. Though
in his saving, the Votes of both Houses be condemned, and the Kingdom and Law
in danger not to be saved.

FINIS.

