Every MAN his own DOCTOR.

In two PARTS.

Showing 1. How every one may know his own Constitution and Complexion, by
certain Signs. Also the Nature and Faculties of all Food as well Meats, as
drinks. Whereby every Man and Woman may understand what is good or hurtful to
them.

Treating also of Air, Passions of Mind, Exercise of Body, Sleep, Venery and
Tobacco, etc.

The Second part shows the full knowledge and Cure of the Pox, and Running of
the Reins, Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, Consumptions, and Obstructions, Agues.

Showing their causes and Signs, and what danger any are in, little or much,
and perfect Cure with small cost and no danger of Reputation.

Written by John Archer Chemical Physician in Ordinary to the King.

Felix qui potuit Rerum Cognoscere Causas.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap for the Author, and are to be sold by most
Booksellers, 16^^.

To the Reader.
COnsidering the great damage that comes upon most people daily by not knowing
or not regarding there own Constitutions of body, whereby they neglect the
precious Jewel of Health, and so by Ignorance do live negligenly, and Eat and
Drink they care not what so it be good in it self, thinking it cannot be bad
for them so it please the Pallat, but thereby many dig their Graves with their
Teeth, and cut off the thread of their lives sooner then is required by God or
Nature, besides their uncomfortable living in sickness and disease of body. Now
for prevention I have to the benefit of all if perused, writ this short
Compendium; Showing how every one may know his own Complexion, and the Nature
and Faculty of most Food now used in England, whereby every Man may be his own
Doctor in a Dietetical way which may prevent a Physical course, and for such as
are distempered or Diseased. I have mentioned some of the most dangerous
Diseases now in being, which with their knowledge and dangers, are clearly laid
down, and their best cure faithfully propounded, which experience will best
testify, having pity to all that are so ignorant, that eat they know not
what, or that are diseased and know not how to be cured, but with ruin to
their Credit and Name. These Reasons made me publish this short tract, for thy
good that art willing and have need of Advice least too late thou considerest.

J. A.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

The Contents of this Book.
FIrst, The Epistle to the Reader. Chap. 1. Of the preservation of health. page
1. Chap. 2. Shows the best temperature. page 4. Chap. 3. Shows certain Signs to
know your Constitution and Complexion. page 6. Chap 4. Shows the benefit to be
gathered from knowledge of our own Complexion. page 10. Chap. 5. Declaring
some common Axioms and Maxims to be observed in preserving of health. page
12. Chap. 6. Treats of the worth of Air, and the best and worst Air, also
difference of Air. page 14. Chap. 7. Treats of Meat or Food, showing the
difference, also the best and worst. page 23. Chap. 8. Shows the Nature and
Faculties of every thing we eat in beasts or fowl. page 26. Chap. 9. Shows the
Nature and variety of Fish. page 40. Chap. 10. Treats of Food taken from living
creatures, as Milk, Eggs, Honey, and others. page 48. Chap. 11. Treats of Food
from plants and Vegetables. as Corn, Fruits, Roots, Herbs. page 57. Chap. 12.
Shows the difference of drinks, and nature of Waters, Wine, Beer, Ale, Honey
drinks, Coffee and Tobacco, for whom it is good. page 80. Chap. 13. Of passions
of the mind, and exercise and rest of the body, sleep, watchings, excretions,
retentions and Venery. page 96.
The Second part*
Chap. 1. THe advertisement. page 109. Chap. 2. Treats of the Pox. page 115.
Chap. 3. Shows the Signs of Infection by the Fox. page 118. Chap. 4. How to
cure the Pox. page 120. Chap. 5. Shows how to cure the Running of the Reins or
weakness of Nature. page 125. Chap. 6. Shows how to know and cure the Scurvy
page 129. Chap. 7. Treats of the Gout and how to cure. page 132. Chap 8. Of the
different Dropsies, their causes and cures. page 135. Chap. 9. Of an Ague or
Fever, what it is, and how to cure. page 137. Chap. 10. Of a Consumption and
decays of strength, and how to cure. page 140. Chap. 11. Treating of all sorts
of Jaundies, and obstructions, and green sickness. page 146. Chap. 12. Of the
prices of the Medcines that cures these great diseases and proper for all
Constitutions. page 149.
Being to be had at the Authors house only.

Every man his own Doctor.
CHAP. I. Of the preservation of Health.
TO preserve health when present and to Restore if lost is the chief end of
Physic and shall be my Main design in this small tract. The word Medicina
being derived amedendo that is healing such as are sick does properly belong to
the Theraputicall part only, which part being most necessary was first invented
yet afterward when that part was added which shows the preservation of present
health the same denomination was still retained and is now given to the whole
art of Physic, therefore for definition Physic is an art of preserving man's
health when present and restoreing it when lost as far as it is posible.

The subject of Physic is man's body as it is obnoxious to diseases, the scope
or end of Physic is to heal -- although it is impossible to cure all that are
sick; yet the Physician has performed his office if he has omitted none of
those things that are in the power of nature and art.

Health amongst all things called good by Mortals is most desired when sick,
therefore ought to be highly prized, when in well being, and I think it may not
only be acceptable, but very profitable to all, to be sincerely and briefly
informed how to keep health and cure themselves; Especially for those that have
not patience to read voluminous Authors, and those that want time and means
for due Regulation and Government; although we have an old Proverb, that every
Man is a Fool, or a Physician at forty year old. Which saying is very true, my
meaning is, that every Man in prudence should so far be his own Doctor as
rightly to know his own Constitution and Complexion, and the reasons for the
Friendly agreement or the Antipathy of any Food to his own body, and for this
end he ought to know the Nature of all Meat and Drink in use as ordinary Food
(amongst us in England especially.)

The aforesaid knowledge is the Hygenial part of Physic, that is Rules how
present health may be preserved, and how to beware not to fall into a Disease,
not that I think it necessary that every particular Person should be able to
read an Anotomy Lecture upon the parts of his own Body, nor study the Nature,
differences, causes of Diseases, nor the various sorts, nor qualities of
Purgative Medicines, but that Man is to be pitied that eats for hunger and
knows not the Nature of what he Eats, which negligence in so necessary a
knowledge has occasioned much Sickness to many, and Death not to few. For
preventing of such dangers, you shall now receive brief Rules how to know your
own Constitution and Complexion, and also the Nature and Faculty of all the
Meat, Drink, or sorts of Food, now used in this Kingdom. To the end that every
Man may be his own Doctor, so far as to know as well by reason as experience,
that this does agree with my Constitution, and why that does not.

Now first I understand the temperature of a sound Man, and that of all living
Creatu^es man is most temperate, so that all living Creatures, and Food and
Medicines compared to man are said to be hotter, Colder, moister, or dryer,
though man be not absolutely temperate for common sense tells us that heat in
man is predominant over the other qualities.

CHAP. II. Shows the best Temperature.
THe best temperature for a man to perform his actions, is hot and moist, for
our lives consist o^ heat and moisture, and the contrary Coldness and Dryness
leads us to Death, and by how much sooner a man is cooled and dried, by so much
sooner a man grows old and dies, yet that heat and moisture have their degrees,
for if the heat exceed the cold, the moisture, the drowth, moderately that
temper is best and accounted temperate, and all others differing from this, are
called either hot and moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, cold and dry, though
all in general are hot and moist, these Temperaments are commonly explained by
these differing Names* of Sanguine, Choleric, Plegmatick and Melancholy,
which must be und^rstood of the variety of blood, which is the Nutriment of the
body and not of Extrementitious humors. Now I will give some Signs how and
whereby you may judge your Complections according to Senertus, and whether you
differ from the best Constitution.

CHAP. III. Of Signs to know your Constitution or Complexion.
FIrst bodies which are too hot, yet moderate in dryness and humidity, such
discover themselves, to the touch Hair abounds in the whole body, and is
inclining to yellow and thick, they are thinner as to m^tter o^ Fat, they are
swift and strong for motion, prone to anger the color of the Face is r^dder
then of a temperate body they are easily hurt by hot things.

Signs of a hot and dry Constitution, viz. Choleric.
If moisture be joined to heat which they call Choleric the body shall be hot,
hard, thin, and lean, hairy and the hairs are black curled, the pulse of the
Arteries are great, and their veins great, they are angry persons, which are
endued with such a temperature obstinate lovers of Brawlings they desire few
things they are fit for the generation of males.

Signs of a hot and moist Sanguine Constitution.
If moisture be joined to heat which Temperament they call Sanguine the bodies,
shall be hot and soft abounding with much blood fleshy endued with large veins
and those which are so in their youth often have the Hemorrhoides, or bleeding
at the Nose, and if the humidity abound they are apt from their youth to
Diseases of putrefaction.

Signs of a cold Constitution.
If the body be too cold, such a body is perceived by the touch and is white,
fat, slow, soft and bald, it is easily hurt by cold things, it has a narrow
breast without hair, and narrow veins, scarcely appearing, the h^irs thin and
of small increase for the most part, they are f^arful that are of that
Temperament.

Signs of a cold and moist Phlegmatic Constitution.
If moisture be joined to the cold not much, nor that coldness great, the body
shall be white in color, fat, thick, soft, reddish Hair, inclining to
palen^ss, but if the frigidi^y with the ^umidity be more intense the body shall
be th^ck, colored yellow, exceeding bald, the hair smooth, the vein^ lying
hid, ^uc^ ^emp^raments are dull and slow of app^ehension and for the most part
altogether ^ol^, no ways ready, simple, no^ prone to anger.

Not that any sca^c^ly may be said to be of a simple Com(...)l^ction, without
mixture of some other, neither do any abide long what they are.

Of a cold and dry Melancholy Complexion.
If Frigidity be joined to dryness, such a body is discerned by the touch,
those shall be lean, bald, pale, which are of such a constitution, slow in
motion, dejected in countenance with their eyes fixed, as for Melancholians in
particular, not only whom the vulgar, but whom Aristotle in the thirty Section,
and the first problem accounts ingenious, wherein the said Aristotle writes
that much and cold Choler is black, such are foolish and idle: Wherein there
is much and hot Choler, those are quick-sighted and ingenious, apt to love,
propense to anger and lust.

Some great Bablers -- but those whose heat is more remiss, more temperate, and
as it were reduced to Mediocrity, those are more prudent, and although they
less exceed in some matters, yet in others they are far better then the others,
some in the study of Literature, others in Arts, others in Commonwealths;
namely those Melancholians are ingenious, who by nature abound with good and
plenty of blood, wherewith some part thicker and dryer is mingled; which adds
as it were strength to the blood, and when attenuated, and as it were poured it
is spiritual.

CHAP. IV. The Benefit to be gathered from knowledge of our own Complexion.
BY comparing what is already said to the present Temperament of our own bodies
we may find a certain agreement with them and some of the Temperaments
described which known and well considered it will prove of no small value to
all that desire health, or Wisdom; for we say premonitus premunitus, if I know
by the forewritten Signs that I am a Chollerick person, I will resolvedly
beware the evils of that Temperament, both of body and mind as knowing my
inclination to quarrels, Wrath, anger, fightings, etc. I will bridle Nature for
it is truly said. Mores sequntur humores, according to the humors of the body,
so are the conditions of the mind, and also for Food, knowing my Temperament to
be hot and Choleric, I must avoid those things in meat and drink that increase
it, and use things that do allay and cool heat. And so a Phlegmatic person
ought to avoid cold and moist things especially, both in meat, and drink,
therefore his drink may well be more strong, and Food hotter, and more drying
then the person that is hot and dry already -- For the person being hot and
dry, ought to correct his heat with cooling and moistning, as the Melancholy
man who is cold and dry ought to take Food both healing and moistning. So
Sympathy and Antipathy must be observed in Physic rules for preservation of
health, for it is truly said Contrariae Contrariis Gurantur, all Remedies are
performed by their contraries.

CHAP. V. Some common Axioms and Maxims, there are to be observed in the
method of preserving of health* as,
1. NAture does nothing rashly.

2. Too much of any thing is an enemy to Nature.

3. Nature is the Physician of Diseases but the Physician is the servant of
Nature and ought to imitate her she acting aright.

4. Custom is a second Nature and those things which he are accustomed to a
long time though worse they are wont to be less troublesome then those things
we are not used to.

Doctrine of the preservation of health.
DOctrine for health is comprehended in these 2 parts, viz.

Materials of health or wholesome causes.

2. A knowledge necessary for the preservation of health teaching how things
called Non-Natural are to be used for the keeping men in health, they are
comprehended under the notion of things Non-Natural, and ought to be ordered
into four Ranks. as, 1. First, Those things which are taken in. 2. S^condly,
Those things which are carried. 3. Thirdly, Those things which are emitted and
Retained. 4. Fourthly, What befalls the body by accident. as, Of Air, Meat and
Drink, Passion of the mind, Motion, and exercise of body, Rest, Sleep and
Watching, Venery, excretions and Retentions.



CHAP. VI. Of Air.
AIr is the most worthy Element for the preservation of Life in every creature,
nay the other Elements subsist by it, as for example fire is extinguished if
you keep Air from it, and water putrifies and stinks if Air comes not to it:
and the very Earth brings forth nothing to maturity, without it.

Therefore we may well give precedence to its worth in discourse. The Air
affects our bodies two ways, viz. Extrinsecally as it insinuates through the
pores of the skin and as it is attracted by inspiration, so it has a force
upon our bodies and impresseth its quality whether good or bad upon us,
according to all writers.

The best air.
The best Air is temperate as to the primary quallities, and is pure and
infected, with no pollutions but is Serene, moved or stirred with the Winds,
breathing sweetly with pleasant Gales and sometimes moistened with wholesome
showers.

Corrupt air*
On the contrary that Air is vicious which is infected with exhalations and
vicious vapors breaking forth on every side, or is compassed with marish or
standing waters after what manner soever it be impure, and such as cannot be
purified by the blowing of Winds, that Air which is troubled, or too Hot, or
too Cold, too Dry, or too moist.

Constitution of air.
But the Constitution of Air may be polluted though diverse causes, first the
Constitution of the Air depends on the situation and nature of places for some
Regions are hotter then others, others colder, for by how much the more any
Regions receive the direct beams of the Sun; and by how much the longer the Sun
remains above their Horizon, by so much the Country is more hot, the contrary
Reasons make it so much the Colder, yet this cause only does not suffice,
neither is the same Constitution of Air in all the inhabitants under the same
Latitude for these ten Reasons. First the mold and proper Nature of the Earth
conduces to the Constitution and Temperature of the air, wherein is to be
observed what the Nature of Ground is, whether Fat, Dirty, Filthy, Gravelly,
Stony, Sandy.

Whether the place be high, or low, what situation there is of Mountains and
Valleys, what Winds it often admits, and from what Climates, whether the Sea or
any Lakes be near it, whether it brings forth metals from whence malignant air
may be exhaled.

2. Situation of Mountains.
The Mountains also change the Constitution of the air, according as the
blowing of certain winds drive away and admit it, and if the Mountains drive
away the North wind, but admit the South wind, it comes to pass that the air is
hotter and moister, the contrary makes the place colder and dryer.

3. Winds.
The different winds bring forth great Mutations, as the Oriental or East winds
are more temperate, also the Occidental or West, but these are moister, the
Northern are cold and dry, and have power to bind bodies and dry them, the
Southern are hot and moist, therefore as the Region or Situation is more or
less disposed to this or that wind, so it obtains this or that Constitution of
air, but generaly Countries exposed to the Oriental Sun are more wholesome then
those which are exposed to the Septentrional or North winds, and hot winds are
more wholesome then those which are exposed to the West.

4. Sea and Lakes
The Vicinity to the Sea and Lakes conduce much to the peculiar Nature of the
air, unless interjected Mountains prohibit, for from moist places of this
Nature many exhalations are drawn up, which mingle themselves with air and
moisten it, and indeed the humidity will be increased if the Sea or Lake be
situated on the South, but if toward the North fridigity.

5. Metallic Pits or Mines.
Mines generally communicate their malignant smell and vapou^s to the
neighboring places, also Caves exhale venomous air, also Woods that are too
thick hinder the light of the Sun and Moon, as also the motion of the air.

6. Times of the Year.
Indeed the seasons of the Year change the air, which Astronomers constitute
equal according to the motion of the Sun, and Zodiac, being divided into four
parts but Physicians regard these times according to the temper of the air, and
call that the Spring, when the constitution of the air is more temperate, when
we grow neither stiff with cold nor sweat with heat: but the Summer when the
same is hot and dry, Winter when it is cold and moist, neither do they appoint
these seasons to be equal in all Countries.

7. The Spring.
The Spring being the most temperate, or as Hypocrates calls it hot and moist,
that is when calidity moderately overcomes frigidity, and humidity moderately
exceeds dryness, it is the most wholesome time of the Year, and although
diseases are generated (or rather shows themselves) in the spring time, yet the
spring of its self does not produce them, but the vicious humors which are
gathered together in the Winter time are driven out in the spring by the heat
o^ the Sun, and Planets.

8. The Summer.
This quarter is hot and dry, ergo makes bodies more hot and dry, purifies and
disolves and renders them weaker, by reason of heat, it attenuates humors and
kindles them, from whence Cholorick and Acrimonius humors are accumulated.

9. Autmne.
This Season is mixed with cold and heat, that is mornings and evenings are
cold, the middle part of the day hot, its Constitution is hot and cold, and by
Reason of its inequality in Air it is very obnoxious to Diseases, and blood at
this time of the Year is diminished by Reason of approach of cold Winter makes
it dangerous to Phlebotomise but upon necessity, for now Melancholy abound
bodies are thickened by the Retiring of Blood and Spirits which causes the
pores to close.

10. Winter.
Now the Frigidity of the Air with moisture makes Phlegm abounds and procures
Catarrhs, Distillations, Rotten Coughs. But if the Seasons of the Year are
variable and uncertain it makes the Air corrupt, by which means diverse Diseases
are Reigning according to the various Constitution of the different seasons.

The most healthful air and place*
From what we have said it is evident that those places, dwellings, Countries
and Region are most wholesome, where the Air is temperate, the Spring
temperate, the heat of Summer sufficient to ripen Corn, and Fruit, Autumn
Colder, Winter Cold, yet not offending our bodies with extremes, also a
Fruitful Soil, men comely of Body, well colored in the Face, Laudable in their
manners, and joyful in their prosperous health, etc. Ingenious in invention, to
all which may be added valor, which not only is seen in Men in England, but as
well in other Creatures here, as the Mastiff Dog, and cock, for which no part
of the world can parallel, being no small argument of the excellent Temperature
of the Air of England, for by experience their valor declines in a few years,
being transported to other Countries.

CHAP. VII. Of Meat, or Food.
HAving now finished our discourse of Air, and though we choose to live in the
best, it is not sufficient without good Food, therefore having already showed
how all may know their own Constitutions, and Complections, and goodness of
Air, it will be necessary in the next place, to show the nature, temper, and
virtue of most Food is now used in this Kingdom, whereby every man may easily
see and know by comparing it with his Constitution what is Friendly and
healthful to him, and wherein in it is inimical, and therefore know that all
Aliment as Meat, and Drink, wherewith the substance of our bodies is renewed
and strengthened, is of virtue to increase the substance of our bodies, for it
is a true saying in a sense, that we our selves have had our selves upon our
trenchers.

Food properly so called is to nourish our bodies if Medicinal to alter our
bodies. But Food is taken from two things, viz. From the animal Kingdom, or
Vegitable, all those things that proceed from living creatures are either parts
of animals, or those things which proceed from them as Eggs, Milk, Honey,
Butter, Cheese, etc.

Difference of Food.
Many things there are for the Aliment and Food of man, and great is the
difference of them in Nourishment, for some are very good and some of ill
nourishment, and Juice, some are of easy concoction, others hard to be
concocted again, some will corrupt easily in the Stomach, other some not.

The best Food.
The best m^at yield plenty of nourishm^nt, is easy of concoction, not quickly
corrupted, nor has an ill quality and there remains after it, but few
excrements.

But the contrary are unwholesome and all that leaves an ill Juice and are
easily corrupted is the worst.

Firm Food,
That Aliment which brings forth much nourishment is accounted firm, but it
requires much strength of heat for concoction. But that is in firm which is
easily concocted and nourishes, but affords but little nourishment, and such
that is soon dispersed and after it the Stomach soon calls for more.

CHAP. IV. Of the Nature of every Food we Eat.
ANd because I know that people of all qualities do commonly Feed upon what
comes to Table, be it what it will, without considering the Nature or qualities
of any thing, or agreement, or disagreement to their Constitutions, so it do
but please the pallat, by which means diverse have and do dig their Graves with
their Teeth, to prevent which I think very necessary that every one should
understand the Nature and property of his daily Food as well as his own
Constitution, and so by doing himself right, he is truly become his own Doctor,
which is the thing I aim at for the benefit of all good people, for without
doubt, daily experience upon a Man's own body by help of sensation may soon make
him (if observant to these small Rules the wisest Doctor living in a Diatetical
way to himself, and so by preventing of Diseases, he may not need so frequent
use of Physic, which many are forced to.

But to detair you no longer, I will first begin with Flesh Meat, and after to
Vegetables, etc. And for your first dish, and generally approved.

Beef.
Beef the best of which is English bred and fed, but there is great difference
in this sort of meat, as well as others, it is hard of concoction, thick,
flesh, it does not easily pass through the Veins, it does not participate of
viscidity of slymyness, the frequent use thereof causes dry and melancholy
humors, without exercise and labor of body, especially if it be old Cow Beef,
or Ox Beef, that with labor and much working has contracted dryness and
hardness of Flesh or is hardened with Salt and Smoke. But above all meats it is
most profitable for laborious people being not easily passed away, and gives
much strength where it is concocted by labor.

Veal.
Veel is temperate and tender, though something Waterish, if thoroughly Roasted,
affords good Juice, of a pleasant taste, and yields a thicker Juice then Lamb,
or Mutton.

Mutton.
The beff Mutton is Weather the younger is the best meat, and is easily
concocted and generates good blood, and agrees both with those that are well
and also with those that are sick. -- But Ewe mutton is evil both by default of
the temperature and by frequenting of Copulation and bringing forth young,
therefore the Flesh of Ewes is evil and dull and viscid juice is bred thereof.

Lamb,
A Lamb before it be a year old has moist flesh, slimy and viscid, but when it
is a year old, it is very good nourishment, consisting of good and plentiful
juice, and indifferent lasting, and easy of concoction, but with those that
are exercised with strong labor it is easy discussed, and not very solid
Aliment is made thereby.

Bacon or Pork,
Swines flesh nourishes very plentilully and yields firm nutriment, and
therefore is most profitable for those that are in their flourishing age, sound
and strong which are exercised with much labor, but in weak and corrupt
stomachs, not laboring very dangerous, for we say optimae corumputur siunt
pessimae, the best nourishment corrupted proves most dangerous.

Sucking Pigs.
Sucking Pigs are very nourishing, but they agree not with all constitutions,
because too much humidity abounds in it, the fumous vapors ascends up to the
head, in many causing pain, and swimings.

Brawn.
Of the flesh of tame Boars we usually make Brawn, being long corn-fed, and
young, makes a delicate meat, having not so much excrementitious moisture as
Bacon or Pork, but the hard and horny part is difficultly concocted.

Food taken from the parts of Animals.
Aliment taken from the parts of Animals are many, which both according to the
kinds of living Creatures, and accordding to their diversity of parts do vary,
the feet of Animals of what kind soever are cold and dry, they have little
flesh, and scarce any blood, they yield a cold juice, dull and glutinous by
reason whereof the broth wherein feet are boiled is turned to a jelley.

Hearts.
All hearts of Animals are of a hard and dry Nature and fibrous, neither is it
easily concocted, but if it be well concocted, it yields neither ill juice nor
a little, and that very stable and firm, chiefly corroberating the heart by
sympathy.

Liver.
The Liver is very binding, and yields thick nourishment, but is hard to be
concocted, which is slowly distributed. All Animals varyin their Liver,
according to their age and feeding, the youngest and best fed are most
delicate, and have the greatest Livers and fullest of juice.

Spleen.
The Spleen as it is the receptacle of gross Melancholy blood affords little
nourishment, and is hardly concocted, therefore not fi^ for food.

Lungs.
The Lungs in substance are light and airy, therefore properly called the
bellows of the body, they nourish but little, yet easy of concoction, and
afford good nourishment.

Bowels*
The intestines afford not very good but thick Aliment, and the Powels of
younger Quadrapeds, as Calves are of better Juice and easier concocted then of
old.

Tongue.
The Tongue excells the other parts in pleasant taste and goodness of alinent,
and is also easily concocted.

Brain*
The Brain yields petuitous and thick juice, and is not easily concocted, nor
distributed, and causes loathing, except it be well sharpened with Vinegar.

Venison.
Although Venison be in high esteem both by Gentry and Peasant, yet it is hard
of concoction and generates Melancholy juice especially if the Venison be
grown to ripeness of years, it does obstruct the bowels, the usual way of
seasoning it does much meliorat and make tender the flesh, and by drinking a
glass of Wine therewith it becomes good nourishment.

Hare.
Hares flesh is accounted by Physicians for Melancholy meat, therefore not so
good for those that have dry bodies, yet they are thought to generate a good
color in the face, they are best boiled.

Goats.
Goats flesh afford good nourishment, and may well be offered before other
sylvestrous Animals, for goodness of Aliment, facility of concoction,
pleasantness of taste, pancity of excrements, yet they are something dryer.

Conies.
Conies if they be not old, yield a good juice, are easy of concoction, and if
thoroughly roasted very drying for the Phlegmetick, young are safe food for sick
people.

Of Foul, first Turkies.
Amongst tame Fowl the Turkey is of the uper rank, both for the largeness of
his body, goodness of food, having good juice, and laudable nourishment, it is
most fit for those that are in health.

Capons and Pullets and Chicken.
Hens and Capons are accounted the chief among Birds, they are temperate easy
of concoction, of good juice, and contain few excrements if young, and yield
most profitable food to those who are not used to labor, they procreate good
blood, yet there is great difference amongst this kind of Fowl, the best is the
flesh of crammed Capons, next is that of fat Chickens, the next are Pullets, as
for old Cocks and Hens, their flesh is harder and dryer, and not to be eaten,
but by laborious people.

Geese.
The flesh of tame Geese does abound more with exc^^ments, then that of wild,
yet the flesh of them both are hard of conc^ction, and yield no good juice, but
vicious and excrementious, and such as is easily putrified, and in weak
stomachs often cause surfeits, but in strong stomachs and if it be well
concocted Geese affords plenty of nourishment, but the delacacy of a Geese is
the Liver, which if it be well fatted especially with sweet food, as boiled
carrots etc. The Liver will grow large, and is delicious and temperate meat,
easy of concoction, of good juice and much nourishment, and indeed of more
value then the Carcass.

Duck and Mallard.
Tame Ducks if not young are very hard of concoction, of ill juice, and little
nourishment, but the young ones are wholesome Food, and yield good juice for
the wild Duck and Mallard, are much better then the tame, more tender of
concoction, and yields good nourishment, and do not easily putrify in the
Stomach.

Pheasants.
Pheasants are most excellent Food, and are the best nourishment, for those
that are in health, most easy of concoction, therefore safe and good for those
that do not labor.

Partridge and Quails.
The Flesh of Partridges are temperate, and drying, easy of concoction,
affords excellent juice, and much nourishment, and few excrements for those
that are in health good, and for those that have Consumptions, or the French
Pox, admirable nourishment.

Quails are excellent Food for all in health, it is hot and moist, but the sick
must not eat of them, because they are apt to generate Fevers.

Pigeons.
There are diverse sorts of Pigeons, those of the Mountains and Woods are best,
the flesh of all of them are of a melancholy Juice not easily concocted, but
most dangerous in a Putrid Fever.

Plovers.
The Gray Plovers, exceed the Green, both are very good Food, easy of
concoction, afford good nourishment, save that they are something melancholy.

Cocks, Snites, Thrushes.
These Winter Birds are easily concocted, yields good Juice, not
excrementitious, and affords nourishent firm enough.

Black birds.
Black birds are something harder of concoction, then Thrushes, but are firm
nourishment.

Larks.
The Lark generates excellent Juice and is easily concocted and it has a
peculiar qualitiy, not only to preserve one from the Chollick, but also to cure
it.

Having now run through most of our English Flesh meat, we will now proceed to
the Fish.

CHAP. IX. Fish.
FIshes are colder and moister Food then the Flesh of Terrestial animals, and
scarce afford so good juice as Corn, and Fruits, and other Vegitables, they do
easily putrify, and if they are corrupted they acquire a quality most
dangerously averse to our natures, but there are great variety of Fish.

A Salmon.
A Salmon in the first place is tender of Flesh, grateful to the Palate, easy
of concoction, affords good juice, and is not inferior to any, nay it is the
best of Fish, but when they are pickled with salt, and hardened with smoke, they
are much worse and difficulty concocted.

Trout.
Trouts amongst Fishes which are bred in Fresh Waters are the best and are next
in goodness to a Salmon, easy of concoction, full of much good and thin juice,
but the greater of them of flesh, not a little excrementitious, Fat, and Full
of viscidity, those are commended above others, which have Red flesh, and many
Red spots, and have hard flesh, and participates not of vilcidity and Fat,
those are easier concocted, descend sooner and not so excrementitious, in juice.

Soles, plaice, and Turbet.
These Fish is highly commended amongst Sea-fishes which has delicate flesh,
and is easy of concoction, being white fleshed, yields good juice, plentiful
nourishment and such as is not easily corrupted, but being dried in the smoke
they are much worse and harder of concoction.

Gudgeons, Smelts.
Gudgeons and Smelts are the best amongst the small sort of fish and very
wholesome Aliment, easy to be concocted and such as remain not long in the
stomach, and are profitable both for pleasure and health, and may safely be
given to those that are sick, to these other little fish are alike as Dace and
Minners, etc.

A Carp.
For dilicious taste especially if it be fat, is inferior to none, and if it be
thoroughly decocted or stewed with Wine as the manner is, makes a Princely dish,
and yields good nourishment and firm, but is not fit for sick People.

Pike.
A Pike especially of the smaller growth has hard Flesh, it is easily
concocted and easily distributed, and has not many excrements, and may also be
given to those that are sick.

Perch.
A Perch also has tender flesh, and such as will easily part asunder, and no
Fat, nor glutinosity, it is easy to be digested, the Juice is not evil, yet it
affords weaker Aliment, and such as is easily discussed.

Bream.
A Bream has soft and moist Flesh and yields a Juice very excrementitious and
is to be eaten, for the most part, as all other Fish are not, it is not to be
mixed with diverse kinds of meats.

Tench.
Tench is neither of a pleasing taste nor easy to be concocted, nor good
Aliment, but yields a filthy slymy juice and such as is easily corrupted,
neither is easily distributed and it brings forth obstructions.

Barbel.
A Barbel whose Eggs perchance gave an occasion for some to suppose that he
hears very bad, it causes not only the pain of the belly but also vomiting, and
disturbs the belly, and stirs up Choler, from the use thereof we ought to
abstain, but the flesh thereof is very White, easy of concoction and
distribution and affords Aliment of good juice.

Eells.
The Flesh of Eells is sweet but glutinous with Fat and abounding, with much
moisture it generates ill juice, and the use thereof is not safe for sick
people, nor plentifully taken for those that are well.

Lamprey.
A Lamprey is a Fish of a grateful and delicious taste, if it be rightly
prepared, and sauced, yet it puts not away its slymyness, wholly for which
cause Physicians, do not number them among Fishes of the best sort.

Herring.
A Herring has white flesh apt to cleave into small pieces, has a good taste,
easy of concoction, it affords good juice, not thick and glutinous when its
pickled with salt, or hardened with smoke, which we call red Herrings, they are
harder of concoction, and does not nourish so much.

Codfish.
Codfish and Stockfish while it is fresh, has friable flesh and tender, of
good juice, and easy of concoction, yet being dried it is hard of concoction,
and affords thick nourishment, and is not to be eaten without danger to any
save those that have healthy strong stomachs, and labor much.

Sturgeon*,
Sturgeon commonly called Sea-beefe, has hard fat and glutinous flesh, which
yields a thick juice, yet safely to be eaten it is hard of concoction but firm:
nutriment and very lasting to work upon.

Lobsters and Crabs*
Lobsters, Crabfish, Prawns and Crawfish are frequent in most Countries near
the Sea, there is no great difference in their efficacy or nature, they are all
hard of concoction, and will not well digest but in a strong stomach yet if
they are well concocted, they beget good juice, nourish much and stimulat Venus.

Oysters.
Oysters and Scollops have a soft juce, and therefore irritate the belly to
dijection, and cleanse the Vereters stimulate Venus, they easily generate
obstructions, being hard of concoction, and nourish but little.

CHAP. X. Meats from living Creatures.
THere be many living Creatures which supply us with necessary food, agreeable
to our Natures, as being nearer and more familiar with our Natures, and l^ss
exceed in the qualities, and afford better juice, as in the first place we will
begin with milk.

Milk.
Milk is of a cold and moist, or rather of a temperate and moist Nature, and
yields nourishment very good, the best by much if it be rightly concocted in
the stomach, and the milk be good in its self.

Parts of Milk. There be three parts of Milk, viz.
The Butrious, the Caseus, and the Serous, the Butrious, is of an oily and hot
substance, the Caseus is of a cold and dry substance, the Serous is of a watery,
and indeed Cows milk is the fattest and thickest, and contains more milk then
the milk of other Animals, and therefore nourishes more, and is most agreeable
to us, and has more of the Caseous part then Ews milk, Goats milk is of a
middle Nature between these two, sound Animals only generate good milk, but
sick diseased Animals generate vicious and corrupt, dry meat as Hay etc. cause
the milk to be thick, but green and such as are full of juice make much better,
wherefore the milk at the latter end of the Spring is best, by how much the
thiner it be, and more Serous by so much it is the easier concocted, and sooner
passes through the belly, and obstructs least, but nourishes less, to know
the best milk, it is of a good smell, and sweet to the taste, of a middle
consistence, neither too thick, nor too thin, neither Serous nor Caseous, too
much of a white color which yields good Aliment, and that plentifully and
constantly enough.

Milk is nourishing enough especially for lean bodies, as being that which is
elaboured by so many concoctions, and is thereby made Familiar to our natures,
that it is easily and truly concocted, in unwholesome bodies, it is easily
corrupted, as in a cold Stomach: it soon grows sour in a hot, it is turned to
an adust smell and choler, and causes pain in the Head, wherefore it is
hurtful to those that are sick of Putrid Fevers, and to those that have pains
in the head, and sore Eyes, or are obnoxious to breed Gravel, and to those that
are obstructed in the Liver, and are inflamed in the Hypochondries, according
to the Apho. 64. But the worst corruption thereof is when it is coagulated,
which may be prevented if any Salt, Sugar or Honey be added to it, it is most
conveniently taken on an empty Stomach, nor are other Meats to be eaten
presently after, especially the use of wine after milk is very unwholesome.

As for the parts of Milk, Butter is used in England and other Countries
instead of Food, and sauce. Butter is hot and moist almost of the same Nature
with Oil, yet it nourishes more, and is sauce for most Meat, it is pleasant to
the taste, it is easily concocted, and nourishes much, yet it agrees not with
those that have a moist and slippery Stomach, yet it is far better to be taken
before other Meats then after, nor is it so agreeable to hot Natures, it is
conveniently eaten with bread.

Sour Milk is colder, and agrees not with colder Stomachs, but with hotter,
especially in the Summer and very hot weather, it is refreshing and concocts
well.

Although in Consumptions, sometimes is prescribed woman's Milk, Asses Milk, or
Goats Milk, yet for Food none is so good as Cows milk, and of that sort the Red
Cow is best, and in a Consumption, I should prefer it before the former, being
taken warm while the spirit of the animal is in it.

Cheese.
Cheese is good and is agreeable to most and very desirable to whom it is
Friendly, is hardly concocted, and yields thick nourishment, and therefore
stops the belly, opens the pores, and affords matter fit for the generation of
Stones, but that which is old affords ill nourishment, and if taken in
quantity, obstructs much it is very useful to close the mouth of the Stomach,
after a full meal, being eaten to the quantity of a dram or two. New Cheese may
be eaten more plentifully, because it affords better nourishment, and while new
it is cold and moist, and of a flatulent Nature, middle Age Cheese, which is
neither hard nor soft, and is moderately sweet and Fat, is the best, but of
what kind soever it be, it is always to be eaten sparingly, and after other
meats, now there is great differences of Cheese, according to the nature of
living Creatures, and diversity of pastures, and Countries, that of the Ewe is
the best, because it is easier concocted then the rest, and nourishes more,
next in goodness is Cows Cheese, the Goats is the worst of all; But no Cheese
is good without the Butrious part be also included with the Caseous.

Whey.
The thinnest part of Milk, which is called Serum or Whey, is more fit for
medicine then Food, and is most fitly used for the evacuation of serous and
adust humors, it consists of two parts, the one is Salt, and participating
of acrimony, and is altogether hot, which is the lesser part, the other is
Watery, and is the greater part, therefore it is called cold and moist.

Eggs.
Eggs and chiefly those of Hens, are a Food much used and esteemed amongst us,
an Egg consists of two parts the yolk, and the white, the yolk is moderately
hot and moist, and very corroborating, the white is cold and dry, and affords
also much nourishment, and that lasting enough, but hard of concoction.

The newest Eggs are the best, and nourish most and soonest, and yield good
Aliment, but the stalest are the worst, and the corruption of Eggs is most
dangerous, for we say ( optimae fiunt pessimae) the best food corrupted becomes
the worst and most perilous, they do not well agree with those whose Liver and
Stomachs are filled with vicious humors, and in Chollerick and hot Stomachs
they are easily corrupted and turned into Choler, as for the cooking of them
they are best when the yolk is soft, and the Rear hardened to a white color,
and so supt up, being boiled in water, they may easily be given to a weak
Stomach, they are stronger in taste, boiled in the shell then potched,
especially if Roasted, but the worst way of dressing them, is to fry them in a
pan.

Honey.
Honey is of a hot and dry Nature in the second degree, but that which is white
is not so hot, and is the best and most commodious for those that be sound, but
all Honey is a medicinal Aliment, convenient for old men, and those of cold
constitutitions, but it is not fit for Chollerick persons, because it turns
into Choler, therefore not good for the Liver, but very good for the Lungs,
because it has an abstersive cleansing faculty, and resists putrefaction.

Sugar.
Although it comes not from Animals, but is made of Canes, for its agreement
with Honey may well be put together, yet it is not so hot as Honey, therefore
properly mingled with many sorts of Food, and Medicine, and does preserve
medicines better then Honey, and has the same cleansing quality in the body of
man, though not so griping in the belly.

CHAP. XI. Meats from Plants, or Vegetables.
Wheat.
AS for Grains or Fruits, being the most ordinary kind of Food, amongst which
in the first Rank are all sorts of Wheat, and Grain, which the Greeks call by
the name of Si^^^, and in the first place Wheat is hot and moist, and above all
Vegitables affords much nourishment, and that firm and most wholesome, out of
Wheat diverse kind of Foods are made, yet the best among them is bread, and that
leavened or fermented, which agrees to every Age, and is to be taken with all
meats.

Barley
The bread which is made of Barley is colder, and yields not so good
nourishment as Wheat, there is a sort of Barley called Spelt, is next in nature
to Wheat, and is the middle betwixt Wheat and Barley, and nourishes more then
Barley, but is weaker then Wheat; Barley is also made into ptisan or broth,
which is a good nourishment for sick people, and those that are well also, and
is not viscid or clammy, but easily passes through and cleanses the passages
and Reins, of which all Physicians are well acquainted being generally
prescribed to the sick.

Rye.
Rye of which bread is made in some parts of this Kingdom, and for its
delicious sweetness and moisture, is frequently mixed with Wheat, by nature it
is hot and dry, it is hotter then Barley, yet not so hot as Wheat but the bread
which is made of it is harder of concoction then that of Wheat, and Windy,
causing in some griping pains.

Rice.
Rice is hot and dry, or rather temperate, it nourishes much, especially
boiled with Milk, it increases seed.

Rice does not easily putrify, it stops lasks or looseness of the belly, it is
hardly concocted and yields nourishment somewhat thick, the frequent use of it
may easily occasion Obstructions.

Oats.
Are almost of the same Nature, and are cold and dry, Oatmeal stops Fluxes of
the Belly, they afford not much nourishment, yet are very useful in Pottages
and broaths, which may be given to sick or well, it stops the looseness of the
belly.

Beans.
Beans are cold and dry, flatulent, hard of concoction, and yield
excrementitious nourishment, yet not viscid, and have some cleansing power,
they make the senses dull, and noises become troublesome.

Pease.
Pease are cold and dry, flatulent, especially the green, yet they yield better
nourishment then beans, but not so plentiful, yet easier of concoction, and
very pleasing to Stomachs surfeited with overfulness of stronger Food.

Parsnips.
Parsnips are hot and dry, not very good nourishment have a great Force of
cleansing, provoke Lust, they are more us^ful in Physic then Food, they
provoke Urine, and bring down the Menses.

Turnips.
Turnips afford strong nourishment, stimulate Venus, the long Turnips commonly
are the better, they are safely eaten with Meat, or alone buttered, being baked
their Juice makes a very good Surrup for a Consumption.

Carrots.
Carrots are hot and dry, flatulent, these as well as the former, are very
wholesome and provoke to Venery, and are opening, easy of Concoction, and
yields good Aliment.

Radish and Mustard.
Radishes which we commonly use for sauce, afford little nourishment, they heat
beyond the second degree, and have a sharp taste, they cut Phlegm, attenuate
and provoke Urine, break the Stone, and expels Gravel from the Veins, yet cause
a ructation or belching of wind from the Stomach the wild are hotter and more
Forcible, Mustard is much for heat, taste and efficacy like the Root of Wild
Horse radish.

Leeks and Garlic,
Leeks and Garlic are near of Nature, but the Garlic is the hotter and more
potent, they are hot and dry, little nourishment and that bad, they have a
power of attenuating thick Phlegm, and viscid humors, taking away cold, and
this is a good Remedy for the pravity of Waters also against the Plague and
venomous Air.

Onions.
Onions also afford but little nourishment, have a heating, attenuating,
cutting Faculty, inflame the blood, they leave behind them a thick Juice,
provoke Venus, they are all hurtful to the Head, Eyes, Teeth, and Gums, and
cause disturbive sleep and turbulent dreams.

Cabbage.
Cabbage is generally accounted to be cold and dry, yet the bitterness and
acrimony of the Juice is observed to stir the belly it is hard of concoction,
affords little nourishment, and that thick and melancholy, from whence
fulliginous vapors fly into the head and produce turbalent sleep, and weakens
the sight, and are very dangerous for those are incident to a Vertigo, or
swimming in the head.

Being boiled in the broth with Fat Meat, it is somewhat corrected, yet the
stinking coction or broth, shows its danger, and that its only fitting for
laborious people.

Artechoaks*
Artechoaks heat and dry to the second degree, they afford no good Aliment,
they are hard of concoction, and stimulate Venus, Windy, yet the Meat of the
Leaves, Stalks, and Roots do wonderfully cleanse the Reins, sending forth
stinking Urine, and cures the Running of the Reins; if it be decocted in
White Wind* and the decoction drank.

Lettice.
Letttice is esteemed the best of Sallads, affords more nourishment then other
herbs, it is cold and moist, and corrects Choler, and good for hot Stomachs, it
provokes sleep, allays the heat of the Reins, but too much does diminish the
natural heat.

Spinnage
Spinnage cools, and moistens, affords little nourishment, it generates col^
and Serous humors in the Stomach, unless it be corrected with Oil, Pepper, or
Butter, it is not profitable and begets wind.

Beets, Orach, and Mallows.
They all loosen the belly by humectation, they nourish little, and yields a
watery Juice, and unpleasing of taste, except the sauce mends them.

Asparagus.
Asparagus and like to them are the young branches of Hops, they neither heat,
nor manifestly cool, they are grateful to the taste and cause Appetite, yet
afford little nourishment, they have a detergent cleansing faculty, provoke
Urine, they cleanse the Reins open Obstructions of the Liver, and other
intrails.

Parsley.
Parsley is hot and dry, provokes Urine, and the courses opens Obstructions,
purges the Reins and Bowels, yet it affords but little nourishment.

Purslain*
Purslain is an excellent Sallad with Oil, it cools the Reins, helps such as
have a scalding of Urine, and pain by heat, also Rectifies the Teeth being set
on Edge.

Mints.
Mints are pleasing in smell, especially Spear mints, which are hot and dry,
and very strengthening to the Stomach, they stay Vomiting and are a most
excellent Sallad minced in Vinegar and Sugar for any fresh meat.

Melones.
Melones are pleasant in taste, and send forth an Aromatic smell, but are of a
cold watery moist substance, whereby they quench thirst and cause Urine, they
cool and cleanse the Reins, but are easily corrupted, and being corrupted,
become as it were of a poisonous nature, and stir up Choler, or generate
Fevers, whereby many great men are killed, therefore they ought to be eaten at
the first course, or before meat that they may the easier descend through the
belly, and after the eating of them some good Food ought to be eaten, and good
Wine to be drank that their corrupting may be hindered.

Cucumbers.
Cucumbers are also cold, but not so moist, and the Juice not so dangerous nor
so easily corrupted in the Stomach, they are least offensive to hot Stomachs.

Strawberries*
Strawberries are cold and moist; they are profitable to those that are
troubled with Choler in the Stomach, they cool the Liver and restrain the heat
of blood, and Chollerick humors, they allay thirst, therefore profitable to
hot constitutions, they have thin juice purge the Reins cause Urine, but are
easy corrupted in the Stomach, therefore ought to be eaten before meat.

Fruits of Trees, First of Apples.
Apples there are diverse sorts, which discover themselves by their taste, the
sour are colder then the sweet, and of a thin and less flatulent substance,
the austere and sharp are yet colder and of a thick substance, and descend more
slowly through the belly and stay it, yet their violence is corrected by
boiling and sour sharp Apples are rather to be used for Medicine then Aliment,
they afford ill Juice, but those are worst, which are watery and have little or
no taste, the best have a sweet Aromatic taste and smell, and such as afford an
indifferent quantity of Aliment, they strengthen the Heart, exhilerate the
mind, and are very beneficial to those which are troubled with Melancholy,

Pears.
Pears there are of diverse kinds and faculties, the austere and sharp are
astringent and cooling, and hurtful to the Stomach and Guts, sweat are more
temperate, yet almost all are of a cold moist nature, but some are hot and
moist, if taken before meat they are apt to stop a looseness, being taken after
meat, they loosen the belly, and shut the mouth of the Stomach they are better
boiled then raw.

Quinces.
Quinces are cold and dry, and have an astringent quality they afford little
nourishment and are hard of concoction, they strengthen the Stomach, stop
vomiting, and if they are taken after meat, hinder vapors so that they cannot
easily ascend to the Head and so loosen the Belly, but being taken before meats
they stops a looseness, if they are eaten raw, they hurt the Nerves and often
cause Fits of the Chollick, and Obstructions.

Peaches.
Peaches are cold and moist, and are easily corrupted, and afford little
nourishment, and therefore are to be eaten sparinly, and warily, and not
without danger to cold Stomachs, and they are to be eaten before meals not
after other meats, neither is water or any cold drink to be drank after them
but generous Wine, being dried they are less hurtful, but best boiled in Wine,
whereby their pravity is taken away and become not dangerous.

Apricocks.
Apricocks are far beyond Peaches in goodness and are more pleasing to the
Stomach and are not easily corrupted.

Medlers.
Medlers are cold and dry, and are not eaten till they are Rotten, they afford
little nourishment, and are slowly concocted, they stop the belly and all Flux,
they stay vomiting and agree well with a Chollerick Stomach.

Cherries.
All Cherries have a cooling Faculty, but the sour especially, they are easily
concocted and quickly descend through the belly, and cool the Stomach and
Liver, they quench thirst, and raise an Appetite, and are not so easily
corrupted, nor of so hurtful a Juice as the sweet ones, which are much
inferior to the sharp in goodness by reason of the moisture abounding are
easily corrupted and generate Putrid humors, and sometimes Worms in Putrid
Fevers, taken by surfeit, and ever-much eating them, yet the black are most
wholesome, and indeed Medicinal against Convulsions.

Plumbs and Prunes*
Plumbs in general are cold and moist, but there are diverse kind of Plumbs, the
sweet ones are not so cold as the sower in nature, they are chiefly profitable
to cholorick stomachs, they are easily concocted and pass through the belly,
those that are fresh alter most powerfully, they mollify the belly being taken
before meat, but very dangerous taken after by reason they scatter abroad many
excrements and that crude, they do not generate good juice those which abound
most with a moistcrude juice are the worst, also the white or yellowish are the
worst, but the best are of a black or blew color like Damsons and Damask
Prunes, the dry are more fit for nourishment for those that are weak in
stomach, plumbs are not convenient because they loosen its strength by a
cooling moisture.

Mulburies.
Mulburies do very powerfully quench thirst from their moisting and cooling
quality, they mitigate choler, but nourish little, they easily pass through
the belly, but if they are retained they are easily corrupted and become
putred, and acquire an ill Nature wherefore they are to be eaten when the
stomach is empty only and not stuffed with peccant humors that they may
quickly descend through the belly.

Figs.
Figs are hot and moist by Nature, and nourish very much above any other
Fruits, they easily descend and pass through the belly, they have a penetrating
and cleansing faculty, yet too much use of them begets Wind, dry Figs are
hotter and dryer, then green and are of a very opening and attenuating quality,
and do also loosen the belly, and drive humors to the external parts,
therefore profitably taken by Women near their time of travel they generate
blood also but none of the best.

Grapes.
Grapes that are sweet, are hot, and therefore cause thirst, sharp, sower,
austere are colder, therefore allay drotwh or thirst, the mean between sweat
and sour are best to make Wine of, the fresh gathered, ate flatulent, windy,
afford little nourishment, and if they are detained long in the Stomach, are
corrupted and dilate the belly, and stir up Chollick Fits, and cause the Spleen
to swell, and fill the Stomach and Liver, with crude humors, the fresh
gathered serve rather for pleasure then health, but the best are the sweet
ones, mixed with a little sharp taste, those without stones loosen the belly
more, but with stones strengthen the Stomach.

Almonds and Nuts.
Sweet Almonds are the best of Nuts, and of them the largest and sweetest are
most to be desired, they are temperately hot and moist, and yields store of
nourishment, and of good juice and moderate, they attenuate and cleanse, for
which Reason they are the best Food for imatiated bodies, and they replenish
the intrails, and the whole body with convenient nourishment, and such as is
not apt to corruption, they purge the breast, open Obstructions of the Urinary
passage, and cause sleep, but are not so useful for a Chollerick Stomach, nor
good to be given in Fevers, proceeding from Choler, they are usually given to
the Sick, dissolved in broaths, which are called emulsions.

Filberds and Hasle-Nuts.
The best of Hasle Nuts are Filberds and do come nearest to Almonds in virtue,
but they are hot and dry in quality, hardly digested afford a thick juice if
old the young or newly gathered are the best.

Walnuts.
Walnuts if new gathered are hot and moist, the old are hot and dry in faculty,
the new are safer eaten then the old, for the old generates Choler, offend the
orifice of the Stomach, and hurt the Gullet, or Windpipe, cause a Cough, and
causes pain in the head, the use of them is commended after eating of Fish,
because their heating and dryness prevent the corruption of Fish.

Chestnuts.
Gallen that learned Physician believes that Chestnuts have no ill juice, as
all other Fruits of Trees have, they are hot and dry, and if they are well
concocted, nourish very much, and affords durable nourishment, they bind the
belly, and if they are eaten in too great plenty, generates Wind.

Olives Oil.
Olives are temperate, and the Oil drawn from them that are Ripe, affords
nourishment temperate, and agreeable to our Nature, and can correct the pravity
of other Aliments, amends the crudity of Herbs, Resists poison, it mollifies
and loosens the belly, it takes away sharpness, it helps Ruptutes, and such as
are bursten bellied, and mittigates pain internally and externally.

Mushromes and Toad-stools.
Lastly, since the wantonness of some will eat Mushromes, yet they are not
eaten without danger, they are by nature cold, they yield a watery and thick
nourishment, but oftentimes they are poisonous therefore better let alone then
eaten.

Now we have passed through all eatable things, it is necessary we speak next
of all sorts of Drink.

CHAP. XII. Of Drink Its Use.
DRink is of so absolute necessity, that without it, the moist substance which
is daily consumed, cannot be restored, nor the natural thirst allayed, neither
can the Fat and thick moisture be carried through the narrow passages, and by
drink the meat in the Stomach is mingled, concocted, and poured forth, and an
inflammation of that Fat, which destinated by Nature to nourish our bodies is
prohibited.

Kinds of Drink.
There are diverse kinds of Drink, as Water, Wine, Strong Beer, Ale, Syder,
Perry, Drinks made of Honey, Sugar, etc. and diverse decoctions.

Waters how to know good.
There is great variety of Waters, all which are cold and moist, but the best
is that which is pure and clear, by the sight, taste, smell, and offers the
sale of nothing to the taste, nor odor to the smell, which upon the fire is
soon made hot, and taken from the Fire does soon grow cold, which is light, and
wherein Flesh and Fruit are soon boiled, some is Fountain others is River
water, some Rain water, others Lake or Pond water, some marish, others Snow
waters.

Fountain Water*
Fountain water is the best which has these marks of good water, that spreads
toward the East, and Runs Eastward, and Rises through Sand, and Gravel, that
carries no mud with it, that is hotter in Winter and colder in Summer.

River Water.
River Water for the most part is Fountain water, and arises from many
Fountains flowing together, and therefore is of a mixed nature, and receives
also a mixed Nature from the Earth it passes through.

Waters are mixed.
And sometimes also they are mingled with Snow melted in the Mountains, and
great showers of water collected together, yet its crudity is corrected by the
beams of the Sun, whilst it runs through diverse parts of the Earth, before the
use of it, it should stand and settle in Cisterns, and Tubs, that what
impurities it brought with it, may settle to the Bottom.

Rain Water.
Rain Waters which falls in the Summer time with Thunder, is the thinnest and
lightest, but since many vapors are lift up by the heat, and mingled with the
Showers, these Waters are not very pure, whence they are obnoxious to
putrefaction.

Well Waters.
Well Waters since they are not raised up but by the benefit of Art, are thick
and heavy, whence they continue long in the Bowels, and obstructs them.

Lakes and Marish waters.
These Waters are the worst, they easily become putrid, they are thick and
crude, and oftentimes malignant* and pestilent, from whence the Stomach is
offended with them, the Bowels obstructed, and humors corrupted, and oftentimes
putred, and malignant, and Pestilential Fevers do thence arise, wherefore
their use is wholly to be forborne.

Waters of Snow and Ice.
Waters of Snow and Ice are condemned because they are thick and hurt the
Stomach, and stir up grievous symptoms and Diseases of the Joints, Nerves, and
Bowels.

Correcting of Waters.
Waters are corrected by boiling and their conditions and Malignancies are
abated, and the terene and vicious parts, are separated, which will settle in
the bottom when they are cold.

Of Wine, Its Nature.
All Wine has a heating and drying quality, but some is hotter and more
generous, others less, that it is hot is manifest by the spirit, which is drawn
out of it, yet because it nourishes much, and increases moisture and blood,
fit to nourish the body, it is said to be moist, therefore Wine is a Medicinal
Aliment, hot and dry, some in the first, some in the second, and some in the
third degree, for this Reason the use of it is forbidden, boys by reason of
its drying faculty, many do mix water with their Wine, yet there is not a
little difference in heating and drying, not only according to the Nature of
the Wine, its sel^, some Wine is called windy wine, because it may endure much
water to be mixed with it, and be still good.

Difference of wines.
Wines diff^r according to smell, taste, color, and manner of subsistence as
for taste, sweet wines properly so called, nourish best, and are not only most
grateful to the palate, but also to the Bowels, but because they are thicker,
easily produce Obstructions in the Liver and Spleen, inflame the Hypochondries,
and are easily turned into Choler, they are profitable to the Lungs, Chops and
Throat, neither do they offend the Head, nor hurt the Nerves.

Austere wines.
Harsh wine have the weaker heat tarry longer in the belly, nor do they easily
pass through the Veins, nor penetrate through the passages of Urine, whence
they are good for loosenesses, of the belly, but hurtful in the Disease of the
Breast and Lungs, for they detain spittle, the middle sort betwixt sweet and
sour is the best.

Smell of wine.
A fragrant smell is a token of the best wine because it can increase spirits,
restore decayed strength, and recreate and refresh those that are suddenly
languishing only by the smell, and can exhilerate the mind, and strengthen the
whole man, and all its faculties, and principally it is good for old man, and
by filling the head hurt the Nerves, but wine that have no smell are base, and
are not received so gratefully by the Stomach, nor so easily concocted, nor do
they afford so fit Aliment, to engender good Spirits, nor strengthen the Heart
so much, not refresh the body, therefore all such wine, as have an unnatural
smell, whencesoever contracted, are all naught, and not fit for drinking.

Color of wine.
Color of wine, shows much of the nature of it, for white or pale wines, heat
less then deep and yellow wines, and are weaker, especially if besides their
paleness, they are o^ a thin substance, all black wines, or deep Red are of
thicker substance, and for the most part sweet, and nourish very much, yet they
beget thick blood, and not so laudable, they cause Obstructions, and continue
longer in the Bowels, and fill the Head with many vapors, between the white
and red, their are middle colors, viz. Yellow, Reddish yellow, a pale Red, and
perfect Red, a pale Red is nearest to White, and if the substance be thin is
the best, as such are Rhenish wines, the most apt to strengthen the Heart, and
most beneficial to those that are troubled with Chollick pains, and with the
Flatus of the Stomach, Red wines for the most part, heat not so much, they
generate good blood, and do not load the Head, but if they are thick in
substance, they are naught for the Liver and Spleen, because they breed
Obstructions.

Wine differ according to Age.
Wines also differ according to Age, new wine is thick and flatuous begets the
Cholick, impeads and hinders Urine, yet it loosens the belly, and unless it
does so, it is the more hurtful, new wine, and that which is as sweet as wine
new pressed, is not easily distributed into the body, and wine too old may work
too much upon the Nerves and offend the head, therefore a middle age is best
for all uses, in which thing also there is great difference according to the
nature of the wine, some will last long, others sooner loose their strength and
spirits.

Beer and Ale.
Beer and Ale is the common familiar drink in England, and no doubt but
profitable and wholesome it is, as experience shows, but the different
preparations, or brewings makes no small difference in drinks, the difference
of waters is greatly to be considered, therefore according to their Natures, I
have taught you before how to judge; Also the different Corn or Grain is very
considerable, as drink made of Wheat Malt nourish more, others mix some
Wheat, some Barley, others mix some Oats with Barley for Malt, generally in
Ale is used less hops, then in Beer, therefore Ale is more nourishing, and
loosens the belly, all new drink is more unwholesome especially if it be
troubled, for it obstructs the Bowels, generates the Stone, but that which is
clear is wholesomer.

Honey Drinks
Various sorts of Drinks there is made with Honey, which for the most part,
heat and dry more then wine, and easily turns into Choler, especially if
Arromaticks are added as spice, etc. Therefore good ^or the Phlegmatic, and
bad for the Chollerick.

Coffee.
Lastly, Since of late Coffee is grown so much into use, it will not be amiss
if we touch upon the quality of it, in its nature it is cold and dry, binding
it does very much sympathize in virtue with Pease, only it has this quality
above Pease, that it will make him that drinks it vigilant, for it does very
much hinder sleep, and therefore good in a Lethargy, but bad to be drank near
bed time, by those that cannot sleep well, it does potently resist drunkenness,
which makes many after hard drinking, refresh themselves with it, and as it is
drank actually hot, and being in it self potentially cold, it is innocent,
working no wonders but one, viz. It has made many poor people by selling it,
become very rich.

Tobacco. And how useful,
And because Drink and Tobacco are seldom at great distance, and it being a
common query amongst Patients to their Doctors is Tobacco good for me, I
thought it necessary to say something of it, therefore take notice that some
that have writ of it, do mu^ter up as many virtues pertaining to it as can be
mentioned, which is a common Fault in Herbalists, to ascribe more praise by
much then is due to every Herb, but this is certain, Tobacco is a good vulnary
Herb, as may be used to wounds, whether made into Ointment from the green Herb,
or the leaf it self applied, it is in Nature, hot and dry, very Balsamaical,
now as used by smoking in a pipe, it is very attractive of moist and crude
humors, as Water and Phlegm, cut of the Head and Stomach, and so it makes a
pump of the mouth, for the benefit of some and detriment to the health of
others.

And that I may make some discovery, for whom it is good, and for what: I say
it is chiefly proper for those that are of a Phlegmatic constitution, and
those that abound with humidity, as Rhumes, Catarrhs, Distillations, and
Hydropick persons, my Reasons are it is good for the Phlegmatic, because it is
hot and dry, and so resists the generation of Phlegm, as well exhausts it; next
it is good against Rheums, Catarrhs, Distillations, because it draws sorth by
the mouth, and so prevents the distilling upon the Lungs, for the acrimony of
Salt Phlegm, falling from the head upon the Lungs, is the worst and dangerous
symptom in a Catarrh, which ulcerates the Lungs, and brings the whole body
into a Cons^mption, and death, therefore whatsoever leads forth the distilling
humor, prevents the great mischief it brings.

For whom Tobacco is not good.
First it is not good for those that are hot and dry; Chollerick
constitutioned, yet if such have long accustomed themselves to the taking it,
it is not safe leaving it of too hastily, but by degrees, neither is it proper
for Sanguine people, that are not troubled with Rheums, because it attracts
humors by heat, and brings an influx where would be none without it, and it
does certainly decay the Teeth for two causes, from its own heat, which comes
with a burning Oil, with the smoke into the mouth, and likewise it destroys the
Teeth from the frequent Flux of Rheum from the Head to the Teeth, which may
well be avoided by them for whom it is not agreeable.

Order in taking Tobacco.
Some Directions ought to be given, as to the manner of using this drug, as
well as others, as first for the Phlegmatic.

For Phlegmatic persons, it is best for them to take it ordinarily after Meats,
especially after drinking, and before going to bed and not to drink after it,
but rather before they smoke, that the crudities of the drink and Stomach may
be emited, but for hot constitutioned persons, as the Chollerick, it is best
for them to drink both before and after, (except to bed ward) least their
natural heat, with the heat of Tobacco may be inflamed, and cause a burning at
the Heart and in the Stomach.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Passions of the Mind, and exercise and rest of the body.
THe next thing conducible to health, having now sufficiently spoken of
wholesome Air, Meat and Drink, etc. Is passions of the mind, and exercise of
body, the perturbations of the mind do much hurt to the body, as no Physician
will deny, and an Euthumy or well settled mind, and such as is at quiet, does
very much tend to the preservation of health, for although every man that is
diseased in body, is troubled also in mind by the peccant humors which makes
men angry and peevish, so that it makes true the saying, there can hardly be
found men's sana, but in corpore sano, yet there are some men in perfect health,
that wilfully take upon them such a habit or custom of anger that not only
disturbs their own house and Relations, but thereby bring into their own bodies
Sickness and Death, but contrariwise, moderate joy and a cheerful spirit does
preserve the body in health, and sound constitution, for it recreates and
refreshes the heart and spirits, and whole body; but if joy be excessive, it
dissipates and consumes the spirits.

Exercise of Body.
Motion and Exercise is of it self, sufficient to keep the body from Diseases,
because it brings a solidity and hardness to the parts of the body, that they
that use exercise moderately, need little other Physic, this makes the
laboring man's sleep sweet, and pleasant, this shows the Justice of divine
providence distributing the happiness of this matrocosm in proportion to all
Ranks of men, for they that are poor and forced to labor, are recompensed with
the rich Jewel of health, better then which nothing can here be found. Exercise
does increase health, and strength, also it moves and agitates the spirits,
from whence the heart is made strong, and can resist external injuries, and is
fit to undergo all actions, and good nourishment is made, and vicious
excrementitious vapors are discussed, on the contrary, those bodies that live
idly, are soft and tender, and unfit to perform labors of every kind, as
Dancing, Running, Playing at Ball, Gesture of Body, Riding, Swimming, Walking
and all others, but diverse exercise have different force, and some exercise,
some parts more then others, in walking the Legs are most exercised, in
handling of Weapons the Arms, in singing speaking loud, and clear Reading, with
a loud voice the Lungs, Breast and Face, but the playing with a Ball, Gallen
that great Physician, has writ a peculiar book in commendations of that
exercise above any other, by reason it exercises the whole body, also there is
a great difference according to strength used, or magnitude in motion, for
example, swift motions attenuates the body, thickens it, slow motions Ratifies
and increases Flesh, vehement motions extenuates the body, and makes it lean,
but with hard flourishing, and firm flesh, too much exercise exhausteth and
dissipates the spirits and the substance of the solid parts, and cools the
whole body, and dissolves the strength of the Nerves and Ligaments, and
sometimes breaks the lesser Veins, and distendeth the membrances.

Of Sleep and Watching*
Watchings that are moderate is a help to distribute Aliment and promotes the
emission of excrements, it stirs up the spirits and renders them more
flourishing, but if watchings are immoderate, they consume and dissipate the
animal Spirits, and dry the whole body, especially the brain, they increase
Choler, they inflame, and the heat being dissipated, they stir up cold
Diseases.

Sleep being moderate does refresh and kindle again the decayed strength, and
spirits that are wasted by diurnal labors are by it restored, the heat is
called back to the internal parts, from whence a concoction of Aliment and
crude humors is happily performed in the whole body, especially the Bowels are
sweetly moistened the heat increased, and the whole body become stronger, cares
are taken away. Anger is allayed, and the mind enjoys more tranquillity, in
moderate evacuations, besides sweat are hindered as the Diarhea or Flux of the
Belly, Sleep is especially beneficial to old men. On the contrary, moderate
Sleep, obscures the Spirits, and renders them dull and causes an amazedness in
the understanding and memory, it sends out the heat, being hindered with crude
and superflous humors, accumulated Sleep also, that seizes on our bodies,
after what manner soever, when they are empty, dryes and extenuates.

Of Excretions, and Retentions.
The severral concoctions have their several excrements, but the body may be
easily kept in its natural State, if those things which are profitable for its
nourishment, be retained, and those things which are unprofitable be cast out,
but if those things which ought to be retained in the body be cast out, and
those things which ought to be ejected be retained, the health will soon decay
the excrements of the belly, if they are not evacuated in due season, hinder
concoction, whilst putrid vapors exhale from thence to the Stomach and
neighboring parts, and so offend the head, and stir up griping pains, and many
evils, too sudden cleansing of the belly does little hurt, save that it
defrauds the body of nourishment, and if it be frequent and of continuance the
strength is weakened, and the Bowels debillitated.

Urine, if it be unseasonably made either too often or too seldom shows a
Distemper present, or will soon procure one if Urine be frequently made sooner
then it ought or is need for, it brings no small damage, for the frequent
stimulation of the expulsive faculty of the Neck of the Bladder when there is
not a sufficient quantity to dilate and extend, the Vesica does make a
contraction of the Bladder, in a lesser compass, then its due limit, and if
Urine be retained longer then it should, it brings great damage by oppressing
the Bladder, and sometimes so fills it that Urine cannot be expelled, which
causes Inflammation, and a violent Fever, great pain and speedy death.

Of venery
Man cannot live for ever although he be nourished, therefore the generative
power is granted to him and given by the Creator of all things for the
begetting of his like that Mankind might be preserved, which is the proper use
of Venery. Now seed untimely retained, causes heaviness or dullness of the
body, and if it be corrupted stirs up grievous accidents, all which may be
avoided by Venery, but let it be timely and lawful, for there is no need of the
unlawful use of means to preserve health, which is contrary to Gods Law, for
the Creator of man is so indulgent to him in this thing as it is necessary for
him that is to have on Woman, more might hinder his health, as I am sure it
does to too many, for too much Venery dissipates the natural heat, cools and
dibillitates the whole body accumulates crudities, hurts the Nerves, generates
the Gout, and causes the Palfie, and debility of the senses and understanding,
and by the commission of uncleanness a rottenness in the Loins, and if
neglected will penetrate the very bones* therefore I advise all to chastity,
but if infected to read the ensuing part and follow the Directions, and doubt
not of Cure.

But that I may prevent the occasion of Disease by Venery; Consider there is
many a Woman, very desirable to look on, yet if you enjoy them, you will less
prize them, and you can find no more pleasure in them, but the evacuation of
your own heat and vigor, therefore it is downright folly and madness, to run
such great hazard of Soul, body, Estate, and good Name, for a Toy of no value.

THE Second Part.

Every Man his own Doctor.

Treating of DISEASES And how to Cure, Viz. Pox, Running of Reins, Scurvy,
Gout, Dropsy, Consumptions, Agues, Jaundies, Obstructions of all sorts.


LONDON. Printed by Peter Lillicrap for the Author, and are to be sold by most
Booksellers, 1671.

CHAP. I. An Advertisement.
WHo ever thou art, thou may if not already be assaulted with the common
Enemy of Mankind, Sickness or Disease, and therefore a way to prevent Sickness
or an absolute cure if diseased, I think need no strong arguments for
acceptance, what I intend by this small Treatise, is the benefit of all
diseased people, whether noble or ignoble, who it may be have sighed if not
groaned many Months or Years under some obnoxious distemper, which Fear, shame,
poverty, or it may be unskilful Physicians by their Faraginious Receipts, have
rather fixed to then freed their bodies from, or I in my practice and study in
Physic, which now draws near the prospect of twenty years, in which time
having perused many Authors and scrutinised into the secrets of Physic, both
Theorical and Empirical, have made this observation that most voluminous
Authors are in use, but flat and dull, and it may be said of too many, nihil
dictum, quod non dictum prius, and their elaborate volumns, are chiefly ( actum
agere) and their chief use is but to amuse and confound the Vulgar with
admiration of the tedious and almost inextricable labyrinth, wherein young
Physicians are commonly involved, as says Ingenious Simpson, how many great
volumns of Gallen, Hippocrates, Diascordes, Actuarius, Rasis, Serapio, Aetius,
Averoes, Hurnius, Fernelius, Senertus, Riverius, cum multis aliis. What tedious
piece of Anotamy of Vel Singius, Riotanus, Bartholimus, spigelius paraeus, etc.
Do some peruse, how many unprofitable discourses for argumentation sake in the
Theory of Physic, are they engaged in, how many hundred plants do they burden
their memory with, what a confused jumble of varieties of pulses do they pulse
their heads withal, what a multitude of symtomes good and bad, what long
discourses of difference of Urine, and to confirm all, what long Pilgrimages
into Italy, and the Universities there do they make, and after all this cannot
as some have ingeniously confessed, and the people experienced, cannot I say
cure one poor Disease.

These things considered, I cannot but wonder and say, Quors^m haec omnia, why
so much noise and so little Wool, I mean so much ado to inform our judgments
and nothing the nearer to cure Diseases, being only enabled to discourse
learnedly of the proceeds of Phlegmatic, Chollerick, and adust humors and now
whilst mere Methodists are sufficiently satisfied, when they can say, Sie dixit
Galenus, vel Hippocrates, we can with more comfort say, experientia docet, for
experience is the Mistress of knowledge, and the best knowledge is taken from
experience.

What I have writ is only to show that experienced Physic is most profitable
though some Doctors will direct things they have read or heard a good and
excellent report of, and so add things as they judge of alike quality according
to that Maxim, vis vnita fortior, and so confound the Medicine with their
mixture, and quite spoil the operation of its genuine effication, so that
Physic is best which is grounded upon Observation of successful experiments,
not that I dissuade or speak against the Theorick of Physic, nor the true
method of the Learned, provided they give the upper hand to successful
experiments, for Nature in the cure of any Diseases, is not tied to any of our
prescribed method, not but consideration is to be had to differing causes and
persons.

And now what I have experienced I shall here insert as to the cure of these
great and Chronick Diseases, being most common and all most difficultly cured,
viz. Gout, Dropsy, Scurvy, Gonorrhea, Consumptions, Obstructions, and in
speaking of them I shall describe their symptoms, cause, and regiment in Cure
very briefly, and those that make trial of my Medicines, shall by Gods grace
find them very effectual, where every one may be his own Doctor if they please,
observing the Rules annexed, the motive that induced me to put forth this
little Treatise, may well claim Charity her self to Patronise it, for in my
daily practice, how many do I meet with, that have wandered from one Physician
to another and yet not cured, nay some, yea very many think the Cure as bad as
the Disease, I mean for fear of having it discored, for too many have received
damage thereby, besides the excessive gain of some Physicians, who for every
Ulcer they cure, will themselves be covered with a Rich Roab, not to mention
the ignorance and dishonesty of many professors, that not being able to give a
diffinition of a disease will yet undertake to cure, by default of whom many
good people have perished in Estate, health, and credit, especially in Venereal
Distempers. Therefore I shall first show what each Disease is, and its certain
Sign to know it, and to avoid all mistake, I have set down certain and safe
ways of Government, with directions in taking that Physic, is most suitable in
each Disease, which I have here prescribed being certain and safe, all
performed by a few Medicines as you will find, and for the certainty of their
goodness, I will not entrust any to prepare them, nor the delivery of them from
my own house, and there only delivered, for the best Medicine, not well and
truly prepared, may make a failing in cure. So wishing preservation of health
to the sound, and recovery of health to the sick, to the Poor I shall be
willing to give advice freely, and to all that are in any doubt I shall readily
resolve them. For oftentimes where the Disease is great, dangerous, or a
complication of Diseases, it is necessary to consult with your Doctor, where no
prescribed rule can in all circumstances, be adaequate without the sight of the
patient in all occasions I shall willingly resolve any doubts or Fears and
shall manifest my self thy Faithful Friend.

J. A.

CHAP. II. Treating of the POX.
IN performance of what I have promised and to begin with this fiery Dragon, or
Mr. Disease the Pox, whose domination or Rule begins not like other Diseases,
lento pede, gently but per saltem, like the bite of a Serpent or sting of a
Scorpion, for most Diseases are seated in some particular part of man's body, as
the Squinancy or Plurisie, etc. Being confined to the spirits humors or solid
parts, but this disease is not confined neither to solid parts nor humors, but
comixeth its self to all, being the malignity of all other Diseases, and a Hell
upon Earth for Man's punishment, bringing at once with a sting of discontent, a
cursed pain with loathsome and shameful symptoms and great fear for
diffinition, lues venerea malum est Contagiosum quod consuetudine veneris magna
ex part contrahitur. It is the corruption of the Radical moisture of the body
chiefly taken by contact in those tender parts in the act of copulation, yet it
may be taken diverse other ways, and though the Liver be especially hurt, and
does labor to free it self by sending the putrefaction to the emunctories as to
the Groins, Buboes, also to the Armpits, and other parts Ulcers, yet does it
transform it self proteus like in diverse shapes, appearing in some like the
Scurvy, in others like an Itch, in some like the Gout, and bringing pain to
all, especially to some most exquisite torment, in the night, the Pox may be
taken several ways without copulation, as by lying in a hot bed with the
infected, whereby emission of putrid sweat through the pores penetrates the
adjacent body, the pores being then open by sleep, and the warmth of the bed,
so one Man may infect another, where that abominable sin of Sodom is
practiced, also drinking frequently with them that have it foul in their
throats, or by sitting upon a close stool, whilst the fume evaporates, also a
young child born of corrupt Parents, may infect the Nurse that succles it, or
the infected Nurse may put it on a sound Child, which I have often seen in my
practice. I come now to the particular Signs if infected. As.

CHAP. III. Signs of infection by the POX,
PResently after a man has lain with an infective Woman, he shall find a
faintness or indisposition, a lassitude over the whole body without other
cause, which is occasioned by the infection of the natural spirits, which are
the instruments of Life and motion, then the next symptom is commonly pain in
the Head, with a vagrant wandering pain, which goes into the Shoulders from one
to the other, also very frequently pain in the Groins and Buboes, there
sometimes in less then a weeks time, also Heat of Urine, Inflammation of the
Yard, and Pustules, with many a Running of the Reins, with some an itching over
all the body, and in some angry Pustules, breaking out in Head, Face, and other
parts, with some there breaks forth a great heat in the palms of the Hands, and
soals of the Feet, also some have an interruption, or sudden starting when they
begin to sleep, and great drowsiness which is caused of the fiery vapors.
Oftentimes there appears Red or Yellow spots upon the body, and sore Pustules
like the Scurvy, and though there be few of the former signs, yet if there is a
corrupt matter, though but a weeping about the privy part, when cause for
suspicion has preceeded, you may be assured that is the French disease.

And I do here declare that I have and do daily cure those that have had it ten
or more years, as many can testify to their comfort.

CHAP. IV. How to cure the POX.
Showing all Men and Women how they may cure themselves of the French disease.

Before you proceed to the particular cure of the Pox, resolve not to do any
thing that may hinder thy present cure, or which may bring thee to thy old
misery again, after thou art cured, and first observe this general Rule for thy
diet, that it might be drying, and easy of concoction, and feed very
sparingly, the best meat is Rabbets, Birds, Poultrey, Mutton, all thoroughly
Roasted, or more then enough, for others stale bread, crusts of bread, or
Biscuit, and you may sometimes eat a few Raisins o^ the Sun therewith, avoid
Venery and leachery, as the bane of Cure in time of Physic, and also all Salt
meats, Fish, spiced meats, and sharp things, as Vinegar Lemmons, Fruit, etc,
All milk meat, also Wine. First begin to purge with our Morbus Pill so called,
because it does so mightily prevail against the Morbus Gallicus, take I say in
bed and sleep after, the first night 3 pills, next night 4 pills, and if thy
strength is sufficient, which you will find by taking the two first doses, take
the third day 5 pills, always taking some posset drink made with small Ale in
the morning, and if the Weather be fair and your body strong, you may safely go
abroad after dinner, or in the morning if you take them going to bed over
night, now after your body is sufficiently cleansed for preparation, if you are
young, strong and Phlethorick take from the Liver Vein of the Right Arm, eight
or ten ounces of blood, then begin to take of the diet drink which does
wonderfully purify the blood, and restores any decay in the vital or noble
parts, and makes the Liver firm and sound, and is very Cordial, you ought to
drink of this 3 half pints every day hot, that is half a pint in the morning in
bed an hour or two before you rise, and put your self into a small breathing
Sweat after it, and take half a pint at four in the afternoon, and walk much
after it, and take half a pint at night going to bed, and endeavor to sweat a
little after it, and if you can confine your self at meals to it is best, if
you cannot, drink some Ale, but the less the better, for our main design is to
dry.

Exercise moving to Sweat is very proper in the Cure. The time of taking this
drink must be according to the Patients disease, if the disease be newly taken,
it cures some in 14 days, others a Month, but if it be inveterate and old, it
requires six weeks, but it is a sure medicine.

It never fails where recovery is to be hoped for, without the patient be
irregular, and if he be he must wait the longer for Cure, but this must be
remembered to purge it least twice a week with the Morbus pills, with 3, 4 or 5,
according to your strength, and that morning as you take the Pills, take no
diet drink, but posset drink till the afternoon, then drink again as at other
days and leave not off taking your cordial diet drink, and the pills till you
are cured, and all symptoms be gone, whether pains, Pustules, spots, issuing
at the Yard, or otherwise, for if you do it may grow again, after the Cure be
careful, not to return to a full diet speedily least there be some remains of
the disease, and nature being called from its work, to the digesting of meat,
should omit the encounter, this is a sure way, but sometimes when men have a
great and sore Disease and may keep out of sight for a months time, if
convenient for their constitution, I cause a Flux or Salvation, and I have so
great a secret in that way that never fails, being easy to take without any
danger to the Patient (not like the vulgar poisonous pill which some use) I
perfectly cure many to their great comfort, however there is a necessity of
diet drink also, I am well acquainted with those ways are used in Italy and
elsewhere, yet none better then what I have mentioned, for the diet drink does
corroborate and fortify the noble parts of the body, and does perfectly cure
that Disease, in all that use it is sufficiently experienced.

If you are troubled with violent nocturnal pains in this French Disease, make
use of my cordial pill as directed in the latter end of this book, and you will
find speedy ease.

CHAP. V. How to cure the Running of the Reins, or weakness in Men or Women.
THe Gonorrhea or Running of the Reins, if it came without copulation with a
Woman, as by over-straining or too great fullness of seed, or sharp and
Chollerick humors, any of which causes imbecile the Retentive Faculty of the
Spermatick Vessels the cure is easy after gentle purging with my opening and
corroborating Pills, that are both cleansing and wonderful strengthening, using
also the cordial drying drink as before directed, and remember to keep a
slender diet as in the French disease, and at meals the smallest drink or water
(which is better] forbearing leachery and much motion of the body, and avoid
lying on your back in bed, and all sharp, salt, spice, and acrimonous things,
and by taking of the pills every day, or as your strength will permit, you will
soon be well, commonly in ten days.

A foul Gonorrhea being taken by copulation is of a different nature from the
former, for this proceeds from a venenate quality taken by contact from the
poisonous morbifick matter of the Pox, and by the corrosive quality thereof, it
has eaten into the Yard, Neck of the Bladder or Reins, where it ulcerates and
so infects the Liver, corrupts the blood and humors, by mea^s whereof it is
sent back again from the Liver to its emunctories, so frequently there arises
Buboes in the Groins, with issuing forth of corrupt matter, pain and heat, from
the Yard which if neglected infects the whole man and so the body becomes a
miserable subject for that loathsome disease to prey upon (the Pox) although
the Pox may be taken without the Running of the Reins, and by several ways
without copulation as before intimated, as by lying in a hot bed with the
infected, whereby emission of Sweat, through the pores, penetrates the adjacent
body being then open by sleep and heat, so one man may infect another, where
that abominable sin of Sodom is practiced, also drinking frequently with them
that have it foul in their Throats, or sitting upon a close stool whilst the
Fume evaporates, also a young child born of corrupt parents, may infect the
nurse that suckles it, which I have often seen in my practice, but this is a
digression. I come now to the cure of this Running of the Reins, which indeed
is nothing less then the Pox, though some have it more virulent then others,
which they may observe to increase or diminish as they are observant to my
Rules before directed in the Pox, therefore I need not again ( actum agere) to
give more instructions but advize all to temperance, and a strict Observation
and you may be cured if the disease be small in 14 days at the most, if
virulent sometimes longer, this remember leave not taking the Morbus pills as
your strength will permit and drinking daily of your diet drink till well, and
return not suddenly to a full diet, after you are well, for the reasons given
already. I caution you not to procure a stopping of the issue of the Yard, by
any other means then by the Morbus pills and diet drink least you stop the
Morbifick matter there, and dissipate it to all parts of the body.

CHAP. VI. The Cure of the Scurvy.
THere is scarce any Disease now in being, but some Physicians will call the
Scurvy, and it is true in a sense that every Disease is a Scurvy Companion, but
when some are at a loss in the understanding and full comprehending of the
cause of Distempers in Patients, it is common to fly to the sanctuary of the
Scurvy, like young Philosophers that when they cannot find out the cause or
reason of such an effect, will fly to their ultimum refugium, and say it does
it by an occult quality, or some hidden property, my thinks such might
ingeniously say I do not understand it, nor can yet find out the reason, but
most certain such a Disease there is, which is peculiarly called the Scorbute
or Scurvy, which in brief (not mentioning all the Catalogue of Distempers
entailed to it) it is a putrefaction of the blood by which sundry Diseases may
be bred, after which I think it ought to loose the name of the first cause, as
the names of small brooks are swallowed in the current of a great River.

Generally the symptoms are laziness or wearyness without cause, especially in
the Calves of the Leg and Thighs, pain, spots, putrefaction of the Gums,
blackness and looseness of the Teeth, for the Cure after purging with one dose
of our Morbus Pill, with 3, 4 or 5, as the Patient is strong or weak, let them
drink Morning and Evening half a pint of our excellent diet drink, and stir
much after it every morning and every night, endeavor to sweat with some in
bed after 2 days from taking your purging Morbus pills, take every morning
before your mornings draught of diet drink one or two of our corroborating
pills and so drink your diet drink, and walk or stir much after, it presently
helps.

And for the corruption of the Gums, I have often experienced, and I find very
certain if you apply a Leech to suck them, it will draw away the corrupt blood
presently, and the diet drink and Physic takes away the inward cause, so
continuing the pills and diet drink every day till cured.

CHAP. VII. The Cure of the Gout.
THe Gout is a most grievous pain in the Joints, or est articulorum
imbecillitas dolorque ex inter vallo invadens, the cause is an acremonious
humor proceeding from the Spermatick part of blood, and congealing in the
Joints, therefore very seldom Women, or Eunurches or Children are ever troubled
with it, it takes its various names from its situation or place residing if in
the Hands or Fingers it is called Chiragra if in the knees it is called
Genogra, if in the Feet Podagra, in the Hips Sciatica; For the Cure it is best
cured in Spring and Fall, although all diseases are then best cured, yet this
is especially moved then, in youth it may be perfectly Cured but in the Aged
seldom so thoroughly, but it will sometimes give a visit to his old Mr.
especially if they eat plentifully or drink French Wine much, or sharp things.

For the absolute Cure leave off all Wine, Beer, and Ale for a season, and
drink every night and morning, for 14 days half a pint at a time of our Cordial
drink, and one Pill of our corroborating pill every morning, after the Pill
stirring about much take the diet drink warm. And at meals drink only Fair
Water, take this Water at meals constantly, but after you have used about 30 of
the corroborating pills, you may leave them off at pleasure, or use them as you
find cause.

For pains in any part nothing is better then a poultess of Milk, Bread and
Marshmallows, applied with some Saffron, and put a little Oil of Camomile to
it, so put it to the pained place, or you may use Oil of Camomile,
Marshmallows, and Oil of Turpentine each alike quantity, mixed with some
Brandy-Wine, so anointed by the fire, keeping it warm, avoiding salt meat,
sharp things, Strong Beer and Wine, this remember that one of our pills every
morning, and drinking nothing but diet drink, and spring water for a season
will be the Cure.

If pain be extreme, use one of my cordial Pills, that gives ease in an hours
time, you may find its use with directions at the latter end of the book.

CHAP. VIII. Of different Dropsies, For Diffinition.
Hydrops passio est quam aquosi humoris copia comitatur propter sanguificandi
facultatem vitiatam. A Dropsy is a gathering together of the serous and watery
humors from the Veins and Arteries into several parts of the body, through hurt
or imbecility of the sanguifying faculty, and by want of excretion by Urine
and Sweat, and by weakness of the Liver from a cold cause, there are three
sorts of Dropsies, to wit, the Dropsy Ascites, Timpaintes, and Anasarca. When
the waterish humor is collected in the Abdomen it is called Ascites, or the
Water Dropsy, Timpaintes, is when much windyness is heaped up between the
peritonaeum and the Bowels, Anasarca is when the ill humors are dispersed
throughout the whole body that all the flesh appears moist like a sponge, all
proceeding from a cold cause and want of Fermentation of the blood, the want of
which brings obstruction of the Ureters, and in the pores, by which means
what ought to be emitted is retained.

How to cure the Dropsy.
One method may well work the Cure of all Dropsies, that is let their diet be
easy of concoction, and very d^ying, abstaining as much from Drink as
possible, and keeping altogether to our cordial diet drink, and Sweating a
little morning and evening, with half a pint at a time of it warm in bed, and
it will dry up the humors powerfully and speedily even as Lime does water, and
for 3 weeks or a month take every day if possible one or two of our
corroborating pills, which will cause Fermentation, strengthening the Liver and
Ureters, free them from all weakness and Obstructions, and by exercising after
your diet drink and pills it safely cures.

CHAP. IX. Of an Ague, or Fever what it is.
A Fever is so called from the Latin word Ferveo, because it is a Fervor, or
heat affecting the body, it is a preternatural heat kindled in the heart, as in
its proper subject primarily and per se hurting our actions which heat by the
meditation of blood in the Veins and Spirits is diffused through the whole
body. The reason of circuits of intermitting Fevers, is of no small moment
amongst the Learned for what one allows, another rejects, and therefore as well
from their difference in judgment as their frequent Failing in Cure, the Ague
may be truly called Approbrium Medicorum, but Fevers are usually distinguished
into putred and malignant, and putred Fevers into continual and intermitting,
not to enlarge upon all Agues, passing under the several denominations or
names, though proceeding from putred of Quotidian, Tertian, Quartan, double
Tertian, etc. But the difference of its fits, shows the humor it came from.

How to cure the Ague.
First take 2 or 3 of our vomiting pills in the morning, then at night take of
our cordial diet drink half a pint hot every night and morning, sweating upon
it every time, and forbear drinking of Beer or Ale for 4 days, taking this
drink at meat and else, and take also 3 of our corroborating pills, every
morning for a week together, early stirring after them, it will free your body
with ease and safety. Avoiding the violent sweats, the Jesuits powder does
commonly bring upon all that take it.

CHAP. X. Of a Consumption and decays of Strength, or Consumptio corporis.
I Am come now last of all to treat of a Consumption, any of which Diseases
before mentioned if neglected may bring the body into, therefore we say
veniente occurite Morbo it is easier to prevent then cure the least Disease.
Diffinition Tabes. Quia partium ingreditur soliditatem and soluit. A
Consumption so called, because the Disease enters into the solid and noble
parts and consumes them as Fire does mettles by melting them, though properly
it signifies an Ulcer in the Lungs which by spreading does wast and consume
them and the whole body, the French call it, Le pulmonick by the name of the
Lungs, and there it does begin by a putrid corosive sharp humor contained in
the mass of blood, which humors become such for want of Fermentation and
continue such by additional acrimony which is the cause that all salt, sharp
Rheums and distillations, which usually fall down most by night are so
destructive and mortal, and that the venenat quality of that sharp Phlegm,
distilling does so continually stimulate the expulsive faculty of the Lungs,
desiring to free it self by Coughing. Therefore all sharp, salt, acrimonous
things, or things easily corrupted, are most dangerous to consumptive persons,
and all things that resist putrefaction, and acrimony are the best
preservatives.

For cure of a Consumption and all decays of Strength and Nature.
Be careful to dispose of your self so that the Disease may be oppugned and
nature strengthened, and first I shall admonish you to have regard to those
things called not natural as Air, Food, Sleep, the passions of the mind,
exercise and to the former may be added excrements, that these may be Rectified
if amiss and procured if wanting the full directions there to you are taught in
the beginning of this treatise in the Doctrine of preservation of health, be
careful of keeping your body from all excess which is hurtful to nature, also
leave not of suddenly what you have been long acustomed to, although worse,
except Air, which we ought to change though you live in the best, yet change is
better, walking Mornings to Hills or high grounds in the Evenings, in Summer
time by pleasant Rivers according to the saying, Fons speculum gramen haec dant
occulis Relevamen, mane igitur montes sed serum inquirito fontes. I caution you
not to be out of house after Sun set, nor to live in nor adjoining to old Stone
Walls, nor new Buildings, the former being though most before wet Wether yet
dampishly unwholesome penetrating, and will transmute Sound and Solid Bodies to
putryfaction, the latter very Suffocating till Summer Air has thoroughly dried,
putrid Air is also to be avoided if you live near stinking Lakes of Water
Moorish Ground etc. for as Air is more, or less putred it is better or worse in
this distemper for Air is obnoxious to putrefaction as well as any thing else
therefore it is worth while for all Weak, or Consumtive people especially to
enquire into the nature of the Air of the place they intend to live in, for we
chiefly live by the Air by reason we are continually drawing in and breathing
forth. Generally the Air in Cities (we find by daily experience) is not so good
as the open Country because the breath of many people in a close place does
putryfie the Air as well the transpiration of the pores of the Body, and also
the ill smells of diverse filth -- These things are and may be proved, as also
the goodness or badness o^ any Air, by the keeping of any kind of Flesh meat,
for the better the Air is, the longer it will keep incorrupt, and so it is with
our instruments of Respiration as the Lungs, will keep longer sound in a good
Air then bad, small Ale is most agreeable at meals and warm.

For diet, your best diet being meat easy of concoction, not easily corrupted,
fine manchet Land Birds, Rabbets, Poultrey, etc. Also where the Stomach is not
very Phlegmatic, milk hot from the Cow, with Sugar of Roses dissolved, to be
drank about 5 a Clock in the afternoon, is safely to be taken to the quantity
of half a pint. But for the Consumption Cure.

The most effectual remedy you will find is, especially where there is any
Catarrh, distillation, Rheum, or Cough, is our cordial diet drink and
corroborating pill, therefore take of the diet drink half a pint, morning and
evening warm in Bed, which strengthens the vitals, and resists putrefaction,
lying every morning an hour after it without drinking or eating any thing for
that space, at night taking as much and sleep upon it, the Pill is to be taken
one or two in a morning when you rise, either constantly, or as you find your
strength, and walk after it, and you may eat or drink within an hour after. It
does cleanse the Stomach and body in general, it is a little laxative, but very
strengthening, making a due Fermentation, and a lively complexion, you ought to
exercise according to your strength, and to have your Legs, arms and body,
often rubbed with a soft hand, never drink cold, nor sharp things, which duly
observed is the best means for recovery.

CHAP. XI. Treating of all sorts of Jaundies, and Green Sickness, Obstructions.
ICteritia est effusio bilis modo flavae modo atrae subnide, utriusque quod in
puellis saepe accidit per Universum corpus, or the Jaundies is nothing but a
diffusion of Choler, or Melancholy, or both through the whole body, many
times happening when the blood is corrupted without a Fever, as in the Crisis
of Diseases, and in Maids that have the Green Sickness, all oftentimes caused
by Obstructions of the Gall, Liver, Spleen, etc. It is easily discovered by the
yellowness and discoloration of the skin, and deep Red tincture of the Urine,
or pale color in the Green Sickness of young women.

The cure.
Be it to Men, Women, or Maids, the cure is very safe and speedy, first vomit
with 2 or 3 of my emetick pills, drinking posset drink as they work, then sweat
at night and morning with our cordial diet drink hot half a pint at a time, the
next morning after your Sweat, take 3 of our corroborating pills, stir much
after the taking of them, and half an hour after taking them, drink a large
draught of small Ale, or posset drink, Maids ought to take the pills for 3
weeks time, for the Green Sickness.

If Maids take them for the Green Sickness, let them drink White Wind and
continue taking the pills as directed for 20 days though you may be cured
before, it is not safe to leave dregs behind, and walk much every day after your
pills, and the Cure will speedily be effected, though it be black Jaundies,
yellow, or Green Sickness, or any other obstructions in Liver, Spleen, or
Reins, in Men, Women, or Children, and does strengthen the noble parts and
Reins to admiration.

For your diet in the Jaundies, it ought to be tender, cooling, and opening,
easy of concoction, as Barley, Grewel, Fresh Fish, Poultrey, Rabbets, and
drink freely of small Ale or Barley broth, with Liquorish boiled in it. But
Maids in the Green Sickness ought to use hot drinks that are opening as our
diet drink is, also White Wind, spiced meats, etc. because their Disease of
Obstruction rises from a cold cause, therefore they must avoid all stopping
cold things, as Milk, Cheese, Fruit, Nuts and such like.

One thing I shall say for the comfort of all persons that have lost their
Complexion, that the corroborating pills, being taken every morning for ten
days or longer, does wonderfully revive, and clear the countenance, and make a
fresh color though in aged people, and if Ladies once try them they need never
paint more, besides it makes the body sound and strong.

CHAP. XII. Of the Prices of the Medicines that cure the Diseases
aforementioned.
First, our cordial diet drink is 2 s. 6 d. the quart.

Morbus Pill the Box containing 30. at 5 s.

The corroborating Pill the box containing 40. at 5 s.

The vomiting Pill the box containing 20. at 3 s.

The Cordial Pill giving ease in an hour, and frees thy body from the greatest
pain.
If pain be great in any part of the body, occasioned by Gout, Chollick, Pox,
Stone, or otherwise, take one of my Cordial Pills, at night going to bed and
endeavor to sleep upon it, and it will give ease in one hours time, provided
you do not eat nor drink any thing after for two hours space, and fotbear
speaking, or else that may hinder its efficacy upon the Vitals, for it gives
ease by corroborating and not by stupifying. It is most beneficial when the
Patient has had a stool not long before the taking of it. Which may easily be
procured by help of any small Glister. I need not write more in commendation of
it, for he or she that finds release from pain, will not longer doubt of the
value and goodness, its price 12 d. each pill, there being three in a box, is 3
s. price.

These pills and diet drink are so well known by all that have used them for
their excellent virtues, that they need nothing of pen praise, their benefit in
use will show their worth, and to be had only from my house in
Winchester-street near Gresham College next door to the Fleece Tavern.

FINIS.

