THE PERSONAL REIGN OF CHRIST UPON EARTH.

In a Treatise wherein is fully and largely laid open and proved, That Jesus
Christ, together with the Saints, shall visibly possess a Monarchical State
and Kingdom in this World.

WHICH SHOWS. 1. That there shall be such a Kingdom. 2. The Manner of it. 3.
The Duration of it. 4. The Time when it is to begin.


By JOHN ARCHER, sometimes Preacher of All-Hallows Lumbard-street.

Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which
is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen
him go into Heaven. Act. 1. 11. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and
he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall
be with them, and be their God, Revel. 31. 3. And the Kingdom, and dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the
people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. Dan. 7. 27. LONDON:
Printed, and are to be sold by Benjamin Allen, in Popes-Head-Alley. 1642.

THE PERSONAL REIGN OF CHRIST UPON EARTH.
THE Scripture reveals to us a Threefold State of Christ's Kingdom.
Threefold state of Christ's Kingdom.


One Providentiall, which is that universal influence and Sovereign power, by
which Jesus Christ manageth the Affairs of all the World, both in Heaven,
Earth, and under the Earth: as Mat. 18. 18. Thus in Mat. 13. The Field which is
the World is called by Christ his Kingdom: ^providentiall
whence it is, that he enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, Ioh.
1. 9. For ever since the fall of Man, the immediate dispensation and government
of all things, is delegated to him from the Father, so that he is deputed as
Viceroy, or immediate Administrator of all things. Therefore it is, that he is
Distinguished from the Father, and Holy Ghost, by the Title of Lord Acts 2. 36.
Christ since the fall is the sacred Governor of all things.
Lord and Christ, that is, anointed to be Lord, in a distinct sense, meaning
one who by commission is deputed and delegated to immediate administration, in
the behalf of others. This indeed (though the mystery was not revealed Christ
as God-man; though not as then manifested in the flesh) governed and ruled the
whole world, ever since Adam his fall: For if God the Father had not deputed a
Mediator, his Justice and Holiness, according to the Covenant of works; (by
which he only had to deal with mankind, and this World) had overthrown
mankind, and all this World. This is the first state of Christ's Kingdom.

A second state of Christ's Kingdom, 2. Christ's spiritual Kingdom.
is spiritual, which is that Sovereignty, which by his Word and spirit, he
exercises over the consciences of some people, and in special the Elect of
God the Father, whom by his Word and Spirit, he subdues in conscience to an
universal obedience to him, as 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5, this has (...) ever since the
fall, first on Adam (as we have) to be sure on Evah, (for to her and her seed,
as to Abraham and his seed, to David and his seed, was the promise made.) This
also has been eve^ since the fall.
And to Abel, Seth, and so along to Abraham: and all his Children by faith,
Jews, and afterward Gentiles, but this is not general over all the world,
and respecting this, Christ says, His Kingdom is not of this world, and that
the Kingdom of God is not by observation, that is, after a worldly pomp and
honor; and of this he still speaks, when he says, The Kingdom of God is at
hand; is within you, etc. And this state of his Kingdom was more narrow and
obscure till Christ's coming in the flesh, and the preaching the Gospel to
every creature (that is, to all mankind, where ever there was opportunity)
without restraint to the Nation of the Jews, as it was before, and many worthy
ones have thought, and many do to this day think, that this is the only
state of Christ's Kingdom; and therefore do appropriate and apply all that is
said of his Kingdom in Scripture, to this state of it. Indeed, in many things
belonging to Christ's Monarchy, there is a spiritual sense also, and they may
not untruly be applied spiritually; as that of making all new, which
appertains to the Monarchy of Christ, as Revel. 21. 2. 4. 5. and yet applied
spiritually, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

But they have a farther sense, 3. Christ's Monarchical Kingdom,
as there is (besides this) a third state of Christ's Kingdom, which I may call
Monarchical, not because the other two forementioned states of his Kingdom
were not so in some sense; for in some sense, they are as absolute, and
Monarchical as any State or Kingdom can be, in that he rules by his will and
absolute Prerogative, he alone as he lists, in his providentiall state of
government, by which he rules all things, he does as he will, of that is Psalm.
33. spoken, and it is said, verse. 10. 11. that he only does by his will: and
so in the spiritual state of his Kingdoms Romans 9. 15. Phil. 2. 13. But I call
this last state of his Monarchical, s^ called.
because in this, when he enters upon it, he will govern as earthly Monarchs
have done, that is, universally over the world, (in those days known and
esteemed) and in a worldly visible earthly glory; not by tyranny, oppression,
and sensually, but with honor, peace, riches, and whatsoever in and of the
world is not sinful; having all Nations and Kingdoms doing homage to him, as
the great Monarchies of the World had.

Now because in this visible Majesty, it shall be conformed to the Monarchies,
I call it a state Monarchical, to distinguish it from the two former states,
which ever have been since the World began, (whereas yet this has not been)
which also shall abide with this when it comes: and of this last state of the
Kingdom of Christ, I am to treat, and show four things. 1. That there shall
be such a Kingdom. 2. The Manner of it. 3. The Duration of it. 4. The Time when
it is to begin.


First, that there shall be a Monarchical State of Chri^ts Kingdom, a
Sovereignty which Christ shall administer over all the Earth, 1. There (...) be
such a Monarchical K^^^dome.
in a visible and worldly manner, for splendour, riches, peace, etc. though not
in a fleshly or sinful manner: Of this God gave us a type in the Government of
the Nation of Israel, from the time he called them out of Egypt, 2. Typified
the Jews ^vernment.
till they desired a King, and cast off their Judges; when he says, They cast
not off Samuel, but God, that is, Jesus Christ, who is God; because Moses,
Joshua, and all the Judges, were not their Kings, though they exercised a
Kingly power; therefore Moses is called King in Iesurun; Deuteronomy. 33. 5. but it
was not of themselves, but by Commission, and Deputation from Christ, as a
Viceroy; so that it was not they, but Christ all that while did immediately
rule them, not so much, or only by a providence (as he did all the world else)
nor by a spiritual government, for so he ruled not them all, but a very few of
them, such as were elect unto eternal life and sanctified, but by a King of
Monarchical Government, so that he was an immediate and particular King to
them, and was visibly present amongst them in signs and tokens of presence, He
was (...) present an^ them in si^ and tokens
as the Pillar of the Cloud and fire; and after that in the Tabernacle, Arc,
Mercy-seate, etc. And did manifestly give them Laws, appearing as a consuming
fire, Exodus 24. 17. and appointed Officers, to administer the Kingdom, both
ordinary and extraordinary; and to punish the offenders, executing Justice by
an immediate hand, and had all hard cases brought to him, and gave order about
their battles, and appointed their Generals for wars; for the Judges for the
most part, except Ely and Samuel, were but extraordinary Officers, or
Generals, raised up in danger of enemies, and case of war; so that every way
Christ was a Monarch and King to Israel: (...) a (...) to Israel.
wherefore indeed when they refused Judges, and would have a King like other
Nations, they did cast off him; yet notwithstanding, after he had punished them
by one King, namely, Saul, he gave them a King also for a type and shadow of
that which he himself did before, but in a type and shadow: For as the Nation
of Israel in their Mosaicall Discipline and Lyturgy, were but a type of the
Nations of the World, whom in a moral way God will bring to be a People to
Christ (among which the Israelites as a first borne shall be chief:) So
Christ's government of that Nation, from the time they were called out of Egypt,
till they cast off Judges, and after that also, by Kings immediately called and
Deputed by him, (which showed that he still kept the Sovereignty, and was their
King) was a shadow or type of his state of Monarchical government, (...) Kings
(...) not be (...) by men.
which in due time he will have immediately and visibly over all Nations on the
earth; therefore the Israelites Kings could not be deposed by men, because not
set up by men, and ruled so absolutely, because they ruled by Commission
immediately from Christ, and as types of that his Rule Monarchical, which in
the latter Days he meant to take up over all the World.

Thus we see ever since Christ gathered a visible people and Kingdom, he
fore-shewed his intent, to have a state Monarchical in the World, (for h^s
Spiritual Kingdom he typified from the fall of Adam) by the Sacrific^s,
Altars, and the Priests, which were the Fathers, and first Borne of the Family;
but this his Monarchical Government be began to typifie, This state was (...).
when he called a Nation to be his people; and as he typified it, so he
foretold and Prophesied it: the 8. Psalm is made only out of a prophetical
Meditation of this Monarchical state of Christ's Kingdom; as the Apostle
teaches us. Heb. 2. 5. 6. 7. 8. who applies that Psalm to Christ, and to this
Monarchical state of Christ: For he says, it is meant of a world, and a world
to come; after that the Apostle writ that Epistle Verse. 5. But by providence
Christ then had ruled the World, and in a Spiritual Government by the Gospel,
he had spread himself over all the world before Jerusalem was ruined, as he
told his Disciples, Matthew 24. 14. then the end (that is, of the City
Jerusalem) shall come.

But besides all this, there is a whole world to come to be put in subjection
to Christ; of which Adam in innocence was indeed a Type (for in innocence was
diverse Types of Christ; in that God ever intended Christ) Adams fa^l, and
damning all mankind, was a Type or figure of Christ saving all the elect: In
innocen^ were divers^ types of (...)
Rom: 5. 14. So Adams marriage to the woman, was a type of Christ's conjunction
to the Church Ephesians. 5. 30. 31. 32. So in the Sovereignty that Christ gave Adam
over all that present World, was figured out the subjection of a World to come
to Christ: wherefore the Psalmist speaks in such a phrase, as makes Expositors
think, he meant Adam (because Adam was its figure) but it is evident it cannot
be meant of Adam, or the state in innocence, because in this Epistle to the
Hebrews, after Christ had set up his Spiritual Kingdom by the Gospel over
all the World, in some consciences every where, yet he says it is a World to
come; and besides, there are diverse passages in the Psalm, which are not
competible with the state of Innocence; as the stilling the avenger, etc.
whereas in innocence were not Enemies or avengers: Therefore this Psalm
fore-tels a state of Christ's Kingdom to come, after the Gospels preaching to
all the World, wherein he should have as perfectly all the World Subject to
him: as in Innocence Adam had all under his dominion; as we read Gen 1. 26.
Nor can this be meant of the last of all time, namely, the General Judgment,
When all knees shall bow to him, and ^^ery tongue shall confess him Lord,
Phil. 2. 10. 11. which is refer (...) to his last Judgment, Romans 14. 10. 11.
For then he is to resign (...) to surrender up the Kingdom to God the Father,
and to hold and administer it no longer, 1 Cor. 15. 24. But this and many other
places as we shall see, prophecy of a state of Monarchical Government, which
Christ shall hold after the Gospel is preached universally, before that last
and general Judgment. Psalm. 22. he prophesies of Christ's Passion, and in
verse. 6, 7, 8. the words of reproach torments inflicted on Christ, piercing his
hands and feet, and verse. 18. their demeanor toward the garments of Christ,
applied to Christ, as Mat. 27, 35. and what Christ would do after his
deliverance from his Passion, Psalm. 22. 22. applied to Christ, Heb. 2. 12. By
all which is clear, that Psalm is of Christ's Passion, after which it is
prophesied that all the world should turn to him, and worship him, and that he
should have the Kingdom, verse. 27. 28. and that a generation of Saints should
serve him, and all that be fat on the earth shall worship him, verse. 29. which
must be meant of the Monarchical state of Christ, and not of his spiritual
Government in the conscience only, because it is said, verse. 29. that all the
fat on the earth shall bow to him, and all that go down to the dust, there is
none can keep alive his soul, that i^, Christ shall have a Sovereignty over
all that live and die, which he has not in his spiritual Government, which
only reaches the living. This was also celebrated typically and
prophetically, by Isreal's subduing all the earth, ^ypically and ^^^^hetically.
that is, all known neighboring Nations round about them, Psalm 47. and in
Solomon as in a type, Psalm. 72. and is certainly the scope of Psalm. 96. 97.
98. 110. For what state of Christ's Kingdom as yet, whether providentiall or
spiritual, gave all the earth cause to joy, because of peace, justice, and
truth.

Therefore there is a state to come, wherein it shall be done to all the earth;
this is most fully set down by the Prophet Daniel, chap. 2. 31. to 46, the
great Image presented in a dream to Nebuchadnezzar, represented four great
Monarchies, whose foundations indeed were laid presently after the Flood, ^he
four great ^^narchyes.
in Nimrod, and that Assyrian Monarchy, which grew up into the Babylonian etc.
(whatsoever God did before the Flood) it is evident that ever since it, except
a little time at first to grow, he has held this World under a Monarchy, and
so he will hold it until its end. I say, God by Daniel the Interpreter, and by
that dream to Nebuchadnezzer, in and by an Image, represented four great
Monarchies, one of which was then in being, and the rest were to follow, and
every one of them had the World (as then it was found and esteemed) under them.

The first Monarchy was the Assyrian, ^e first Mo^hy.
which fell into the Babylonian, and blossomed in Nimred, Gen, 10. 8, to the
13, and was ripened in that present Nebuchadnezzars child and grandchild. This
Monarchy was expressed in that Image by the head of gold.

The second Monarchy, ^e second ^narchy.
was that of the Medes and Persians, which blossomed in Cyrus, who conquered
Babylon, and slew the Grandchild of Nebuchadnezzar, namely, Balteshashar, Dan.
2. 39. and endured till Darius, whom Great Alexander the Greek overthrew; this
Monarchy was expressed in that Image, by the Breast and Arms of Silver.

The third Monarchy was that of the Greeks, ^e third Mo^hy.
which blossomed or rather immaturely and suddenly ripened in Great Alexandar
of Macedon, a Grecian; and by his sudden victories overran the World; and by
his sudden and untimely death, was divided into four great parts, by four of
his chief Generals, who parted the world among them, Dan. 2. 39. until the
more Western people, by little and little (namely the Romans) won all from
them: this Grecian Monarchy was expressed in that Image by a belly and thighs
of brass.

The fourth Monarchy was that of the West, The fourth M^narchy.
namely that of the Romans (which compared with the former is Western) which
blossemed and ripened leisurely, and by degrees; and was therefore the more
like to last long. And by certain gradations and much time, rooted out
successively all the inheritors of Alexander, and the upholders of the Greek
Monarchy, and possessed all the chief known parts of the world, and so fetching
its beginning lower Westward, and yet up as high Eastward, it became a mightier
Monarchy then any of the former.

This Monarchy was expressed in the Image, by the legs of Iron, Dan. 2. 32. 40.
Because as Iron, it was strongest of all, and subdued all under it; but in
process of time, the body of the world which it bore up, being so great, to
which it was a leg or supporter, it divided it self (as it is in the natural
body) into two legs, and is in the image so expressed (though for a great while
it was but one Monarchy) yet at last it grew into two, the Eastern and Western
Monarchy, which yet though divided, were both strong as Iron, and held all
Nations under them: but in process of time these fell into feet and toes, as
the natural body of man, from two legs, descend into feet and toes. The
Eastern Monarchy was swallowed up by the Persian, Turk, etc. The Western
Monarchy fell into diverse Kingdoms, but among these subdivided Kings was
strength and weakness, the feet being part of Iron, and part of Clay, Dan. 2.
33. 41. and much mingling shall be among them to rejoyn the Kingdoms into one
body, some whereof are weak, and some strong, (as Iron and Clay) but it never
shall be; as Iron cannot be mixed with Clay, Dan. 2. 41. 42. 43. The Spaniard
and Austrian in Spain and Germany, and other Nations in Europe, some of which
are strong, and some weak, have sought by marriage and other Covenants, to
mingle and rejoyne into one Monarchy, but it shall never be, as we cannot
mingle Iron and Clay. But to the period and upshot, of their Sovereignty and
Monarchy, they shall remain Kingdoms distinct, as feet and toes, of Iron and
Clay, partly weak, and partly strong: now in the days of this fourth Roman,
and Western Monarchy, There shall be a stone cut out without hands, Dan. 2. 34:
to 36. which shall first ruin these Kingdoms (it smote the Image on the feet
that were of Iron and Clay, verse. 34, and so swallowed up the whole Image; all
the foregoing Monarchies were brought under it, and by it to nothing, verse. 35.
and it became a Monarchy over the whole Earth, wherever any of the former
Monarchies had ruled, ^ers. 35. that is, as is explained, Dan. 2. 44. 45, a
Kingdom which that Stone shall obtain, set up by the God of Heaven. Whereas
the other Monarchies were erected by men on earth, (though permitted and
ordered by God) which Kingdom or Monarchy shall swallow up in it, all
foregoing Monarchies, and that by no humane means or policy; for it was
without hands, or not in hand: that is, not of man, but a Divine work every
way; and it shall reach and swallow up not only the feet and toes, but the
legs of Brass, the Breast and Arms of Silver, the head of Gold, Dan 2. 34.
35. that is, all Kingdoms and States, that were from first to last under any
of the Monarchies, shall be swallowed up and come under this. And this is a
fifth Monarchy which shall arise in the world after the former feure, The fifth
Monarchy is Christ's ^s i^ appears.
which is meant of a state of Christ's Kingdom, as appears.

First, 1. Because cal^ed a Stove.
because it is called a stone, as Christ is the stone which the builders
refused, become the head of the corner, 1 Pet. 2. 3. to 8.

And secondly, 2. Reared up by ^iod only.
it is a stone not in hand, or not cut out with hands, because by God
immediately without humane help, this Kingdom shall be reared up.

Thirdly, 3. By the dura^ion of it.
its duration, that it shall last for ever, shows it is (...) of Christ's
Kingdom; we people shall swallow it up, as they have done all other
Monarchies; the Babylonian was (...) to the Medes and Persians, and this to the
Grecians, (...) the Romans, but this shall be left to none, but this shall be
(...). Dan. 2. 44. that is, to the worlds end; but the Kingdom at the worlds
end shall be Christ's, for then he gives it up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24.
therefore till then, and at that time, when all ends, he has the Kingdom;
Christ's spiritual Kingdom, and his Providentiall, were before this time;
therefore that which is to begin, when these Monarchies end, must be Christ's
Monarchy: wherefore from this prophecy we learn, that Christ shall have a
Monarchical State on earth, and a visible Kingdom as other Monarchs had;
swallowing up or causing to vanish all other Monarchies, (as the latter
Monarchies did the former:) And that this Monarchy is to be Christ's, is yet
more plain, by Dan. 7. where the four Monarchies under 4, Beasts are
prophesied of verse. 3. to 9. the 16. 17. after which Christ sets up a Monarchy,
Christ the (...) of Man is the Monarch.
verse. 9. to 13. And as the Son of Man in reference to which name he calls
himself the Son of Man, as we read in the Gospel, and to him was given a
Monarchy, and that after the fourth Beast or Monarchy was destroyed, which is
the Roman, that is yet in being, and so Christ's Monarchy is yet to come, but
his Providentiall and Spiritual Government has been of old, therefore it is
meant of another, and not of those states of Government, Hos. 3. 4, 5. the ten
tribes then cast off, should be left without all Religion till the latter
days, in which they should be converted, and have David for their King, that
is Christ, whom David typified; Christ to be a King in the ^^ter days.
therefore Christ is to be a King in the latter days: So 2. Tim. 4, 1. when
Christ appears next, he is to have a Kingdom, and that on earth, before the
Worlds end, because then he resignes it, 1 Cor. 15. 24. and yet this his
kingdom is not till he come again, which yet he has not, though it is so
long since he ascended; wherefore his Kingdom is yet to come, and this is the
scope of the Parable, Luke, 19. 11. 12 which he spoke because they thought Gods
Kingdom, (that is, the Kingdom of which God has prophesied or promised so
much, which indeed was this Kingdom of Christ, as he calls it in that Parable)
which they thought should immediately appear, he tells them he must go a far
journey to receive it, and then he will come, at the time appointed, and bring
it with him; by which he means his Ascension into Heaven, and his long stay
there till his next coming; So that he confirms them in their opinion of a
Kingdom, but rectifies them in the thoughts of the time, The Apostles know not
the time when.
when it should be; and so Act. 1. 6. 7. he denies not the kingdom, but would
not tell them the time when it should be; which was the question they asked,
but if he had only meant his spiritual kingdom, through the Gospels
preaching, he might have told them the time of that, for he had said before,
that it should be over all the world, Called Israel^ Kingdom.
before the r^ine of Jerusalem, Matthew. 24. 14. therefore he means this his
Monarchy, which is called Isreal's kingdom; as here, so Dan 7. 18. because they
under and with Christ, shall enjoy the honor of that Kingdom: All the Proph^
have spoken of
And indeed of this Monarchical kingdom, have all the Prophets spoken more or
less, a^ it is said Act. 3. 19. 20 21, which place of the Apostle is expressly
meant of this kingdom of Christ, Act. 3. 19. 2^ 21. England.
and not of the last General Judgment at the worlds end (as it is often
interpreted.)

For first, all the Prophets since the world begun, have not spoken of the
Worlds end, and last judgment, but of this Kingdom of Christ have they all
spoken, (...) Doctrine so ^erally belee^d among the ^ws.
so that no Doctrine was so generally believed among the Jews, at Christ his
being among them, as that of the Messiah, and of his kingdom, wherefore they
so stumble still on that.

restoring all things; that is, a making all things new, as it is elsewhere
expressed, 2 Pet, 3. 13. which cannot be meant of the Worlds end, and heaven
which follows it, for at the worlds end, the earth ends, and shall not be made
new; and the highest heavens needs no making a new, nor have they any earth in
them; therefore it must be me^^t of a time and a state to be in this world,
therefore Rev. 21. 25. the new things come down from heaven and therefore there
must be a reforming things in this World, and a reducing them to their
original, as they were at the Creation; which restitution of all things, shall
not be perfected indeed, till the last general Judgment, but shall be begun,
and proceeded much in, at the beginning of this kingdom of Christ; of which
also the last Judgment is a part; therefore the whole time of Christ's kingdom
is truly called a time of restitution, and this place is meant of that
Kingdom.

Thirdly, which yet further appears, because it is said, that Christ Monarchy
and Kingdom of Christ, is that he chiefly means in the Lords Prayer (so
called) thy Kingdom come, (...) Kingdom (...) in the (...).
for in this Kingdom is Gods Name most hallowed, because the Son is most
honored, and then especially is Gods will done in earth as in heaven: because
(as we shall show anon) all in that Kingdom shall be holy, and so thoroughly
sanctified; as that they shall resemble (though not perfectly equal) them in
Heaven that do Gods will, that is, the Angels: for Souls of Saints departed,
he cannot mean, in that their doing of Gods will, is not expressed in Scripture
for our imitation, as the Angels is: now this kingdom of Christ, is called the
Fathers also, both in this Petition, as elsewhere, Rev. 11. 15. and in the
close of the Prayer, because it is his Originally, he first made it by a
Decree, and then gave it to Christ. Daniel. 2. 44. and 7. 9. 10. 13. 14. verse:
therefore he is called his King, Psalm. 2. 6. and it is confessed in the close
of the Lords prayer to be his, that is, it is beginning and root is from him,
and it shall in the end return to him; thus much for the first thing that
Christ shall have in this world, a Monarchical state or Kingdom.

Secondly, consider the manner of this Kingdom of Christ, that is, In the man^
Christ's King^ are two thin^
both the extent of it, and the qualities of it.

First, the extent of it shall be over all the World, as the other Monarchies
were to be, which go before it, and shall be swallowed Dan. The extent of
Christ's Ki^dome.
2. 37. 38, 39. 40. and 7. 23. all the known and esteemed parts of the World
were under those Monarchies; and so they shall be under Christ; therefore it is
said to grow up into a Mountain, and fill the whole earth, It shall be (...)
all the World
Dan. 2. 34. 3^. and 7. 27. therefore the seventh Trumpet, which declares this
Kingdom of Christ, brings in all kingdoms on earth under Christ Rev. 11. 15.
to the end: For of this Trumpet it is said Romans 10. 7, the Mystery spoken of by
the Prophets should be done, that is, the Kingdom of Christ set up, and as the
other great Monarchies brought under them all kingly power, and they were Kings
of Kings, so shall Christ also: therefore Dan. 2. 35. the Monarchy, that is,
not the people, but the State and Dignity vanished as dust to nothing, the
people remained, but the Monarchy came to nothing: So Dan. 7. 12, the Dominion
was taken away, though their lives continued, and ver. 9. the Thrones cast
down, that is, of the four mentioned kingdoms, and verse. 27. all dominion
and greatness shall be Christ's and his Saints, none shall have Dominion and
Greatness but he, All Rulers shall serve him: Christ's Kingdom expressed. 1 In
its Sp^rituall estate. 2. The^re shall bring all (...) it.
So Isa. 2. Christ's kingdom is expressed; First; in its spiritual State by
the Gospels preaching, verse. 2, 3. etc. thence it shall proceed, to bring under
it all the earth, even the haughtiness of people, that is, their Kingly power,
which is the height and pride of the earth, and he alone shall be exalted as
Monarch, verse 11. 17. etc. Isa 24. 21, 22. 23. The high ones, that is, the
Kings, and their Monarchies, shall fall before the Lord; and the Sun and Moon,
that is, Majesty of a higher and lower rank, shall vanish before him, as Rev.
Rev. 21. 23, 2^ explan'd.
21. 23. 24. No need of Sun or Moon, that is, kingly power, Christ will be
instead of all to it; so Chap. 22. 5. 21. 24. Kings bring their glory to it,
that is, lay down their Honors th^re; and this he seems to mean, by shaking
not earth only, in change of customs with people, but Heaven also, that is,
the Kingly power; therefore he adds, Hag. 2. 21. 22. explained.
shake Heavens, and overthrow Thrones, Hag. 2. 21, 22. which the Apostle
applies to Christ and his Kingdom, Hebr. 12, 26, 27. and shows, that he can
do it, in that he is so great a King, as once shook the Earth with his voice,
when he gave the Law, and set him up a kingdom of one Nation; but he can and
will shake Earth and Heaven also, when he sets up his full Kingdom, and makes
the new Heaven and Earth, for these words, yet once more, signifies the
removing of old things in Heaven and Earth, to make new, that is, to change all
worldly customs, and so all kingly glory, and set up a new, even his own
glory: So Zach. 14. 9. Then the Lord shall be King of all the earth; and his
Name one, and the Lord one, no more Lords but he, as the Monarchies in that
time swallowed up all kingly power under them: And this Monarchy of Christ's,
coming after all the rest, when more of the world is found out, will be larger
in extent then all the former, The name of the Lord Great, from East to West,
as never yet any was, Mal. 2. 11.

For the better understanding the extent of Christ's Kingdom, consider that
before this Monarchy of Christ shall end, ^ards the end it shall ex^ to all
reable creatur^, ^els, Devils, all tongues.
and be given up to the Father, it shall extend it self to all reasonable
creatures, Angels, Devils, and all tongues, Phil. 2. 10. 11. so that every
creature, reasonable, shall acknowledge Christ to be Lord and King, but this
general extent of it, shall not be till toward its consummation, He shall put
all under his feet, and then resign, 1. Cor. 15. 24. and by Paul; Romans 14^ 10.
11. this universal subjection is referred to the last and general Judgment,
so that of this I now speak not; but of the generality of all that live on
earth, under Christ his Scepter and Monarchy, in its first rise and
continuance; this is the extent of Christ's Kingdom.

(...) quality of ^ists King^.
That the day of Judgment is taken sometimes more strictly, sometimes more
largely in Scripture; Strictly, it is taken for a partial Judgment, when some
are judged, but not all: (...) day of judge^t taken ^ctly for a par^ll Iudg^t.
many both Saints and sinners shall be judged, and that with great terror and
solemnity, but all Devils, and all the generation of Mankind, from Adam to the
last that shall be born, shall not be judged in this partial and more strict
day of Judgment. But more largely, More largely.
is taken for that general day, when all men and Devils shall be judged, as
Matthew. 25. 31. to the end, and Phil. 2. 10. 11. and now it is not, usual by
the day of judgment, to mean only this large and general Judgment, but the
Scripture speaks of a day of Judgment more partial and more strict, wherein
not all, ^any shall be ^ged before the ^erall judge^t.
but yet a world of Saints and sinners shall be judged, and that long before
the last and great judgment, as Dan. 7. 9. 10. and 2 Timothy 4. 1. and 2 Pet. 3.
7. and Rev. 11. 15. 18. which cannot be meant of the last general Judgment,
because after that Christ resignes his Kingdom, as is showed formerly, 1 Cor.
15. 24. but this is when he takes his Kingdom, as all the places show, and much
is to be done by Christ and his Saints after this; and it is said expressly,
that the second death instantly follows the last general Judgment, Rev. 20.
4. but of this Judgment it is said, the Temple was opened, and great things
done after it, Rev. 11. 15. 18. 19. and in 2 Pet. 3. 7. 13. it is said, There
shall be a new Heaven, whereas the highest Heavens are not made new, into which
the Saints enter, after the last Judgment, and a new earth, in which dwells
righteousness; but the Saints after the last Judgment enter the highest
Heavens, and dwell not on earth, Matthew. 25. 34. that is the Kingdom prepared
ever since the foundation of the world, and they go into eternal life, verse.
46. that is, the highest Heavens above the Sun and time, so that no righteous
men shall be left upon the earth, and this is applied to the new Jerusalem,
Revel. 21. that former things pass away; and all things are made new, verse 4.
5. Now this Jerusalem is not heaven, for it comes down from God out of Heaven,
verse. 2. therefore it must be meant of a change which shall be in this world,
Why the (...) there made (...) called a judgment.
on earth, before the General Judgment, which he calls by the name of the day
of Judgment, verse. 7. And it is fitly so called, for it shall be.

First, 1. Because (...) judging of (...) godly.
a general Judging (though not to the second death) of all the ungodly in the
world, at least, of all that will not stoop to Christ his Scepter, being
indeed that Judging, Luke 19. 27. as Noah's flood was, from whence he fetched
his argument, 2 Pet. 3. 6. That as once by water God destroyed all people,
(except such as were in the Arc) but did not then end the world, but gave time
and ages after it; So will he once again destroy all ungodly ones on earth;
but give thereby a Reformation, not an end to the world.

Secondly, A judging to Saints alive.
this shall be a judging to the Saints alive, Many that are dead and killed
shall be raised up, and justified before men, and they that are alive, shall be
blamed (as we shall show anon.) So that this time is fitly called a day of
Judgment, now these two times and degrees of Judgment, begin and end Christ's
Kingdom or Monarchy; wherefore all the time of Christ's Kingdom may fitly be
called a day of Judgment, it being a rewarding of his Servants, and punishing
the wicked. And as in a natural day there is the beginning or evening, Its
called a (...) because morn^ and evening.
and progress to its end, or morning of it (which is the best time of it,) So
is there in this day of Judgment, or time of Christ's Monarchy, an evening or
beginning which is less glorious, and a morning which is much more Glorious;
but leads to its end, Kingdom is Day, and is evening morning.
as the morning does to the end of the Day. Now because the evening and morning
makes one Day, and all Christ's time for his Monarchy is but as one Day,
(wherefore it is called Christ's Day 1 Cor.) Therefore that which is to be done
in the morning or latter part of the Day, is joined with the evening or
beginning of the Day: because before this time is ended all such things shall
be done; thus Dan, 12. 2. 3. It is said, that at the time in which Michael the
great Prince shall stand up; for Daniels Prophecy: And there shall be a time of
trouble, such as never was, and many that sleep in the Dust shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to everlasting contempt, and they that be wise
shall shine a^ the brightness of the Firmament. Which things Christ applies to
the last general Judgment, which we call the Morning or glory, or close of
that day of Christ, Mat. 25. 46. and 13. 40. 43. Yet it is conjoined to the
Evening, and first beginning which is troublous and Dark, Dan. 7. 9. 10. The
everthrow of things, that is, former Monarchies and all Kingly power, and the
innumerable company of Angels, and setting the Judgment, and opening the
Books, (which is not till the last part of the Day, of the general Judgment,
as Rev. 20 12. 13. etc.) are joined together, so 2 Timothy 4, 1. Christ's appearing
kingdom, judging quick and dead, are conjoined, as if all one; whereas
(though at his first appearing, he shall judge some quick, and some dead, yet)
the general judging all quick and dead, shall not be till the latter end of
this Day. And this is it has made many mistake, as if there had been no
coming of Christ, or Judgment, but the last and universal Judgment, whereas
there is another before it, more then a thousand Years, ^n Scripture ^imes
joins ^her, far ^t in time.
as we shall see hereafter. But God in Scripture joins together, things far
distant in time, because done in the same day of Christ's Monarchy: as we
sometimes see an hill, and see not many miles of low grounds and valleys
between us and that Hill: but think the Hill is near us: So God has made
visible some of the most glorious works of Christ, in the morning or latter
part of this his day and Reign, but more obscurely presented a great deal of
the beginning and former part of this his Day and reign, wherefore it has
been over-looked by most Christians, since the first hundred Years: and
nothing has been seen but the last general Judgment, and triumph of Christ
(which shall be only at the last Day) over all People.

Now then to open the quality of Christ's Kingdom, we must show (and that
briefly) what it is in both the parts of that Day of his; namely, what (...)
in the Evening or first part of it, and what it is in the Morning, or latter
part of (...).

First, What manner of Kingdom it a shall be in the Evening of the Day.
What manner of Kingdom Christ's shall be in the Evening and first part of it.
The beginning or first part of Christ's Kingdom, I call an Evening, alluding to
the Creation, in which every day, had first it is Evening, and then it is
Morning. Because compared with the following state and glory of it, it is as
short of Majesty as the Evening is in glory short of the Morning, and time
following.

Now in the evening or beginning and first part of Christ's Kingdom, as in other
Evenings there is first an end, or withdrawing and ceasing of the light and
glory of the foregoing day, this shuts in: and the Day enluing, tends first to
a night; So Christ's Kingdom shall begin with the withdrawing of Peace and
comfort (had through the time and Reign of the foregoing Monarchies) and
darkness of night, that is, great troubles shall begin to arise, upon those
who shall be Subjects of Christ's Monarchy, both believing Gentiles and Jews
with Israelites or the ten Tribes, who shall be all converted, and after that
be greatly troubled, as we shall show, when we open the beginning of his
Kingdom; which trouble, is as the shutting in of a former day: but when this
trouble is at it is height, and full; then comes the beginning, or setting up of
Christ his Kingdom; for the opening of which consider we three things.

First, Three things (...) be considered (...) the beginning Christ's Kingdom.
What Christ will do, when he sets up at first this his Kingdom.

Secondly, Who shall be the Subjects of this his Kingdom.

Thirdly, What shall be the Privileges of this Kingdom, which is the opening
or first part of this his Day.

First, What Christ will do when he at first sets up this his Kingdom, 1 What
Chr^ will do^^ when (...) sets up his Kingdom.
he will come from Heaven visibly, Even as he went up thither: Act. 1. 11.
which coming is not his last coming, to the last Judgment, but a middle oue,
twix't that and his first coming, which has not been considered. Three
coming of Christ.
For Christ had three commings: The first was when he came to take our nature,
and make satisfaction for sin The second is, when he comes to receive his
Kingdom, for to receive which he went into heaven, Luke 19. 12. 15. which is
that I am now speaking of. A third is, that when he comes to judge all and end
the world: the latter comings are two distinct commings, not all one, (as it
has been thought) therefore they are made distinct, Mat. 24. 3. and answered
dictinctly by distinct signs in that Chapter. Now this second coming of
Christ, which shall be long before his coming to the l^^t Judgment, and to
end the world ^ is that when he begins and sets up this his Kingdom, for at
the setting it up, Christ shall come from heaven, Dan. 12. 1. Michael shall
then stand up, that is, Christ shall then visibly appear, which is not spoken
of the day of the last Judgment, For it is the time of the Israelites great
trouble, after their first conversion to Christianity, as we shall show
hereafter, 2 Timothy 4. 1. with Dan. 7. 13. when Christ came to bring his
Kingdom, he appeared, but his coming to his last judgment, is to judge and
resign his Kingdom, therefore this is a former coming, at which second coming
of Christ, when he comes to begin his Kingdom, he will come with the same
glory as at the last; for as it is said of his last coming to judge the world,
Mat. 25. 31. 34. He comes with a Throne, and as a King, so shall he come at his
second or next coming, when he begins his Kingdom, Mat. 19, 28. which place is
the same with Luke 22. 30. where he expressly speaks of his own Kingdom, which
he is to administer in this World, whereas that Kingdom in Heaven is the
Fathers, Mat. What Christ ^all do when he ^omes.
13. 39. 34. Now when Christ with his glory shall come from Heaven, he will do
three things.

First, (...) He shall raise (...) all the ^aints
He will raise up the Saints, which are dead before this his coming, not only
such as have been martyred, as some think, but all Saints who have dyed in
the Faith, Rev. 20. 4. not only they that were beheaded, but all that
subjected not to Antichrist, by which innocence from Popery, he means all
Saints, though he instances in an escape from Popery only, because, that is
the snare, which in this latter part of the world takes such as are not Saints,
and more plainly, Rev. 11. 15. to the chapters end, there is set out Christ's
Kingdom, and it is said, that not only the Prophets, but all that feared him,
both small and great, should be judged and rewarded, even all that fear him,
small Christians and greater, and how judged, that is, their cause pleaded
against their enemies by a just punishment of them, in the present generation
of the wicked, in whom all the foregoing generations of the wicked were
punished, God showing thereby what they all did deserve, and rewarding the
Saints, how is that? by raising them from the dead; for as he speaks of the
dead Prophets, so does he of the dead Saints, and of all Saints dead, and not
only of such as were martyred; and this Resurection is not at the Worlds end,
for after this he showed many things were done in the World, as the Temple
opened, etc. and it is the beginning of Christ's Kingdom, as we have showed
before; this also is clear by that signification that Christ put on their
receiving the Lords Supper, in a Table gesture, where they sat as it were at
his Table, and he served them; for as they sat at Table, eating the Passover,
he instituted and administered the Lords Supper, Luke 22. 14. He sat down,
that is, in a Table gesture, at the Passover, and verse. 19. 20. at that meal
he instituted the Lords Supper, and therefore as they sat in the Table
gesture, for it was as they were eating at Table. Mat. 26. 26. which was
sitting, Mark 14. 18. Now I say having thus Administered to them the Lords
Supper as they sat, he in that being as one that served them, because he gave
the bread and wine; whereas in the Passover, they eat it with him, without
his Administering it to them. He inferres hence two things.

One was, that which met with the present corruption of pride, that then brake
forth, verse. 42. to 48. Since he had set them down, and served them, they
should not strive who should be greatest.

Another was, a consolation for the future, which was signified and sealed up
to them, in that Sacrament of the Lords Supper, verse. 28. 29. 30. that by his
admitting them to sit and eat of that his Supper and Table, he did show and
seal to them the fellowship which they should have in his Kingdom: That they
should sit as Kings, and rule the Tribes of Israel, which cannot be meant of
Heaven; for that is the Fathers Kingdom, and Christ's Kingdom ends when this
world ends. Therefore the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not only seals up
and signifies, spiritual and eternal Privileges, but also the Kingdom of
Christ, which shall be enjoyed in this world: and therefore it is to cease at
his coming, to set up this Kingdom: for it is to show forth his death till he
come, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 26. and then to cease. And this is not only signified
and sealed to the Apostles, but as in them he gave the Sacrament to all
Believers, so in them he taught all Believers (members of his Church) that as
sitting at his Table, assured them that they should rule with him in his
Kingdom; so that the gesture of a Table is necessary at the receiving of the
Sacrament, Sitting at the Sacrament.
or else, a maine use and comfort of the Sacrament is lost, which is the
signification of our Reigning with Christ in his Kingdom, in this World. And
whereas it is inferred upon the Apostles being with Christ in his Temptations,
Luke 22. 28. It is not meant only of his Personal Temptations, but of his
mystical, that is, all the Temptations which in his Name and Members do
befall him; therefore Paul says, He filled up the sufferings of Christ, Col.
1. 24. and so agrees to every Saint. Now if all Communicants at the Lords
Supper, who are Saints, have signified and sealed to them, by sitting at that
Table, in a fellow-like gesture, or rather they sitting, and Christ serving
them, assures them that they shall have a Kingdom and rule in this world with
Christ, then surely being dead before this Kingdom, they must all as well as
the dead Apostles be raised up, when Christ comes to begin this Kingdom. So
Act. 3. 12. 20, speaking of Christ's n^x^ coming, after he ascended, (which is
this his second coming) to set up his Kingdom, for he says, that the heavens
must hold him till then, and then he is to restore, that is, make new heavens
and new earth, which he is to do in his Kingdom, Isa 67. 17. Re. 21. 12. (I
say) he says in these times, those Believers shall be refreshed, and their
sins blotted out, therefore then were they to be raised from the dead; or how
could their sins be blotted out, and they then refreshed, and surely most of
the rewards promised in the Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia, are meant
of these times of Christ's Kingdom, Rev. Chap. 2, 3. and not of rewards in
Heaven, as it is usually taken, as those rewards, Rev. 2. 7. 11. 20, 27. and
Rev. 3. 12. for in heaven there is no Paradise, or tree of life, or Christ his
ruling Nations with a Rod of Iron, or sitting one Thrones with a kingly power,
for at this Worlds end, before Heaven is entered, Christ resignes his Kingdom;
wherefore all these things are applied to Christ's Kingdom on earth, Rev. 21.
22. which because we should not think it to be Heaven, it is said expressly it
came down from heaven, Rev. 21. 2. it is indeed heavenly, but yet on earth,
not in heaven; thus what is promised Rev. 2. 11. not to be hurt of the second
death, is performed to the Saints of this Kingdom on earth, raised from the
first death, Rev. 20. 46.

So what is promised of Paradise, and the tree of life, Rev. 2. 7. is performed
in this Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 22. 14 So what is prophesied Rev. 1. 26, 27. is
in effect applied to this kingdom of Christ on earth, Rev 21. 7. and so that
promise Rev. 3. 12. of the new Jerusalem, is applied to this Kingdom, Rev. 21.
2.

Now the condition of these promises is to overcome, which seems to agree to
every believer, for faith is the victory by which we overcome, 1 Ioh. 5, 4. yet
if it be applicable, only to some who peculiarly contest with adversaries, yet
sure it is found in diverse who were never martyred, as Luther and others, who
conflicted and overcame, more then some Martyrs, therefore surely not only the
martyred Saints shall be raised from the dead at Christ's Kingdom, but other
dead Saints also; therefore this coming of Christ, to set up his Kingdom, is
set out by the Saints raised from the dead, and praising of him, Rev. 15. this
coming of Christ, and setting up his Kingdom, which was spoken of Rev. 11. 15.
to the end is expressed first by the antecedents, and preparatives to it,
namely, seven Vials; that is, a perfect measure of wrath to be cast on the
wicked; which Vials are expressed particularly in chap 16. after the sixth of
which, the wicked combine against Christ and his Saints, Verse. 13. to 17.
which is that in Rev. 11. 18. the Nations were angry and the seventh and last
Vial was powered out, Rev. 18. 17. which was the ruin of all the wicked by
Christ's coming, and setting up his Kingdom, as we shall show anon, the same
with Rev. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18. the blowing of the seventh Trumpet, and then
Christ sets up his Kingdom, which beginning of Christ's Kingdom, after the
general description of the antecedent wrath, Rev. 15. 1. I say is expressed
verse. 2. 3* 4* 5, by all the Saints described by their not subjecting to
Popery, standing on a Sea of glass, singing Moses his Song, that is, they were
Saints raised from dead, as the Israelites were ra^sed out of the Sea, as men
from the dead: when Moses sung that Song, Exodus 15. for so that seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15. to the end, and this, 15. chap. seems to be all one, this
explaining that. This is the first thing that Christ will do, when he comes
from Heaven to set up his Kingdom, he will raise up all Saints who are dead
before his coming, therefore he is said to come with all his Saints, The
Saints the^ like his between (...) his Resurrection and ascension.
Zach. 14. 5. For surely, as Christ had a middle State on earth betwixt his
Resurrection and Ascension for forty days; so shall his Saints have who dye
before his coming from Heaven; but all the dead who are not Saints shall lie
still in the dust, even till the last and general Judgment, Rev. 20. 4, 5,
12. for the second death, that is, hell torments everlasting shall have no
power on them that were raised, therefore they were all Saints. and this is the
first Resurrection, of which they that partake, shall not return to a mortal
state of body again, as they shall be who live on earth, nor yet be so
perfectly glorified, as they shall be afterward, for then the People on earth
could not bear their presence, for they shall shine as the Sun, Mat. 13. 43.
but they shall be in a middle state betwixt glory and mortality, as Christ was
after his Resurrection, before his Ascension, clothed and conversing when he
pleased with men, and withdrawing at his pleasure; and this is the first thing
Christ will do when he comes from heaven, to set up his Kingdom.

Secondly, (...). He will de^roy the wicked. (...)
he will destroy the wicked people on earth, for they about the time of his
coming, will grow to agree and combine against the Saints, and then will
Christ suddenly surprise them to their ruin, Rev. 11. 18 and so Revel. 16. 13.
to 18. for these two places are the same. And so Rev. 15. 1. he expresses
Seven-vials, that is, Gods full wrath to the wicked, for seven, notes
perfection, the particulars of which are expressed, Rev. 16. the last of which,
finds the wicked in Armies against the Saints, and ruins them all, verse. 14.
to the end: therefore it is said, it is done, that is, all the wicked are
ruinated, verse. 17. to the end, therefore in that Rev. 15. 1, 2, 3. after he
had showed the seven plagues which were all to fall on the wicked, he shows the
consequent of the last of them, that the Saints are seen on a glassie Sea,
with Moses Song, because as then all the Egyptians were drowned in the Red
Sea; so now, all the wicked are slain, for before Christ's coming the wicked
shall wear out the Saints, Dan. 7. 21, 25. therefore when he comes he will
destroy them who destroy the earth, as Rev. 11. 18. so 2 Pet. 3. 4. to 14. This
work of Christ is called a day of Judgment, not for all, but only the
ungodly (as it is said in that place.) And the Apostle says, Rev. 16. 15. that
Christ's coming will be sudden, which shows that in both Texts is the same
meant; and even as in the old world by water, so once more by fire, will Christ
ruin the wicked, but the Saints shall escape as they then did in the Arc, and
the world shall not end, as then it did not, indeed the heavens and earth are
said to melt, but it is meant of the Inhabitants of them, both of high and low
ranks, as it is also, Heb. 12. as we showed hefore, for the Apostle speaks from
the Prophets, as Isa. 65. 17. and 66. 15. 16. who means not the place of heaven
and earth, and so the worlds end: for they prophecy of many things to be done
after this in the world, verse. 12, 13. 19. to the end; and so the Apostle tells
us of n^w heavens and earth after this, which shall not be after the worlds
end, for then all time and this earth shall cease for ever, as we shall show
anon; so that not only at this worlds end, but before it, shall the wicked be
slain with fire, and that with great terror and Majesty; therefore David so
discribes his victories in a sum, Psalm. 18. 7. to 16. by Gods coming with fire
and dreadful Majesty, not so much speaking poetically of what was done, as
prophetically of this destruction of Christ's upon the wicked, at the setting up
Christ's Kingdom, of which David was a Type; therefore his words in that Psalm,
verse. 2. I will trust in him* are said to be the words of Christ, Heb. 2 13.

Now some think that this ruin of the wicked shall be to every one, but I
think that that generality shall not be now, but at his third and last coming;
but now he will only ruin the Armies of them (for in such an attempt against
Saints does he find them, Rev. 11. 18. and 16. 13. to 18.) as the ruin of the
Egyptians at the Red sea was not of every one, but of them that were in Armies
combined against the Israelites: And so he will break their head and arm, and
make the rest slaves to the Churches, and it seems some wicked shall be left,
because by the end of Christ's Kingdom great Nations of wicked must be in the
world, called G^g and Magog, Rev. 20. 7, 8. which cannot rise out of such as
prove hypocrites, and be excommunicated out of Christ's Kingdom (as some think)
for there shall be no hypocrite or excommunicate person there (as we shall show
hereafter) therefore there must be some wicked left for a seed to these
Nations; as when the world was drowned, Cham was saved for a seed of the cursed
Nation to be rooted out, when Gods people should have a Kingdom; and so much
seems to be employed, Rev 21. 27. and 22. 15. where it is said, The wicked shall
not enter, but be without, implying, that they shall be in the world, though
kept out of Christ's Kingdom, and these remaining wicked shall be the Nations
ruled with Iron, Rev. 2. 27. for no Saints shall be so severely ruled; and Isa.
65. 28. the sinner, though living long as well as the Saint, shall be cursed;
therefore they shall be, but be cursed tributaries, as the Gibeo^ires to the
Israelites; for all the credit and happiness in those days shall be in Christ
and in being holy, verse. 16. therefore they are described in a slavish state,
Isa. 65. 13, 14, 15. speaking of this time, as appears by verse. 17. And this is
the second thing Christ will do when he comes to set up his Kingdom.

Thirdly, 3. Christ will examine, blame, and shame the Saints.
Christ will examine, blame, and shame the Saints who are alive at that his
coming, if they be found to have walked loosely, he will not kill them nor
change them in a moment, that is to be done at his last coming to judge all, as
we shall show afterward, but he will shame them that have been loose, Rev. 14,
15. therefore Peter exhorts to be holy that we be not blamed at his coming. 2
Pet. 3. 11, 12, 14. now when Christ has thus done and put his Kingdom into
form, he will withdraw to heaven again, and leave the Government to the dead
Saints raised up, Christ with^raws himself ^^to Heaven and ^ave^ the
Go^^rnment to the ^^ised.
among whom the Apostles shall be chief, therefore he says, Luke 22. 29. as
the Father gave him, so he gives them a Kingdom in which they immediately shall
rule; which is Christ's first part of his Kingdom, which finished, Christ will
come again, The Apostles ^^all be chief
and in person administer things (as we shall see anon) but for this first part
of Christ's Kingdom, he will give it to the Saints, that is, to them
immediately to rule, therefore says Matthew. 19. 28. they shall judge on thrones
the twelve Tribes, that is, they and all believers shall rule the world, in
which the twelve tribes shall be chief, and they shall not only rule as
Kings, but as Priests, Rev. 20. 4. that is, Discipline their Souls as well as
rule their bodies, and yet this rule is said to be with Christ, Re. 20. 4.
because in his name and by his appointment, and in a special presence of his,
though not bodily, therefore the Kingdom is said to be sometime Christ's, and
sometimes his Saints, Daniel 7. 13, 14. 18, 22. which surely is said, because
as he will at last, be constantly on the Throne visibly, and come at the first
visibly to set up this his Kingdom: So he will depute the Saints Governors,
and withdraw his visible presence for a time to Heaven again, for, 1 These. 4.
5, 6. and Matthew. 25. 31. (both of which speak of the last Judgment at the
worlds end,) yet he is said then to come from Heaven, though he had come
before, therefore he must have gone to heaven again, therefore the Apostle
comfort them at the last Judgment; That they shall be ever with the Lord,
intimating that before he had come, Object. Better to die before.
and withdrew without them: but now would do so no more. If ye say it is
better then to die before this Kingdom begin, since all the Saints who died
before this Kingdom begun, shall be raised from death, and live immortal
Life's and rule the World, whereas the Saints that live to it, and in it, shall
live but mortal life's, Answer.
and under the Government of the other Saints: I answer, God has appointed
somewhat proper and peculiar to every Age of his Church and people; but the
last Ages, shall in this life and world excel the former, Hebr. 11. 40. the
former without the latter Ages shall not be perfect, Better to live at that
coming.
and for the latter Ages are better things provided then for the former;
wherefore these Ages which shall fall in Christ's Kingdom, shall far
outstrip all former Ages, and not only in happiness in this World, (but for
ought I know) as they shall be more holy in their mortal Life, so they shall
be ever more glorious in Heaven: therefore it is to be desired to live to these
Times of Christ's Kingdom, though I confess in some respects to this present
world and time on earth, the Saints dead before Christ's Kingdom shall have an
advantage of them who live to it, Advant^^ raised Saint^
because the dead Saints shall be raised and live also, but in a nobler way,
by which dispensation God recompenceth them, for they who live and dye before
Christ's Kingdom, live most by faith in trouble and darkness, and therefore are
raised up on earth to inherit Christ's Kingdom: But they who live in Christ's
Kingdom, have a life of peace and joy, and most promises fulfilled; so that
(comparatively) their life is a life of sense, wherefore they shall have no
Resurrection till the last Judgment, but yet they have more glory and
holiness in this world (which is the seed-time for eternity) and so shall
have more glory at the last day, They shall have more glory at (...) last.
and for ever; whereas the deeds of dead Saints raised up, being wages and
reward, and not a work or service, shall not add to their account at the last
day, but they shall be judged according to what they did in their mortal
lives, even as in hell they that dye and are cast into it, shall not be judged
at the last day or punished in hell, for what they do being dead, (except the
poison on earth which their counsels and practices, when they lived, shall
spread) so neither shall the Saints departed, though raised again; So that it
is to be desired to live to Christ's Kingdom, though we may be much comforted,
if God please to have us dye before it come.

If you object, Obje. How (...) souls be fetched from heaven to live on Earth
again.
how can souls of Saints dead be fetched from heaven to live on earth again,
with men in their bodies, since it is a damage to be fetched from heaven to
earth, and from the bodily presence of Christ and face of God, and innumerable
company of Angels to converse again on earth with men. Answ. Their Souls be
not in the^ highest Heavens.
I answer, this objection supposes the souls of the dead Saints, to be in the
highest heavens, which is not so, but if their souls were in the highest
heavens, yet it becomes them to do it, to serve Christ, as the Angels come
from heaven to serve the Saints, and as Lazarus his soul came into his body
again, at the commandment of Christ; but it is likely the souls of the dead
Saints, are not in the highest heavens, but in a middle place, better than this
world, but inferior to the highest heavens, which is meant in the New
Testament by Paradise, in which they have full joy and perfect happiness, Heb.
12. 23. and a special presence of Christ, Phil. 1. 23. and 2 Cor. 5, 6, 8.
that is, a presence to their minds, They are kept in a place till Christ come.
which may be, though they be not where Christ's ^ody is, and in this place they
are kept till this Kingdom of Christ come, and then they shall assume their
bodies, till the worlds end, when with soul and body, they with all other
Saints shall go up into the highest Heavens for ever.

To prove this, ^easons to prove
there are these Reasons.

First, The Apostle puts a difference between Heaven and Paradise, in two
several places, 2 Cor. 12. 2. 4. and therefore calls it visions and
revelations, in the plural number, verse. 1. and Paradise is said to be the
Kingdom of Christ, that shall be in this world, Rev. 22. 14. compared with
Chap. 2. 17. Because that which made this Paradise, is by Christ brought into
this world; and into this Paradise, went Christ's Soul, and the Thieves, which
was not Heaven, for it is called Christ's Kingdom, which is only in this world,
Luke 23* 42, 43. and its most probable, that Christ's Soul, never went into the
highest Heavens, till his body went also; for his going into the highest
Heavens, is a going unto his Father, which when he does, declares his
righteousness, that is, that he is justified from all guilt imputed, Joh. 16.
16. which he is not till he rose from the dead, and so ascended in body and
soul.

Secondly, 2.
None but the high Priest, went into the holy of holiest, which taught us that
none but Christ, and so none before Christ, ever entered the highest Heavens,
Heb. 9. 7. 8. the way to Heaven was never opened till Christ the High Priest,
was entered Body and Soul, The way to the highest Heavens never opened till
Christ went.
(for so only he is the High Priest) and whereas it might be thought,, none
entered in their own name before Christ, but they might in his name do it
before him. That is not possible, for the High Priest could not send any in his
name, into the holiest, but must only go in his own person, and so must
Christ into heaven, for this the Apostle tells us, the Holy Ghost taught us by
that, and so Christ has the High Priests dignity, that no man but he ever yet
came into the highest Heavens: as the holiest in the Tabernacle never had but
one man in it, namely, the High Priest; so the highest Heavens never had but
one man in them, namely, Christ, nor shall have, till the Worlds end: and till
Christ came and went in thither, it was shut up and never opened to any, Heb.
9. 8.

And whereas it may be said, Obj.
that the Souls of Saints may go into the highest Heavens, though their
bodies be not.

I answer, Ans.
That the bodies of Enoch and Elias were taken up together with their Souls,
The bodies of Enoch and Elias taken up with their Souls.
for they did not dye, but were translated and changed, and so left not their
bodies behind them, wherefore if their Souls were in the highest Heavens,
their bodies also were; which is absurd to think that any bodies were there
before Christ's; wherefore there is a place, and not the highest Heavens, in
which the Souls of dead Saints are kept, from whence was fetched the soul of
Lazarus, and other Saints, who dyed and were raised up at Christ's death, whence
they shall come, and being raised shall be joined to their dead bodies, and
rule Christ's Kingdom on earth, Christ himself as a man coming visibly with
them.

And if you ask, where this place of Paradise is?

I answer, Where Paradis.
It must be below the third or highest Heavens, therefore surely it is in the
Region or Element of fire, where the Sun and Stars are, or in the highest
Region of air, which is called Heaven in Scripture, for Paradise is Christ's
Kingdom, begun and shall be its perfection, Rev. 2. Therefore as Christ's
Kingdom is in this world, and the Fathers in the Heaven, so is Paradise. Nor
does this countenance the Papists Purgatory, for that is a place of Penance and
Satisfaction, but this is a place of perfect joy and near commanion with
Christ (though not locally) in which they are reserved till the resurrection of
their bodies; a condition much better then that on earth; though short of the
highest Heavens, which Purgatory is not, but a Prison. Now these Saints fetched
from this Paradise, and joined with their bodies raised from the dead (which is
the first resurection) they rule Christ's Kingdom, even all of them, though some
of them in more eminent places than others.

Now for the second thing; Subjects of Christ's Kin^ all living (...) and all
(...) on the eart^
namely, the Persons that shall be governed, or the Subjects of this Kingdom.
They shall be all that live upon earth, and the place they shall govern shall
be the whole World, Psalm. 45. 16. The Children of the Church (that is the
Saints) shall be Princes in all the earth; the wicked on earth shall be ruled
like slaves, Rev. 2. 26* 27. the Saints that live on earth, shall be ruled like
the Israelites under Solomon, themselves being as Lords, therefore is Christ
called the King of Saints, Rev. 15. 4. where this his Kingdom is described,
because all that rule and are ruled there, are Saints, and he makes the Saints
Lords, and all the wicked slaves.

Now these Subjects of his Kingdom, All the (...) of Israel (...) converted
made Sub^ (...) this King
shall be both their Tribes converted unto Christ, and the Nations of the
Gentiles thereof, Mat. 19* 28. it is said, they shall judge the twelve Tribes,
that is, govern and rule them, not that they only shall be then governed: but
they only are named, partly because in these latter days the conversion of
the Gentiles was not then known, and partly because in these latter days, ten
of the twelve Tribes are lost, but shall be found out and made Subjects of this
Kingdom of Christ; so Isa. 24. 23. God before his ancients shall reign, that
is, his ancient, people the twelve Tribes. Israelites and Jews, they shall be
the subjects of Gods kingdom, Ezech. 37. 21. Israel and Judah (who never were
joined since they were divided in R^hob^ams days (shall be one people for
^ver, under one King David, that is, Christ typified by David, ^alem shall ^ilt
again ^is kingdom.
for this division was since David: and as the twelve Tribes shall be the
subjects of this kingdom, so the Cities of the Tribes shall be built again,
and inhabited by natural Israelites, especially Jerusalem, which shall be the
most eminent city then in the world, or that ever was in the world, Psalm. 69.
35. 36. which is a prophecy of what should be done to Israel, both as a
punishment for their crucifying Christ, verse 10. to 29. and also what should
be done after Christ's death, ver. 35. 36. so Zach. 14. 9, 10, 11. when the Lord
is one King over all the earth, then shall Jerusalem be built, and as the
Israelites, so all the Gentiles which are Saints shall be subjects of this
Kingdom, Revel. 21. 24. but the Israelites shall have the greatest glory, as
the elder brothers double portion, as the natural branches of a s^ock before a
wild branch ingrafted, therefore it is called the Kingdom of Israel, Acts 1.
6. though it contain all saints (Israelites and Gentiles) because its primitive
glory and principal; ^elites s^all (...) preemi^ in Christ's ^gdom, above
Saints.
shall be Isreal's, for indeed the Israelites shall be first raised to this
glory, and at Jerusalem will Christ begin to show himself, and then by and
from the Israelites shall glory descend to the Gentiles, as the Gospel first
did, ^ouble ful^ of the Gen^
Luke 24. 47. there is a double fullness of the Gentiles, Romans 11, 12. 15. 25.

One is, that which is to be from the time of the Jews rejection, till their
calling again, verse 25. while the Gentiles alone, without the Israelites are
Gods people, a set number of persons, and a set degree of grace and glory is
appointed to them; which accomplished is called their fullness, and till that
is fully done, the Israelites must be kept out.

Another fullness of the Gentiles, is a set number of persons converted to the
says, and certain degrees of grace and glory to come to them upon the taking
in of the Israelites again to be Gods people, verse 12. 15. which shall be so
great an increase, as if they received life from the dead, and shall be much
more then what they got by the Jews rejection; this indeed is called the
fullness of the Israelites, Romans 11. 12. but from this fullness shall come in a
greater fullness to the Gentiles then ever they had before, both greater
degrees of grace and glory* therefore it is said the Kings of the earth, that
is, ^rists king^ (...) at all the ^ribes.
of the Gentiles bring their g^ory into it, Rev. 21. 24. 26. that is, it
swallowed up all former glory of others, and also for multitudes there shall be
more nations of the Gentiles converted then were, So all Nati^ of the earth
(...) be converted.
even all the nations of the earth, Mal. 1. 11. Thus much for the Subjects of
this Kingdom, which shall be a world of Saints with some wicked (few in
comparison) slaves and tributaries. The priviledge^ of it.


Thirdly, now consider the Privileges of this Kingdom, which are wonderful
(as though it be so large yet) first all the Subjects of it that are freemen,
^. All its Su^jects, except slaves, shall be holy and (...) Saints* (...)
c^ites among them.
shall be holy, and not seemingly Saints, but true Saints, not any sinner, Isa.
35. 8. and 60. 21. Rev. 21. 27. and 22, 14, 15. Zach. 14. 20, 21. yea no
hypocrite shall be there, Rev. 22. 15. none that makes a lie, Isa. 60. 21.
(that is, in profession by hypocrisy) as Tit. 1. 16. and Rev. 21. 27. nothing
that defiles or works abomination shall be there (now hypocrites defile and
work abominations) for this Kingdom being administered by Christ, and so many
Saints raised from the dead, how can hypocrites be undiscerned? None are to be
in this Kingdom, as free subjects of it, but such as shall be saved, being
elected, Rev. 21. 27. Christ the Lamb has a Book of life, written out of the
Book of the Fathers election, in which are the names of all that shall partake
of the Privileges of this Kingdom, and they are only such as are in the
Fathers book of Election, as appears, because they are opposed to sinners and
to the damned, Rev. 21. 7, 8. which are only reprobates: so that it is most
probable, that no person shall be excommunicated as proving bad, nor any of the
children of these Saints prove naught, but that all that shall be borne of
them, shall be elect and prove Saints, None in Christ^ Kingdom shall prove
(...) excommunicate, all their children shall be elect and ^ain^^.
Isa. 59. is a prophecy of Isreal's badnesse and helplesnesse before his
convertion and call the Christianity; for the next chapter is applied to it,
Rev. 21. 24. and the Apostle, Romans 11. speaking of their fall now expected
after the Gentiles `applies this, Romans 11. 25. to the 33. quoting this Isa. 59.
20, 21. and shew^ that all Israel shall be saved, that is, either all Gentiles
and Jews joined, in one in this new world, or all that of Israel shall be
converted, and that is all of them, as all were rejected, Romans 11. 32. for the^
be all elected, verse. 28. for the Covenant* that is, of election, (as is
explained, Romans 11. 27, 28.) is with their seed^, that is, all the children for
ever, Isa. 59. 25. for to these days God has reserved the harvest of his
elect to come in, and all former times have had but the first fruits or
sprinkling of the elect; for in these times there shall be no sorrow or
weeping, Revel. 21. 4.

Now, if any of these, or their children, should prove hypocrites or wicked
persons, it would more grieve them then any outward affliction, so that they
could not have everlasting joy, neither could sorrow nor sighing fly away, as
it is Prophesied, Isa. 35. 10. Therefore all that enjoy this Kingdom, are
called the seed* of the blessed, they and their offspring, Isa. 65. 23. And
they are called Gods elect, verse. 22.

Thus there shall be general holiness in all persons, so there shall be much
Holiness, In Christ's ^^gdom holi^e shall be ^atey them e^^ it was on ^rth.
greated then ever was, either in Israelites or Gentiles, Isa. 60. 21, 22.
Zach. 12. 8. Isa, 33. 5, 6. The feeble shall be as David, and David as God, as
the Angel of the Lord; that is, as Christ: The meaning whereof is, that the
lowest and meanest Saint amongst them shall be exceeding high in grace, for
they shall have very great familiarity with Christ, and eminent impressions
from him, Rev. 22. 24. For Satan shall be chained up, who is the tempter, ^than
shall be ^ained, original ^rruption re^ained.
Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3. And original corruption shall be so restrained and
over-mastered, that it shall not sell any of them under sin, or lead them
into captivity to it, though yet it shall be in their souls, but as an enemy in
chains: For such shall be the government of those times by Christ and the
Saints raised from the dead* and most of the promises and threatenings in
Scripture accomplished, that it shall be a life much of sense, little (in
comparison) of faith, and therefore shall so yoke original sin as that it
shall get little or no ground of them; and that which crowns all this, is,
that there shall be no more decay, nor backsliding in holiness

There has been an opinion, (...) No back^ding in this ^ingdome.
that there shall be a backsliding before Christ's coming, as indeed there was
before the ruin of Jerusalem after Christ's death, and was a sign of it,
Matthew. 24. 12. and perhaps there shall be the like before his setting up of
this his Kingdom, but there is not the least hint in Scripture of a
backsliding after his Kingdom is set up, before his coming to the last
general Judgment: As for that Luke. 18. 8. it is evidently meant (not of his
coming to the last Judgment, but of his coming in a Providentiall way for a
particular help to his people, as the scope of the Parable shows, verse, 1.)
and indeed backsliding is not competible with the glorious estate of this
Kingdom, for there shall be no sighing or tears, and no curse, but they shall
observe the Lord, Rev. 22. 3. Therefore there can be no backsliding, for then
sighing and tears, and a curse, must needs come sooner or later, and verse.
14. there is the tree of Life, and a right to eat of it, therefore they shall
not decay, but be overcommers, Rev. 2. 7. and therefore God himself shall be
with them, Rev. 21 3. that is, an immediate fellowship with God, That (...)
diate fel^^ with God.
and thereby and not by ordinances, but by God and the Lamb, that is, they
shall be edified immediately from God in Christ, and as they had before the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the gesture and manner of which, Christ makes a
signification of this Kingdom of his, in which they shall rule as he in a
kind of equality, The (...) to last but (...) this (...) comm^^
yea in his stead, Luke 22. 27. 29, 30. This Sacrament is but to last till the
next coming of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 26, that is till he come to set up this his
Kingdom, the Privileges of which it seals to us in a fellow-like gesture of
sitting at a Table together, and serving but till he come and give us this
Kingdom; Sitting at (...) Lords Supp^
it implies that it shall then cease and with it all other Ordinances, but
immediately feed from God in Christ.

Now what comes immediately from God is not subject to change or decay, What
come ^^mediately (...) God not S^ to change.
as the highest Heavens, and that Earth which was without form, called a Chaos
created in the beginning of the first day, and also the Soul of man, these
things made out of nothing immediately from God, decay not at all, whereas all
other things created out of something else, are subject to change; wher^fore
since there shall be the Throne of God and of the Lamb, they shall all serve
him, Rev. 22. 3. And Christ will hold them up in fullness of grace, Christ will
them up (...) of grd^
though not in full perfection of any grace, till the last general Judgment
and their translation into Heaven; which translation of theirs shall not be
from a delivered estate but from an estate of greatest holiness that ever was
upon Earth; for therefore is that Holy and Glorious estate provided for them on
Earth, to prepare them for Heaven; therefore they must not be delivered from it
when Christ comes to fetch them to Heaven at the last Judgment.

And as there shall be a fullness of Holiness, 6 A full (...) to all Prayers.
so there shall be a full and present answer to all their prayers, Isa. 65. 24.
In that there is no sin to keep good things from them, or to separate
between their God and them.

Secondly, The second^ viledge of Christ's K^dom, a (...) of all tem^blessing^.
whence follows that there shall be all fullness of all temporal blessings,
as peace, safety, riches, health, long life, and whatsoever else was enjoyed
under any Monarchy, or can be had in this world, Rev 21. 7. They that shall
enjoy this Kingdom which is described from verse. 1. to 7. are called
over-commers, and that which they shall enjoy in it is the inheritance of all
things, that is, what ever can be had in this world, They shall (...) them
wit^nesse.
that may make their lives comfortable, they shall have for them and their
children for ever, and that with a peculiar sweetning, for through them, they
shall have God for their God, and they be his children also, Isa. 33. 16. to
23. where fullness of peace and quietness is promised to the Subjects of this
Kingdom, ^pted from ^odily trou^
verse. 24. and exemption from all bodily troubles, which also with abundance
of all things, is promised, Isa* 35. throughout the chapter, and Isa, 60.
throughout; so Isa. 65. 13. to the end, it is meant of this Kingdom; for he
says that verse. 17. which is applied to this Kingdom only, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
Rev. 21, 4* 5. of making new Heavens and Earth; and in this Kingdom shall be
long life, (...) life an ^teed years.
an hundred years shall every one have, and no infant or any other shall dye
sooner; they shall last long as a Tree, verse. 20. 23. and there shall be no
sickness or grief or trouble to consume their strength, ^icknesse or (...).
and thus it shall pass from Father to Son, unto many generations, that is,
many hundred years, verse. 21, 22, 23. but the wicked amongst them, though they
live long shall be cursed, ver. 20. Zach. 14. 11. Rev. 21. 4. There shall be no
more death, that is, not an exemption from a natural, ^iolent death
but there shall be no violent or untimely death, by any grief, sickness, and
trouble, therefore when David was to have the Temple settled in his son
Solomon, it is promised the People should have a place of their own, and not
wonder or be afflicted any more, 2 Samuel 7. 10. 12, 13. in reference to which it
is said of this Kingdom of Christ's, which was to come under the Seventh
Trumpet, Rev. 11 15. I say it is said of this Kingdom and that with an Oath to
assure us of it, That there shall be time no longer, Rev. 10. 5, 6. 10, 5. 6.
^nger time (...).
that is, no longer time for sin, misery and sinners to sway in the world:
For of this it is principally meant, that old things are passed away, and all
things are become new, Rev. 21* 4, 5. wherefore in the time and days of this
Kingdom it shall be as in Salomons time, 1 King 4. 2. The People of Iudath and
Israel were many as the sand of the Sea, eating and drinking, and making merry.
In this time they shall Plant, build, marry, beget children from generation to
generation, in perfect peace, and though they shall dye at last, yet it shall
be in a full old age; ^he wicked (...) either ^d (...)
but their Children shall grow up in their room, for all the wicked in the
world, shall either be ruined or enslaved, and Satan wholly restrained from
tempting them to sin, or others to trouble them, and original corruption
shall be kept in, as not to break forth in any gross way, therefore no
affliction shall break forth upon them; but as sin shall so dwell in them as
they shall need Christ's righteousness to justify both them and their works;
So that as they shall be lively sinners, though greatly sanctified, so shall
death, though no other affliction before death seize upon them. This shall be
the glory of the estate of Christ's Kingdom, a middle state betwixt the state
of ordinary Christians in heaven, which must take for heaven, for heaven is so
high above our capacities, that we cannot conceive it till we have enjoyed this
of Christ's Kingdom; and of this Kingdom there is almost all that we have
said, recorded by way of Prophecy together in Psalm. 97. which Psalm the
Apostle shows is meant of Christ, Heb. 1. 6. because he applies to Christ what
is said in this Psalm, Worship him all ye Gods, or Angels, for if Princes be
called Gods, then much more may Angels be so called, who are Thrones and
Dominions, and the Psal^^ it self she^eth its intent is the Kingdom of
Christ, and so that in the Hebrews shows: for chap. 1. 5. he has spoken of
Christ's birth, now of his eternal generation of his Person (This day have I
begotten thee) and the birth of his humane nature in the fullness of time ( I
will be to him a Father, and he my son) then he proceeds and says when he
brings him into the world; that is not at his birth (of which he had spoken
before) but at his bringing him to reign (for so the Psalm quoted carries it)
Christ shall come with his Fathers glory, and by his power into the world to
reign; then shall the Angels worship him, for they shall wait on him as his
servants, his dominion shall be over the earth, that is, the continent, and
multitude of Isles, Psalm. 97. 1. And its said, he reigns, because its a sure
prophecy, and so speaks as if it were in present, as is usual in the
Prophets, to speak as in present of a future thing, He shall with Majesty, and
with Justice, verse. 2. that is, rewarding the righteous, and punishing the
wicked, whom he shall destroy round about with fire, verse. 3. and his Majesty
shall be evident to all, (...). 4, 5, 6. whereupon shall follow shame and
amazement to all sinners, verse. 7. even to such as he kills not; which sinners
are set out by one sin for all the rest, viz. the breath of the second
Commandment, because of that is God jealous; and because a maine fin in
Popery, in whose days Christ shall come and set up his Kingdom, is Idolatry
against the second Commandment.

Thus also all they who are to enjoy the privileges of this Kingdom of
Christ, His people not infected with Popery.
are described, by not being infected with Popery, Rev. 14. 2. and 10. 4. And
therefore such only are said to escape the poison of Popery, whose names were
in the Lambs Book, Revel. 13. 8. that is, Christ has a roll of all his
subjects.
enrolled to enjoy the Lambs Kingdom, as is expressed, Rev. 21. 27. For as the
Father has a Roll of all such as shall live in heaven, (which is his Kingdom)
so has the Lamb for his Kingdom; and this is subordinate to that, whosoever
is in the one, is in the other: And not only such are in the Lambs Book, as
escape Popery, but all Saints from the worlds beginning; for ever since was ^e
slain, and thereupon had a Kingdom assigned him, and a ^ooke, in which he
enrolled all for whom he died, as Rev. 13. 8. As all sinners shall be ashamed
therefore when Christ reigns, so shall all Saints be joyed (and especially the
Israelites, whose glory shall be chiefest, Ps. 97. 8, 9.) for they shall have
at his kingdom a harvest of light or joy, They shall then have an harvest of
light and joy.
Esa. 65. 14, 17. The seed of which is sown in Gods purposes and promises, and
in their holiness, and afflictions; in which, though the harvest of their joy
appears not* but is covered, yet it shall surely spring up at this Kingdom of
Christ's; and in hope of this, the Saints should greatly joy all present as
shall be showed afterward; and in pledge of this, they have all present
deliverances, verse. 10. Thus much for the evening, or first part of Christ's
Kingdom.

Now, when this Kingdom of Christ has lasted to many generations, the slaves
and tributaries to this Kingdom will be grown to multitudes, A little
disturbance Christ's Kingdom shall have.
so prophe^ied of under the name of Gog and Magog, Rev. 20. 8. Ezekiel. 38. 39.
upon whom the Devil shall be let loose, to sti^ them up to combine to ruin
the subjects of Christ's Kingdom, which Satan shall draw them to by some
deceitful trick, Rev. 20. 7, 8. For if they were not deceived, they would never
be drawn to assault the Saints, of whose glory and power they had experience
through so many generations: Which trouble to the Saints shall not be long,
That trouble not long.
but for a little season, Rev. 20* 3. For it shall only be a violent and sudden
assault, the Devil having been so long restrained, being now at liberty, will
violently, in a most sudden hurry, draw in all the wicked of the Earth to
assault the Saints, but there shall not an hair of any of their heads fall to
the ground (for they were set above all trouble at the beginning of Christ's
Kingdom) but Christ will suddenly come from Heaven, and ^ith fire kill all
these wicked ones, Rev. 20. 9* even every Mothers child at this his coming, he
will not leave one wicked one on earth, whom he will not slay, for this is the
only time for their first death; Every wicked one must die (as Heb. 9. 27.)
Christ's. third and last coming.
and then come to Judgment. And the wicked that live to the approaching of the
last judgment, shall die a violent death, every one of them in the world: and
this is the third and last coming of Christ (which has been only considered,
and the former, namely, his second coming, has not been minded.

Thus by his second and third coming, He will ruin (...) world of Nations,
even all that are wicked, with a first death (besides their second death, to
which he will condemn them at his last general judgment, Rev. 20, 14, 15.)
even as it is said of him, Ps. 2. 8, 9, and 45. 5. and 110. 5, 6, 7. But at his
first coming, when he came to live on earth like one of us, he came not to hurt
any, but to save, Joh. 3. 17. Joh. 12. 47. And Christ slayes thus many when he
comes to reign, because his Footstool, which they be, is so much the higher,
Ps. 110. 1. and his glory the more: Therefore, Ps. 97. 7. in his Kingdom he is
high above all; therefore the Father also reprobates so many which are to be his
footstool.

And this occasion will Christ take, How Christ begins the last general
judgment.
to come to the last general Judgment: not any backsliding of his people,
but an assault of the wicked against his people; whom to destroy, Christ will
come from heaven, and so begin the last general Judgment; before which he
will also in a moment* The assault of the wicked on the godly occasions Christ's
last coming to judgment.
in the twinkling of an eye, change the bodies of all his Saints that are not
dead before, but alive on earth at this his coming, 1 Cor. 15. 50, 51, 52.
Which change is equivalent to death (for all must some way or other die) but
the wicked then alive on earth, shall be killed with fire every one of them,
and not one left at this time^ but the Sa^its then living shall bear a change
of a moment, a great difference twixt them and the wicked, and he will raise up
the dead bodies of the Saints, who lived and died during this Kingdom of
Christ's, and they together who were living at this last coming of Christ, but
were changed in a moment, shall all together meet the Lord Jesus in the air,
coming from heaven again, and after this shall never be absent from him any
more. Christ indeed went from them the two former times, after he came to them;
but after this coming, he will take them with him, and they shall never be
parted, because he has now gathered together all the elect, and ruined all the
wicked, which was never done till now.

For this purpose, 1 These. 4. 13. to 18. explained.
consider, 1 Thef. 4. 13, to 18. in which place, the Apostle speaks not of the
believers then living (though he speak it in their person) nor of them who
should live at Christ's first coming to set up his Kingdom, for they shall not
then be killed, though the ungodly shall be then slain (as was showed before)
but the Apostle says it of them who should live when Christ's coming was to the
last general judgment, for he speaks of them who should not die, but be
changed in a moment, which befell not the Apostles, nor any believers in those
days, but is to be the Lot only of those who lived in Christ's Kingdom, and
that at the dawning of the morning of it immediately before his coming to the
last and general judgment; and they that slept; that is, died in the time of
Christ's Monarchy, should not be behind them who were alive at Christ's last
coming, for they should be raised up first. For at the last coming of Christ,
he will come and join himself with them who were governing the world all
those Ages of Christ's Kingdom, and the Saints who lived and dyed during that
Kingdom shall be first raised (that is, before the wicked) and then they that
he alive shall be changed (equivalent to death) but though alive, they shall
not prevent the dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4. and then shall all the wicked be raised from
Cain, Rev. 20. 9. to the end: This is the second and last Resurrection, so that
they who live at Christ's coming shall not prevent, that is, be with Christ
before them that dyed during that time of the reign of the Saints over the
world, but one as soon as the other shall meet Christ. And so this place in
the These. does not prove, that all Saints shall lie dead till Christ's last
coming to general Judgment, but they who after Christ's coming, and setting up
his Kingdom, shall live and die, they shall live and dye, they shall be raised
again, and be with Christ as soon as the Saints living when Christ comes: but
the Apostle speaks of this far distant time, as if it were all one, (as I
showed before.)

Now when Christ thus comes and reigns over all the wicked, and changes the
bodies of all living Saints on earth, and raises up all the dead Saints who
dyed during that his Kingdom in which the Saints reigned, and raise up also
all the wicked, dead from Cain to the last wicked man (for all the wicked that
were deadly dead all the time of this Kingdom of the Saints, at last they
shall be raised up) and then is the Dawning, The Morning or most glorious part
of Christ's Kingdom.
and the Morning of the Day of Christ; compared with which, the former part of
Christ's Kingdom was but a Night (though in it self most glorious) for in it,

Differences between the evening and the morning of Christ's day.
Christ showed himself, but withdrew, and ruled by Saints raised up from the
dead; but now Christ shall never withdraw from this visible Throne, till he end
all, and resign the Kingdom, and all be translated from earth to heaven.

and all Saints shall be glorified in body, as Christ is, Phil. 3. 21. 1 John
3. 2. Whereas those of believers, who lived in the first Resurrection, and
ruled the world, had their luster of glory, which held as Christ had the f^r^y
days on earth after his Resurrection, and all Angels and Devils shall be
judged, and all tongues shall confess Christ to be Lord, whilst every Angel,
Saint, Sinner, Devil, shall be absolved or condemned by Christ in his own
humane nature.

whilst inhabited by sinners, though sanctified; but now, in as much as all
Minkind have died, or have bin changed, or translated, the Earth and all
Creatures shall be delivered from the curse, vanity and bondage inflicted on
them when death was on Mankind, and then shall all the Creation be in its
primitive glory, as it was in the first Creation, which is that it hopes for,
Romans 8. 19, etc.
Romans 8. 19. to 24. For that place cannot be meant of the first time of Christ's
Kingdom, but of this last part of it; for all Believers (not only some) shall
have the redemption of their bodies, verse. 23. which all have not in the first
part of Christ's Kingdom: nor can it be meant of Heaven, for into that none
enter but the Elect: but here every Creature shares with Believers in a
proportion: therefore its meant of this general time of Judgment; during all
which time (how long soever it be) and it it shall be a long time (at we shall
show hereafter) all the Creation, and every Creature shall be in its first
glory as when created, and not in vanity and bondage, that is, not abused to
other ends than God made them unto, namely, to show forth Gods glory, and not
to serve man in a way of sin: and all this state of glory of every Creature
shall be beheld by all men raised from the dead, Saints and Sinners, the one
standing on Christ's right hand, and the other on the left.

Now when this is, Of Hell.
then shall the judgment be which we call the Day of Judgment, Mat. 25. 31. to
the end, as Rev. 20. 10. to the end: which finished, the Saints shall be all
carried with Christ for ever into heaven, and the wicked sent with the devil
into hell. Which hell shall not be that which is now called and used for hell,
but another; for the hell that now is, Hell that now is but a prison.
is but a prison, and not the place of execution, and serves only to reserve
condemned spirits, which have no bodies, till the execution at the last day, at
which this hell that now is shall cease and be swallowed up. Which shall be
swallowed up.
Rev. 20. 14. Now this hell which is at present either in the air or seas (for
the spirits and souls of the damned wanting bodies, may be in either place,
because they do not so take up room as bodies do) The sea is thought to be
hell, because the devils called their place the deep Hell in the sea* or air.
, Luke 8. 31. and did run their Hogs into the Sea, as if there was their place.
But some rather think that hell is in the air, in that the devils are said to
be there, the prince of the air: but if it be in the air, its a lower Region
of it, for in the highest Region of the air, or in the fire, which is next
above it, is Paradise, and the place of dead Saints souls. But I think that
hell should not be in the air, because all the air in Scripture, even where
the birds fly, it called heaven. But to be sure, in some of the places of
air, or in the waters, is hell, and not in the earth: perhaps its in those
waters which are above, Genesis 1. 6, 7. Indeed the Apostle sets out them in hell,
by being under earth, Phil. 2. 10. not to show the place, Phil. 2. 10.
for under the earth is nothing but the water and air, in that the earth is
the center and globe, environed with the water and air, and heavens, but to
set out their base and condemned estate, they are trod under-foot, as the most
^asest of creatures, all other being on or over the earth, and the dead bodies
are under earth, which yet must how to Christ: But the hell which shall be the
everlasting torment of all the damned, shall be all this lower and visible
world, All this lower and visible world shall be hell of damned.
all the places of earth, water, air, sun, moon, stars, and the fire, called
the heavens and the earth, (namely, all the heavens, but the third and highest)
that is, all that^ that God made the first part of the first day, before he
made the Light, which is also called Earth, Genesis 1. 1. and the heaven there is
only meant the highest heavens: for out of that earth which was a dark
confused lump (and is therefore called a Chaos) verse. 2. God afterward made the
other lower heaven, as the light, that is, the element of fire, ver. 3. and the
air, calling it heaven, verse. 8. so that all these lower heavens, and earth
habitable, and every creature and ornament were made out of that Chaos, which
God created immediately.

Now at the worlds end God will reduce all these to that Chaos which they were
at first ( as he does man's body to that dust* it was made of) and leave no
order, All then reduced to the Chaos.
comfort, or delight in any place, nor any light (therefore Hell is called
utter darkness) but a mere place for their bodies to subsist in, which shall
live without air, because they shall be made immortal, to be tormented for
ever. For the things which God immediately made out of nothing, shall never
change ( as the highest he ^^e^s, and the Angels in them, and the souls of
men, and this Chaos, called the earth) but all other things, being made out of
something, even out of this earth or Chaos, they shall after a time change, and
so all this world shall, come to an earth or Chaos again, Rev. 20. 11.
Rev. 20. 11. at the last Judgment the earth and heaven vanishes for ever,
that is, the earth and heaven made out of the Chaos the second and third day,
Genesis 19. 10. and they and all works in them returned for ever to a Chaos, or
first dark earth and lump again. So that this visible world is but as a
Stage, on which God, and man, and devils shall act their parts, and then it
shall be removed, and all the furniture thereof; which also is deserved by man's
^in for whom it was made, and on whom God bestowed it: and surely, if Christ
had not kept in and upheld it, Heb. 1. 3. it had run into this Chaos so soon
at man sinned, for confusion is sins proper effect; Confusion is sins proper
effect.
but Christ took it up and upheld it, because he meant to have a Kingdom in
it: which had; and resigned, then shall the world turn to confusion, and
become that Chaos or earth made at first, and so the place of sinning shall be
the everlasting hell, and men of earthly* minds shall have an ever lasting
earth, (as it is called Genesis 1. 1. but not so comfortable as this is) to be
tormented in: And thus as God in an eternal Counsel had ranked all reasonable
creatures into an eternal estate of two sorts, joy or pain, so he did make in
time two places, heaven and earth, immediately out of nothing, to be eternal
places, the one of joy, the other of torment.

Thus you see when hell was made, When hell was made.
but it was quickly covered, and shall not be uncovered till Christ does it at
the last day; at which time, when Christ has all enemies under his feet, even
death (for after the first resurrection none shall die any more) and hell, that
is then present, hell that now is, 1 Cor. 15. 26. 28. Rev. 20. 14, He casting
away all death and hell, All misery swallowed up in hell torments.
(that is, swallowing up all misery in hell torments) then he resignes his
Kingdom, (that is, his administration of things to God, and leaves this world
to what it was at first, and would have been so soon as man sinned, if he had
not stepped in, and all Angels, devils, and men fall into those eternal states
and places, in which God the Father beheld them in his eternal decrees of
Election or Reprobation, and so the Fathers Kingdom come in; namely, that
eternal estate which is called his Kingdom, Matthew. 13. 43. And as all Counsels
about the Creature begin in the Father, so they end in him, and he is for ever
all in all through the Son and holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Thus much for the
manner of Christ's Kingdom.

Thirdly, How long Christ's Kingdom lasts.
consider we the time of its continuance, how long it is to endure, as every
age of mankind (as well as every man in particular) and every Monarchy; for
Christ's Kingdom being in the world, is also to receive a period or end, though
yet this Monarchy of Christ has no end (as we shall show anon) in some sense,
yet in a true sense it has an end, and shall be resigned and finished, or as
that Text so often quoted shows expressly, 1. Cor. 15. 24.

Now to find out its time of expiring, and show how long it is to last, it will
be considerable that there is of Christ's Monarchy a double estate; One is, the
evening or first part* the other is, the morning or latter part. Now it is the
first part or evening which is usually taken for Christ's Kingdom, and is that
of which we are now speaking, and the duration of it is expressly determined by
the Scripture, which says, it shall be a thousand years, or ten generations:
Rev. 10. 4. it is observable, that in all other prophesies, times were
obscured, by speaking generally (as a time, times, etc.) or at plainest,
putting days for years, as Dan. 12. 11, 12. but here is plainly said, a
thousand years, so that it is not to be questioned, or interpreted as a dark
saying, for so we should slight, and sin against Christ, whose death and
resurrection bought this opening the Book. Rev. 5. 6, 7, 9. that whereas before
all prophesies were sealed up, as Dan. 12. 4, 8. now they be open, as Rev. 5.
6. 7. 9.

I know, the taking this in the Revelation, of a thousand years literally, has
for a long time and of old, and to this day been condemned by worthy men for
an heresy; But God left the next Ages to the first after the Apostles, to fall
into diverse mistakes for the bringing error and darkness, out of which
Anti-Christianisme was to arise, for many generations; amongst which, this was
one, That they abused this sweet and refreshing Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom
lasting a thousand years, and perverted their opinion of it to a kind of
Mahumetan Paradise, of sensual and sinful pleasures. Wherefore holy men
taking up that opinion as they laid it, never examined it, to find the gold and
separate it from the dross, as it was done also (and is to this day with
diverse other opinions by Popery abused) and so they found not out a spiritual
sense of every Scripture, which contained any thing about this Kingdom of
Christ's; and carrying it spiritually, they rejected all literal sense in it:
and they were not wholly mistaken, for there is a spiritual sense in most of
those Scriptures, besides a literal (as was showed before.) That which is
literally applied to this time of Christ's Kingdom, Rev. 21. 4, ^. i^ also
spiritually applied, 2 Cor. 5. 17. But their error was, that ( though truly
they expounded these places spiritually, yet) they rejected all literal sense
of them; whereas besides their spiritual sense, they had a sense literal,
respecting this time of Christ's Kingdom. And it is clear that beyond the first
Age, even an hundred years after Christ it is recorded by one who lived in the
days of the Apostle. John, who was the last Apostle, it was the joint opinion
of all believers, that Christ should have a Kingdom on earth, which should
(after it was come to perfection) endure a thousand years. And this is the
time which I call the evening, or first part of Christ's day: and its duration,
besides the time of its imperfection, or embryonie, before it be settled. Now
there was not any of the foregoing Monarchies of the world, which in full state
and strength endured so long. The first Monarchy, the Babylonian, was but 70.
years, the Grandfather, Father, and Child; and so we might show of the rest,
that they were much short of this of Christ's continuance. Yea, that of Israel,
which fore-shewed this of Christ's, rose but up in Saul and David, was perfect
in Solomon, and declined in the next, in Re^o^oam.

Now, A little interruption when the 1000 year^ be expired.
when these thousand years are expired, there shall be a little interruption
for a while, Rev. 20. 3. by the letting loose of Satan, and his stirring up Gog
and M^gog to disturb this Kingdom, Rev. 20. 3, 7, 8, 9. but it shall be but a
little while; only a Combination, and an Attempt, but no hurt, but fatal ruin
to the enemy ( but till the thousand years be expired, there shall not be any
attempt against the Kingdom.) And when this interruption of cloud is blown
away, there shall arise the Morning, The day of judgment lasts a long time.
or latter part, and most glorious time of Christ's Day and Kingdom (that which
we call the last judgment) which shall last a great while: indeed the
Scripture sets not down the time how long th^s shall last, but it is evident
it must last a long while.

First, 1 It may be a 1000 years. A further description of the Morning, or
most glorious part of Christ's day and Kingdom, which is the last judgment,
and shall last very long.
I know not, but it may last a thousand years, as the other is to do, because
this is the time in which Gods Mercy, Justice, Truth, Power, etc. is to be
gloriously revealed before all Mankind and Devils, and the Truth of every
Title of Scripture cleared, and the Reason, and Righteousness of all Gods
administrations to Men and Devils revealed, Romans 2. 5. So that every sinner is
to be silenced in his reasonings, or convinced, that he said and thought
amiss, Iud. 14, 15. Now this must require much time.

Secondly; This is the time in which Jesus Christ is to triumph, and Lord it
over all reasonable creatures, to be worshipped and acknowledged by every one
in Heaven, Earth, and under the Earth, Phil. 2. 10, 11. which is referred to
this time, Romans 14. 10, 11. For during the other part of Christ his Kingly
Reign in the thousand years, 2. Its the time of Christ's triumph.
he is not always visible; but if he were, yet they under the Earth, the dead
Reprobates from Cain to them that were slain, when he set up his Kingdom, do
not bow to him, and with their tongues confess him; and the devils then are
chained up, but they do not bow to him: But at this time shall Christ sit on
the Throne of his Glory, and every knee shall bow to him, and every tongue
shall confess him Lord; therefore surely it shall be no short time. In all the
time he is to have when he resigns, the Kingdom and People are divided
according to Election and Reprobation: wherefore this being all the time,
surely it will be a long time: This is the reward of his great suffering, a
Reward having respect to all Creatures (though in respect of the Elect he has
another reward) Phil. 2. 10, 11. Therefore God has given him this Name: Of
this, God has much spoken of to him, Ps. 110. 1. and to his enemies and
people, and Christ has sitten waiting till it is done, ever since his
Ascension, Heb. 10. 12, 13. Therefore, surely God will not huddle it over in a
small or short time. God has given a long time to every work, God has given
a long time to every work.
to Satan, to Antichrist, and will he straiten Christ in this his time? when
works in which God is glorified but by accident, have a long day; shall not
Christ's day be long, in which God is so directly glorified? Phil. 2. 11. There
can be no work, besides Heavens glory, so pleasing to God and all Saints, and
so comely in it self, as this, for Christ to sit on the Throne, and all knees
bow to him. Therefore as we do with works, comely and very pleasing God will
draw it out, and lengthen its time.

Thirdly, Else the solemnity of it, were to little purpose.
Because the solemnity of it were to little purpose, if it were not to last
long ( as we deride great preparations and pomp for a short show) the whole
Creation groans for the liberty, and Glory of this time, Romans 8. 19, 22. For
this place as was before showed, is necessarily meant of this last and general
Judgment, and only of it, every Creature in specie, or kind shall be eased of
the vanity which Man's sin, and Gods curse has loaded it withal, and shall
have its primitive glory which it waits for, and it shall last but till this
day of Judgment lasts. Now to what purpose were that omnipotent restitution of
all things, and that large expense of rich Majesty and Bounty, to cloth all
Creatures with glory, if it were to be but for a little season; surely this is
all the time in which Sinners and Saints, good and bad Angels, shall be in one
place, and in which mankind shall behold the glory of this visible world made
for them, and subjected to them in the Creation: therefore the time shall be
long.

But if this time be so long, Object.
the Saints shall be kept long from Heaven. Answ.


First, I answer: God that has eternity for them in heaven, may lengthen out
their time in this world, and yet recompense them.

Secondly, This is a Heaven, a Paradise, and fit and next preparative for
Heaven: who can lose by being kept from heaven, by beholding Christ his most
glorious Triumph over all Creatures?

What shall be done to take up so much time?

All Gods attributes shall be set open before us, Object.
as he has declared them in the Word, Answ.
by Creation, What shall be done all that while.
Providence, Redemption; and Christ his highest Kingly glory shall be showed
us, on which alone one might gaze a thousand years: with great joy, the whole
Scripture in every Tittle of it shall be showed to be fulfilled, how every act
of God in the world is according to it, in riding the world by the Word, and by
it he made it, and according to this word shall be showed to us, the reason of
every dealing of God with Saints and sinners, and all the works of Angels and
Devils, (which are infinitely more and greater than Mankind, because they have
ever wrought since the world began, and are mighty in wit and spirit) and all
the world of mankind shall be revealed to us all, yea the ends, intents and
counsels of men's hearts shall be made manifest, not only to the man's self,
but to every one.

In a word, every act of reasonable Creatures, being immortal Creatures
(though the body once die) is immortal, the thoughts, words, acts, and shall
not only abide for ever in hell or heaven, but shall be revived and brought
forth before all the world in this great day, in as much as every thing was in
Gods sight, it shall be openly showed before all the world, Every thing shall
be made manifest.
this is taught when it is said, Every thing shall be made manifest; for this
is to make them manifest, when they be declared before all.

And all those works from Adam to the last of mankind, shall be orderly and
clearly proceeded in by books, Rev. 20. 12. as in a Court of Justice,
wherefore we need not run hazard to know what is done in other places, for we
shall see and hear all one day, and this may well take up much time though by
an infinite power God will do it, yet it shall be done by Christ as man, and
before men, and therefore leasurely.

Now when this work is dispatched, Christ resignes his Kingdom.
and the final sentence is pronounced upon all creatures, both the blessed and
cursed, as is expressed, Matthew. 25. 31, to the end, then will Christ resign
the Kingdom to the Father, and this world, together with his Kingdom shall
end.

Object. How Christ's Kingdom is for ever.
But you will say, though this be long that Christ shall reign, yet its not
ever, but its said, that he shall reign for ever.

Ans. I answer it is said to be for ever, though it is thus, and at this time
to end (as the Apostle says expressly, he shall then resign) yet it is said to
be for ever;

First, 1. To the worlds end.
because it is to be to the worlds end, and the end of time, and therefore is
truly for ever, as Moses Statutes were said to be, because to last till Christ
came, and the end of that Discipline, Christ and his Saints shall stand on the
earth at the latter day Job 19. 25. that it shall be the last that shall rule
and possess the earth, for so soon as they resign all, this world shall end.

Secondly, 2. It shall never be swallowed up by any other.
because this Kingdom shall never be swallowed up by any other, or after
Monarchy (as the former were by the latter, and all by this of Christ)
therefore it is said, Dan. 2. 44. It shall not be destroyed, it shall not be
left to other people.

Thirdly, 3. It lasts longer than any other.
because it lasts long, yea longer than ever any Monarchy, and we say of long
lasters, that they last ever.

Fourthly, because though his Kingdom be resigned, yet it is but a
translation, 4. The resurrection is but a translation.
or swallowing up of it into glory: it remains, but is perfected not in the
Sons, but in Gods hand; not in this world, but in heaven.

The estate also of the Church shall never decay in grace or peace; though once
it shall be assaulted, and the Saints, after this Kingdom shall never dye,
they who lived and dyed before it began, were raised up and died no more, they
who lived in the 1000. years of it died, but together with the Saints found
alive at Christ's last coming, they are raised up and changed, and are all with
Christ during the last Judgment, and when it is done, they with him go into
heaven, and are ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. therefore in these regards is
that true, Ps. 102. 27, 28. God has no end of years, and the children of his
servants shall continue, and be established before him, that is, abide for ever
in glory as he is. Thus much for the third thing, the Duration of Christ's
Kingdom, how long it shall continue, and when it shall end.

Now follows the fourth thing to be considered, When this Monarchy of Christ
is to begin.
namely, the beginning of this Monarchy, when the time shall come that it shall
be set up.

This Monarchy of Christ is to be the last in the world (as it is to last to
the end of this world) and therefore it is to begin when all the four
Monarchies are expired and ended, Dan. 2. 34. this stone is to simite the Image
on the feet, that is, it is to be set up, when the Monarchy is passed the Head,
Arms, Breast, Thighs, and is come to the Legs, and that in the Feet, or Toes of
it, which is the fourth and last Monarchy, namely, the Roman, after it is
divided into the East, and West Monarchy, and their Weste^ne is broken into
many petty Kingdoms, then when their reign is expired, shall the Monarchy of
Christ come, Dan. 2. 44. In the days of these Kings, not one, but many, when
many Kingdoms are made up out of the Roman Monarchy, shall God set up Christ's
Kingdom: So Dan. 7. 3, 27, etc. Four Beasts, that is, States and Monarchies
(though called four Kingdoms.) The first, was the Babylonian then in being,
and expiring; the second, the Medes and Persians; the third, the Grecians under
Alexander, as a Leopard, and with wings swiftly over-comming the world* the
fourth; the Roman, which was stronger, and more stronger than all the forme^,
because of the many changes that should be in it, as Ten Horns or Kingdoms*
rise out of it, and among them another fearful little Horn, Dan. 7. 7. which
is interpreted, ver. 9, 20, 23, 24, etc. The sum of which is, that after the
Roman Monarchy was parted in two legs, the Eastern and Western Monarchy, in
this Western Monarchy (for the Eastern, which contain now the Persian, and much
of the Turk, Tartar, etc. he passes over) in that the Churches were in those
days to be in the Western parts of the world; I say, in this Western Monarchy
should ten Horns or Kingdoms arise, and among them another little horn, most
blasphemous. Now by the ten Horns, are meant ten Kingdoms, which rose out of
the Western Roman Monarchy, and by the little Horn so blasphemous, is meant
the Papacy, The little horn is the Papacy.
which rose up among, or together with their Ten Kingdoms, as is expressed, Rev.
17. 12. For about the same time that the Bishop of Rome usurped Papal dignity,
or Authority, these Kingdoms in Europe began to be set up, and to become
several distinct Kingdoms; but by the little horn, is meant the Papacy, as
appears, because of its base words, Dan. 7, 8. 21, 25. and its continuing for
a time, times, and half a time, is only applied to the Papacy, Rev. 12. 14.
Dan. 12. 7. and is the same time named in the same phrase, and the same Oath,
which in reference to the Papacies prevailing is used, Rev. 10. 5, 6. and
therefore he says, time shall be no longer, expressing the end of the Papacies
prevailing by the general phrase of the time, because it was prophesied of in
Daniel in those dark phrases, of time, times, and half a time, now whereas it
is said to rise up after the Ten; whereas Rev. 17. 12. the Beast or Papacy is
said to be one horn with the Ten, to be ruinated, v. 16. whereas this roots up
three of the ten Kingdoms or horns; I think in Daniel is meant, the whole
Kingdom, or the Papacy, but he instanceth in the last edition of it, in which
somewhat of the Popedom shall be ruined, but yet shall be Papal and
Antichristian (as perhaps the faction of Jesuits) but this going immediately
before Christ's Kingdom, and lasting to it as Dan. 7. declares, it must be
meant of the ten Kingdoms with the Papacy, because the Revelation show* that
these immediately go before Christ's Kingdom, and are swallowed up by it, Rev.
12. 23. to 16. 2. These. 2. 8. Rev. 17. 12, 13, 14. Wherefore to find out the
beginning of Christ's Kingdom, we must search out how long this part of the
Roman Empire, which fell into ten Kingdoms, and the Papacy shall endure, for
their end is the beginning of Christ's Kingdom.

Now how long this Papacy shall last is told Daniel, How long Papacy shall list.
but hiddenly and sealed up, so that he could not understand it, because it was
about the Gentiles converted, which was a mystery not known till Christ came,
Dan. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9. But in the Rev. Christ by his death purchased the
privilege to open this secret, Rev. 5. 4. to 11. therefore Rev. 10. 25. 6.
Christ comes with the book open, whereas to Daniel it was shut, and takes the
same Oath that he did in Dan. Chap. 12. 7, 8. because it is about the same
thing, and shows what is meant by time, times, and half a time, which in Dan.
were set down in these dark words, which none could interpret, he says that it
is meant of the seventh trumpet, Rev. 10. 6, 4. more plainly, Rev. 11. 2, 13.
that it is meant of 42. months (containing months by the ^oon) or 1260. which
is all one: thus also, Rev. 12. speaking of the same thing, verse. 6. he says
it was, 1260. days, and verse. 14. it was time, times, and half a time; which
is Daniels phrase; so that they showed Daniel so darkly, that none could
interpret it, but Christ expounded it to be 42. months, or 1260. days, a day
signifying a year, thus long from the beginning of the 10. Kingdoms in
Europe, and the Papacy shall prevail over the holy people, and Saints of God,
and then shall it be no more, but Christ will come and set up his Kingdom.

But then the great question is, When the ten Kingdoms and Papacy began in
Europe.
when the ten Kingdoms and Papacy began in Europe?

I answer, Historians are diverse in account, some 4. or 6. years, but about
the year of our Lord and Christ 400. or 406. the Bishop of Rome began to
usurp Papal power, and about that time some of the ten Kingdoms in Europe
began to arise; now let ut reckon it 406. when it begun, and this is the last
account; then add to, 406. the 1260. and it makes 1666. 1666. the number of
the Reast, and the end of the Papacy.
which is the time made the member of the Beast, Revel. 13. 18. that is the
Papacies duration, Dan. 5. 26. thy Kingdom is numbered and finished, in which
number the millenary or thousand is left out, because it comes seldom, as we
use to say; the Spanish Armado coming against us, was overthrown in 588. and
the Papists Powder Treason in 605. so then the end of the Papacy is to be
Anno. 1666. For the conceiving of which, we must interpret that Revel. Rev.
11. expounded.
11. 1. to 15. where by the Temple and them that worship in it, it meant true
worshipping, and truths about worship, which God would preserve from the
prevailing of Popery; where by the Court and holy. City is meant, the general
and common sort of Protestants, over whom there should be a prevailing, and
that by Popery, which is meant by the Gentiles, as Rome, Christendom, or
rather now Antichristendome is expressed by Rome, Heathenish, verse. 8. the City
where that is, ( by whose power our Lord, that is, Christ was crucified, for by
the power of Rome, when it was Heathenish, did they crucify Christ) now this
place means not Rome as it was Heathenish, as we shall show anon, but
describing it by what it once was, it also calls the subjects, that is, the
Popish Gentiles, so that the sum of the second verse, is, that Popery should
prevail over true Christians 42. months, during all which time, there should
be witnesses of God against Popery, verse. 3. who in a sad and low estate, in
sackcloth, should oppose Popery, and that as long as Popery prevailed, for
1260. days, are the same with 42. months, that is also expressed, Rev. 12. 6.
14. And when the time grew up, these witnesses who were but single persons,
shall grow to be both in Magistracy and Ministry, and therefore are called
two, that is, of two ranks to be Christians, and therefore are called two
Candlestickes, Rev. 11. 4. that is, Churches, and these witnesses shall vex and
plague the Papacy, Rev. 5. 6. but when their time, and also the Papacies draw
toward an end, verse. 7. Indeed our Translation reads it, when they have
finished their testimony, but it is better read according to the Greek; and
this scope of the place ( when they are finishing) that is, when their time of
conflict with the Papists draws toward an end, then the Beast, that is, the
Papacy, for so it is called, shall war and kill them, and they lie dead in
the streets, verse. 8. that is, in the streets of Rome; for it was Romes
Authority, by whom Christ was Crucified (as I said before) and yet here is not
meant the same state of Rome, in which it was when it crucified Christ; namely,
Heathenish, as some expound it; for it was called Egypt, and spiritually
Sodom; which Heathenish Rome is not: for a special appellation of wickedness
is only proper to Rome Antichristian, but the Act of Heathenish Rome, in
crucifying Christ by her Deputy Pilate, is here mentioned to cast a hatred upon
the Antichristian state, which is in the same place, when being Heathenish
Christ was crucified, as because this state Antichristian was now crucifying of
Christ's servants and Christians, as the Heathenish state did Christ.

Now, What meant by the streets of Rome.
by the Streets in which they shall lie dead, is not meant strictly the street
of the place Rome, but the places under the power and Jurisdiction, whatsoever
Kingdoms they be, as Christ was not crucified in Rome, but in Jerusalem, by
the Authority of Rome; for the City Rome, called The great City, and Babylon,
is taken two ways in the Revelation, sometimes more largely, for all the
places and Kingdoms which are under his Papal power, and so it is a City of
no strength, that is, Ten Kingdoms in Europe was under her Papal power,
Revel. 17. 13. and so it is here taken, and by the streets are meant any
Kingdom under Papal power, thus it is also taken Revel. 16. 1. but sometimes
it is taken strictly for the place and City of Rome, so it is called the Beasts
seat, Revel. 16. 10. and is meant, Revel. 18. 2. by that Babylon is to be so
destroyed; so that the meaning of this killing of Witnesses, is that Papal
power from Rome, shall kill and lay dead the Orthodoxe Protestants, and
Christians, who oppose Popery in every Kingdom, that is under Papal power,
and by that time the period of the Papacy, namely, 42. months, and of the
Witnesses, viz. 1260. days, grew toward an end, that is, toward Anno Domini,
1666. shall have fully slain all bold opposers of it, either in Magistracy or
Ministry, and all the Christian^ reformed, but by killing, we hope, is not
meant the shedding of their blood, because it is said, They shall rise again
(which they should not so soon if they were killed) but a civil death, by
suspension, and putting them out of Office, and suppressing them, so that they
shall not dare to oppose, but the fear of Law, and the Prophets tumult shall
keep them from shedding their blood, which is meant by the Peoples not
suffering them to be buried, Rev. 11. 9. for if they were slain indeed, no
people would keep them from burying: but being suppressed, they keep them from
being killed, and within three days and an half, that is, three years and a
half, after they be all suppressed, a Spirit that is of Courage shall come on
them, and the people and they shall recover, and do more against Popery than
ever, and put more glory, which is meant by their ascent to Heaven, verse. 11,
12. In all, both dying, arising, ascending, alluding to Christ.

And then a tenth part of the City fell, v. 13. not strictly the people of
Rome, but largely, the Jurisdiction, one of the ten Cities in Europe, which
were under Romes Papal Power, in whom the witnesses were slain, shall by an
Earthquake, that is, by a Commotion of people, revolt from Romish religion, and
reform, perceiving how Papall-power has slain her Witnesses, and abused
them; And this it is thought will bring in the fifth Vial, Rev. 16. 10. which
shall be the ruin of the City of Rome, which is only the fear of the Beast,
or Papacy, whose fall is celebrated, Rev. 18. By which ruin of Rome, the
Kingdom of the Papacy shall be darkened, Revel. 16. 10. but not totally
ruined, till the seventh Vial, verse. 17, 19. which is the seventh Trumpet, and
the beginning of Christ's Kingdom: Therefore it is said, that Christ coming
shall slay them, 1 The^^. 2. 18.

But yet at this ruin of Rome, the Head and Empire of the Papacy shall be
broken, and so ended (though it shall breath a while after) therefore to this
time is the Papacies and the Witnesses continuance prophesying numbered from
their first beginning, 42. months, and 1260. days, which expire, An. Dom.
1666. and by three years and an half before this shall the Papal power have
support in Europe, all the opposers of it, in Ministry, or Magistracy, or
Christians, but by that year 1666. they shall recover again and draw off one
Kingdom in Europe from the Papacy, and ruin Rome; and this is that Woe which
ends the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11. 14, 15.

And if ye object, that more than one of the ten Kingdoms in Europe are
already fallen off from Popery:

I say, they shall all Apostatize again to Popery, as we shall show anon,
and yet one of them shall return again to the Truth at the time forenamed.

And this is the trouble on the Gentile Christians, namely a wea^ing of them
out by the Roman Western Monarchy, which is become Papal, and shall oppress
them all the time; and toward her (...), shall suppress all her Witnesses,
Dan. 1. 20, 21, 23, 24, 25. all which trouble to the Saints goes before
Christ's coming, which shall quickly follow after the slaying of the Witnesses;
as a preparation to which, shall be the Resurrection of the Witnesses, the fall
of the Tenth part of the City, and then quickly sounds the Seventh Trumpet,
which brings in the Kingdom of Christ, Revel. (...) 15. even at the beginning
of it, Revel. 10. 7. For by the Mystery of God is meant the Kingdom of Christ,
as it is explained Chap. 11. ^5. So that there is hope from 666. forwards,
things will go well with the Protestants, or Gentile Christians, till the
Thousand years begin, except one assault which shall not hurt but fear them,
and is to u^her in the coming of Christ, of which anon we will speak.

Now besides this, Another reckoning by Daniel.
we have another reckoning which Daniel gives us, and that more plainly than he
did this; for this concerning the Gentiles, was showed him in the hidden words
of a time, times, and half a time; but when it was to begin and be reckoned,
it was not showed him, but another is revealed to him more plainly, because it
concerned his people Israel, Dan. 12. 11, 12. explained.
Dan. 12. 11, 12. that is set down when the account should begin, (and
plainly a day for a year, as was usual in the Prophets phrase, and as Ezekiel.
4. 5, 6.) And this is to show when the Jews should begin, and be converted to
Christ, and when they should be ripened, and Christ come and set up his perfect
Kingdom, which was to be with the Resurrection of many dead Saints, and to
last a Thousand years, for he respects some work to be done, the time of
which he deciphets, and that is that work of which there was speech, And at
that time thy people shall be delivered, etc. for that answer, verse. 6. 7. is
only to a branch included in the former words, but not expressed about the
Gentile Christians, which, and the Answer, Daniel understands not; but that
finished, he showed Daniel some that he understood about the Jews; therefore
he speaks in the phrase of Sacrifice: and I say, he first shows when the
Jews shall be converted, and that he says should be 1260. days after the
daily Sacrifice is taken away, etc. and the Abomination that makes desolate,
setup, so that if we find when this was done, then 1260* days, that is, years
after, shall the Conversion of the Jews be; and 45. days, that is, years
after that shall be the Resurrection of Saints, coming of Christ, and the
thousand years begin.

Now the Scripture mentions two things, Two things in which the Abomination was
to be set up.
in which the abomination was to be set up; one, was a while after the death of
Christ, the cutting off the Messiah, which Christ makes an immediate
forerunner of the ruin of Jerusalem, Mat. 24. 14, 15, 16. and this is spoken
by Dan. 9. 27. The Sacrifice shall cease, and the over-spreading abomination,
making desolate, and a while before, verse. 26. the Messiah shall be cut off;
this was done some 36. years after Christ's death, a year or two before the
last ruin of Jerusalem, by Vespasian and Titus; for the faction in the City
suppressed the Sacrifice and made the Temple their Rendevous, and so abominably
defiled it. Now this was only a sign of Jerusalems ruin, and a warning to
Christians to fly out of the City; and if we should count from this the
number of years here set down for the bringing in the Jews, it is long ago
expired.

But there is another time wherein the Sacrifice was stained, Julian attempted
to re-build the Temple, and set up Sacrifice.
and Abomination set up, and that was in the Reign of the Emperor Julian the
Apostate; who reigned in the year of our Lord, 360. or 366. and set up
Heathenisme, that Abomination, and endeavored to set up Judaisme, to root out
Christianity, and therefore attempted to set up Sacrifice, and re-build the
Temple: but by earthquakes God cast all down: and whereas the Foundation of
the Temple was never rased, those earthquakes cast up those stones, so that as
Christ says, no^ a stone was left upon a stone (which there was till thi^
time.) Now then this is the time when we must begin to account.

And if you object, That in these days it was no hurt that the Sacrifice was
stopped, because God had suppressed that worship.

I say, so he had at that time before spoken of, Dan. 7. 27. of which our
Savior Christ speaks, for it was 36. years after Christ's death: yet because
it was a famous thing, it served well for a mark when to begin an Account.

So then unto 360. or 366. in which this was done, let us add the 1290. days,
which is the time how long from this it should be before the Jews should be
delivered; The calling of the Jews, 16^6.
and it makes 1650. or 1656. years of the Lord, in which the Israelites are to
be delivered, by being called to Christianity, both the Jews (who are two
Tribes, which were in Christ's days) and the ten Tribes, which are Israel; and
from this time of the conversion of the Israelites for forty five years after,
are the twelve Tribes to suffer great troubles: Therefore Dan. 12. 11. after
1290. days, he says, He is blessed that comes and waits unto 1335. Great
trouble to the converted Israelites.
days more, that is, forty five years after, for to that time the troubles
will be such as never were, Dan. 12. 1. namely, to the converted Israelites,
but not to the Gentile Christians, for these have been troubled by the Heathen
Roman Emperors a long while, and after that by the Beast, which succeeded
them, viz. the Papacy, all the time of the Papacy, and heavily afflicted at
the end of the Papacy, by slaughter of all their witnesses; therefore they
from thence forward, shall have quietness: but the twelve Tribes, who till
656. lived without Religion, being converted to Christ, shall have sore trouble
for 45. years after ( as their Fathers for forty years wandered in the
Wilderness, after they were come out of Egypt, before they entered Canaan) by
the latter days of which time, the remains of Papacy (after Rom^s ruin) will
have spread and got some head again, and join with the enemies of the twelve
Tribes in the East, and so generally both Mahumitans, Heathens, and Papists
will combine together, to ruin the Jews, and all other Gentiles, who be true
Christians, to save from which ruin, Christ will come from heaven, and ruin
with fire all those Nations of the wicked, Revel. 16. 13. to 17. And the
seventeenth verse is the seventh Vial, or Woe of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.
14, 15. whereby as verse. 18. The Nations being angry, Christ's wrath came and
destroyed them; and then will Christ set up his Kingdom, and begin the
thousand years, This coming of Christ will be sudden.
and raise the dead Saints: And this coming of Christ will be sudden, as a
Thief he will steal in on the world, Revel. 16. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 10. Which
shows that Peter speaks of this coming of Christ, and not of the worlds end.
Therefore of 45. years after 656. Christ speaks to Daniel, Chap. 12. 1. He
shall then stand in the lot, that is, he with the rest of the dead Prophets and
Saints shall be raised up from the dead. Christ's coming to raise the dead will
be about 1700.
So that it is likely, that Christ's coming from heaven, and raising the dead,
and beginning his Kingdom, and the thousand years will be about the year of
our Lord, 1700. for it is to be about 45. years after 1650. or 1656.

But yet I conceive that there may be some conception or more remote beginning
of Christ's Kingdom sooner, even presently upon the end of the sixth Trumpet,
which brings in the resurrection of the Witnesses, and fall of the tenth part
of the City, and that by the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, which follows
presently upon it, about the year 1666. For it is said, upon the blast of the
seventh Trumpet, that the Temple was opened, etc. Revel. 11. 15. 19. and so
Revel. 1^. 5. which is the same with the other, as has been showed. Now the
opening of the Temple is the Revelation of Gods truth and worship more clearly
then was before, and so a state of greater light and purity of worship then was
before, which seems necessary to follow upon the resurrection of their
Witnesses, and their ascension or taking up to God, and yet this is made the
work of the seventh Trumpet. Therefore I think, that the Seventh Trumpet may
begin presently after the ruin of Rome, Anno Domini 1666. and bring in a pure
state of Churches, and yet Christ not to come and begin the thousand years,
till Anno Dom. 1700. for surely, in the thousand years there shall be no
Temple, as was showed before. If therefore the thousand years began at the
first entrance of the seventh Trumpet, when and where should the Temple be
opened, which was measured, Revel. 11. 1. to be preserved and used, and goes
before the new Jerusalem, or the thousand years, Rev. 3. 11, 12. And whereas
it is said, the mystery should be furnished so soon as the seventh Trumpet
sounded, Revel. 10. 7. and that the Kingdoms were Christ's, Rev. 11. 15. I
suppose it may be truly said, since so great a Reformation shall be presently
therewith, and within so few years after, viz. some thirty four years, the
full setting up of the Kingdom.

Now having found out when Christ's Kingdom, Having found out when the 1000
years begin, its easy to know the end of the world.
or the thousand years shall begin, it is easy to guess when the time of the
last general Judgment and the worlds end shall be: A question which Christ's
Disciples asked him, Matthew. 24. 3. but he says, neither Angel, nor he himself
as a man, knew, verse. 36. that is, in those days, but it was locked up in the
Fathers secrets. Indeed Daniel had a mark given him, by which we do find out
the beginning of Christ his Kingdom, namely from the time of the Sacrifice
ceasing, 1335. days; yet he knew not when the time was of the ceasing of the
Sacrifice, nor how long Christ's Kingdom should last, at whose ending the day
of Judgment should begin: so that not for himself, but for us, was that
revealed to him, as 1 Re^. 1. 12. But after Christ's Sufferings and Ascension,
all the Fathers secrets were opened to him, for he was worthy of it, and he
reveals them to the Churches by John, he opens the meaning of Daniels time,
times, and half a time (which no creature could expound) to be 42. months, or
1260. days; he tells expressly, that his kingdom should last, after it was
fully ^^itled, a thousand years, and then should be a little season of
disturbance, but no hurt to his people, and then comes the last judgment, and
the and of the world, Rev. 20. 3, 7. to the Chapters end.

Thus we have some comfort, in that there is hope the troubles on us Gentile
Christians shall cease about 666. We are like to see sad days till 1666.
But until those days, (...) are like to see sad times, even till Anno Dom.
1666. For it (...) to be ^^red, that Popery shall again overrun Europe, and
bring back under Papal power every King in Europe, Its likely Popery shall
again overrun Europe. 1 Arg. to prove it.
and so suppress all oppos^^s in every Kingdom by Papal power; as appears
by these Arguments.

Argument 1. First, in Revel. 17. 12, 13. it is spoken of a double giving up of
the Ten Kingdoms in Europe to the Papacy, and again verse. 7. which may seem
both one; yet it will be found of him who ponders them, that two diverse and
several times: For in the former it is only said, They had one mind to give
their power to the beast, (that is, to the Papacy) at that time they were all
alike ignorant, and superstitious, and so the Papacy easily devoured them; but
in the latter place it is said, God put it into their minds to agree and do
it, that is, at this time they were not all alike: some of the Kingdoms had
Light and Reformation, and had with-drawne from Rome: yet by some special
overruling Providence (in respect of which, it is said, God put it into their
hearts) they who had departed from Popery shall revolt, Kings shall agree to
give up their p^^wer to the Pope.
and by some Agreement or Covenant with the rest, all jointly shall again give
up themselves to Papal power: so that it differs much from the former Act, and
seems to be a second Act of the Ten Kings, that is, of so many as were
revolted from the Papacy: and it also appears to be so, because it is made
the forerunner and immediate fore-goer of the ruin of Rome, which is here
meant by the Whore, verse. 16. as is explained verse. 18. This Act of the Kings,
is the means by the which God will fulfill his Word; of Romes ruin by fire;
therefore it is said, They shall burn her with fire, for they shall agree to
give up their power to her, till the words be fulfilled: But the former giving
up their power to the Beast, was at the beginning of the Papacy, This the
fore-running of Romes ruin.
verse. 12, 13. So that it seems by the general Vassallage of all Kingdoms in
Europe to Popery again, God will bring about the ruin of Rome: for the
revolted Kingdoms eyes shall be opened, to see how Rome has abused them, to
bring them back again to her slavery, and to slay all their Prophets and
Witnesses^ and then they shall hate her, and ruin her; and this may be by some
one of the Ten Kingdoms in Europe reformed, and yet revolted, and at last fell
off from Rome again: For though it is said, The Ten should ruin the Whore, it
cannot be meant of them all, for some of them lamented her ruin, Revel. 18.
19. But if any of them do it, it is truly said the Ten did it (as it is said,
the Thieves reviled Christ, Mark. 15. 32.) when as it was but one of them, Luke
23. 39. and by this revolting of Reformed Kingdoms to Popery again in Europe,
comes it, that the Witnesses (that is, the Orthodox Christians and Professors)
are slain by the Papacy, which also is a second Argument, for that is meant
by the Beast, Revel. 11. 7. and that their Bodies lie dead in the streets of
Rome, for that is meant by the great City; for it was Romes power which
crucified Christ; therefore he is said to be there crucified: Pilate by Roman
Authority did it. Now it cannot be the City of Rome in which all witnesses lie
dead, for there be none or few Witnesses in Rome, but most Witnesses are in
Reformed Kingdoms, and must there be slain and lie dead, therefore by the
streets must be meant the Ten Kingdoms in Europe come under Romes
Jurisdiction: every Kingdom being under Romes power in Europe, is at a street
to the City, and by Romes power, and in her name slayes the Witnesses;
therefore Papal power must be over Europe before the Witnesses be slain.

Argument 2. 2. Arg. To prove Kings resign to Rome.
A second Argument is, because when Rome is ruinated she is most secure, no
Widow, no Sorrow, Revel. 18. 7. that is, none of her Kingdones shall be rent
from her, which she had at any time under her Jurisdiction, but is in her full
strength; therefore it is said, Strong is the Lord, verse. 8. that is, she being
in perfect strength, God shows his strength in her ruin.

Thus between this, and 1666. is like to be a revolt of the Reformed Kingdoms
to Popery, and by Papal power a suppressing of Orthodoxe Christians and
public persons in Europe, whose full suppressing will be complete within a few
years of 1666. And this is the sad time of the Gentile Believers, which will
be sweetened with the glorious work of the Conversion of the Israelites in the
midst of it, about 1656. but that will yield no present relief to us
Gentiles against Antichrist, but he shall go on to slay the Witnesses, and
finish it. Which having done, before he can triumph four years, the Witnesses
shall be raised up, and one of the Ten Kingdoms fall off from him, and ruin
the City of Rome; and this will be a general good to Europe: But yet the
Papacy shall breath, and by degrees get head, and join with Turk, Tartar,
and the Christians in Europe: But from this danger will Christ save all
Christians, by his coming and setting up his Kingdom. And as there shall be
trouble in regard of Religion, Trouble both in regard of religion and justice.
before this coming of Christ, so there shall be (it is to be feared) in
regard of Justice, and that all Princes shall fall by degrees to tyranny and
oppression, and enslaving their Subjects, that so Christ's coming and Kingdom
may be more welcome to the world. Which is therefore celebrated, chiefly by the
joy it brings through doing of Justice; Psalm. 72. 1. to 5. Psalm. 96. 10. to the
end, and relieving the oppressed: For, Christ having a purpose to swallow up
all Kingly power, When Christ will swallow up all Kingly power.
he will weary the world of it, by letting it vex and spoil the earth; and
when all the World groans under tyranny and oppression of Kings, then will he
come and throw down all their Thrones, and erect his own only, who alone is
fit to rule the World Monarchically, being infinitely, full of Wisdom,
Justice and Meekness. Amen.

But what Use should we make of all this Doctrine about Christ's Kingdom? Even
this also the Scripture teaches us; namely,

First, 1. We must look for this Kingdom of Christ.
to look for it (therefore we should know it, for there can be no expectation
of things unknown) and to long for it, and so to hasten to it in our desires
and fervent affections, 2 Pet. 3. 10. For, though we cannot hasten its time, to
come to us, yet we may hasten to it, by our longing for its coming: And there
is no loss by such love of Christ's appearing; For to them that love it, he
will give, when he comes, a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. And surely,
they who most love and long for it, shall speed best at it; and therefore it is
pity, that this Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom is no more studied.

Secondly, 2. We must hate evil, be holy.
This Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom teaches us, who will love him, to hate
evil, Psalm. 97. 10. That is inferred from the Prophecy of his Kingdom: For,
if he will ruin the works of evil, because he hates them, it becomes them
who love him, to hate evil. God saves the Saints from the wicked, therefore
let the Saints keep themselves from wickedness; yea they must be
extraordinary in all holy conversation and godliness, as 2. Pet. 3. 11. ^or so
much that phrase ( What manner of persons ought ye to be) seems to imply: In
Christ's Kingdom, all such things as now draw to unholinesse shall be done
away, and nothing but godliness shall bear sway. Therefore, they who expect
that Kingdom, should be every way holy, and give diligence to be found of him,
at his coming in peace without spot, and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. For though
he will not ruin, yet he will shame the Saints, whom he finds loose
walkers. And therefore he deferres his coming not because he is slack to it
(for it is his glory) but because he would have increase of Knowledge, and
Grace so work with his Saints, that they might repent and amend what is amiss
in them, that it may go well with them at his coming, 2 Pet. 3. 9, 15. for he
speaks only of Saints, and therefore says, is long suffering to us word.
This is the reason of Christ's deferring his coming so long.

Thirdly, 3. We should joy in the hope of it.
this Doctrine of Christ's Kingdom teaches us that be righteous, to joy
greatly in the hopes of it, and to give thanks at the memory of it, though it
be but present in promise and prophecy, Psalm. 97. 11, 12. And therefore to
meditate of it as it were in present, and to behold it in joy sown for us, and
arising up in an Harvest, verse. 11. Therefore there are many triumphing Psalms
made of this Kingdom, though it be to come, Psalm. 96, 98, 99. Saints neither
could nor should fear Christ's coming, i^ they understood this Doctrine of it,
for his coming is for them, John ^4. Now since the Scripture speaks so much,
and so plainly of this Kingdom of Christ, and makes for us such wholesome uses,
showing as that it is a special and practical Truth, and was a chief*
Meditation of all the Prophets, let every Saint search into, and study this
Doctrine, it is our Harvest of joy and gladness, and Christ pardon us our so
much neglect of it hitherto. Amen.

FINIS.

