Arbitrium Redivivum: OR THE LAW OF Arbitration;

COLLECTED From the Law Books both Ancient and Modern, and deduced to these
Times: Wherein the whole Learning of Awards or Arbitrements is methodically
treated.

WITH Several Forms of Submissions by way of Covenants and Bond: As also
several Forms of Arbitrements or Awards.

By the Author of Regula Placitandi.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Rich. and Edw. Atkins Esquires, For Isaac
Cleeve at the Star in Chancery Lane near Serjeants-Inn, 1694.

TO THE READER.
Arbitrament is much esteemed and greatly favored in our Common Law; the end
thereof being privately to compose Differences between Parties by the Judgment
of honest Men; and to prevent the great Trouble and frequent Expense of
Lawsuits: This therefore being rightly understood and practiced, may
undoubtedly save our Purses, and procure much Peace and Tranquillity amongst us:
But on the other hand through Ignorance and Defect of good Arbitrators we may
run our selves into far greater dangers, than we thereby thought to avoid, and
so make that our Ruin which is intended for our Happiness. For though it be
said, That the Power of Arbitrators is such, That they may judge according to
their Will and Pleasure, and therefore greater than that of any public Judge;
yet they must keep themselves within their Jurisdiction, and their Awards must
be measured by the Rules of the Law. It Is true, they are not so tied up to
Formalities as our Lawyers; notwithstanding there are many things must be
observed to make their Arbitrements good and effectual. All which are
methodically laid down in this small Treatise; and though much may be said
concerning Arbitrements in the Law Books, yet it is mostly mixed with other
Matters, or else lies so privately under the Shadow of some other Title, that
it has not been so much as heard of by those who are most concerned to make
use of it; and therefore answers not the End for which it was intended. A
general Good should be generally known and enjoyed. To this End therefore this
Treatise is compiled, that the People in general may have Benefit thereby,
which is the chief End of the Publisher, who is a hearty Well-wisher to Peace
and the Public Interest.

Vale.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Showing what Matters in Controversy may be submitted to Arbitrament,
and what not. page 3 CHAP. II. Concerning the Submission, and the Circumstances
to be regarded therein. 8 CHAP. III. Concerning the Parties to the Submission,
and who may submit, etc. 13 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Arbitrators and Umpire,
and their Power, with several Presidents of Submission. 17 CHAP. V. The Duty of
the Parties after submission, and concerning publishing the Award, Notice and
Delivery. 39 CHAP. VI. What things are chiefly to be regarded in Arbitrements
or Awards; and first, that it must be according to the Submission. 40 CHAP.
VII. That an Award ought to be certain. 51 CHAP. VIII. That an Award must be
equal, and appoint either Party something beneficial. 52 CHAP. IX. That the
Performance of an Award must be possible, lawful, and within the Parties Power,
without the Aid of others. 57 CHAP. X. That there must be a means by Law to
attain unto the thing awarded. 61 CHAP. XI. That an Award must be final. 64
CHAP. XII. Concerning an Umpire. 66 CHAP. XIII. Several Notes concerning
Arbitrament in general. 68 CHAP. XIV. How Arbitrament or Award shall be
expounded and intended. 73 CHAP. XV. The Effect of every Arbitrament or Award.
74 CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Performance of an Award. With several Presidents
of Awards, Umpirage and Release. 77
THE LAW OF Arbitrament.
Arbitrament in Latin Arbitrium, is an Award, Arbitrament what.
Determination or Judgment made, or given between persons in Controversy, 8 E.
4.1, and 10. a 9 E. 4.43. b. 16 E. 4.9. a. 19 E. 4.1. a. 21 E. 4.39. a. 19 H.
6.36, 37. a. b. Dyer 236. 10 Eliz. pl. 39.
by the Arbitrators or Umpire, being such person or persons as are thereunto
elected, by the Parties controverting, for the ending and pacifying the said
Controversy according to the Submission or Compromise of the said Parties, and
agreeable to Reason and good Conscience.

It is said to be called an Arbitrament, Why so called.
either because the Judges elected therein, may determine the Controversy not
according to the Law, but according to their Opinion and Judgment as honest
Men: Or else because the Parties to the Controversy, have submitthemselves to
the Judgment of the Arbitrators, not by Compulsion or Coertion of the Law, but
of their own accord. It is also called an Award, of the French Word Agarder,
which signifies to decide or judge, and sometime in the Saxon or Old English,
it was called a Love-Day, because of the Quiet and Tranquillity that should
follow the ending of the Controversy.

There are five things incident to every Award or Arbitrament. Incidents to
Arbitrament. 4 Eliz. Dyer, 217. a.


1. Matter of Controversy.

2. Submission to the Arbitrators.

3. The Parties to the Submission.

4. The Arbitrators or Umpire.

5. The manner of the Award or yielding up their Judgment.

CHAP. I. First therefore we must see what Matters in Controversy may be subto
Arbitrament, and what not.
1. Things uncertain. 22 H. 6.39. 14 H. 4.24. 4 H. 6.17.
THings and Actions merely personal and uncertain are arbitrable, as Trespass,
etc. though the Submission be not by Deed.

Arbitrament ought to be of a Duty uncertain, 6 H. 4.6. a. 2 H 5. Fitz. 23. 4.
H. 6.17. b. 10 H. 7.4. a.

2. Things certain. 4 H. 6.17. 2 H. 5.2. 12 R. 2. Dyer. 33 H. 8. f. 51. pl. 14.
But things certain are not arbitrable (but when the Submission is by
Specialty) if they be not joined with others uncertain, as Debt with Trespass.

Controversy of Debt alone cannot be put into Arbitrament; but Contract of
Debt with another thing may well be put in Arbitrament, 45 E. 3.16. a. 2 H. 5.
Fitz. Arbit. 23. 8 H. 5.3. b. 4 H. 6.17. b. 10 H. 7.4. a.

Debt upon Contract without Specialty by the Resolution of some Books may be
put in Arbitrament, 45 E. 3.16. a. 6 H. 4.6. a. 4 H. 6.18. a.

3. Chattels real or mixed. 9 H. 6.60. 14 H. 4.24. 3 H. 4.6.
Chattels real or mixed, as Charters of Lands, are not arbitrable by themselves,
if the Submission be not by Specialty.

In Real Actions Arbitrament is no Plea.

In Mixed Actions Arbitrament is no Plea, if the Submission be not by Deed, 19
H. 6.37.

In Personal Actions on personal Wrongs Arbitrament is a Plea, although the
Submission be not by Deed, 14 H. 4.24.

In a Controversy concerning the Property of Real Chattels a^^ Arbitrament
transfers the Property of them according to the Award, 21 H. 7.29. b.

In Chattels personal Arbitrament transfers the Property.

In personal Duty grounded upon a Specialty, Plea of Arbitrament is not
available, 3 H. 4.1. b. 8 H. 5.3.

And the Lord Cook in his Reports, Li. 4. f. 43. b. 44. a. say That an
Arbitrament is no Plea when an Action is founded upon a Deed, when it is in the
Realty, except in such Cases where Damages alone are to be recovered.

Note, Nota, See Cowels Interp. tit. eisdem.
Action Real claims Title of Freehold in Land.

Personal claims Debt, Goods or Damages.

Mixed claims not only a real thing, but Damages for the Wrong.

Chattels Real are such as belong not immediately to the person of a Man, but
to some other thing by way of dependency, as a Box with Charters of Land,
Apples on a Tree, or a Tree it self growing on the ground, or issuing out of
some moveable thing, as a Lease or Rent.

Chattels personal belong immediately to the person of a Man, as a Bow, Horse,
etc.

4. Annuity. 9 H. 6.60. 14 H. 4.18. 3 H. 4.6.
Also an Annuity is not arbitrable if the Submission be not by Specialty, that
is, by Deed or Bond, wherein the Parties covenant or are bound to stand to the
Award.

5. Freehold.
Nor a Freehold, 11 H. 4.12.14. H. 4.18, 19. and 24 and 54 E. 3.16. 12 Ass. pl.
25.21 E. 3.15.

Yet some hold that a Freehold may be awarded by Deed where the Submission is
by Specialty. But 21 E. 3.26. says, An Arbitrament that the one Party shall
have the Land out of the possession of the other, does not give a Freehold.

6. Debt on Record. 4 H. 6.17. 3 H. 4.5. 6 H. 4.9.
Nor Debt upon Arrerages of Account before Auditors, because such Debt is due
by Record.

In a Controversy grounded upon a Matter of Record, Arbitrament shall not be
regarded, 6 H. 4.6. a. 8 H. 5.3. b. 4. H. 6.17. b.

7. Things not in Rerum natura.
And it seems, that such things as were not in Rerum Natura at the time of the
Submission, West. Symb. Par. 2. sect. 33.
(though they happen to be before the Award made) are not arbitrable as if the
Submission be of Ewe^ with Lamb, which after the Submission and before the
Award made, have Lambs: It seems the Arbitrators have no power to make any
Award touching the Lambs.

8. Matters Criminal.
Matters concerning Criminal Offenses, as Treasons, Felonies, etc. touching the
Crime, West. Symb. Pars 2. sect. 33.
seem not to be arbitrable, for it is for the benefit of a Kingdom and
Commonwealth that such Offenders be made known and punished.

9. Causes Matrimonial. West. ut supra.
Also Causes Matrimonial seem not arbitrable, lest Men should separate those
whom God has joined together.

To conclude, generally, General Rule.
No Chattels real or mixed, no Debts by Deed or Record, no Annuities, nor
Freeholds are of themselves arbitrable.

Yet in such Cases though the things themselves be not arbitrable, yet if a Man
will bind himself to stand to an Award, such Bond is good: And for the
Nonperformance of the Award the Bond will be forfeited.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Submission, and the Circumstances to be regarded
therein.
THE Submission or Compromise is the Faculty or power of pronouncing Sentence
(between Persons at Controversy) given to Arbitrators by the Parties mutual
private Consent without public Authority. Submission what. 8 E. 4.2. West.
Symb. p. 2. sect. 1.


And every Submission is either General, Dyer 217. pl. 6. 4 Eliz.
or Special.

General, General.
as of all Quarrels, Actions, Executions, Demands, etc.

Special, Special.
as when it is only of certain Matters, Facts and Things, as of a Trespass, or
all Actions of Trespass, or of Debt or Detinue, etc.

Submissions are in two manners, either by Writing or by Word. Note, Upon
Submission by Word only there is no remedy to enforce the Party to perform the
Award; but an Action on the Case for reciprocral promises will lie; and if Money
be awarded an Action of Debt will lie, 5 E. 4.7. 1 Keb. 600. 2 Keb. 238. 3 Keb.
64.


Those that are by Writing are either by Obligation or by Covenant.

Which Obligation is either of Record, as a Recognizance, or by Deed between
the Parties.

And this Submission by Writing or by Word is either absolute or conditional,
as so that, Absolute and Conditional.
or provided that, the Award be delivered by a certain day or time, sealed or
unsealed, indented, and the like; See after.
and in such Cases the Time, Manner and Matter must be exactly observed, or the
Arbitrament will be void. 8 Co. f. 97, 98. Dyer f. 22.

But it is necessary, that every Com-promise or Submission be made by Writing
And convenient time and place therein limited for the yielding up of their
Award to the Parties, etc.
, (with the Parties Covenants or Bonds to perform the Award that shall
thereupon be made) That thereby the Arbitrators may know their power; and the
Parties how far they are subject to their Sentence. And also lest their Labor
and Judgment therein should be frustrate for want of means to compel the same
to be executed. West. Symb. p. 2. sect. 34.


1. Countermand. Fitz. Arbit. 21. 21 H. 6.30. a. 28 H. 6.6. b. 5 E. 4.3. b. 8
E. 4.10. b. 12. a.
For it seems, That if the Submission be without Deed, either of the Parties
may countermand, and discharge the Arbitrators without Deed, and shall lose
nothing upon notice to the Arbitrators of such discharge; except there be
diverse persons concerned.

2. 28 H. 6.6.
And if diverse of one part and diverse of the other part submit themselves to
Arbitrament without Deed, one of them of the one part cannot discharge the
Arbitrators without the other his Companions of the same party; for they were
chosen by joint Authority.

3. Finch 49 E. 3.9. 49 E. 3. Fitz. Arb. 22. 5 E. 4.3. b. 8 E. 4.11. b.
And if the Submission be by Deed, the Discharge must likewise be by Deed. And
it is said, that in such Case one of the Parties alone cannot countermand the
Arbitrators.

4. Submission by Bond. 5 E. 4.1. 21 H. 6.30. 28 H 6.6. 49 E. 3.9.
But if the Submission be by Bond (as most commonly it is, though by some not
thought so convenient, for that thereby the Parties may hazard the Penalty of
the Bond for a Trifle or small matter) though afterward countermanded, yet the
Bond seems to be forfeited. And so says Brook. tit. Arbit. 35. 5 E. 4.1.

5. And so it is adjudged 8 Co. Bond forfeited
fol. 82. That though a Man be bound to stand to an Arbitrament, yet he may
countermand the Arbitrators; but in this Case it was further resolved, that by
the Countermand or Revocation of the power the Bond is forfeited, because he
was bound to stand to the Award which he does not do when he discharges the
Arbitrator.

6. Request. 2 Keb. p. 10. Siderf. 281.
In an Action upon the Case on promise to perform an Award on Submission to A.
and B. when their occasion will permit, Keeling conceived that only a
convenient time was to be given, at least after Request, which Twisden and
Moreton agreed, but Windham was contrary, and that they have time during their
Lives, as if it had been to be made at their Wills and Pleasure. But if it be
to be made generally without any time limited the Law implies it must be done
in convenient time. And it has been agreed by the Court, 2 Keb. p. 20.
That though the Submission be when their Conveniences permit, yet after
Request or convenient notice the Party may revoke on neglect by the Arbitrators.

And it was said, Bond forfeited by Marriage.
that where a Woman sole submits by Bond to stand to Award, and before, the
Award marries, this is a Revocation of the Submission and Forfeiture of the
Bond; but the Parties agreeing to enter into new Bond, it was adjourned, 2 Keb.
865, 877. 3 Leon. p. 9.

But upon a Countermand there must be Notice given to the Arbitrators; Notice.
for in pleading the Defendant may take Issue upon it, That he did not revoke
or countermand, etc. And if there were no Notice it shall be found for the
Defendant; but the Plaintiff need not aver, an express Notice so he show an
implied one, 8 Co. 81, 82. 8 E. 4.10. and 12.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Parties to the Submission or Compromise; Persons
chiefly regarded in Submission, are the striving Persons and the Arbitrators.
THE Persons striving be they, Dyer 217. 4 Eliz.
between whom the Controversy depends, and which submit or compromit the
same.

And they must be two at the least, the Plaintiff and the Defendant, of which
sometime there be two or more of a side or Party.

What Persons may submit to Arbitrament, and what not.
All Persons both Male and Female may submit to Arbitrament, What persons may
submit.
except they be prohibited by Nature or by Law,

As Infants, Madmen, Hindered by Nature.
Lunaticks and Idiots, also such as are Dumb, Deaf or Blind by Nature, but if
it be by Chance, and they can write and read, it is said they may well by
writing compromit or submit to Arbitriment.

And it is said that Infants are hindered to submit, 18 E. 4.2. 7 E 4.5.
but it seems to be meant by Deed, because their Covenants and Bonds are
void; but otherwise it is said if an Infant submit himself to an Award, he shall
be bound to perform it as well as a Man of full age. 13 H. 4.12 a. 10 H. 6.14.
a. But this has been adjudged since to the contrary, betwixt Rudson and Yates,
15 Car. B. R. That the submission of an Infant to an Arbitrament was absolutely
void.

As Women Covert without their Husbands, Hindered by Law.
2 H. 5. 9 E. 3.28.

And persons civilly dead; as Monks, Friars, Canons, professed Nuns, etc. 14 H.
8.6. 2 R. 2.5.

So such as are compelled thereto by threats and imprisonment, Compelled by
Threats.
8 Ass. 25. 7 E. 4.21. for in submission, the consent ought to be free.

Also such as are attainted of Felony or Treason, Attainted.
and persons Outlawed or waved in personal Actions, for they have no Goods, 36
H. 6.26. 16 H. 6.47. 21 H. 7.7. 8 E. 4.4. 5 H. 7.16.

So they that have joint power with others, Joint Power.
cannot singly submit in relation to such power, without their fellows. As, a
Dean without a Chapter, a Mayor without his Commonalty, the Master of a College
or Hospital without his Fellows; and so of other Societies and Guilds, 21 E.
4.13.

And generally it seems, General Rule. West's Symb. Part 2. Sect. 20.
that in Award such persons only may of themselves submit, as may of themselves
make good Grants.

If one of the Parties submit himself to an Arbitrament on the one part, Deputy.
and a Deputy on the other part in the name of the other party, 4 Eliz. 217. a.
the Arbitrament thereupon made betwixt them seems to be good.

The Husband may submit himself to an Award for himself and his Wife, Husband
and Wife.
for the Chattels of which he had disposition in right, and by reason of his
Wife, and it shall bind his Wife, 21 H. 7.29. b.
and upon such a submission, Money awarded to be paid to him and his Wife is
good, Trin. 16 Car. in B. R.

If diverse on the one part have done a Wrong or Trespass to another, Joint
Trespassers.
and he to whom the wrong is done and one of the others submit themselves to an
Award, upon the Award made, 7 H 4.31. b. 20 H. 6.12. a. and 41 a.
the others not being Parties to the submission, shall have advantage in
extinguishment of the Trespass.

If diverse of the one part submit themselves to the Award of certain persons,
^oynt and se^eral.
and diverse of the other part, the Arbitrators have power to make an Award for
matters between them jointly, 2 R. 3.18. b. 21 H. 7.29. b. Com. Dalton 289. b.
and so for matters between them severally.

If diverse of the one part and of the other part submit themselves to the Award
of one, Diverse on each side submit.
who makes an Award betwixt some of the one party and some of the other party,
and not betwixt them all, 22 Ed. 4.25.
and say not any thing in his Award concerning the others, yet such an Award is
good, 1 Keble, page 886.

An Award between one of one side and one of another is sufficient, on a
submission by several.

Note, if the submission be, that they will stand to the Award of the
Arbitrators for the whole matters submitted or any parcel thereof.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Arbitrators and Umpire, and their Power, with several
Presidents of submission.
ARbiter signifies an Arbritrator or Umpire.

They are properly called Arbitrators who (having no power from the Law) are
made choice of for Judges, Arbitrator, what.
by the consent of the Parties in Controversy to whom it is submitted, that
their Sentence shall stand. Johannes Paulus Lancelottus in his Institutes of
the Cannon Law.

And by our Law Books an Arbitrator is described to be a private or
extraordinary Judge, 9 E. 4.43. b. 16 E. 4.9. a. 19 H. 6.37. b. 8 E. 4.10. a.
chosen by the Parties, to appease the debates betwixt them, 8 E. 4.10 a: 19 H.
6.37. a.
and to arbitrate and adjudge according to their good intent.

Who because the Controversy is committed to his pleasure and arbitrament, Why
so called.
is termed an Arbitrator; and for that it is done by the mutual promise or
compromise of the Parties, Dyer. 536. 19 El. 39.
he is called Compromissarius Judex.

His power is larger than the power of any ordinary or other extraordinary
Judge; His Power.
for an Arbitrator has power to judge according to the compromise o^
submission after his own mind, as well of the Fact as of the Law, but the other
Judges are tied to a prescript form, West Symb. Part 2. Sect. 21.
limited to them by the Law or Magistrate.

And since his power is so great and incontrolable, Caution in choice of
Arbitrators.
Men ought to be cautious how they make choice of Arbitrators; therefore it is
thought fit that such persons be Elected as are sufficient and indifferent.

That they have sufficient skill of the matter submitted to them and have
neither legal nor natural Impediments. Skilful. West ibid. Sect. 23, 26, 27.


That they be not Infants, At years of discretion.
who by reason of their few years may want discretion and knowledge.

That they be neither Mad nor Idiots, for such are void of Understanding.

That they be neither Deaf, Having their principal Senses.
Dumb or Blind, for thereby their principal Senses necessary for the
apprehension of the Matter may be impaired.

As for indifferency, Indifferent persons without Malice, etc.
That they be void of Malice and Favor to either of the parties, that they be
not notorious by Outlawry, Excommunicated, Irreligious, nor Covetous, for
though he has absolute power, yet his Judgment or Sentence ought to be sincere
and incorrupt, according to right and equity, without malice, flattery, and
every other vicious affection or perturbation, which may in any sort lead him
awry from the right Path of Justice and Equity, West Symb. Part 2. Sect. 27.
These are thought to be fit Qualities, though the Law prescribes no Rules
herein.

Having shown what persons are most fit to be Elected Arbitrators, we will
proceed, respecting in the Arbitrators these three things.

1. His Ordinance, from whom it is.

2. His Authority, what it is.

3. His Duty, wherein it consists.

Touching his Ordinance, 20 H. 6.41 a. 8 E. 4.10. a.
he is Ordained by these two things, viz. by the Election of the Parties, and
by his own undertaking of the charge.

Touching his Authority, 19 H. 6.37. 8 E. 4. f. 1. and 9. 9 E. 4.43. b. 16 E.
4.9. a.
what it is; it is derived from the submission, and extends no farther, and
thereby he is Judge between the Parties, and therefore he cannot transfer his
Authority over to any other.

Touching his Duty, it consists in three things. First, to hear the grief of
the Party. Secondly, to judge according to Equity. Thirdly to give notice of
his Award.

Of the two first Branches enough has been said before, only it remains to
set down some Forms and Presidents of Election and Submission in Writing, which
are the best and most in use.

Presidents.
The Form of a Submission or Compromise by way of Covenants.
THIS Indenture made the 1st day of Aug. in the fourth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary by the Grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Domini, 1692. between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said A. B. and C. D. do by these
Presents willingly compromit and submit themselves, Compromit, that is, do
mutually promise.
and either of them, to the Award, Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final End
and Judgment of E. F. of, etc. and G. H. of, etc. Arbitrators indifferently
chosen, elected and named, as well by the said A. B. as the said C. D. to
arbitrate, award, order, judge and determine of, for, upon or concerning all
and all manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits,
Bills, Bonds, Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels,
Controversies, Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever at any time
heretofore had made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed or depending by and between the said Parties [Here if you
have any Exceptions you may enter them, Exceptions.
as, Except one Action of Debt depending between the said Parties in their
Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, and except one Debt of 10 l. due to the said A.
B. by the said C. D. for the Price of certain Corn, etc. And except all Lands
and Tenements of the said A. B. etc. And such like Exceptions] So always as the
said Award, Arbitrament, Order, Determination, final End and Judgment of the
said Arbitrators of, for or upon the Premises be made and given up in Writing
Note, you may say by Writing indented under both their Hands and Seals, and one
part thereof delivered or caused to be delivered by the said Arbitrators to the
said A. B. or his certain Attorney in that behalf requiring the same on the --
day of -- at or in the Dwellinghouse of -- in the said County of -- and the
other part of the said Award be likewise delivered or caused to be delivered to
the said C. D. or his certain Attorney in that behalf, requiring the same at the
said day and place, etc.
under their Hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the said Parties or such
of them as shall come and require the same on or before the day of (...) next
ensuing the date of these Presents at or in the Dwelling House of (...) in
(...) aforesaid, and so always that the said Arbitrators do not by the said
Award, order or appoint any Act or Acts, Thing or Things to be done or
performed by or to any person or persons, other than to or by the said Parties
to these Presents their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns or some of
them, and not to or by any Stranger or Strangers to this present Submission.
And the said A. B. C. D. and either of them, for themselves, their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of
either of them do by these Presents mutually covenant, conclude, promise and
agree, Note, You may make it so as that the Arbitrators shall give notice to
the Parties of their Award.
to and with the other his Executors and Administrators, and every of them,
that neither they nor either of them will at any time hereafter revoke the
Authority hereby given to the said Arbitrators, nor discharge them nor either
of them of the said faculty or power of Arbitration. And that it shall he
delivered to both Parties.
And that they and either of them, and the Heirs; Executors, Administrators and
Assigns of either of them on their several parts shall and will well and truly
observe, perform, fulfill and keep all and every Clause, Sentence, Article,
Submission and Agreement in these Presents mentioned on his or their part to be
performed and kept according to the tenor, true intent and meaning of the same.
In Witness whereof the said Parties to this present Submission have
interchangeably set their Hands and Seals the day and year first above written.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

Note, This and such like are said to be Submissions Conditional, because of
the Words So always that the said Award, etc. be made in Writing, etc. And So
always that the Arbitrators do not order any thing to be done by a Stranger,
and the like.

And in this Case the Award must be made of all things according to the
Submission, because the Parties submit only on those Terms. And if the
Arbitrators award contrary, it will avoid the whole Award, as you may observe
by the Books cited hereafter.

Note, it is said, That if the Submission be, that the Parties will stand to
the Award of the Arbitrators for the whole Matter submitted, or any parcel
thereof, then the Award may be made for parcel, 39 H. 6.11.

A single Bond of Arbitration of all Actions without Exceptions and without an
Umpire.
Noverint universi per praesentes me A. B. de C. in Com. D. Genesis teneri and
firmiter obligari E. F. de C. praedict. Gen' in viginti libris bonae and
legalis monetae Angliae Solvend. eidem E. F. aut suo certo Attornato,
Executoribus vel Assign. suis, Ad quam quidem solution' been and fideliter
faciend' obligo me, Haeredes, Executores and Administratores meos firmiter per
praesentes sigillo meo sigillat' dat. primo die Augusti Anno Regni Domini
nostr' Willielmi and Dominae Mariae Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae Regis and Reginae Fidei Defensor', etc. quarto Annoque Domini, 1692.

Or in English thus:
KNow all Men by these Presents, That I A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent.
am held and firmly bound unto E. F. of C. aforesaid Gent. Note, You may make
the penalty as you think fit, according to the Circumstances submitted, but it
ought to be reasonable.
in Twenty Pounds of good and lawful Money of England, to be paid to the said E.
F. or his certain Attorney, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to which
Payment well and truly to be made I bind my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators firmly by these Presents, sealed with my Seal, dated the first
day of August in the fourth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady
William and Mary by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
King and Queen Defenders of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini, etc. 1692.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden A. B. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators for his and their parts and behalfs shall
and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey, abide, observe, perform,
fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, Judgment, final End and
Determination of G. H. and J. K. both of C. aforesaid in the said County of D.
A. B. as of the above named E. F. to arbitrate, award, order, judge and
determine of, for, upon and concerning all and all manner of Action and
Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds, Specialties,
Judgments, Executions Quarrels, Controversies, Trespasses, Damages and Demands
whatsoever, at any time heretofore had made, moved, brought, commenced sued,
prosecuted, done, suffered committed or depending by o^ between the said
Parties, so always as the said Award, Arbitrament, Order, Determination final
End and Judgment of the said Arbitrators, of, for or upon the Premises be made
and given up in Writing indented under their Hands and Seals ready to be
delivered to the said Parties in difference (or such of them a^ shall desire
the same) on or before the first day of Sept. next ensuing the date above
written [Or otherwise as the day agreed on will be] Then this Obligation to be
void and of none effect,

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

Note, This may properly be called a Conditional Submission general by Bond.

And note, That each Party must give a Bond unto the other, Word for Word only
changing their Names as occasion requires.

A Bond of Arbitration without Exceptions, from two to two, and without an
Umpire.
NOverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. de C. in Com. D. You must name the
Parties, their Places and Additions right.
Genesis and E. F. de C. praedict. in Com. praedict. Genesis teneri and firmiter
obligari G. H. de C. praedict. i^ Com. praedict. Yeoman, and J. K. (...) C.
praedict. in Com. praedict. Yeoman, in centum libris bonae and l^ galis monetae
Angliae solvend. eis^ them G. H. and J. K. seu eorum a^ teri Note, If the Bond
be to three you say, seu little alicui.
vel eorum certo Attornato Ex^cutoribus, Administratoribus vel As^signatis
suis. Ad quam quidem so lutionem been and fideliter facien^ obligamus nos and
If three be bound you say, obligamus nos and quemlibet nostrum.
utrumque nostru^ per se pro toto and in solido Haerede^ Executores and
Administratores nostro^ and If three be bound you say, cujustibet nostrum.
utriusque nostrum firmiter pepraesentes sigillis nostris sigillat. da^ primo
die Augusti Anno Regni Domini Willielmi and Dominae Maria^ Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis and Regin^ Fidei Defensor', etc. quarto
Annoqu^ Domini 1692.

Or thus in English.
KNow all Men by these Presents, Note, You must name the Parties, their places,
and Additions right.
That we A. B. of (...) in the County of D. Gent. and E.F. of C. aforesaid in
the County a fore said Gent. are held and firmly bound to G. H. of C. aforsaid
in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, and J. K. of C. aforesaid in the County
aforesaid Yeoman, in one hundred pounds of good and lawful Money of England to
be paid to them the said G. H. and J. K. or to one Note, When a Bond is made to
three you say, or to any of them.
of them or their certain Attorney, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns:
To which payment well and truly to be made, we bind our selves and Note, When a
Bond is from three, you say, and every of us.
each of us by himself for the whole entirely, our Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and the Heirs, Executors and Administrators of When three are
bound, you say, of every of us.
each of us firmly by these Presents, sealed with our Seals, dated the first
day of August in the fourth year of the Reign ( etc. as before in the other
Bond.)

Note, You must not date a Bond of any day that is not come, though if you
happen to date it of a day that is past it may serve.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden A. B. and
E. F. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for their and every of their
parts and behalfs shall and do in all things well and truly stand to, obey (
etc. as in the other Condition till you come to) Arbitrators indifferently
named as well on the part and behalf of the above bounden A. B. and E. F. as of
the above named G. H. and J. K. to arbitrate, award, order, judge, ( etc. as in
the other till you come to) by or between the said Parties or any of them, So
always as the said Award, etc. as before in the other.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

Note, you may put Exceptions in these Conditions as well as in Covenants.

The Condition of a Bond of Arbitration, with an Umpire certain, nominated
therein.
THE Condition of this Obligation is such, Note, the Bond is as before.
That if the above-bounden A. B. etc. as in the others, till you come to --
ready to be delivered to the said Parties in difference, or such of them as
shall desire the same, in or before the first day of Sept. next ensuing the
date above-written. And if the said Arbitrators shall not make and give up
their Award and Arbitrament, of and upon the Premises, on or before the said
first day of September, if then the said A. B. his Executors, Administrators,
and every of them do and shall stand to.

If the Submission be concerning a Title of Land, Mr. West in his Symb. part 2.
sect. 40. advises to word it thus:

As well of, for and concerning the Right, Title, Interest, Use, Possession and
demand, of and in the Manor of S. with the Appurtenances in S. in the said
County of Y. and all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with the
Appurtenances in S. aforesaid in the Occupation of the said A. B. and his
Assigns, as of and upon all Actions, Trespasses, Suits, Quarrels, Debts,
Duties, Debates, Griefs, Inconveniences and Demands, had moved, stirred or
depending between the said Parties, concerning the said Manor, Tenements and
Premises, or any part thereof; and also if the said A.B. before the Or such
other time as may be thought convenient.
Feast of P. now next coming, do show unto the said Arbitrators all such
Writings as he has concerning the said Manor and Premises, at such time and
place as the said Arbitrators shall appoint for the sight thereof, -- So always
That, ( etc. as in others) That then etc. as before, in others.

And Note, such a submission as this may properly be called a special
Conditional Submission.

And though the Title of Land is (as aforesaid) of it self not Arbitrable, and
therefore an Award pleaded in such case no Bar, yet being by Bond, in this case
the Bond will be forefeited for not performing the Award.

CHAP. V. The Duty of the Parties after submission, and concerning publishing
the Award, Notice and Delivery.
THE Election and Submission being thus made.

In the next place it is the Duty of the Parties to come before the
Arbitrators, Parties to show their Grievances. 8 E. 4.10. a.
and to show their Grievances, Arbitrators must hear them.
and the Arbitrators ought to hear them, and to judge accordingly, or otherwise
they are no good Judges.

The Arbitrators having heard their Grievances and Matters, Award agreed upon.
and agreed upon their Award, the third part of the Duty of an Arbitrator is
the publishing or notifying of his Award.

And it is to be considered, Award to be published, or notice thereof given.
That the publishing or notifying of an Award is either provided for and
ordained by the submission it self, Or else it is left and permitted to the
discretion of the Arbitrator.

If it be provided for by the submission, as sometime it is and may be, If it
be so provided by submission.
that the same Award made be notified by the Arbitrators to the parties or some
of them, etc. and that either by a certain day or time, or else without
limitation of any time.

Then in such case its said Arbitrament is no Arbitrament before it be
pronounced. Else it is no Arbitrament. 8 E. 4.21. b.


Also, Delivery of the Award. 8 E. 4.11. 8 E. 4.21 a. 1 H. 7.5. a. 27 H. 8.46.
where by the submission it is appointed or conditionally provided, that the
Award shall be delivered to the Parties, etc. it is then no Arbitrament in Law
before it be delivered in Deed.

But if the submission be, Where the Parties must take notice at their Peril.
That the Award shall be delivered to the Parties, (etc.) before such a day,
requiring the same, and no certain day limited when it ought to be delivered,
then the Parties are obliged to take notice of the Award at their peril. 8 E.
4.1, 8, 10, 13, 21, etc.


If diverse of the one party, How to be delivered when diverse are concerned.
and diverse of the other part submit themselves to the Arbitrament of another,
provided that he shall deliver to the Parties or one of them, 4, 5 El. 218. b.
5.
the Arbitrator is not obliged to deliver it to two of one Party, or to one of
each Party, but it is sufficient to deliver it to any of the said Parties.

If the submission be, Delivered by word.
That the Arbitrament shall be delivered before such a day, it may as well be
delivered by Word as by Deed; 5 El. 218. b. 5.
if the submission be not, that it shall be delivered by Deed or Writing. By
Deed.


If the submission be that the Arbitrament shall be delivered, 5 H 7.7. a.
it may be made in one County and delivered in another County.

If the submisson be by Deed, Day past, and new submission. 49 E. 3.9.^.
and the time past in which the Arbitrament ought to be made, the parties
cannot prorogue the time over to make the Award, without a new submission to
that purpose; and whatsoever the Arbitrators do award after the time appointed,
Void Award. 8 H 6. f. 18.
is void.

But if the submission be without Deed, Time prorogued. 49 E. 3.9. Fitz. Agard
22.
the Parties may prorogue the time which was given to make the Award.

If the Arbitrators make their Award between the Parties one day, Arbitrators
cannot make two Awards. 22 H 6.52. a. 33 H. 6.28. b.
and give their judgment therein, they cannot make another Award between the
Parties another day, albeit the time given by the submission is not expired.

An Arbitrament cannot be made part at one time and part at another, Or by
parcel.
39 H. 6.12. a. 8 E. 4.10. b. 19. E. 4.1. a. 3 H. 4.1. b.
albeit it be within the time of submission.

Note, this is meant where it is declared or pronounced to the Parties by
pieces or parcels.

But the Arbitrators may discourse betwixt themselves, But may have several
Discourses. 47 E. 3.21 a. 39 H 6.12 a.
and agree upon one thing one day, and of another thing another day, and in the
end make one entire Award of the whole, and it is good.

If the Arbitrators Award one thing on one part, Time expired before Agreement.
and before they can agree of their Award for the remainder, the time given by
the submission expire, 39 H. 6.12. a.
their whole Award is void.

Lastly, Notice in Conscience to be given. 8 E. 4.10. a. 8 E. 4.2. a. and b.
where by the submission there is no order taken for the delivery or
publication of the Award, then in honesty and conscience the Arbitrator is
obliged to make notice to the Parties of it.

But in rigor of Law the Arbitrament it self is intended to be a thing known.
But not in rigor of Law. 8 E. 4.1. b. 21. b.


And therefore the Parties to the Arbitrament are bound to take notice of it at
their Peril, 8 E. 4.1.8.21. 18 E. 4.18. a. 1 H. 7.5. a.
especially if they be bound to stand to the Award, etc.

Although the Parties are not to have notice given them of the Arbitrament,
Notice of one act depending on another. 8 E. 4.21. b. 20 E. 4.8. b.
yet if the Arbitrators award that one of the Parties shall do an act which
depends upon another first to be done of the other Party, he shall have notice
of it.

But now all submissions are usually by Bond, conditionally, General Rule.
so as the Award be made in Writing, and ready to be delivered to the Parties
or such of them as shall require the same, etc. and in this case it is clearly
resolved and agreed, That the Parties having so bound themselves are obliged to
take notice of the Award at their peril, 18 Ed. 4.18 a. 4 Coke 82. 8 Coke f. 9,
92.

CHAP. VI. What things are chiefly to be regarded in Arbitrements or Awards;
and first, that it must be according to the submission.
HAving now received the Award from the Arbitrators; Next we come to examine
the Arbitrements themselves, and to see what things are chiefly to be regarded
in them.

In the form of every Arbitrament six things are specially to be regarded, Six
things to be regarded in every Arbitrament.


1. That it be made according to the very submission touching, the things
submitted, or necessarily depending thereupon, and every other circumstance, as
aforesaid.

2. That it ought to be certain.

3. That it ought to be equal, and appoint either Party to give or do unto the
other something beneficial in the appearance at the least.

4. That the performance thereof be possible and lawful, and within the power
of the Parties.

5. That there be a means how either Party may by Law attain unto that which is
thereby awarded unto him.

6. That it be a final end of the Controversies submitted: And if it fail in
any of these points, then it is said the whole Arbitrament shall be void.

First, That it be made according to the submission.

An Arbitrament which is made of a matter not contained in the submission is
void, as follows, 7 H. 6.40. b. 19 H. 6.36. b. 9 E. 4.44. a. 19 E. 4.1. a. 7,
8 El. 4.4 a.


It may be void as to the submission in three respects, Void in three respects.


1. Of the Persons submitting etc.

2. Of the things or matter submitted.

3. Of the circumstances of the submission.

First, As to do an act to a Stranger. 17 E. 4.23. 19 E. 4.1. b. 5 H. 7.22. b.
As to the Persons.

If the Arbitrators award tha^ one of the Parties shall do an act to a
Stranger, as make a Feofment or the like, such Arbitremen^ is said to be void,
8 E. 4.1.9^ 22 H. 6.46. b.

But see after Chapter 13. where it is said otherwise.

So if it Award a thing to be done by a Stranger, Act to be done by a Stranger.
it is also void as to the Stranger, Mich. 28. and 29 El. Moor and Bedel's
Case^ See the General Rules after.

If the Arbitrament be that the Parties shall stand to the Award of the
Stranger, To stand to the Award of a Stranger to be made.
it is void, for power cannot be assigned. 47 E. 3.21. a. 8 E. 4.10, 11. a. 19.
^ Coke, Samons Case.

But if a Stranger had made an Arbitrament before between the said Parties, To
stand to Award of Stranger formerly made.
an Award to stand to such an Arbitrament of the Stranger, its said is good. 39
H. 6.10.

And this may be, because the former Arbitrament is a thing already done and
certain.

If the Arbitrament be, Award supposed to be formerly made.
That the Parties shall perform the Award of another formerly made between the
said Parties; whereas in truth there is no such Award, yet the Arbitrament is
good (prima facie) at first sight, until it be known that there be no such
Award, 39 H. 6.12. a.

If an Arbitrment be that an act limited by the Award shall be done by the
advice and counsel of another, Act to be done by advice of Counsel.
such an Award has been thought to be good, but by others ill, because not
final, and uncertain whether the Counsel will advise.

But if the act be to be done by the advice of the Arbitrator himself, By
advice of the Arbitrator.
this is to make two Awards, and so void, 8 E. 4.11. a. 14 E. 4.1. 18 E. 4.22,
23. 19 E. 4.1. a.

See after Chap. 13. Concerning Payment in the House of a Stranger: Concerning
Payment at the House of a Stranger: Concerning Payment at or in the House of a
Stranger.

2dly. As to the things.

If one be chosen to make an Award upon one thing, Submission of one thing.
Award of another.
and he makes it upon another, the Arbitrament is void: As if the Submission be
of all things in variance betwixt the Parties; and the Award is of things not
in variance, Pl. Com. 396. a.

So if the Submission be of the Right and Interest of Land, Submission
concerning Title; Award concerning profits only. Submission of the Manor of D.
Award of Manor of S. Submission of all Causes till that time; Release after of
all Causes to that time.
and the Award is concerning the Profits only of the Land, Dyer f. 242.

So if the Submission be of the Manor of D. and the Award is of the Manor of S.

So if the Submission be of all Canses till that time, and the Award is of a
Release of all Causes to the time of the Award, especially if any new Causes be
shown.

But if the Award be made of and concerning the Premises, 8 Co. fol. 98.
and that such a day to come, the one party shall pay the other 10 l. and that
the party shall make general Releases;

But if the Submission be of a Thing, Award of a thing incident or accessory. 8
H. 6.18. b. 19 E. 4. a. 26 E. 4. 9 H. 7.15, 16.
the Award may be made of a thing incident or accessory, as if it be of Title
and Possession of Land, the Award may be made also of the Evidences and
Charters concerning the Land, Mich. 9 Jac. Tiderby and Tiderby.

Note also that it is said, Submission of things personal, Award of things real.
That if the Submission is of things personal, the Arbitrators may award, That
one of the Parties shall do an act which is of a thing real in satisfaction of
a personal Wrong. Also

If the Submission be of a thing real, Submission of things real, Award of
personal.
the Arbitrator may award Satisfaction to be made of a thing personal, 9 E.
4.44.

General Rules.
Where an Award is made for more than is submitted, The Award for more than is
submitted.
it is good for that part which is submitted, and void for the residue.

So where the Award is, Acts to be done by a Stranger.
That the Parties shall do such Acts, and a Stranger such Acts, the Award may
be good as to the Parties though void as to the Stranger, Mich. 29 Eliz. More and
Bedel. 14 H. 8. Lee's Case.

And in some Cases where the Award is of less things than were submitted it
will be void, Award of less things then submitted.
as where two or three things are put in Arbitrament jointly, and an Award is
made of part and not of the whole, 39 H. 6.9.

But if the Submission be of all Actions real and personal, Submission of
Actions real and personal, Award only of personal.
and an Award is made of all Actions personal only, this has been adjudged to
be good, 19 H. 6.

And it has also been adjudged that though there are many matters in
Controversy, Arbitrator may make an Award of one thing only, if he have notice
of no more.
yet if one only be shown to the Arbitrator, he may make an Award of this, for
the Arbitrator is a Stranger to the particulars, and the Parties, who are
Privy, ought to show the Causes of their Controversy to ^im, or otherwise most
Arbitrements might be avoided by the Parties concealment, 8 Co. f. 98.

Where a Submission is without Deed, Submission without Deed and Award only of
part.
an Award may be made of ^art of the things only, and good, so it be with Deed,
and the Submission either general or special, and not conditional.

But where the Submission is either general or special by Deed conditional,
with the Words, Submission by Deed conditional.
Provided that, or, So as the said Award concerning the Premises be made in
Writing, etc. and delivered by such a time, etc. In such Case ^he Award must be
made of all ^he Matters submitted, 8 Co. f. 98. Award must be of all Matters.
Dyer 216, 242.

And note, Pleading an Award upon a general Submission conditional. 8 Co. 98.
That where a Man ^n pleading an Award made upon a general Submission
conditional, says the same was made of and concerning the Premises, and shows
only one Matter (among many) to be awarded, this shall be good and intended an
Award of all Causes submitted, until the contrary be shown, and he is not
obliged to aver that is all.

But it is otherwise in Pleading an Award made upon a special Conditional
Submission, Pleading an Award upon Special Submission conditional.
for there the Award must be expressly alleged to be made of all things or
otherwise it is naught, because in a special Submission conditional the Causes
are apparently set forth.

So upon the general Submission Conditional, See Dyer 216.
when other Causes are shown than were pleaded, the Award will be void, because
that it was Conditional.

3ly. Circumstances.

An Award may be void in respect of the Circumstances of the Submission, as
where the Submission is, Delivery under Hand and Seal.
That the Award be delivered in Writing under their Hands and Seals; and the
party pleads a Delivery, but says no^ under their Hands and Seals, i^ shall be
supposed to be no Arbitrament according to the Submission, and therefore no
Cause o^ Action.

For upon these Submissions conditional, as to writing, All Circumstances to be
observed.
sealing and delivery, etc. all the Circumstances must be observed, and awarded
of, at or before the day appointed, otherwise all is void, Dyer 243. 21 H.
8.42. 8 E. 4.11. 8 H. 6.18. 4 Co. 103.

General Rules.
Again observe, An Award of all things awarded out of the Submission
That where an Award is of one single Matter only, or of many, and all out of
the Submission, such Award is totally void.

So where the Award is of one single Matter only, or of many, Of all things
awarded within the Submission, but not agreeing, etc.
and all within the Submission; yet if it be not of all Matters submitted, or
not agreeing in Circumstances: Where the Submission is by Specialty
conditional, in such Case also the Award will be totally void.

But where an Award, Award of things part within the Submission, and part out.
is of one thing only, or of several things, part within the Submission and
part out, there the Award is void only as to that which is out, and good for
the Remainder.

Yet though it may be void in part and good in part, Award void on one part is
void on both.
it cannot be totally void only as to one of the Parties and good against the
other, for if it be void against one it is void against both: An Arbitrament
ought to be of both sides, and equally binding, 22 H. 6.46. 36 H. 6.1. 17 E.
4.5. 18 E. 4.1. 21 E. 4.75. 17 H. 7.43. and 45. 5 Co. 77. 8 Co. 98. 10 Co. 31.

And the Law is held the same as to these things where the Parties are tied by
Promise only. Submission by Promise.


Now where an Award is totally void, Upon an Award totally void, Bond not
forfeited.
there a Bond can never be forfeited for the Nonperformance of it; for such an
Award is as if no Award, and the Law requires not the Observation of that which
is void, 10 Co. 31. Keil. 175.

Again, Upon an Award void in part only, Bond forfeited.
where the Award is void in part only, there the Bond may be forfeited for not
observing the Award, especially for that which is contained in the Submission
though not for that which is out and therefore if the Breach be a^signed in
that part which is void the Action will not lie. But a Breach may be assigned
for that which is within the Submission, and the Bond will be forfeited for the
Nonperformance of it, 18 E. 4.22, 17 H. 7.42, 45.
23.41, 42 Eliz. in C. B. Mich. 7 Jac. in B. R. Lawrence versus Carr, 10 Co.
131.

CHAP. VII. That an Award ought to be certain.
IF the Arbitrators award that one of the Parties shall enter into a Bond to
the other, Bond awarded and no Sum mentioned.
and does not award in what time, such Award is void for the Uncertainty, 5 Co,
77, 78.

And where an Award is of things within the Submission, Award void in part,
void in the whole.
and is uncertain in any part that concerns a Party to the Submission, it is
void in the whole, 8 E. 4.1. Hill. 15 Car. in B. R.

Yet a small Variation is not material; A small Variation not minded.
as if the Award be that one of the Parties shall discharge the other of a Bond
of the Penalty of 100 l. or thereabouts, this was held a sufficient Certainty,
Pasch. 15 Car. in B. R.

Also an Award that is seemingly uncertain, Award good if it may be reduced to
a certainty.
and yet may be reduced to a Certainty is good enough, as that the Defendant
shall pay so much during the continuance of such a Lease, naming it, etc. Here
the payment of the Money is referred to the Continuance of the Lease which is
certain, and therefore the Award good, Pasch. 5 Jac. in B. R. Girling versus
Gosnold, Hob. 68. Dyer 242.

CHAP. VIII. That an Award must be equal, and appoint either Party something
beneficial.
AN Award ought to be equal, General Rule.
that is, mutually satisfactory, and appoint either Party to give or do unto
the other something beneficial in the appearance at the least.

An Arbitrament is no Plea in Trespass, Nothing for amends in Trespass, ill.
if nothing be awarded to the Plaintiff for amends, 43 E. 3.28.

In Trespass of Goods taken, it i^ ^ot good Pleading an Award, that the
Defendant should retain part of the Goods and the Plaintiff have the rest.

So in Debt, Half to the one, half to the other, ill.
to plead an Award that the Plaintiff should have one Moiety, and the Defendant
the other, or should pay part and keep part, this is no Plea, 17 E. 3.6. 45 E.
3.16. 10 H. 4. Fitz. Arbit. 19. and therefore such an Award is void, and with
good reason. For

In Trespass for taking away of Goods, Goods awarded to be redelivered, ill.
the Defendant pleaded an Award, that because the Defendant had taken away the
Plaintiffs Goods, he should therefore carry and redeliver them to the
Plaintiff, which he had done, this was held naught; for redelivery of the
Plaintiffs own Goods could be no satisfaction, much less the redelivery of part
of them, 45 E. 3.16. 2 H. 5.2. a. 12 H. 7.14, 15.

But if upon the Delivery of Goods, If benefit to him for whom delivered, good.
he for whom they are to be delivered may have any benefit by such Delivery in
satisfaction of the Wrong, then the Arbitrament is good, 2 H. 5.2 (...) 14 H.
4.14. b. 12 H. 7.15. a. As if the Defendant had been awarded to have carried
the Goods to such a place for the Plaintiffs benefit.

If two submit themselves to Arbitrament of all Trespasses, Award on one fide
only.
etc. between them, and it is awarded that the one shall make amends to the
other, and nothing is awarded for the others Benefit, this Award is void being
but on one side, 7 H. 6.40. 39 H. 6.9. 22 E. 4.25.

So if it were that the one only shall go quit against the other, One quit
against the other.
19 H. 6.36. 20 H. 6.18, 19. Hob. 68. For such Arbitrements are only on one
side.

But where there is an Acquittal or express Satisfaction on both sides, Nota.
General Rule.
or on one side only with an implied discharge on the other, the Award may in
such case be good.

An Award that the one shall give to the other a Quart of Wine, A small
recompense and good.
or some such small Recompense in satisfaction of the Wrong, is good.

So, A Penny in satisfaction, good.
for that the one has done more Trespass to the other than the other to him, he
shall pay the other a Penny in satisfaction, and that he shall be quit against
him, 19 H. 6.37. 20 H. 6.18, 19.45 E. 3.16. b. 9 E. 4.44. a.

An Award for that the Wrongs done by the Parties each to other are equal, Each
party quit against the other.
they shall therefore be quit each against the other is said to be good, 20 H.
6.19. 21 H. 6.9. Dyer 356. 22 H. 6.39. 19 H. 7.37.

Yet it is said to be otherwise, if the Submission was by Word of Mouth, 9 E.
4.8. Quaere.

Where diverse of the one Party and the other submit themselves to Award, One of
each party quit against the other.
and the Arbitrament is, That one of one of the Parties shall pay to one other
of the other Party so much, without saying any thing of the others, it is said
to be a good Award, for that the others, it may be, have no Cause to have any
thing, 22 E. 4.25. b.

If the Arbitrament be that one of the Parties shall pay a greater Sum in value
than the Wrong which he has done requires, Damage of things uncertain lies in
the direction of the Arbitrators.
as 10 l. where but 5 s. damage, and the like; yet the Award is said to be
good, for that it lies in the discretion of the Arbitrators, who are Judges,
especially of things uncertain, as Trespass, and the like; but of things
certain, as Debt, etc. (as before) it may be otherwise, 8 E. 4.121.

Again as to an implied Discharge, Nota. Implied Discharge good.


If it be awarded, That the Defendant shall pay 10 l. for a Trespass, it is
good, 22 E. 4.25.

So that the Defendant shall pay a Penny to the Plaintiff in satisfaction of all
manner of Actions, if the Defendant show that he has paid it, it is a good
Bar, 22 H. 6.39. Because these imply a Discharge to the Defendant.

But if the Award be that he that is bound in a Bond shall pay the Debt, No
Discharge on Bond without Acquittance.
this does not imply a Discharge; for payment in such Case without Acquittance
is no Discharge to him, Hob. 68. and therefore the Award void, unless there be
provision for a Discharge, See 8 Co. 98.

An Award that in satisfaction of the Wrong the Parties shall intermarry, is no
good Award, Intermarriage, 9 E. 4.44.
for it is no satisfaction.

That one of the Parties that is in Arrear in Account, The Parties to account.
shall account with the other, is held no Satisfaction, 30 H. 6. Fitz. Abr. 27.

CHAP. IX. That the Performance of an Award must be possible, lawful, and
within the Parties Power, without the Aid of others.
IF an Award be to do a thing impossible, Award of a thing impossible. 8 E.
4.6.10. and 12. 9 H. 6.19. 22 H. 6.46. 21 E. 4.38, 39, 48.
as to turn the River of Thames to run over the Cellar of Westminster within a
day, or to pay a Sum of Money at a day already past, or to release all Right in
such a Manor, where in truth there is no such, and the like; such an Award is
void, and the Bond not forfeited.

But if the Thing seem feasible and possible though very hard and difficult,
General Rule. Award of a thing possible must be performed.
yet the Award may be good, and the Party ought to perform it. As,

That I shall at such a time, Example.
go to such a place, and bring from thence, such a thing as is not there; in
this case I ought to buy the thing and convey it to the place, and bring it
from thence, etc. 9 H. 7.15.

If the Award be that I shall pay 1000 l. Example.
within an hour, etc. I am bound to do it, 8 E. 4.1. though perhaps I have not
10 l. 19 E. 4.4. and so of the like.

Again, Award to do a thing expressly against Law.
an Award ought to be lawful, therefore that which is unlawful is void. Many
things in general acceptance are against Law because they do not agree with
Law, but in this place it is meant of things which are expressly forbidden by
the Law, as if it be awarded that the Defendant shall kill, rob, steal, forge a
Deed, or the like, Coke on Lit. 206. b. 42 E. 3.6. 2 H. 4.9. 19 H. 6.55.

Again, General Rule.
the performance ought to be within the Parties power, without the Aid of
others.

If the Award be that I shall make a Stranger pay 20 l. Award to do a thing out
of my power.
to the Plaintiff, it is void, for I cannot force him to do it, 8 E. 4. f. 2.
22 H. 6.46.

So if it be that I shall pay 40 l. A ward to do a thing at the Will of a
Stranger.
thus, 10 in hand, and three several persons to be bound every one for 10 l.
apiece; this has been held void, 17 E. 4. f. 5. b. 19 E. 4. f. 1. For this
lies at the Will of a Stranger, whether he will be bound or not.

But where I may do the things awarded my self, General Rule.
or force it to be done, the Award is good, 5 H. 7.22. 21 E. 4. f. 40.

If the Award be that one of the Parties shall pay a Sum to the other, What
shall be a good Discharge.
and that the other in consideration shall discharge him of a Bond, in which
they two were bound to another person:

In this Case it was held that the thing was feasible by the Party himself;
Performance of the Award by Equity. Pasch. 15 Car. in B. R.
for if the day of payment was not come, the payment of the Money at the day
would be a good Discharge of the Bond, and so a good Acquittal of the other
Party; and if the day of payment was past, it was held he might pay the Money,
and force the Obligee in Chancery to deliver up the Bond though forfeited, or
else the Party might suffer an Action to be brought against him upon the Bond,
and then discharge and pay it.

It was also held that where any are seized, Where the thing may be done by
Compulsion.
etc. to my use, and that I have an Interest and Power to compel them to do the
thing awarded upon my part, that in such Case the Award is good, 17 E. 4.5. and
I ought to compel them.

And this is a general Rule, General Rule.
That where I may do the thing awarded my self without the Aid of another, or
it lies in my power to enforce the doing thereof by others; in such Case the
Award is good, and I am obliged to perform it.

CHAP. X. That there be a means by Law to attain unto the thing awarded.
THIS is chiefly meant where the Submission is without Specialty, As,

If in Trespass an Award be pleaded, Award to pay and release, and that after
the other shall release. 22 H. 6.12, 18. 19 H. 6.37, 38.
that one Party should pay a Sum of Money, and release to the other all Actions
of Trespass, etc. and that after the other should release to him, this is not
good, because if the one pays the Money and releases, he cannot after force the
other to release to him.

Yet it may be a good Plea if the Party pleading shows that he has performed
his part, as appears after.

If the Defendant in an Action of Trespass pleads an Award, Pleading Award to
pay Money, and the day not come.
that he should be bound to the other by a day not yet come, this will be no
Bar, for if he should, the other would be without Remedy to compel him to make
the Bond. 5 E. 4.7. 45 E. 3.16.

But if the submission were by Bond, Bond forfeited.
though such a Plea as above will be no Bar to the Action, because there is no
means to enforce the making of a Bond, Release, or other Collateral Note any
other thing besides payment of Money, is called a Collateral matter.
Matter, yet if the party do not make it, he will thereby forfeit the Penalty
of his Bond.

Where the submission is without Bond, General Rules. 28 H. 6.12. 2 H. 4.4. 5
E. 4.7.
if the Award be for payment of Money at a day to come, it is good, because an
Action of Debt will lie for the Money upon such Award, if it be not paid, the
Party, if he please, may resort to his force Action.

Also if an Award be to do a Collateral thing, as make a Release, etc. for
which there is no remedy, yet if it appear to be executed, the Award will be
held a good Plea, 19 H. 6.37, 38.

And if the Collateral thing appear not to be executed, yet if the submission
be by Bond, the Bond will be forfeited for nonperformance of the thing awarded,
9 E. 4.44. a.

As to pleading an Award in Bar of an Action, in these Cases, observe
1. That where an Award is for payment of Money, for which there is Remedy, and
the day of payment not past, in such case an Award pleaded will be a good Bar
to an Action, 20 H. 6.18, 19. 2 H. 44. 9 E. 4.51. 19 E. 4.8. 45 E. 3.16.

2. Where the day of payment is past, it will be no Bar to plead an Award,
without pleading of payment by the Party; 20 H. 6.12.

3. Where the day of payment is past, and though it appear that the Arbitrament
is not executed, yet if there be no default in the Defendant, it may be a good
Bar to plead an Award, 20 H. 6.18. 2 H. 4.1.

4. Where an Award is for doing a thing for which the Party has no remedy
(though the day be not come in which the thing ought to be done) in such case
it will be no Bar of an Action to plead the Award, 19 H. 6.37. 5 E. 4.7. 7 H.
4.41.

CHAP. XI. That an Award must be final.
THat it be a final end of the Controversies submitted.

This is to be understood with respect to what is said before, That though an
Award may be good of part of the things only submited, yet it must be final as
to that part, or else it will be void.

As if an Award be, Award that the Parties shall be nonsuit.
That the Parties shall be nonsuit one against the other, in Actions depending
betwixt them; this Award is void being not final, for after non-suits the
Parties may begin again, and thus there is no end of the Controversy, 19 H.
6.36, 37. 8 E. 4.10.

And so it is where the Award is of one side only, because it does not
determine the Controversy between the Parties.

And so where it is uncertain, for such an Award cannot decide the matter in
Controversy, 5 Co. 78.

And it is a general Rule, General Rule.
That the Law does reject all Arbitrements, which leave the matter in
Controversy in suspense or unconcluded, for it is the proper Office of an
Arbitrament to put an end to Controversy, 8 E. 4.12.41, 42 El. in Com. Banco,
Emery cont. Emery.

Note, The Arbitrators may ordain in their Award, an Act to be done for the
better performance of their Award as to enter into Bond, etc. 8 H. 6.18. b. 19
H. 4.1. a.

CHAP. XII. Concerning an Umpire.
IF the Parties submit themselves to the Award of certain Persons, Umpire, how
to make his Award of parcel.
and if they cannot agree, then to the Ordinance of another, as Umpire: If the
Arbitrators make their Award of Parcels, The Umpire shall not make his Award of
the other remaining part.

But if the submission be such, That the Umpire shall make his Award of the
whole or of part, then its said he may make Award of such part with which the
Arbitrators have not meddled, 39 H. 6.10. a. 11. b.

In Debt upon a Bond Conditional to perform an Award, When the same time is
limited to the Arbitrators and Umpire.
to be made by two, by such a day, and if they cannot agree, then to the
Umpirage of A. B. so he awarded by the same time; and there said, that where
the Arbitrators and Umpire have the same time, if either make an Award its
sufficient; but then all agreed, That an absolute refusal of the Arbitrators
should be alleged, The Arbitrators must first refuse.
as to say, That they altogether refused, and not to say, That they did not,
nor could not make the Award, 2 Keb. 562.619. Syderf. 428. Mod. Rep. 15.

If the Arbitrators do wholly desert it, the Umpire may Award; They must wholly
desert.
for if the Arbitrators desert only one while, they may take it up within the
time, Syderf. 455.

But where the Arbitrators are left to choose the Umpire in the same time, and
do so, Arbitrators choose an Umpire in the same time.
they thereby relinquish their power, especially where the Submission to an
Umpire, is upon their disagreement, otherwise an Award by the Umpire within
their time is void, 1 Keble 6.848. 2 Keble 714. Mod. Rep. 274.

In debt upon a Bond to perform an Award of Arbitrators, Time given over to the
Umpire.
so as it be made by the second of March, and if not agreed then, to the
umpirage of whom A. and B. elect, so as he Award by the fifth of March. It was
objected, That the Umpire was elected but the third of March, but the Court
said, if he were elected on the fourth, it was sufficient, 3 Keble 387.

Note, That the usual course is now by Bond, with a time over for the Umpire,
in case the Arbitrators make no Award.

CHAP. XIII. Some things of Note concerning Arbitrament, Registered by Mr.
Styles in his Practical Register, as follows.
AN Award that is made, Concerning payment of Money in the House of a Stranger.
That one of the Parties who submitted themselves to the Award, shall pay money
in the House of a Stranger, is not good, for this is to Award him to do a thing
which will make him a Trespasser, and so liable to an Action, which is
unreasonable, Mich. 22 Car. B. R.

But if the Award be to pay the Money in the House of one of the Parties that
submitted to the Award, such an Award is good, In or at the House of a Stranger.
for it implies a License from the Party for him to pay it there, Pract.
Regist. 27.

Award to pay Money in or at the House of J. S. The Plaintiff says it was not
paid at the House, which the Court held to be well enough, and if it were paid
in the House, it may be given in Evidence on issue, That it was paid at the
House, 1 Keble 753.16 Car. 2. B. R.

An Award to pay Money at the House of a Stranger may be good, At the House of a
Stranger.
for the may come to the House in many cases and be no Trespasser; but if he
cannot come to the Strangers House, without being a Trespasser to him, there
such an Award is not thought good, Pract. Reg. 27. and by Keble 1.13 Car. 2.
Where payment is to be in the House of a Stranger, he shall not be presumed to
be able to perform it, but otherwise where the Payment is to be at the House of
a Stranger.

A Conditional Award is not good because it is not final to determine the
Matters in difference submitted to the Arbitration, Conditional Award. Pract.
Reg. p. 27.
Mich. 22 Car. B. R.

If all the Matters submitted to the Arbitrators be not awarded upon, All the
Matters must be awarded on.
the Award is not good, Pasch. 23 Car. B. R. Pract. Reg. 27.

(...) is, when the Submission is by Deed Conditional, See before Chap. 6.

An uncertain and doubtful Award is not good, An uncertain Award.
because it makes not an end of all the Matters submitted unto by both Parties,
but leaves them at large, to sue and trouble each other, as they were before
the Award made, Trin. 23 Car. B. R.

An Award may be void in some part, Award void in part, and good in part.
Pract. Reg. 28.
and yet good in another, viz. if the Award do make an end of all the
Differences submitted unto the Arbitrators by the Parties, Trin. 23 Car. B. R.
Mich. 24 Car. B. R.

An Award ought to be final and certain, else it is not good, Mich. Award must
be final.
23 Car. B. R. Pract. Reg. 28.

If each Party submitting to the Award has power by the Award to compel the
other Party either by Law or equity to perform the Award, Power by Award to
compel either by Law or Equity.
the Award is good enough although the Party be thereby put to his Action,
Mich. 24 Car. B. R. Pract. Reg. 28.

An Award, Things to be done to a Stranger.
that a thing shall be done to a Stranger is a good Award, if it appear that
the Parties who submitted to the Award bave benefit by the doing it, Pract.
Reg. 28. See before Chap. 6.

If an Award be good in any part of it to all the Parties that did submit to
it, Award good in any part to all the Parties.
if the Award be broken in that part, an Action will lie for that Breach,
Pract. Reg. 28.

An Arbitrator cannot delegate or transfer the Power given him by the Parties
that submitted to the Arbitration; for it is contrary to the Submission; but an
Arbitrator may refer a ministerial act touching the Arbitration to another,
Pract. Reg. 28.

As that the Parties shall enter into Bond (for such a Sum awarded) as Counsel
shall advise, 19 E. 4.1.

Note, It was held a good Award, that an Action should be commenced betwixt the
Parties by advice of W. and P. 8 Ed. 4.1.10.

The Court will not suppose any thing to be awarded in an Award, which is not
submitted unto, except the contrary be made to appear, Pract. Reg. 28.

Thus you see most of the former Cases confirmed by this Register. And farther,

That a thing may be awarded to be done to a Stranger, See before.

CHAP. XIV. How an Arbitrament shall be expounded and intended.
EVery Arbitrament is a Judgment, 8 E. 4.1. b. 8 E. 4.10. a. Arbitrament is a
Judgment.
21 E. 4.39. a.

And there is Diversity where a Man is judged by Authority of the Law,
Diversity between Arbitrament and Judgment by Law.
and by Election of the Party himself; for a Judge of Record does not give
Judgment against the Parties if so be they are not called before him by Process
of Law; 8 E. 4.2. a.
but otherwise it is of an Arbitrator, who is Judge between the Parties.

And whereas every Judgment of Record shall be executed literally according to
the Warrant issuing out of the Record, How an Arbitrament shall be expounded
and intended.
upon and for the executing the said Judgment. Yet nevertheless,

17 E. 4.3. 21 E. 4.39. a. b. 19 H. 6.36. b.
Every Arbitrament ought to be expounded and intended according to the intent
of the Arbitrators, and not literally, 10 Co. f. 57. b.

But if the intent of the Arbitrators will not stand with the Law, To be
performed in such Sense as agrees with the Law. 21 E. 4.39. b.
then the Parties shall perform it according to those Words, in such Sense as
agrees with the Law.

And note, It has been held, That an Averment shall not be allowed to show the
intent of the Arbitrators, if it be not expressed in the Award, either directly
or by Circumstance, Dyer 242.

CHAP. XV. The Effect of an Arbitrament or Award.
THE Effect of an Arbitrament or Award is as follows:

By Arbitrament the Controversy passes into a Matter judged of, 49 E. 3.3. a.
20 H. 6.41. a. Arbitrament passes into Judgment. 6 H. 7.11. b.
9 E. 4.51. a.

And therefore, How to plead it. 6 H. 7.11. b. 9 E. 4.51. a. 20 H. 6.12. b. 40.
a. b. 28 H. 6.12. 5 E. 4.7. a.
where the Party brings his Action for the Wrong done him, it is a good Plea,
That he submitted himself to the Arbitrament of such and such, who awarded that
he should pay so much, etc. but the day of payment of it is not yet come.

But if the Day of Payment be passed, Tender of Money pleaded 16 E. 4.8. b.
he ought to show that he tendered the Money at the Day, and that he is yet ready
to pay it, etc. 8 H. 6.25. b. See before Chap. 10.

For Arbitrament by which the Arbitrators award, Arbitrament for Money gives
Action. 6 H. 7.11. 9 E. 4.51.
that one of the Parties shall pay Money, does give an Action, 5 E. 4.7. a. 16
E. 4.9. a. 17 E. 4.2. b. 17 E. 4.8. a. Fitz. Not. Brev. G. 121.

And it is now held by the Court, When Debt on Award shall be within Statute of
Limitation.
That Debt upon an Award by Word of Mouth is within the Statute of Limitation,
21 Jac. 16. That it must be sued for within six years after the Cause of
Action: But Debt upon an Award under Hand and Seal, is as if it were a
Specialty, 2 Keb. p. 462.
and so out of the Statute.

This is the same if the Submission be without Deed.

And if the Parties do not perform the Arbitrament, Party restored to his first
Action. 49 E. 3.3. a. Or he may have Debt upon the Award. 49 E. 3.3. a. 33 H.
6.2. b. If the payment be made, first wrong is determined. Double Action
the Party is restored to his first Action.

But yet it is at his Election to have a Writ of Debt, upon the Award, or the
first Action.

But if the Payment be made, the first Wrong is altogether determined by the
Award, 4 H. 6.1. a. 25. b. 21 H. 7.28. b.

And if the Arbitrators award, that one of the Parties shall pay so much Money,
and either of them is bound to the other to stand to the Award, 21 E. 4.41. b.
33 H. 6.2. b.
the Party may have an Action upon the Award, and also the Deed if the Award be
not performed. Quaere.

If the Submission be by Word, Award of a Collateral things gives no Action.
and the Award is, That one of the Parties shall do a Collateral Act, other
than payment of Money, it gives no Action; and if it be not indeed executed and
satisfied, 20 H. 6.19. a. 5 E. 4.7. a. 11. b.
the Arbitrament has no Effect, and such Arbitrament does not determine the
first Wrong, 19 H. 6.38. a.

Yet if the Submission be by Bond, Submission by Bond, and Bond forfeited.
if a Collateral Act be awarded to be done, if it be not performed, the Bond
shall be forfeit, 9 E. 4.44. a.

And it is the usual course to sue the Bond on Nonperformance of the Award.
Usual course of Practice.


CHAP. XVI. Concerning the Performance of an Award. With several Presidents of
Awards, Umpirage and Release.
LAstly we are to consider the Performance of the Award, How the Parties ought
to perform the Award. They ought to use their utmost Endeavor.
whereof it is said, That

The Parties ought to do all that in them is to perform it, 21 E. 4.39. b. See
before Chap. 9.

If by the Arbitrament it is awarded, Things to be done two ways, how to be
performed.
That an Act shall be done which a Man may perform in two manners, the one way
by himself, and by the other way he must have the Aid of another person, the
Party ought to perform it by such means as he himself can do, 21 E. 4.40. b.
without the Aid of another.

Arbitrament ought not to be performed in part, Must be totally performed.
and in part not, 6 H. 7.10. b.

But though an Arbitrament cannot be made by the Arbitrators, May be performed
at several times. 8 E. 4.10. b.
part at one time and part at another time, yet it may be performed part at one
time and part at another time.

But this must be before the Day limited.

The Parties shall have reasonable time allowed them for the performance of an
Award if no time be limited, How to be performed when no day is limited. 21 E.
4.41. a. b. etc. One Act to be done depends upon another to be first done. 5 E.
4.7. a.
20 E. 4.8. b.

If the Act which the Arbitrators award that one of the Parties shall perform,
cannot be performed before another Act first done by the other Party, if the
Party does not do the first Act, the other is excused.

Arbitrament, Payment of Money, and release at the same time. 21 H. 7.28. b.
that one Party shall pay Money, and the other shall make a Release, it shall be
done at one and the same time, if there be no Bond to perform the Award.

But if there be an Obligation to perform the Award, When Parties must perform
Award at their Peril.
then either ought to perform his part under the peril of the Obligation, 21 H.
7.28. b.

If a Bond be made to stand to an Arbitrament, though the Arbitrament is void
in Law, yet it is said it ought to be performed, otherwise the Bond shall be
forfeited. 22 H. 6.46. b.


This must be meant when the Award is only void in part, See before Chap. 6.

But if an Action be brought upon such void Award, 22 H. 6.46. b.
the Action shall not be maintained.

If the Matter contained in the Award, Difference in Words between the Award
and Submission.
and the Matter contained in the Submission, of which the Arbitrators ought to
award, differ in Words or in Circumstance.

The Parties to the Arbitrament shall not in a Suit thereupon be allowed to
aver, 7, 8 El. 242. b. 52. Averment not allowed.
that it is all one, Dyer 242. See before Chap. 14.

Thus have I shown you the whole Law of Arbitrament by Method and Rule; wherein
if you find some things twice, it is not without some Reason, either relating
to the Method or to the Matter of an Award.

There may be many other things said of Arbitrament in later Books, as in the
three Books of Keble's Reports; but these things being no more than what is
already said, and especially belonging to Pleading, I shall omit them.

Several Forms of Awards, Arbitrements and Vmpirage.
Mr. West in his Treatise Symb. Part 2. Sect. 45. gives us a President to this
purpose.

An Arbitrament or Award of Lands, by which the Party covenanteth to perform it.
THIS Indenture made the 1st day of Aug. in the fourth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary by the Grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Domini, 1692. between A. B. of, etc. of the one part, and C. D. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That whereas there has been and yet is
Contention, Variance and Suit betwixt the said Parties, not only for and
concerning the Right, Title and Interest of and in a certain quantity of
Ground, by estimation two Acres or thereabouts, lying in E. and adjoining,
(etc.) Setting forth the bounds and borders of the Ground.
For the friendly ending and appeasing of which said Variances and
Controversies, the said Parties have compromited and submitted, and by these
presents do compromit and submit themselves and all Matters in variance
aforesaid, to the Order, Arbitrament, Award, Judgment, final End and
Determination of E. F. and G. H. of etc. Arbitrators indifferently chosen,
elected and named, as well on the part and behalf of the said A. B. as of the
aforesaid C. D. Whereupon the said Arbitrators having viewed the said Ground in
variance, and perused diverse Writings and Evidences concerning the same, and
heard the Testimony and Witness of diverse ancient Men and Neighbors, dwelling
nigh the said Ground, as well touching the Occupation and Usage of the said
Ground by the said A. B. and his Ancestors, as also the said ways used
thereunto, by the Inhabitants of the Neighborhood, time out of mind; Do make
and declare their Award, Judgment, final End and Determination of and
concerning the Premises and every part thereof. And to that end the said A. B.
and C. D. do, and each of them by these Presents does, severally Covenant and
Grant, to and with the other for themselves, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, in manner and form following, that is to say, First, the said
Arbitrators do Order, Award and Judge, and the said C. D. is so contented and
agreed, and accordingly does Covenant and grant for him and his Heirs, to and
with the said A. B. and his Assigns, That he the said A. B. shall and may from
henceforth have, hold, occupy and quietly enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever,
the said parcels or quantity of Ground, containing by estimation two Acres,
lying and being -- ( etc. setting forth the Buttels and Bounds, and the
substance of the Award) -- and that the said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
and will at all times hereafter, at his and their proper costs and charges, and
within the space of Two years, Or other time as is thought fit. And with such
Exceptions as may be thought fit.
next ensuing the date hereof, do make, acknowledge, and suffer, or cause to be
made acknowledged and suffered, all and every Act and Acts, Thing and Things
for the further, better and more perfect assuring and sure making unto the said
A.B. his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, as well the said parcel or quantity of
Ground, containing about two Acres, as also of the said ways in manner and form
before expressed, as by the said A. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their
Counsel learned in the Laws, shall for that purpose be reasonably advised,
devised or required, according to the true intent and meaning of these
Presents. In consideration whereof the said A. B. has paid to the said C. D.
at the ensealing hereof, at the Request and by the Award and Order of the said
Arbitrators, the Sum of 100 l. of lawful Money of England. In Witness whereof,
not only the said Parties to these present Indentures of Award interchangeably
have put their Seals, and subscribed their Names, but also the said
Arbitrators, to both the parts of these Indentures have put their Hands and
Seals the day and year first above written.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

Note, That all such Covenants and Conditions as are usually made for the
assurance or enjoying of Lands or Tenements, Goods and Chattels may be inserted
into Awards, as the Arbitrators, etc. shall think fit.

Another more usual and formal Award upon submission by Bond.
TO all People to whom this present Writing of Award Note, it need not be
indented, unless the Bonds of Submission do so provide.
Indented shall come, A. B. and C. D. of (etc.) send Greeting, Whereas great
Variance, Strife, Debate and Controversy has heretofore been had, moved and
stirred, between E. F. of (etc.) and G. H. of (etc.) of, for and concerning --
( etc. reciting the Matters in Controversy, --) for the appeasing and ending
whereof, either of the said Parties by their mutual Assents, Consents and
Agreements, have submitted and bound themselves, either to the other, by their
several Writings Obligatory, bearing date -- [ etc. setting forth the date -- ]
in the Sum of, [ etc. mentioning the Penalty] To stand to, obey, abide, observe
perform, fulfill and keep the Award, Order, Arbitrament, Judgment, final End
and Determination of Us the said A. B. and C. D. Arbitrators indifferently
Elected and Chosen between the said Parties to Arbitrate, Award, Order, [ etc.
as the Words in the Condition of the Bond are expressed] -- of and for the
Premises, as by the said several Obligations, with the Conditions for the
performance thereof, relation being thereunto had, more at large may appear.
Now know ye, That we the said Arbitrators having taken upon us the Business and
Charge of the same Award, and willing to set the said Parties at Peace and
Concord, by making a final End and Determination concerning the Premises in
Controversy, and having taken good advice and deliberation, and heard and
examined both their Title, Allegations and Proofs offered, concerning the said
Premises in Controversy, do, with the assent and consent of both the said
Parties, make, publish, declare and give up this our Award concerning the
Premises, in manner and form following, viz. First, We Award, Order, Judge and
Determine, That, -- Setting forth the Judgment or Award.
etc. Also we award, etc. Finally we award, judge and determine, etc. -- In
Witness whereof we the said Arbitrators, and also both the said Parties to the
Submission, have interchangeably put our Hands and Seals, (...) day of (...)
Annoque Domini, 1692.

Another most usual and general Form of an Award upon a submission by Bond.
TO all People to whom this present Writing of Award indented, shall come A. B.
of, etc. and C. D. of, etc. Arbitrators indifferently chosen, elected and
named, by and between E. F. of, etc. and G. H. of, etc. to Arbitrate, Reciting
the words in the Condition of the Bond.
Award, Order, Judge and Determine, of, for, upon and concerning all and all
manner of Action and Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions, Suits, Bills, Bonds,
Specialties, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, at any time before our said
Election, had, made, moved, brought, commenced, sued, prosecuted, done,
suffered, committed or depending, by or between the said Parties, as by the
several mutual Bonds or Writings Obligatory of the said Parties, with the
Conditions thereof, relation being thereunto had, more fully and at large may
appear. Now know ye, That we the said Arbitrators, in pursuance of our said
Election, and the power given us thereby, for the ending of all the Matters to
us therein submitted, and for the future Peace and quiet of the said Parties
concerning the Premises, do Arbitrate, Award, Order, Judge and Determine
thereupon as follows, First, (etc. Setting forth the Judgment.
-- In Witness whereof, we the said Arbitrators have to these our present
Indentures of Award, interchangeably set our Hands and Seals, the (...) day of
(...) Annoque Domini, 1692.

The Form of an Umpirage, briefly thus:
TO all People to whom this present Writing shall come, I A. B. of C. etc.
Umpire indifferently chosen by E. F. of, etc. and G. H. of, etc. having
deliberately heard and understood the Griefs and Allegations and Proofs of both
the said Parties, and willingly, as much as in me lies, to set the said
Parties at unity and good accord, do by these Presents, arbitrate, award,
order, deem, decree and judge, That the said E. F. his Executors or
Administators, shall well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said G. H.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the dwelling House, etc. the
full Sum of Ten Pounds of lawful Money of England on the first day of Septemper
next ensuing the Date hereof; and that upon payment thereof either of the said
E. F. and G. H. shall seal, subscribe, and as his several Act and Deed, deliver
unto the other of them a general Release in writing of all Matters, Actions,
Suits, Causes of Actions, Bonds, Bills, Covenants, Controversies and Demands
whatsoever, which either of them may, might or in any wise ought to have of,
and against the other of them by reason aforesaid, or means of any Matter,
Cause or Thing whatsoever from the beginning of the World until the 20th Day of
The Day of the Date of the Bonds of Submission.
July now last past. In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal
the (...) Day of (...) in the (...) year of the Reign of, etc. Annoque Domini,
1692.

The Form of the Release.
KNOW all Men by these Presents, Naming the Parties, their Places, and Trades
or Qualities.
That I E. F. of, etc. have remised, released, and for ever quit claimed, and
by these Presents do for me, my Heirs, Executors and Administrators remise,
release, and for ever quit claim unto G. H. of, etc. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, all and all manner of Actions, Cause and Causes of Actions,
Suits, Bills, Bonds, Writings Obligatory, Debts, Dues, Duties, Accounts, Sum
and Sums of Money, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Quarrels, Controversies,
Trespasses, Damages and Demands whatsoever, which against the said G. H. I ever
had, now have, and which I, my Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall or may
have Claim, Challenge or Demand for or by reason or means of any Matter, Cause
or Thing whatsoever from the beginning of the World until the 20th Day of July
now last past. In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal this
(...) day of (...) in the (...) year of the Reign of, etc. Annoque Domini, 1692.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

Note, You may date the Release upon the day to which it ought to release, and
then say, From the beginning of the World unto the day of the date of these
Presents.

FINIS.

