LETTERS FROM THE MARQVESSE OF ARGYLE, the Earl of LANERICK, Lord WARRISTON,
and others now at Edinburgh, to their friends at London. Intercepted by Sir
RICHARD WILLYS Governor of Newarke, and Printed faithfully by the Originals.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITY. 1645.

THe Reader may take notice that these Letters are printed exactly according to
the Authors Spelling, without the least alteration of Word or Syllable: Most
of them bear date at Edinburgh about the middle of March, and were
superscribed to London, except that written by J. Meldrum in January to his
friend in France, which therefore we place first; the rest follow according to
their several dates, in this Order. viz.

To the Earl of Lowdon from Mr Patrick Maule of His Majesty's Bedchamber. To
Mr Hebbe a Merchant at London, from Mr Mowet conceived to be one of their
Advocates of the Sessions. To James Oswold from To. Kirkwood said to be one of
the Writers to the Signet. To the Scots Commissioners at London from Archibald
Johnston Lord Warriston. To the Earl of Lauderdale 'one of the Scots
Commissioners at London, from the Earl of Lanerick brother to the Duke of
Hammilton To the Scots Commissioners at London from the Marquis of Argyle Earl
of Cassils, Lanericke, Lord Balmerinoth, and the rest of the Commissioners at
Edinburgh. From Mistress Dorothy Spense (without a Superscription.) To the Earl
of Somerset at London from J. Elphinston the Lord Balmerinoths son. From
Master James Stuart a Merchant in Edinburgh to his Kinsman at London, To John
Campbell a Merchant in London from John Wood a Stationer in Edinburgh. To the
Earl of Lowdon from Master J. Meuar.
LETTERS FROM THE Marquess of Argyle, the Earl of Lanerick, Lord Waristone,
and others now at Edinburgh, to their friends at London, etc.
Sulsi^ the 26 of January. 1645. Most loving friend,
I Perceave in your last letter to me ye have not resaved any from my hand;
indeed ye sall not wonder thairat, nor imput any neglect of dewtie to me, for
I have not forgotten you nor never sall, but the evil tym I have endured hes
maed me almost forget my self and my Country both; for sinc the Irishes came
amongs us (which was in July) we never have had peac or quietness but in danger
of our lives and estates; as for my estate, I thank God I have spent in this
year more nor I can win in thrie yeir to cum, by quartering of troopers
rigging out of seuldiers, horse and fut, tax and loan, tents and twanties, and
victual to the army, with my own personal service at all occasiones to the
public, hes put me mere in debt nor ever I can get paid. The occurments of
our Kingdom ar many but not guide, there came in in our West-Ills in July last
about the number of tua thousant Irishes, under the conduct of Alex:clan
Donald, alias Colmak^ittach, and within short tim the Marquis of Montros joined
with them, being cum out of Ingland secretly, and raised many in our Hilands
and all Atholl, and came toward Sant Iohnstonn about the number of 4000 men,
being the beginning of September, whom ane Sunday the fifth, Strathern, Angus,
with Perthshire, with 6000 met tham about Sant Iohnstonn, where for want of
governament and commanders we was put to flight, and the number of 800 killed
and drowned in the water in the flying, and than entered the town and
plundered it. From thence they came throw Angus, and gat many ajoint to tham as
Arlie Kinowl, Spiney, with the Meister, and diverse Barons: than to the Mearns,
Marshall keipt Dunnotter his house: they crosed Die at the milnes of Drum, and
came to Aberdene, the shirif of Aberdene and Bamff being present at the tua mill
cross where Elchoes Regiment and the Townsmen, gaiff ane assault wpon the 13
of September, the wind being high and with tham, we was forced to retire to the
loss of many of our men, the Town of Aberdene losed sevin scor and ten and
also many more, they stayed three days in the Town. This is all I can show
you for the present.

The Lord of Haltowne is dead of ane fever upon the 6 of Ianuar.

Your loving Father in the Lord Jesus. J. Meldrum.

To William Gray Preacher to Coll: Douglas Regiment in France.
Edinburgh March 8. 1645. My Lord,
IT has pleased my Lady to conclude the business betwixt my Lady Jane your
daughter, and my son, so it wants nothing now to the finishing thereof but
your aprobatione and blissing to it, and I pray the Lord with all my soull to
bless them, and make their happiness according to their affections; my
opinion is, the privater that it is consummate it will be the better, wherein
you may signify your pleasure and it will be obeyed, both the time, and your
absence forth of the Kingdom requiring privacy.

I think my occasions will force my coming to London this Summer, if there be
any possibility of travailing either by sea or land: if you think at my being
there if I procured liberty to go and see the King, that I might say any thing
to His Majesty that might be for the good of Himself and His Dominions, that
you would be pleased to write thereof to the Marquis of Argyle, that I might
speak with him therein: for unless there be some middles found to save the
miserable distractions of this Kingdom, we and our posterity shall be but
miserable at the best: for unless that God Almighty has decreed the ruin of
the King and His race, it is not to be doubted but He will prevail in the end,
though to the ruin of all His Kingdoms. I have many times spoken the
Marquess herein, for he gets much blame from His Majesty of the courses that
this Kingdom takes, and I think gets not many thanks here for his pains,
which is all I will say for the present, but that I shall ever remain

Your Lordships most humble servant.PATRICKE MAULE.

For the Earl of Lowdon.
Edinburgh March 12. 1645. Loving Brother,
I Omitted Yesternights packet because I had this bearer John Pringle, George
Lesly's godsonne, before my hands. I remit likewise to his relation the estate
of our present affairs, which are not as you could wish. These godless rebels
since the routing of Argyles forces in Lothaber, did return to Murray, and
finding Innernesse fortified went not that way, but held them about Ferres and
Elgin, and all the parts of that poor Country. And turning over Spey returned
be Ennys and Bamff, and Yesterday we heard they were at Aberdene, using all the
expedition possible to be at Angus and farther South before we be in
readiness. The Parliament before it rose, (which was upon Saturday last) made
all the have it could to provide for moneys to our Army, which is making
against these Rebels, for without present pay no soldier could be moved to
advance. Colonel Vrrey was sent away hence upon Saturday last, to guard our
troops, we expect two Regiments presently from New Castle, and as many are
sent for from Ireland, but apparently these will come late. The perfidious Lord
Gordon went into that wicked Band in Murray, and since the Earl of Seaforth.
The Gordons and Graunts are risen and are with them. This is our present
condition, which or it be long, must suffer ane change, or else we sall be made
very miserable: the Lord assist us and grant us ane happy deliverance from such
ane base cruel enemy: There has been ane great Fray near York lately at
the releife of Pontfract Castle, which was reported here to have been ane
total overthrow of Fairefax Armies: this bearer and others from New Castle
will report the truth far betternor I, who has it scarcely at the third
hand. Our General marched from New Castle (as we hear) toward Yorkshire,
upon the report of that overthrow, with 3000 fut and the most part of his
horse, his son the Lord Balgonie is not like to live, it is in effect ane
Consumption, proceeding, as is reported, from intemperancy. The Parliament is
very slow in all their determinations. Lord be with you and grant us ane happy
and peaceable meeting to his glory and our comfort. So I rest

Your loving BrotherA. MOVV^T.

For Master Heb Merchant, etc.
Edinburgh this 12 of March. 1645. James Oswald,
And loving friend, my love remembret. I wonder that I never hare from you
since your departing from London to the Country concerning your Commission you
left me about Charles Dickeson. For news hear yester night certain word came of
Montrosse his arrival at Aberdein, accompanied with the Earl of Seaffort
being about 7000 men in all, not compting thoss he hes left behind him at
Innernesse, our Parliament is risen and nothing expected heir bot misery. Genesis
Leslie is to march presently southward with his army, only leaving a garrison
at Newcastle. It is thought that Montros will be this night at Dundie, our
Parliament hes ordered ane army of 10000 men, bot they are so slow in leviing,
that God hes left us and some heavy judgment to light on us. Master William
Rutherfoord and Crawfoord and all your friends remember them to you. I rest

Your affectionate. To. Kirkwood.

For James Oswald, etc.
Edinburgh March 13. Right Honorable,
I Can add little to what I did write by sea with our Ministers, and
thereafter with the Post, there is a public Letter from the Committee about
the ships, and another for favor or trial at New Castle to the Delinquents
that are sent up; the General of Artillery hes pressed it very hard, ye will
make the best use of it as may not wrong this Kingdom in their reputation and
affection amongst the weall affected. I have gotten the answer to the
Parliaments Letters, as also to Sir William Ermin's papers, drawn up very
fair, which we shall, God willing, bring with us on Tuesday next. My Lord
Craford and the rest of the Committee for the North goes to Bailie this day
and to morrow; the enemy we believe be with Seaforth his prisoner with his will
now at Aberdene; I am my self this day under physic and so hes not attended
the Committee. If Crafurd and Middletoun continue not in employment their, I
wish them at home with our Armies; Monroe will be dispatched hither to assist
Garthland and Cowdon, whom we have sent to Ireland. Thus in have resting

For the Commissioners of the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland.

I fear M. Baitzee, and M. Gilespie, with Maistresse Murray, be driven over to
Campheire in the water, that went from this Yesterday morning.

Your Lordships real servant ARCH: JOHNSTON.

My Dear Lord, Edinburgh March 13. 1645.
IT has now pleased God to put an happy end to this Session of Parliament,
after a solid course was taken, for maintaining our forces at home against our
as yet prevailing Enemies and recalling such from England and Ireland as our
Danger and Necessity forced us to; which I hope will no ways be misunderstood
where you are, seeing the only way to make us useful to our friends, and
considerable every where abroad, is to preserve our selves entire at home. The
bad success of the Treaty occasions a great confidence here in Malignants, of
His Majesty's powers and means of persuing actively the war this ensuing
summer; and the new alterations in the Command of the Parliaments armies, give
some grounds to honest men, (who looks at a distance upon their proceedings)
not only to fear a great loss of time by these changes, and hazard of
disobedience to their commands, but likewise more desperate and dangerous
effects from an appearance of divisions in their Counsels. It is not long since
you had the like fears of that amongst us here; I confess I cannot say there
wants discontented persons amongst us, and those even of the honestest, but I
am confident it can never heighten so as to occasion disaffection in any, to
the great work we are all sworn to; for whatsoever particular mistakes there
may be amongst persons, yet praised be God, there has been unanimity in our
Counsels, which (whatsoever your Lordship may hear to the contrary) none shall
more constantly endeavor to continue and preserve then my self, for as I
shall answer to God I have no private or particular ends, nor do I otherwise
consider or look upon my self, but as I may be useful to the public, and I
hope all amongst us have the same thoughts, if not these sifting times will
soon separate the Corn from the Chafe. I pray the Lord bless you in your
employment, and send us a happy meeting when he thinks fit.

Your Lordships faithful and obliged servant LANERICK.

For the Earl of Lauderdale.
Postscript.
My Lord, I am desired to recommend to you the desires of a Brother in Law of
my wifes, one Sir Thomas Boyer, I hope your Lordship will not look the less
favorable upon him that he has this interest in your servant.

Edinburgh 13 March 1645. Right Honorable,
We have several times heirtofore Represented to your Lordships the prejudices
have ensued to this Kingdom throw the Parliament of Englands not sending of
ships to attend our coasts as they are bound be Treatee. And now finding that
there is not one ship on our coast toward Ireland (Captain Kerse being come in
for fresh provision) And being certainly informed of great preparations of
men and ammunition to come out of Ireland for supplee of the Rebels who now
infest this Kingdom, and whose coming here had been interrupted, if the
Parliament had performed what they are obl^idged to be the Treattie. We do
seriously Recomend to your L^^ care To deal effectually with the Parliament
of England that besides Captain Kerse Two other ships of 20 piece of
Ordinance a piece with two pinnaces be surthwith sent to attend on our West
coast toward Ireland and our Isles. And that they be provided with six months
provision. And some settled course taken be exchange or otherwise, how they may
be furnished of new within this Kingdom and not forced as formerly they have
done for want of provision to leave the service. And that they be ordered to
obey all such direction as sall be given to them be the Marquis of Argyle,
General Major Monro, or any other having power from the Committee of Estats
for that effect. Your Lordship sall also desire, that the Excyse of Merchandise
that comes to Newcastle be not anticipat an London But that the same may be
paid at Newcastle and employed for the use of the Army, and the like for such
merchandise as sall come to Sunderlaind and Hartlepoole, We rest

Your Lorships assured friends Argyle Yester Yougar Patrick Leslie Cassillis
Lannericke Balcarres Tullibardine Balmerinoth Braighall Sir William Dicks.
For the Commissioners of Scotland at London, etc

13 of March 1645. GOod friend
having this sure bearer I could not omit but let you know how it is with me, I
am blessed be God in health, and would be glad to hear the like of you, and
hope ere long to hear of your arrival here with the rest. You desire to hear
news, truly we can promise our selves nothing but misery, for the enemy
grows stronger, and our hands weaker, for God has taken all courage from us;
and the ministers of God foresees great desolation, and still threatens the
people, but still they continue a stuped unsencible people, and do not see
Gods hand in it. I think we must drink of that cup which England has begun
to us, and I fear we here must drink the dreggs. My Lord Argyle is going out
again with new forces for he was defeated by the help of some of his own me.
So now I cease to write but never from being

Your faithful friend Dorothy Spense

Edinburgh March 13. 1645. Loving Cussing,
YOur last by the ordinar post I answrit by the samen, 10 Current; wherein I
sent you the list of the north committie, I haif nothing new to enlarge; only
Montrose came to Aberdene with his rebels on Saturday the 8 of this, Bailie
Iefrey came yesternicht who shows that Nathaniell Gordun with a party of
horse fell on the baggage of Lothians regiment and hes taken it with Leiutenant
Colonel Murray prisoner. The Earll of A new Earl of Craford of their own
making, the true Earl being for his loyalty prisoner in Edinburgh.
Craford went over water this day for Pearth where Baillie stays; Its like God
hes a great contraversie with this Land, the judgment so grown by reason
means are not activelie followed, and yet no man will say its his default,
nether haif we had success since my Lard Chancellor went away, though I cannot
attribute it to that only, yet I am confident matters would go a great deal
better of his presentts, General Major Hurrie is gone the north and commands
nixt to Baillie, their is small appearance Baillies stiring, so it is like
Montross sall once essay all our sitting. My humble service to my Lord
Chancellor, Lady Warriston, etc.

Your Cussing to power I. Steuart.

From the Abbay the 14 of March. 1645.
I Wrett to you before that all your trunkes was broken up, for ane black heart
of my Lord Maitland's, and shortly they have taken your hat caisse for my Lord
Maitland's use; I have no fewer news to wrytt to you but that the bearer can
aquent you; times looks strangelye in Scotland, the enemy is very strong and
daily gatheres strength, by numberes that runes into him both greatt men and
commones. And for any thing that I can sie, Scotland shall drink as deip in
the cupp of the Lords wraith as either England or Irland. It hes pleased the
Lord to stryke Scotland with two rodes, and threatenes for with the thride, and
yet there non that lays to heart; never more gross sining against God in
Scotland nor at this same time. Now the Lord be with you.

Your humble servant till death. John Wood.

For John Campbell etc.
14 March. 1645. My Lord,
I Have so long bein silent that any good newis from this cuntry I can show
your Lordship are not worthy of your Lordships pains, the parliament here did
close on Saturday 8 of this Month having farfaulte the Earls of Montros,
Nithisdaill, Airlie, Lord Aboyne, Harrise, and Alexander Mackdonald who is
appointed General Major of his Majesty's forces nnder the Marquis of Montrose,
who now although a Marquis by His Majesty's patent under his own rashet not
having passed the grit Seall is declared a traitor by the State, the Earls of
Seafort and the Lord Gordon are lately joined to him, he hes bein at Elgin in
Murray and hes rased diverse gentlemen's housis, the Lard of Brodies house he hes
razed to the ground, and two other gentlemen's housis. I have named this
gentleman the rather because of his saythfull and approved service to his
cuntry, the Lord Gordon hes likewise wasted all the Viscount of Freindret and
the Lord Frasers boundis, all out deadly fead that hes bein tuixt the Gordouis
and the Lord Forbese and Fraser who are the two pryme men in these boundis.
This is all I can say at this time for newis, wishing your Lordship all health
and happiness, I rest

Your Lordships humble Servant I. Elphinston.

For my much honored Lord and Uncle the Earl of Sommerset at London.
Newcastle 15 March 1645. Most honored and my most noble Lord,
I sent a letter by this poast on Wednesday last, I have heard of your Lordship
in print since at the Common counsel at London, I know not how, but the Lord
for a time has departed from us. In my last I spoke of your Lordships regiment
which is claimed by Lumsden as his own that you would signify your mind to
my Lord General his excellence. My poor opinion is that in these times your
Lordship ought to be so far from quitting of your regiment, that one of your
Lordships Trust had rather need of ane army which may be clear before you have
the Kingdom in the posture wherein your Lordship left it, I say no more, but
refer it to the bearer, The quick dispatch with this bearer I hope will
signify your Lordships sense of the troubles at home, and the remembrance of

Your Lordships most affectionate Minister I. Meuar.

For the Earl of LOVVDON
FINIS.

