Licensed, March 10. 1678/9.

ROG. L'ESTRANGE.

Order and Disorder: OR, THE WORLD MADE AND UNDONE. BEING MEDITATIONS UPON THE
CREATION and the FALL; As it is recorded in the beginning of GENESIS.

LONDON, Printed by Margaret White for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1679.

The PREFACE.
THese Meditations were not at first designed for public view, but fixed upon
to reclaim a busy roving thought from wandering in the pernicious and perplexed
maze of humane inventions; whereinto the vain curiosity of youth had drawn me
to consider and translate the account some old Poets and Philosophers give of
the original of things: which though I found it, blasphemously against God, and
bruitishly below the reason of a man, set forth by some, erroniously,
imperfectly, and uncertainly, by the best; yet had it filled my brain with such
foolish fancies, that I found it necessary to have recourse to the fountain of
Truth, to wash out all ugly wild impressions, and fortify my mind with a
strong antidote against all the poison of humane Wit and Wisdom that I had
been dabling withal. And this effect I found; For comparing that revelation,
God gives of himself and his operations, in his Word, with what the wisest of
mankind, who only walked in the dim light of corrupted nature and defective
Traditions, could with all their industry trace out, or invent; I found it so
transcendently excelling all that was humane, so much above our narrow reason,
and yet so agreeable to it being rectified, that I disdained the Wisdom fools
so much admire themselves for; and as I found Icould know nothing but what God
taught me, so I resolved never to search after any knowledge of him and his
productions, but what he himself has given forth. Those that will be wise
above what is written, may hug their Philosophical clouds, but let them take
heed they find not themselves without God in the world, adoring figments of
their own brains, instead of the living and true God.

Lest that arrive by misadventure, which never shall by my consent, that any of
the pudled water, my wanton youth drew from the profane Helicon of ancient
Poets, should be sprinkled about the world, I have for prevention sent forth
this Essay; with a Profession that I disclaim all doctrines of God and his
works, but what I learn out of his own word, and have experienced it to be a
very unsafe and unprofitable thing for those that are young, before their faith
be fixed, to exercise themselves in the study of vain, foolish, atheistical
Poesy. It is a miracle of grace and mercy, if such be not deprived of the
light of Truth, who having shut their eyes against that Sun, have, instead of
looking up to it, hunted gloworms in the ditch bottoms. It is a misery I cannot
but bewail, that when we are young, whereas the lovely characters of Truth
should be impressed upon the tender mind and memory, they are so filled up with
ridiculous lies, that it is the greatest business of our lives, as soon as ever
we come to be serious, to cleanse out all the rubbish, our grave Tutors laid in
when they taught us to study and admire their inspired Poets and divine
Philosophers.

But when I have thus taken occasion, to vindicate my self from those
heathenish Authors I have been conversant in, I cannot expect my work should
find acceptance in the world, declaring the more full and various delight I
have found in following Truth by its own conduct; Nor am I much concerned how
it be entertained, seeking no glory by it, but what is rendered to him to whom
it is only due. If any one of no higher a pitch than my self, be as much
affected and stirred up in the reading, as I have been in the writing, to
admire the glories and excellencies of our great Creator, to fall low before
him, in the sense of our own vileness, and to adore his Power, his Wisdom, and
his Grace, in all his dealings with the children of men, it will be a success
above my hopes; though my charity makes me wish every one that has need of it
the same mercy I have found.

I know I am obnoxious to the censures of two sorts of people: First, those
that understand and love the elegancies of Poems, They will find nothing of
fancy in it; no elevations of style, no charms of language, which I confess are
gifts I have not, nor desire not in this occasion; for I would rather breath
forth grace cordially than words artificially. I have not studied to utter any
thing that I have not really taken in. And I acknowledge all the language I
have, is much too narrow to express the least of those wonders my soul has
been ravished with in the contemplation of God and his Works. Had I had a fancy,
I durst not have exercised it here; for I tremble to think of turning Scripture
into a Romance; and shall not be troubled at their dislike who dislike on that
account; and profess they think no poem can be good that shuts out drunkenness,
and lasciviousness, and libelling Satyr, the theams of all their celebrated
songs. These, (though I will not much defend my ownweakness) dislike not the
Poem so much as the subject of it.

But there are a second sort of people, whose Genius not lying that way, and
seeing the common and vile abuse of Poesy, think Scripture profaned by being
descanted on in numbers; but such will pardon me when they remember a great
part of the Scripture was originally written in verse; and we are commanded to
exercise our spiritual mirth in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs; which if
I have weakly composed, yet it is a consenting testimony with the whole Church,
to the mighty and glorious truths of God which ir not altogether impertinent,
in this atheistical age; and how imperfect soever the hand be, that copies it
out, Truth loses not its perfection, and the plainest as well as the elegant,
the elegant as well as the plain, make up a harmony in confession and
celebration of that all-creating, all-sustaining God, to whom be all honor and
glory for ever and ever.

MEDITATIONS ON THE CREATION, As recorded in the First Chapter of Genesis.
MY ravished soul, a pious ardour fires,
To sing those mystic wonders it admires,
Contemplating the Rise of every thing
That, with Times birth, flowed from the eternal spring:
And the no less stupendous Providence
By which discording Natures ever since
Have kept up universal Harmony;
While in one joint obedience all agree,
Performing that to which they were designed
With ready inclination; But Mankind
Alone rebels against his Makers will, Es. 10. 5, 6, 7, etc.

Which though opposing he must yet fulfill.
And so that wise Power, who each crooked stream
Most rightly guides, becomes the glorious theme
Of endless admiration, while we see,
Whatever mortals vain endeavors be,
They must be broken who with Power contend, Eccl. 6. 10.

And cannot frustrate their Creators End, Es. 27. 4.

Whose Wisdom, Goodness, Might and Glory shines Genesis 45. 4, 5.

In guiding men's unto his own designs. Act. 2. 23.

In these outgoings would I sing his praise, Genesis 50. 20.

But my weak sense with the too glorious rays
Is struck with such confusion, that I find
Only the worlds first Chaos in my mind,
Where Light and Beauty lie wrapped up in seed,
And cannot be from the dark prison freed,
Except that Power, by whom the world was made,
My soul in her imperfect strugglings aid,
Her rude conceptions into forms dispose,
And words impart, which may those forms disclose.
O thou eternal spring of glory, whence
All other streams derive their excellence, Jam. 1. 17.

From whose Love issues every good desire,
Quicken my dull earth with celestial fire,
And let the sacred theme that is my choice,
Give utterance and music to my voice,
Singing the works by which thou art revealed. Romans 1. 19.

What dark Eternity has kept concealed
From mortals apprehensions, what has been
Before the race of Time did first begin,
It were presumptuous folly to enquire. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Let not my thoughts beyond their bound aspire,
Time limits mortals, and Time had its birth,
In whose Beginning God made Heaven and Earth. Genesis 1. 1.

God, the great Elohim, to say no more,
Whose sacred Name we rather must adore
Than venture to explain; for He alone Job 11. 7.

Dwells in himself, and to himself is known. 1 Timothy 6. 16. and 1. 17.

And so, even that by which we have our sight,
His covering is, He clothes himself with light. Ps. 104. 2.

Easier we may the winds in prison shut,
The whole vast Ocean in a nut-shell put,
The Mountains in a little balance weigh, Es. 40. 12.

And with a Bullrush plumm the deepest Sea,
Than stretch frail humane thought unto the height
Of the great God, Immense, and Infinite,
Containing all things in himself alone, Job 38.

Being at once in all, contained in none.
Yet as a hidden spring appears in streams,
The Sun is seen in its reflected beams,
Whose high embodied Glory is too bright,
Too strong an object for weak mortal sight;
So in Gods visible productions, we Romans 1 20.

What is invisible, in some sort see; Heb. 11. 27.

While we considering each created thing,
Are led up to an uncreated spring,
And by gradations of successive Time,
At last unto Eternity do climb, Esai. 44. 6.

As we in tracks of second causes tread
Unto the first uncaused cause are led;
And know, while we perpetual motion see
There must a first self-moving Power be,
To whom all the inferior motions tend, Romans 11. 36.

In whom they are begun, and where they end.
This First eternal Cause, the Original Act. 17. 24, 26, 28.

Of Being, Life, and Motion, GOD we call;
In whom all Wisdom, Goodness, Glory, Might,
Whatever can himself or us delight
Unite, centring in his Perfection,
Whose Nature can admit but only One: Ephesians. 4. 5.

Divided Sovereignty makes neither great,
Wanting what is shared to make the sum complete.
And yet this sovereign sacred Unity The Trinity.

Is not alone, for in this one are three,
Distinguished, not divided, so that what 1 John 5. 7.

One person is, the other is not that; Mat. 28. 19.
Mat. 3. 16, 17.

Yet all the three, are but one God most High,
One uncompounded, pure Divinity,
Wherein subsist so, the Mysterious three,
That they in Power and Glory equal be;
Each does himself, and all the rest possess Joh. 14. 10.

In undisturbed joy and blessedness. Prove. 8. 22, 30.

There Is no Inferior, nor no Later there, Jo. 1. 1.

All Coeternal, all Coequal, are. Phil. 2. 6.

And yet this Parity Order admits. Joh. 5. 18.

The Father first, eternally begets,
Within himself, his Son, substantial Word Joh. 1. 14.

And Wisdom, as his second, and their third 1 Cor. 1. 14.

The ever blessed spirit is, which does Joh. 16. 13, 14.

Alike eternally proceed from both.
These three, distinctly thus, in one Divine, Joh. 15. 16.

Pure, Perfect, Self-supplying Essence shine:
And all cooperate in all works done Joh. 5. 17.

Exteriourly, yet so, as every one,
In a peculiar manner suited to
His Person, does the common action do.
Herein the Father is the Principal, Heb. 12. 19.

Whose sacred counsels are the Original
Of every Act; produced by the Son, Es. 42. 4.

By'the Spirit wrought up to perfection. Joh. 5. 26.
1 Cor. 8. 6.

In The Creation thus, by'the Fathers wise decree, Joh. 5. 19.

Such things should in such time, and order be, Ephesians. 1. 11.
2 Timothy 1. 9.

The first foundation of the world was laid. Jo. 1. 3.

The Fabrique, by the Eternal Word, was made Heb. 1. 2.

Not as the instrument, but joint actor, who Joh. 5. 19, etc.

Joy'd to fulfill the counsels which he knew.
By the concurrent Spirit all parts were Genesis 1. 2.

Fitly disposed, distinguished, rendered fair, Job 26. 13.

In such harmonious and wise order set,
As universal Beauty did complete.
This most mysterious Triple Unity,
In Essence One, and in subsistence Three,
Was that great Elohim, who first designed,
Then made the Worlds, that Angels and Mankind
Him in his rich outgoings might adore, Rev. 4. 11.

And celebrate his praise for evermore; Psalm. 147, and 148.

Who from Eternity himself supplied, Act. 17. 24.

And had no need of any thing beside,
Nor any other cause that did him move
To make a World, but his extensive Love,
It self delighting to communicate;
Its Glory in the creatures to dilate,
While they are led by their own excellence
TO admire the first, pure, high Intelligence, Job 33. 12.

By all the Powers and virtues which they have, Psalm. 95. 3.

To that Omnipotence who those Powers gave; Rev. 19. 6.

By all their glories and their joys to his,
Who is the fountain of all joy and bliss; Ps. 16. 11.

By all their wants and imbecillities, Genesis 17. 10.

To the full magazine of rich supplies,
Where Power, Love, Justice, and Mercy shine
In their still fixed heights, and never decline.
No streams can shrink the self-supplying spring,
No retributions can more fullness bring Job 35. ^.

To the eternal fountain, which does run Psalm. 16. 2.

In sacred circles, ends where it begun, Rev. 1. 8.

And thence with inexhausted life and force Esa. 41. 4.

Begins again a new, yet the same course
It instituted in Times infant birth,
When the Creator first made Heaven and Earth. Genesis 1. 1.

Time though it all things into motion bring Time.

Is not it self any substantial thing, Be resheth

But only Motions measure; As a twin In Capite, Principio.

Born with it; and they both at once begin
With the existence of the rolling sphere,
Before which neither time nor motion were.
Time being a still continued number, made
By the vicissitude of Light and Shade,
By the Moons growth, and by her waxing old,
By the successive Reign of heat and cold,
Thus leading back all ages to the womb
Of vast Eternity from whence they come,
And bringing new successions forth, until
Heaven its last revolutions shall fulfill,
And all things unto their first state restore,
When Motion ceasing, Time shall be no more; Rev. 10. 6.

But with the visible Heavens shall expire
While they consume in the worlds funeral fire; 2 Pet. 3. 12.

The invisible Heavens being still the same, Heb. 12. 27, 28.

Shall not be touched by the devouring flame.
Treating of which, let us wave Platonic dreams
Of Worlds made in Idea, fitter theams
For Poets fancies, than the reverent view
Of Contemplation, fixed on what is true
And only certain, kept upon record
In the Creators own revealed word,
Which when it taught us how our world was made,
Wrapped up the invisible in mystique shade.
Yet through those clouds we see, God did create Heaven.

A place his presence does irradiate.
Where he does in his brightest luster shine; Heb. 11. 10.

Yet does not his own Heaven, him confine:
Although the Paradise of the fair world above, Es. 66. 1. Mat. 5. 34.

Each where perfumed with sweet respiring Love, 1 King. 8. 27.

Refresht with Pleasures never shrinking streams,
Illustrated with Lights unclouded beams, Luke 23. 43.

The happy land of peace and endless Rest 1 Cor. 13. 13.

Which does both soul and sense with full joys feast, 1 John 4. 16.

Feasts that extinguish not the appetite
Which is renewed to heighten the delight. Psalm. 16. 11.

Here stands the Tree of life, decked with fair fruit, Rev. 20. 5. Heb. 4. 9.

Whose leaves health to the nations contribute. Rev. 14. 13.

The spreading, true celestial Vine Rev. 22. 2.

Where fruitful grafts and noble clusters shine. Joh. 15. 1.

Here Majesty and Grace together meet;
The Grace is glorious, and the Glory sweet.
Here is the Throne of the universal King Rev. 21. 25, 26.

To which the suppliant world addresses bring.
Here next him does his Son in triumph sit,
Waiting till all his foes lie at his feet. Ps. 1 10

Here is the Temple of his Holiness, Ex. 15. 17, 18.

The Sanctuary for all sad distress.
Here is the Saints most sure inheritance Rev. 7. 17.

To which they all their thoughts and hopes advance. 1 Pet. 1. 4. Col. 3. 1, 2,
24.

Here their rich recompense and safe rest lies,
For this they all the inferior world despise; Heb. 12. 2.

Yet not for this alone, though this excel,
But for that Deity who here does dwell;
For heaven it self to Saints no heaven were Psalm. 73. 25.

Did not their God afford his presence there;
But now, as he inhabits it, it is
The treasure-house of everlasting bliss,
The Fathers house, the Pilgrims home, the Port 2 Timothy 4. 8. Joh. 14 2.

Of happiness, the illustrious Regal Court, Heb. 11.

The City that on the worlds summit stands, Psalm. 15. 1. and 122. 3.

United in it self, not made with hands;
Whose Citizens, Walls, Pavements are so bright Heb. 12. 22.

They need no Sun in Gods more radiant Light. 2 Cor. 5. 1.

The pure air being not thickened with dark clouds, Rev. 21. 23.

No sable night the constant glory shrowds;
Nor needs there night, when no dull lassitude
Does into the unwearied soul intrude;
New vigor flowing in with that dear joy
Whose contemplation does their lives employ.
This heaven, the third to us within, 2 Cor. 12. 2.

The first, if from the outside we begin,
Is incorruptible, and still the same,
Confirmed by him who did its substance frame: 1 Pet. 1. 4.

No time its strong foundations can decay,
Its renewed glory fades not away.
The other heavens which it does enfold, Joel 2. 30.

In tract of time as garments shall wax old, Esa. 34. 4.

And all their outworn glory shall expire Ps. 102. 26. 1 Pet. 3. 7, 12.

In the worlds dreadful last devouring fire;
But this shall still unchangeable remain,
While all the rolling Spheres which it contains
Shall be again into their Chaos whirled
At the last dissolution of the world.
For God, who made this blessed place to be
The habitation of his Sanctity,
Admitting nothing into it that is vile, Rev. 21. 27.

Nothing that can corrupt, or can defile,
Never withdraws his gracious presence thence
But is on all the Glory a defense. Es. 4. 5.

Nor are his Gates ere shut by night or day,
His only dread keeps all foes far away.
He not for need, but for Majestic state, Angels.

Innumerable hosts of Angels did create
To be his outguards, in respect of whom
He does his name El-tzeboim assume. Esa. 48. 2.

These perfect, pure Intelligences be, Mat. 26. 53.

Excel in Might, and in Celeritie, 2 Samuel 14. 17.

Whose sublime natures, and whose agile powers,
Are vastly so superior unto ours, 2 These. 1. 7.

Our narrow thoughts cannot to them extend, Dan. 9. 21. Es. 6. 6.

And things so far above us comprehend,
As in themselves, although in part we know, Col. 2. 18.

Some scantlings by appearances below,
And sacred Writ, wherein we find there be
Distinguished Orders in their Hierarchy; Romans 8. 38.

Archangels, Cherubims, and Seraphims, 1 These. 4. 16.

Who celebrate their God with holy Hymns.
Ten thousand thousand vulgar Angels stand Ps. 103. 20, 21.

All in their ranks, waiting the Lords command, Genesis 3. 24.

Which with prompt inclination of their will, Dan. 7. 10. Mat. 6. 10.

And cheerful, swift obedience they fulfill;
Whether he them to save poor men employ,
Or send them armed, proud rebels to destroy; Psalm. 91. 11, 12.

Whether he them to mighty Monarchs send, 2 King. 19. 35.

Or bid them on poor Pilgrim Saints attend,
Whether they must in heavenly luster go, Genesis 32. 1. Luke 2. 13, 14.

Or walk in mortal mean disguise below:
So kind, so humble are they, though so high, Genesis 32. 1, 2.

They do it with the same alacrity. Genesis 19. 1.

Why blush we not at our vain pride, when we Psa. 104. 4. Lu. 16. 20.

Such condescension in Heavens Courtiers see,
That they who sit on heavenly thrones above,
Scorn not to serve poor worms with fervent Love?
And joyful praises to the Almighty sing,
When they a mortal to their own home bring?
How gracious is the Lord of all, that He Mat. 13. 39.

Should thus consider poor mortality,
Such powers for us, into those powers diffuse,
Such glorious servants, in our service, use?
Who whether they, with Light, or Heaven, had
Creation, were within the six days made.
But leave we looking through the vail, nor pry
Too long on things wrapped up in mystery,
Reserved to be our wonder at that time, Heb. 12. 22.

When we shall up to their high mountain climb.
Besides the Empyrean heaven we are told
Of diverse other heavens which we behold
Only by Reasons eye, yet were not they
If made at least distinguished the first day.
Then from the height we cannot comprehend,
Let us to our inferior world descend.
The Earth at first was a vast empty place, Earth's Chaos.

A rude congestion without form or grace,
A confused mass of undistinguisht feed, Genesis 1. 2.

Darkness the deep, the Deep the solid hid:
Where things did in unperfect Causes sleep,
Until Gods Spirit moved the quiet deep,
Brooding the creatures under wings of Love,
As tender birds hatched by a Turtle Dove.
Light first of all its radiant wings displayed,
God called forth Light: that word the creature made. Genesis 1. 3, 4, 5.

Whether it were the natures more divine,
Or the bright mansion where just souls must shine,
Or the first matter of those Tapers which
The since-made firmament do still enrich,
It is not yet agreed among the wise:
But thus the day did out of Chaos rise,
And casts its bright beams on the floating world,
Over which soon envious night her black mists hurled,
Damping the new born splendor for a space,
Till the next morning did her shadows chase:
With restored beauty and triumphant force,
Returning to begin another course,
An emblem of that everlasting feud
'Twixt sons of light, and darkness still pursued; Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21.

And of that frail imperfect state wherein
The wasting lights of mortal men begin; Col. 1. 12, 13.

Whose comforts, honors, lives, soon as they shine 1 Pet. 1. 24.

Must all to sorrows, changes, death resign;
Even their wisdoms and their virtues light
Are hid by envies interposing night.
But though these splendors all in graves are thrown,
Wherever the true feed of light is sown,
The Powers of Darkness may contend in vain, Psa. 97. 11.

It shall a conqueror rise and ever reign.
For when God the victorious morning viewed,
Approving his own work he said 'twas good:
And of inanimate creatures sure the best,
As that which shows and beautifies the rest,
Those melancholy thoughts which night creates
And seeds in mortal bosoms, dissipates:
In its own nature subtle, swift and pure,
Which no polluted mirror can endure.
By it the Almighty Maker does dispense
To earthy creatures, heavenly influence;
By it with angels swiftness are our eyes,
Exalted to the glory of the skies.
In whose bright character the light divine,
Which flesh cannot behold, does dimly shine.
Thus was the first Day made; God so called Light,
Severed from Darkness, Darkness was the Night.
Canto II.
AGain spoke God; the trembling waters move, Genesis 1. 6.

Part fly up in thick mists, made clouds above,
Part closer shrink about the earth below, The Firmament.

But did not yet the mountains dry heads show.
The allforming Word stretched out the Firmament,
Like azure curtains round his glorious Tent, Psalm. 104. 2, 3.

And in its hidden chambers did dispose
The magazines of Hail, and Rain, and Snows,
Amongst those thicker clouds, from whose dark womb Job 38. 22, 23.

The imprisoned winds, in flame and thunder come.
Those Clouds which over all the wondrous Arch
Like hosts of various formed creatures march,
And change the Scenes in our admiring eyes;
Who sometimes see them like vast mountains rise.
Sometimes like pleasant Seas with clear waves glide,
Sometimes like Ships on foaming billows ride,
Sometimes like mounted warriors they advance,
And seem to fire the smoking Ordinance.
Sometimes like shady Forests they appear,
Here Monsters walking, Castles rising there.
Scorn Princes your embroidered Canopies,
And painted roofs, the poor whom you despise
With far more ravishing delight are fed,
While various clouds sail over the unhoused head,
And their heaved eyes with nobler scenes present
Than your Poetic Courtiers can invent.
Thus the exalted waters were disposed, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

And liquid Skies the solid world enclosed,
To magnify the most almighty hand,
That makes thin floods like rocks of crystal stand, Job 37. 18.

Not quenching, nor drunk up by that bright wall
Of fire, which neighboring them, encircles all.
The new built Firmament God Heaven named,
And over all the Arch his windows framed.
From whence his liberal hand at due time pours
Upon the thirsty earth refreshing showers; Ps. 147. 16, 17, 18.

And clothes her bosom with descending Snow
To cherish the young seeds when cold winds blow: Job 26. to the end.

Hence every night his fatning dews he sheds, Ps. 18. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

And scatters Pearls amidst the enameled beds.
But when presumptuous sins the bright arch scale,
He beats them back with terrifying hail: Job 38. 27, etc.

Which like small shot amidst his foes he sends,
Till flaming Thunder, his great Ordnance, rends
The clouds, which, big with horror, ready stand
To pour their burdens forth at his command. Ex. 9. 2.

But the unpolluted air as yet had not
From mortals impious breath infection got,
Enlightened then by a superior ray
A serene luster decked the second day.
The inferior Globe was fashioned on the third,
When waters at the all-commanding word Genesis 1. 10, etc.

Did hastily into their channels glide, Psa. 104. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

And the uncovered hills as soon were dried.
In the same body thus, distinct, and joined,
Water and earth, as flesh and blood, we find.
The late collected waters God called Seas.
Springs, Lakes, streams, and broad Rivers are from these
Brancht, like life-feeding veins, in every land,
Yet wheresoever they seem to flow or stand,
As all in the vast Oceans bosom bred, Eccl. 1. 7.

They daily reassemble in their head,
Which thorough secret conduits back conveys
To every Spring, the tribute that it pays.
So ages from the Eternal bosom creep, Eccl. 1. 4.

So lose them selves again in that vast deep.
So Empires, so all other humane things,
With winding streams run to their native springs.
So all the goodness mortals exercise Romans 4. 22.

Flows back to God out of his own supplies. Ephesians. 2. 6.

Now the great fabric in all parts complete,
Beauty was called forth to adorn the seat;
Where Earth, fixed in the Center, was the ground, Ps. 102. 25.

A mantle of light air compast it round; Job 26. 7.

Then first the watrie, then the fiery wall,
And glittering heaven last involving all.
Earth's fair green robe vi'd with the azure skies,
Her proud Woods near the flaming Towers did rife.
The valleys Trees, though less in breadth and height,
Yet hung with various fruit, as much delight. Genesis 2. 9.

Beneath these little shrubs and bushes sprung
With fair flowers clothed, and with rich berries hung,
Whose more delightful fruits seemed to upbraid
The tall trees yielding only barren shade.
Then sprouted Grass and Herbs and Plants
Prepared to feed the earth's inhabitants, Ps. 104. 14.

To glad their nostrils, and delight their eyes,
Revive their spirits, cure their maladies.
Nor by these are the senses only fed,
But the understanding too, while we may read
In every leaf, lectures of Providence,
Eternal Wisdom, Love, Omnipotence.
Which the eye that sees not, with Hells mists is blind,
That which regards not, is of brutish kind.
The various colors, figures, powers of these
Are their Creators growing witnesses,
Their glories emblems are, wherein we see Ps. 90. 5, 6.

How frail our humane lives and beauties be.
Even like those flowers which at the Sunrise spread
Their gaudy leaves, and are at evening dead. Job 14. 2.
Es. 40. 6, 7, 8.

Yet while they in their native luster shine,
The Eastern Monarchs are not half so fine
In richer robes God clothes the dirty soil Mat. 6. 28, 29, 30.

Than men can purchase by their sin and toil. Jam. 1. 10, 11.

Then rather Fields than painted Courts admire,
Yet seeing both, think both must feed the fire:
Only Gods works have roots and seeds, from whence Job 14. 7, 8.

They spring again in grace and excellence,
But men's have none, like hasty lightning, they
Flash out, and so for ever pass away. 1 Cor. 3. 15.

This fair Creation finished the third day,
In whose end, God did the whole work survey,
The Seas, the Skies, the Trees, and less plants viewed,
And by his approbation made them good;
In all the plants did living seeds enclose,
Whence their successive generations rose; Genesis 1. 12.

Gave them those powers which in them still remain,
Whereby they man and beast with food sustain.
Thrice had the day to gloomy night resigned, The fourth day.

And thrice victorious over the darkness shined,
Before the mediate cause of it, the Sun
Or any star had their creation,
For with the Omnipotent it is all one
To cause the day without, or by the Sun.
God in the world by second causes reigns,
But is not tied to those means he ordains.
Let no heart faint then that on him depends, Hab. 3. 17, 18.

When the means fail, that lead to their wished ends.
For God the thing, if good, will bring about
With instruments we see not, or without.
The fourth Light having now expelled the shade
God on that day the Luminaries made,
And placed them all in their peculiar spears Genesis 1. 14. etc.

To measure out our days, and months, and years,
Which by their various motions are renewed,
And heat and cold have their vicissitude:
So Springs and Autumns still successive be,
Till ages lose them in Eternity.
The Sun whom the Hebrews Gods great servant call, Sun.

Placed in the middle Orb, as Lord of all,
Is in a radiant flaming chariot whirled,
And daily carried round abut the world Psalm. 19. 4, 5, 6.

By the first Movers force, who in that race
Scatters his light and heat in every place,
Yet not at once. Now in the East he shines,
And then again to'the Western deep declines,
Seeming to quench his blazing taper there
While it enlightens the other Hemisphere.
Thus he their share of day and night divides
Unto each world in their alternate tides.
But then its Orb by its own motion rolled,
Varies the seasons, brings in heat and cold,
As it projects its rays in a straight line,
Or more obliquely on the Earth does shine.
And thus does he to the low world dispense
Life-feeding and engendring influence.
This Lord of Day with his reflected light Moon.

Guilds the pale Moon the Empress of the night,
Whose dim Orb monthly wastes and grows,
Does at the first sharp pointed horns disclose,
Then half, then her full shining Globe reveals,
Which waining she by like degrees conceals.
The other glittering Planets now appear Stars.

Each as a King enthroned in his own Sphere;
Then the eighth heaven in fuller luster shines
Thick set with stars. All these were made for signs
That mortals by observing them might know
Due times to cultivate the earth below,
To gather fruits, plant trees, and sow their seed,
To cure their herds, and let their fair flocks breed,
Into safe harbors to retire their ships, Act. 27. 10.

Again to launch out into the calm deeps,
Their wandering vessels in broad seas to guide,
When the lost shores no longer are descried;
Physicians to direct in their great art,
And other useful knowledge to impart.
Nor were they only made for signs to show
Fit opportunities for things we do,
But in their various aspects too we read
Various events which shall in time succeed,
Droughts, inundations, famines, plagues and wars,
By several conjunctions of the Stars,
At least shown, if not caused, through the strong powers
And workings Astral bodies have on ours,
Which as above they variously are joined,
So are their subjects here below, inclined
To sadness, mirth, dread, quiet, love or hate,
All that may calm, or trouble any state.
Yet are they but a second cause, which God
Shakes over sinners as a flaming rod,
And further manages in his own hands,
To scourge the pride of all rebellious lands;
Falsely and vainly do blind mortals then,
To them impute the fates and ills of men,
When their sinister operations be
Only the effects of men's iniquity,
Which makes the Lord his glittering hosts thus send
To execute the just threats they portend. Judge. 5.

Nor are they characters of wrath alone,
They sometimes have Gods grace to mankind shown,
Such was that new Star which did heaven adorn, Mat. 2.

When the great King of the whole word was born.
Such were those stars that fought for Israel
When Jabins vanquished host, by Gods host fell.
Even those Stars which threaten misery and woe
To wicked men, to Saints deliverance show:
For when God cuts the bloody Tyrant down, Lu. 22. 28.

He will their lives with peace and blessings crown.
Thus the fourth evening did the fourth day close,
And where the Sun went down, the Stars arose.
New triumph now the fifth day celebrates,
The perfumed morning opes her purple gates,
Through which the Suns Pavilion does appear Psalm. 19.

And he arrayed in all his luster there,
Like a fresh Bridegroom with majestique grace,
And joy diffusing vigor in his face,
Comes gladly forth, to greet his virgin bride,
Tricked up in all her ornaments and pride;
Her lovely maids at his approach unfold
Their gaudie vests, on which he scatters gold,
Both chearing and enriching every place,
Through which he passes in his glorious race.
But though he found a noble Threatre,
As yet in it no living creatures were;
Though flowery carpets spread the whole Earths face,
And rich embroideries the upper Arch did grace,
And standards on the mountains stood between
Bearing festoones like pillars wreathed with green,
The velvet couches and the mossy seats,
The open walks and the more close retreats
Were all prepared; Yet no foot trod the woods,
Nor no mouth yet had touched the pleasant floods;
No weary creature had reposed its head
Among the sweet perfumes of the low bed;
The air was not respir'd in living breath,
Throughout a general stilness reigned, like death.
The King of day came forth, but unadmir'd,
Like unprais'd gallants blushingly retired;
As an uncourted beauty, Nights pale Queen,
Grew sick to shine where she could not be seen.
When the Creator first for mute herds calls,
And bade the waters bring forth animals:
Then was all shellfish and each Scaly race Genesis 1 20, etc.

At once produced, in their assigned place,
The crooked Dolphins, great Leviathan,
And all the Monsters of the Ocean,
Like wanton kids among the billows played, Job 41.

Nor was there after on the dry land made
Any one beast of less or greater kind
Whose like we do not in the waters find;
Where every greater fish devours the less,
As mighty Lords poor Commoners oppress.
Next the Almighty by his forming Word
Made the whole plumie race, and every bird
Its proper place assigned, while with light wings
All mounted heaven, some over the lakes and springs,
Some over the vast Fens and Seas did fly,
Some near the ground, some in the cloudy sky,
Some in high trees their proud nests built, some chose
The humble shrubs for their more safe repose,
Some did the marshes, some the rivers love,
Some the Cornfieldsd, and some the shady grove.
That silence which reigned every where before,
Its universal Empire held no more,
Even night and darkness its own dear retreat
Could not preserve it in their reign complete:
The Nightingales with their complaining notes,
Ravens and Owls with their ill-boding throats,
And all the birds of night, shrill crowing Cocks
Whose due kept times, made them the worlds first clocks,
All interrupted it, even in the night,
But at the first appearance of the light
A thousand voices, the green woods whole quire
With their loud music do the day admire;
The Lark does with her single carol rise,
To welcome the fair morning in the skies;
The amorous and still complaining Dove,
Courts not the day, but woes her own fair love;
The Jays and Crows against each other rayl,
And chattering Pies begin their gossips tale:
Thus life was carried on, which first begun
In growth of plants, in fishes motion,
And next declared it self in living sound,
Whilst various noise the yielding air did wound.
Various instincts the Birds by nature have,
Which God to them in their creation gave,
That unto their observers do declare
The storms and calms approaching in the air,
That teach them how to build their nests at spring,
And hatch their young under their nursing wing,
To lead abroad and guard their tender brood,
To know their hurtful and their healing food,
To feed them till their strength be perfect grown,
And after teach them how to feed alone.
Could we the lessons they hold forth improve,
We might from some learn chaste and constant love,
Conjugal kindness of the paired Swans,
Paternal Bounty of the Pelicans,
While they are prodigal of their own blood
To feed their chickens with that precious food.
Wisdom of those who when storms threat the Sky,
In thick assemblies to their shelter fly,
And those who seeing devourers in the air,
To the safe covert of the wing repair.
The gall-less doves would teach us innocence, Mat. 10. 16.

And the whole race to hang on Providence;
Since not the least bird that divides the air Mat. 8. 26. and 10. 19.

Exempted is from the Almighties care,
Whose bounty in due seasons, feeds them all,
Prepares them berries when the thick snows fall,
Clothes them in many colored plumes, which vain
Men borrow, yet the Peacocks gaudy train
More beautifully is by nature dressed,
Than art can make it on the Gallants crest.
This privilege these creatures had to raise
Their voices first in their great Makers praise,
Which when the morning opes her rosy gate
They with consenting music celebrate;
Again with hunger pincht to God they cry,
And from his liberal hand receive supply,
Who them and all his watery creatures viewed,
And saw that they in all their kinds were good.
Then blessed them that for due successions they
Might multiply. So closed he the fifth day.
And now the Sun the third time raised his head
And rose the sixth day from his watery bed, Genesis 1. 2

When God commands the teeming earth to bring
Forth great and lesser beasts, each reptile thing
That on her bosom creeps, the word obeyed,
Immediately were all the creatures made.
Like Hermits some made hollow rocks their Cell,
And did in their prepared mansions dwell.
The vermin, Weazils, Fulmots and blind Moles,
Lay hid in clefts of trees, in crannies and in holes.
The Serpents lodged in Marshes and fens,
The savage beasts sought thickets, caves and dens.
Tame herds and flocks in open pastures stayed,
And wanton kids upon the mountains played.
Here life almost to its perfection grew
While God these various creatures did indue
With various properties, and various sense,
But little short of humane excellence,
Save what we in the Brutes dispersed find,
Is all collected in man's nobler mind,
Who to the high perfection of his sense,
Has added a more high intelligence.
Yet several Brutes have noble faculties,
Some apprehensive are, some subtle, wise,
Some have invention and docility,
Some wonderful in imitation be,
Some with high generous courage are endued,
With kindness some, and some with gratitude,
With memory some, and some with providence,
With natural love, and with meek innocence:
Some watchful are, and some laborious be,
Some have obedience, some true loyalty.
Among them too we all the passions find,
Some more to love, some more to hate inclined.
The musing Hare and the lightfooted Deer
Are under the predominance of fear;
Goats and hot Monkeys are with lust possessed,
Rage governs in the savage Tygres breast;
Jealousy does the hearts of fierce Bulls move
Impatient of all rivals in their love.
Some sportive, and some melancholy be,
Some proner to revenge and cruelty.
The Kingly Lion in his bosom has
The fiery seed of self-provoking wrath,
Joy is no stranger to the savage breast,
As often with love, hate and desire possessed,
Through the aversion and the appetite
Which all these passions in their hearts excite.
God clothed them all in several woells and hair,
Whereof some meaner, some more precious are,
which men now into garments weave and spin,
Nor only wear their fleeces, but their skin;
Besides employ their teeth, bones, claws, and horn,
Some Medicines be, and some the house adorn.
A thousand other various ways we find,
Wherein alive and dead they serve mankind,
Who from the obedience they to him afford
Might learn his duty to his Sovereign Lord. Es. 1. 3.

Canto III.
NOW was the glorious Universe complete
And every thing in beauteous order set,
When God, about to make the King of all,
Did in himself a sacred council call;
Not that he needed to deliberate,
But pleased to allow solemnity and state,
To wait upon that noble creatures birth
For whom he had designed both heaven and earth: Psalm. 8. 6.

Let us, said God, with sovereign power endued: Genesis 1. 26, etc.

Make man after our own similitude,
Let him our sacred impressed image bear Ephesians. 4. 24.

Ruling over all in earth, and sea, and air. Psalm. 8.

Then made the Lord a curious mold of clay,
Which lifeless on the earths cold bosom lay,
When God did it with living breath inspire,
A soul in all, and every part entire,
Where life ris' above motion, sound and sense
To higher reason and intelligence;
And this is truly termed life alone,
Which makes life's fountain to the living known.
This life into it self does gather all
The rest maintained by its original,
Which gives it Being, Motion, Sense, Warmth, Breath,
And those chief Powers that are not lost in death.
Thus was the noblest creature the last made,
As he in whom the rest perfection had,
In whom both parts of the great world were joined,
Earth in his members, Heaven in his mind;
Whose vast reach the whole Universe comprised,
And saw it in himself epitomized,
Yet not the Center nor circumference can Eccl. 3. 11.

Fill the more comprehensive soul of Man,
Whose life is but a progress of desire,
Which still enjoyed, does something else require,
Unsatisfied with all it has pursued
Until it rest in God, the Sovereign Good. Mat. 11. 25.

The earthly mansion of this heavenly guest
Peculiar privileges too possessed.
Whereas all other creatures clothed were
In Shells, Scales, gaudy Plumes, or Woolls, or Hair,
Only a fair smooth skin over man was drawn,
Like Damask roses blushing through pure Lawn.
The azure veins, where blood and spirits flow,
Like Violets in a field of Lillies show.
As others have a down bent countenance,
He only does his head to heaven advance,
Resembling thus a Tree whose noble root Ps. 144. 12.

In heaven grows, whence all his graces shoot.
He only on two upright columns stands,
He only has, and knows the use of hands,
Which Gods rich bounties for the rest receive,
And aid to all the other members give.
He only has a voice articulate,
Varied by joy, grief, anger, love and hate,
And every other motion of the mind
Which hereby does an apt expression find.
Hereby glad mirth in laughter is alone
By man expressed; in a peculiar groan,
His grief comes forth, accompanied with tears,
Peculiar shrieks utter his sudden fears.
Herein is Music too, which sweetly charms
The sense, and the most savage heart disarms.
The Gate of this God in the head did place, Prove 15. 1.

The head which is the bodies chiefest grace,
The noble Palace of the Royal guest
Within by Fancy and Invention dressed,
With many pleasant useful Ornaments
Which new Imagination still presents,
Adorned without, by Majesty and Grace,
O who can tell the wonders of a face!
In none of all his fabriques more than here
Does the Creators glorious Power appear,
That of so many thousands which we see
All humane creatures like, all different be;
If the Front be the glory of man's frame,
Those Lamps which in its upper windows flame,
Illustrate it, and as days radiant Star,
In the clear heaven of a bright face are.
Here Love takes stand, and here ardent Desire 1 John 2. 26.

Enters the soul, as fire drawn in by fire, Mat. 5. 28.

At two ports, on each side, the Hearing sense 1 Pet. 2. 14.

Still waits to take in fresh intelligence,
But the false spies both at the ears and eyes,
Conspire with strangers for the souls surprise,
And let all life-perturbing passions in, Jam. 5. 11.

Which with tears, sighs and groans issue again.
Nor do those Labyrinths which like brest-works are,
About those secret Ports, serve for a Bar
To the false Sorcerers conducted by
Man's own imprudent Curiosity. Pro. 1. 10, 11, 12.

There is an Arch in the middle of the face
Of equal necessary use and grace,
For there men suck up the life-feeding air,
And panting bosoms are discharged there;
Beneath it is the chief and beauteous gate,
About which various pleasant graces wait,
When smiles the Rubie doors a little way
Unfold, or laughter does them quite display,
And opening the Vermillion Curtains shows
The Ivory piles set in two even rows,
Before the portal, as a double guard,
By which the busy tongue is helped and barred; Pro. 25. 11.

Whose sweet sounds charm, when love does it inspire,
And when hate moves it, set the world on fire. Eccl. 12. 11.

Within this portals inner vault is placed Jam. 3. 6.

The palate where sense meets its joys in taste;
On rising cheeks, beauty in white and red
Strives with it self, white on the forehead spread
Its undisputed glory there maintains,
And is illustrated with azure veins.
The Brows, Loves bow, and beauties shadow are,
A thick set grove of soft and shining hair
Adorns the head, and shows like crowning rays,
While th'airs soft breath among the loose curls plays.
Besides the colors and the features, we
Admire their just and perfect Symmetrie,
Whose ravishing resultance is that air
That graces all, and is not any where;
Whereof we cannot well say what it is,
Yet Beauties chiefest excellence lies in this;
Which mocks the Painters in their best designs,
And is not held by their exactest lines.
But while we gaze upon our own fair frame
Let us remember too from whence it came,
And that by sin corrupted now, it must
Return to its originary dust. Job 4. 19.

How undecently does pride then lift that head
On which the meanest feet must shortly tread?
Yet at the first it was with glory crowned, Eccl. 7. 29.

Till Satan's fraud gave it the mortal wound.
This excellent creature God did Adam call
To mind him of his low Original,
Whom he had formed out of the common ground
Which then with various pleasures did abound.
The whole Earth was one large delightful Field,
That till man sinned no hurtful briars did yield,
But God enclosing one part from the rest,
A Paradise in the rich spicie East Genesis 2. 8.

Had stored with Natures wealthy Magazine,
Where every plant did in its luster shine,
But did not grow promiscously there,
They all disposed in such rich order were
As did augment their single native grace,
And perfected the pleasure of the place,
To such a height that the apelike art of man,
Licentious Pens, or Pencils never can
With all the essays of all presuming wit,
Or form or feign ought that approaches it.
Whether it were a fruitful Hill or Vale,
Whether high Rocks, or Trees did it impale,
Or Rivers with their clear and kind embrace
Into a pleasant Island formed the place,
Whether its noble situation were
On Earth, in the bright Moon, or in the Air,
In what forms stood the various trees and flowers,
The disposition of the walks and bowers,
Whereof no certain word, nor sign remains,
We dare not take from men's inventive brains.
We know there was pleasant and noble shade
Which the tall growing Pines and Cedars made,
And thicker coverts, which the light and heat Genesis 3. 8.

Even at noon day could scarcely penetrate,
A crystal River on whose verdant banks Genesis 2. 10.

The crowned fruit trees stood in lovely ranks,
His gentle wave thorough the garden led,
And all the spreading roots with moisture fed.
But past the enclosure, thence the single stream
Parted in four, four noble floods became;
Pison whose large arms Havilah enfold; Genesis 2. 11.

A wealthy land enricht with finest gold,
Where also many precious stones are found;
The second river Gihon, does surround ver. 13.

All that fair land where Chus inhabited,
Where Tyranny first raised up her proud head,
And led her bloodhounds all along the shore,
Polluting the pure stream with crimson gore.
Edens third river Hiddekell they call,
Whose waters Eastward in Assiria fall.
The fourth Euphrates whose swift stream did run ver. 14.

About the stately walls of Babylon;
And in the revolution of some years
Swelled high, fed with the captived Hebrews tears.
God in the midst of Paradise did place
Two trees, that stood up dressed in all the grace, Genesis 2. 9.

The verdure, beauty, sweetness, excellence,
With which all else could tempt or feast the sense:
On one apples of knowledge did abound,
And life-confirming fruit the other crowned.
And now did God the new created King
Into the pleasures of his earthly palace bring:
The air, spice, balm, and amber did respire,
His ears were feasted by the Sylvan Quire,
Like country girls, grass flowers did dispute
Their humble beauties with the high born fruit;
Both high and low their gaudy colors vied,
As Courtiers do in their contentious pride,
Striving which of them should yield most delight,
And stand the finest in their Sovereigns sight.
The shrubs with berries crowned like precious gems,
Offered their supreme Lord their Diadems
Which did no single sense alone invite,
Courting alike the eyes and appetite.
Among all these the eye-refreshing green,
Sometimes alone, sometimes in mixture seen,
Over all the banks and all the flat ground spread,
Seemed an embroidered, or plain velvet bed.
And that each sense might its refreshment have,
The gentle air soft pleasant touches gave
Unto his panting limbs, whenever they
Upon the sweet and mossie couches lay.
A shady Eminence there was, whereon
The noble creature sat, as on his throne, ver. 19, etc.

When God brought every Fowl, and every Brute,
That he might Names unto their natures suit,
Whose comprehensive understanding knew
How to distinguish them, at their first view;
And they retaining those names ever since,
Are monuments of his first excellence,
And the Creators providential grace,
Who in those names, left us some prints to trace;
Nature, mysterious grown, since we grew blind,
Whose Labyrinths we should less easily find
If those first appellations, as a clue,
Did not in some sort serve to lead us through,
And rectify that frequent gross mistake,
Which our weak judgments and sick senses make,
Since man ambitious to know more, that sin
Brought dullness, ignorance and error in.
Though God himself to man did condescend, Society.

Though his knowledge to all natures did extend;
Though heaven and earth thus centred in his mind,
Yet being the only one of his whole kind,
He found himself without an equal mate,
To whom he might his joys communicate,
And by communication multiply.
Too far out of his reach was God on high,
Too much below him brutish creatures were,
God could at first have made a humane pair,
But that it was his will to let man see
The need and sweetness of society;
Who, though he were his Makers Favorite,
Feasted in Paradise with all delight,
Though all the creatures paid him homage, yet
Was not his unimparted joy complete,
While there was not a second of his kind,
Endued with such a form and such a mind,
As might alike his soul and senses feast:
He saw that every bird and every beast
Its own resemblance in its female viewed,
And only union with its like pursued.
Hence birds with birds, and fish with fish abide,
Nor those with beasts, nor beasts with these reside:
According to their several species too,
As several households in one City do,
So they with their own kinds associate:
The Kingly eagle has no buzzard mate;
The ravens, more their own black feather love,
Than painted pheasants, or the fair-neck'd dove.
So Bears to rough Bears rather do incline
Than to majestic Lions, or fair kine.
If it be thus with brutes, much less then can
The brutish conversation suit with man.
It Is only like desires like things unite:
In union likeness only feeds delight.
Where unlike natures in conjunction are,
There is no product but perpetual war,
Such as there was in Natures troubled womb,
Until the severed births from thence did come,
For the whole world nor order had, nor grace
Till severed elements each their own place
Assigned were, and while in them they keep,
Heaven still smiles above, the untroubled deep
With kind salutes embraces the dry land,
Firm does the earth on its foundation stand;
A cheerful light streams from th'aetherial fire,
And all in universal joy conspire.
But if with their unlike they attempt to mix,
Their rude congressions every thing unfix;
Darkness again invades the troubled skies,
Earth trembling, under angry heaven lies;
The Sea, swollen high with rage, comes to the shore
And swallows that, which it but kissed before;
The unbounded fire breaks forth with dreadful light,
And horrid cracks which dying nature fright,
Till that high power, which all powers regulates,
The disagreeing natures separates,
The like to like rejoyning as before,
So the worlds peace, joy, safety does restore.
Yet if man could not find in bird or brute
That conversation which might aptly suit
His higher nature, was it not sublime
Enough, above the lower world to climb,
And in Angelick converse to delight,
Although it could not reach the supreme height?
No; for though man partake intelligence,
Yet that being joined to an inferior sense,
Dulled by corporeal vapors, cannot be
Refined enough for angels company:
As strings screwed up too high, as bows still bent
Or break themselves, or crack the instrument;
So drops neglected flesh into the grave,
If it no share in the souls pleasures have.
Man like himself needs an associate,
Who does both soul and sense participate.
Not the swift Horse, the eager Hawk, or Hound,
Dogs, Parrots, Monkies amongst whom Adam found
No meet companion, thinking them too base
For the society of humane race,
Though his degenerate offspring choose that now
Which his sound reason could not then allow,
But found himself amongst them all alone.
Whether he begged a mate it is not known,
Likely his want might send him to the spring;
For God who freely gives us every thing,
Mercy endears by instilling the desire,
And granting that which humbly we require:
However it was, God saw his solitude Ez. 36. 37.

And gave his sentence that it was not good.
Yet not a natural, nor a moral ill, Genesis 2. 18.

Because his solitude was not his will
Opposing his Creators End, as they
Who into caves and deserts run away,
Seeking perfection in that state, wherein
A good was wanting when man had no sin.
For without help to propagate mankind
Gods glory had been to one breast confined,
Which multiplied Saints, do now conspire
Throughout their generations to admire. Heb. 12. 23.

Man's nature had not been the sacred shrine,
Partner and bride of that which is divine;
The Church, fruit of this union, had not come
To light, but perished, stifled in the womb.
Again it is not particularly good
For man to waste his life in solitude,
Whose nature for society designed
Can no full joy without a second find,
To whom he may communicate his heart, Eccl. 4. 8, etc.

And pay back all the pleasures they impart;
For all the joys that we enjoy alone,
And all our unseen luster, is as none.
If thus want of a partner did abate
Man's happiness in man's most perfect state,
Much more has humane nature, now decayed,
Need of a suitable and a kind aid:
It is not good, virtue should lie obscure,
That barren rocks, rich treasures should immure,
Which our kind Lord to some, for all men gave, 1 Cor. 12. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12.

That all might share of all his bounties have.
Not good, dark Lanthorns should shut up the light Mat. 5. 16. 15.

Of fair example, made for the dark night.
Not good, experience should her candle hide,
When weak ones perish, wanting her bright guide.
Not good, to let unactive graces chill,
No lively warmth receive, no good instill
By quickening converse. Thus nor are the great,
The wise, and firm, permitted to retreat,
Betraying so deserted innocence,
To which God made them conduct and defense.
Nor may the simple and the weak expose
Themselves alone, to strong and subtle foes;
Men for each others mutual help were made,
The meanest may afford the highest aid.
The highest to necessity must yield,
Even Princes are beholding to the field. Eccl. 5. 9.

He that from mortal converse steals away
Injures himself, and others does betray,
Whom Providence committed to his trust,
And in that act, nor prudent is nor just.
For sweet friends both in pleasure and distress,
Augment the joy, and make the torment less.
Equal delight it is to learn and teach,
To be held up to that we cannot reach,
And others from the abject earth to raise
To merit, and to give deserved praise.
Wisdom imparted like the increasing bread,
Wherewith the Lord so many thousands fed,
By distribution adds to its own store, Mat. 15. 36.

And still the more it gives it has the more.
Extended Power reaches it self a crown,
Gathering up those whom misery casts down.
Love raises us, it self to heaven does rise,
By virtues varied mutual exercise.
Sweet love, the life of life, which cannot shine, Romans 13. 9, 10.

But lies like Gold concealed in the Mine,
Till it through much exchange a brightness take
And Conversation does it current make. 1 Cor. 13.

God having showed his creature thus the need
Of humane helps, a help for man decreed:
I will, said he, the man's meet aid provide.
But that he from his waking view might hide
Such a mysterious work, the Lord did keep
All Adam's senses fast locked up in sleep.
Then from his opened side took without pain Genesis 2. 21, 22.

A clothed rib, and closed the flesh again,
And of the bone did a fair virgin frame
Who, by her Maker brought, to Adam came
And was in matrimonial Union joined,
By love and nature happily combined.
Adam's clear understanding at first view
His wives original and nature knew;
His will, as pure, did thankfully embrace,
His fathers bounty, and admired his grace.
And as her sweet charms did his heart surprise
He spoke his joy in these glad ecstacies,
Thou art my better self, my flesh, my bone,
We late of one made two, again in one ver. 23, 24.

Shall reunite, and with the frequent birth
Of our joint issue, people the vast earth.
To show that thou were taken out of me
Isha shall be thy name; As unto thee
Ravished with love and joy my soul does cleave,
So men hereafter shall their fathers leave,
And all relations else, which are most dear, Ephesians. 5. 31.

That they may only to their wives adhere; Mat. 19. 5.

When marriage male and female does combine
Children in one flesh shall two parents join.
Lastly, God, who the sacred knot had tied,
With blessing his own Ordinance sanctified,
Increase, said he, and multiply your race,
Fill the Earth allotted for your dwelling place,
I give you right to all her fruits and plants, Genesis 1. 28, etc.

Dominion over her inhabitants;
The fish that in the floods deep bosom lie,
All Fowls that in the airy region fly,
Whatever lives and feeds on the dry land,
Are all made subject under your command.
The grass and green herbs let your cattle eat,
And let the richer fruits be your own meat,
Except the Tree of knowing good and ill,
That by the precept of my Sovereign will
You must not eat, for in the day you do,
Inevitable death shall seize on you.
Thus God did the first marriage celebrate
While man was in his unpolluted state, Genesis 2. 22.

And the undefiled bed with honor decked, Heb. 134.

Though perversemen the Ordinance reject,
And pulling all its sacred Ensigns down Prove. 18. 22.

To the white Virgin only give the crown.
Nor yet is marriage grown less sacred since
Man fell from his created excellence,
Necessity now raises its esteem,
Which does mankind from deaths vast jaws redeem,
Who even in their graves are yet alive,
While they in their posterity survive.
In it they find a comfort and an aid,
In all the ills which humane life invade.
This curbs and cures wild passions that arise, Psa. 127. 3, 4, 5.

Repairs times daily wastes, with new supplies;
When the declining mothers youthful grace
Lies dead and buried in her wrinkled face,
In her fair daughters it revives and grows,
And her dead Cinder in their new flames glows.
And though this state may sometimes prove accursed,
For of best things, still the corruption's worst,
Sin so destroys an institution good,
Provided against death and solitude.
Eve out of sleeping Adam formed thus
A sweet instructive emblem is to us,
How waking Providence is active still Psa. 121. 3, 4, 5.

To do us good, and to avert our ill,
When we locked up in stupefaction lie, Job 33. 15, 16, 17, etc.

Not dreaming that our blessings are so nigh.
Blessings wrought out by providence alone
Without the least assistance of our own. Deuteronomy. 32. 36.

Man's help produced in death-like sleep does show, Romans 4. 19

Our choicest mercies out of dead wombs flow.
So from the second Adams bleeding side
God formed the Gospel Church, his mystique Bride, Joh. 19. 34.

Whose strength was only of his firmness made, 1 John 5. 6.

His blood, quick spirits into ours conveyed: Tir. 5. 5.
Phil. 4. 13.

His wasted flesh our wasted flesh supplied, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

And we were then revived when he died. Joh. 5. 2.

Who waked from that short sleep with joy did view Ephesians. 2. 1, 5, 6, etc.

The Virgin fair that out of his wounds grew, 2 Timothy 1. 10.

Presented by the eternal Fathers grace
Unto his everlasting kind embrace: Es. 53. 5.

My spouse, my sister, said he, thou art mine; Act. 20. 28.

I and my death, I and my life are thine; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, etc.

For thee I did my heavenly Father quit Rev. 5. 19.

That thou with me on my high throne may sit, Joh. 17. 9, 10.

My mothers humane flesh in death did leave
For thee, that I to thee might only cleave, Psalm. 2. 8.
Cant. 2. 16. and 4. 10.

Redeem thee from the confines of dark hell,
And evermore in thy dear bosom dwell: 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.

From heaven I did descend to fetch up thee, Joh. 6. 38, 39.

Rose from the grave that thou might reign with me. Rev. 5. 9, 10.

Henceforth no longer two but one we are,
Thou do my merit, life, grace, glory share: Phil. 2. 9.

As my victorious triumphs are all thine, Joh 19. 27.
Col. 2. 13, 14, 15.

So are thy injuries and sufferings mine,
Which I for thee will vanquish as my own, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 21, 22.

And give thee rest in the celestial throne: Joh. 17. 23, 24. and 14. 3. Ephesians.
4. 9, 10, etc. Romans 8. 17, 18. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Col. 1. Ephesians. 1. Joh. 1. 16. Act.
9. 4. Mat. 25. 34. and forward.

The Bride with these caresses entertained Heb. 4. 13. and 10. 19, 20.

In naked beauty does before him stand,
And knows no shame purged from all foul desire
Whose secret guilt kindles the blushing fire. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Heb. 13. 12.

Her glorious Lord is naked too, no more
Concealed in types and shadows as before. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12.

So our first parents innocently did Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.

Behold that nakedness which since is hid, Heb. 8. 5.

That lust may not catch fire from beauties flame 2 Pet. 2. 14.

Engendring thoughts which die the cheeks with shame, Mat. 5. 28.

Thus heaven and earth their full perfection had, Genesis 2. 1.

Thus all their hosts and ornaments were made,
Armies of Angels had the highest place,
Bright starry hosts the lower heaven did grace,
The Mutes encamped in the waters were,
The winged troops were quartered in the air,
The walking animals, as the infantry
Of the Universal Host, at large did lie
Spread over all the earths most ample face,
Each regiment in its assigned place.
Paradise the head quarter was, and there
The Emperor to his Viceroy did appear, ver. 16.

Him in his regal Office did install,
A general muster of his hosts did call, ver. 19.

Resigning up into his sole command
The numerous Tribes, that fill does sea and land.
As each kind severally had before
Blessing and approbation, so once more,
When all together God his works reviewed,
The blessing was confirmed and renewed.
And with the sixth day the Creation ceast. Genesis 1. 31.

The seventh day the Lord himself did rest,
And made it a perpetual Ordinance then Genesis 2. 2, 3.

To be observed by every age of men, Ex. 20. 8.

That after six days honest labor they
His precept and example should obey,
As he did his, their works surcease, and spend
That day in sacred rest, till that day end,
And in its number back again return,
Still consecrated, till it have outworn
All other time, and that alone remain,
When neither toil, nor burden, shall again
The weary lives of mortal men infest,
Nor intermit their holy, happy rest.
Nor is this Rest sacred to idleness,
God, a perpetual Act, sloth cannot bless.
He ceast not from his own celestial joy,
Which does himself perpetually employ
In contemplation of himself, and those Pro. 8. 22, 30, 31.

Most excellent works, wherein himself he shows; Mat. 3. 17.

He only ceast from making lower things, Joh. 5. 17, 20, 21.

By which, as steps, the mounting soul he brings
To the upmost height, and having finished these
Himself did in his own productions please, Jer. 9. 24.

Full satisfied in their perfection,
Rested from what he had completely done; Psalm. 104. and 147. and 145.

And made his pattern our instruction,
That we, as far as finite creatures may
Trace him that is infinite, should in our way
Rest as our Father did, work as he wrought,
Nor cease till we have to perfection brought Eccl. 9. 10.

Whatever to his glory we intend, Heb. 6. 1.

Still making ours, the same which was his end: Phil. 3. 19.

As his works in commands begin, and have
Conclusion in the blessings which he gave, 1 Cor. 10. 30.

So must his Word give being to all ours; 1 John 5. 3.

And since the events are not in our own powers, Ps. 119. 9.

We must his blessing beg, his great name bless,
And make our thanks the crown of our success.
As God first heaven did for man prepare,
Men last for heaven created were,
So should we all our actions regulate, Mat. 6. 33.

Which heaven, both first and last, should terminate, Col. 3. 1.

And in whatever circle else they run,
There should they end, there should they be begun,
There seek their pattern, and derive from thence
Their whole direction and their influence.
As when the Almighty this low world did frame,
Life by degrees to its perfection came,
In Vegetation first sprung up, to sense Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.

Ascended next, and climbed to reason thence,
So we, pursuing our seize, should
Press forward from what is positively good,
Still climbing higher, until we reach the best,
And that acquired for ever fix our rest.
Our souls so ravished with the joys divine
That they no more to creatures can decline.
As Gods Rest was but a more high retreat
From the delights of this inferior seat,
So must our souls upon our Sabbaths climb,
Above the world, sequestered for that time,
From those legitimate delights, which may Es. 58. 13.

Rejoice us here upon a common day.
As God, his works completed, did retire
To be adored by the Angelick Quire,
So when on us the seventh days light does shine,
Should we our selves to Gods assemblies join,
Thither all hearts, as one pure offering, bring Job 1. 6.

And all with one accord adore our King. Heb. 10. 25.

This seventh day the Lord to mankind gave,
Nor is it the least privilege we have. Mat. 2. 27.

And ours peculiarly. The Orbs above Ez. 20. 12.

As Well the seventh as the sixth day move,
The rain descends and the fierce tempest blows,
On it the restless Ocean ebbs and flows:
Bees that day fill the hive, and on that day
Ants their provisions in their storehouse lay,
All creatures plie their works, no beast
But those which mankind use, share in that rest:
Which God indulged only to humane race,
That they in it might come before his face
To celebrate his worship and his praise,
And gain a blessing upon all their days.
O wretched souls of perverse men, who slight
So great a grace, refuse such rich delight,
Which the inferior creatures cannot share,
To which alone their natures fitted are,
And whereby favored men admitted be Heb. 4. 9. and 12. 22.

Into the angels blessed societle.
Yet is this Rest but a far distant view
Of that celestial life which we pursue,
By Satan often so interrupted here,
That little of its glory does appear,
Nor can our souls sick, languid appetite
Feast upon such substantial, strong delight.
As music pains the grieved aching head,
With which the healthful sense is sweetly fed;
So duties wherein sound hearts full joys find, Am. 8. 5.

Fetters and sad loads are to a sick mind,
Till it thereto by force it self mure,
And from a loathing fall to love its cure.
God for his worship kept one day of seven,
The other six to man for man's use given;
Adam, although so highly dignified,
Was not to spend in idle ease and pride
Nor supine sleep, drunk with his sensual pleasures,
Profusely wasting the Empires sacred treasures,
As now his fallen sons do, that arrogate
His forfeited dominion, and high state;
But God his daily Business did ordain
That Kings, hence taught, might in their Realms maintain
Fair order, serving those whom they command,
As guardians, not as owners of the land, Romans 13. 3, 4.

Not being set there, to pluck up and destroy
Those plants, whose culture should their cares employ.
Nor does this precept only Kings comprize, 1 These. 4. 11.

The meanest must his little paradise
With no less vigilance and care attend 1 Timothy 5 8.

Than Princes on their vast enclosures spend.
All hence must learn their duty, to suppress
The intrusions of a sordid idleness. Pro. 19. 15. and 10. 26.

Who formed, could have preserved the garden fair
Without the employment of man's busy care,
But that he willed that our delight should be
The wages of our constant industry,
That we his ever bounteous hand might bless
Crowning our honest labors with success,
And taste the joy men reap in their own fruit,
Loving that more to which they contribute
Either the labor of their hands or brains,
Than better things produced by others pains.
Led by desire, fed with fair hope, the fruit
Oft-times delights not more than the pursuit.
For man a nature has to action prone,
That languishes, and sickens finding none.
As standing pools corrupt, water that flows,
More pure, by its continual current, grows,
So humane kind by active exercise,
Do to the heights of their perfection rise,
While their stocked glory comes to no ripe growth,
Whose lives corrupt in idleness and sloth
Which is not natural, but a disease,
That does upon the flesh-cloy'd spirit seize.
Where health untainted is, then the sound mind
In its employment does its pleasure find.
But when death, or its representer sleep
Upon the mortals tired members creep,
This during its dull reign does life suspend,
That ceasing action, puts it to an end.
Lastly since God himself did man employ
To dress up Paradise, that moderate joy
Which from this fair creation we derive,
Is not our sin but our prerogative,
If bounded so, as we fix not our rest 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.

In creatures which but transient are at best, 1 John 2. 17.

Yet it is sin to neglect, not use, or prize, 1 Cor. 7. 31, 20.

As well as it is to wast and idolize.
Canto IV.
GOod were all natures as God made them all, Genesis 1. 31.

Good was his Will permitting some to fall, Romans 9. 21, 22, 23.

That the rest renouncing their frail strength might stand
Humble and firm in his supporting hand, Romans 11.
Romans 3. 6.

His wisdom and omnipotence might own, Genesis 18. 25.

When his Foes power and craft is overthrown,
Seeing his hate of sin, might thence confess Romans 11. 33.

His pure innate and perfect Holiness, 1 Cor. 10. 12.

And that the glory of his Justice might Romans 16. 20.

In the Rebels torturing flames seem bright.
That the ever blessed Redeemer might take place Psalm. 2.

To illustrate his rich mercy and free grace Jos. 24. 19.
Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. and 7. 11. etc. and 11. 5, 6.

Whereby he fallen sinners does restore
To fuller bliss than they enjoyed before;
That Virtue might in its clear brightness shine
Which like rich ore concealed in the mine 1 Pet. 1. 10.

Had not been known, but that opposing vice Ephesians. 1. 4, 11.

Illustrates it by frequent exercise. Joh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 2. 5. Romans 8. 35, 36,
37, 38, 39. Romans 5. 5, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14.

If all were good, whence then arose the ill?
'T was not in Gods, but in the creatures will,
Averting from that good, which is supreme,
Corrupted so, as a declining stream Eccl. 7. 29.

That breaks off its communion with its head, Jude 6.

By whom its life and sweetness late were fed, Joh. 8. 44.

Turns to a noisome, dead, and poisonous Lake,
Infecting all who the foul waters take:
Or as a Branch cut from the living Tree,
Passes into contempt immediately,
And dies divided from its glorious stock;
So strength disjoined from the living rock,
Turns to contemned imbecility,
And does to all its grace and glory die. Jer. 2 13.

Some new-made Angels thus, not more sublime Devils.

In nature, than transcending in their crime,
Quitting the eternal fountain of their light,
Became the firstborn sons of woe and night, Ephesians. 2. 2.

Princes of Darkness, and the sad Abyss, Act. 26. 18.

Which now their cursed place and portion is, Mat. 25. 41.

Where they no more must fee Gods glorious face
Nor ever taste of his refreshing grace, Rev. 20. 10.

But in the fire of his fierce anger dwell,
Which though it burns, enlightens not their Hell.
But circumstances that we cannot know
Of their rebellion and their overthrow
We will not dare to invent, nor will we take
Guesses from the reports themselves did make
To their old Priests, to whom they did devise
To inspire some truths, wrapped up in many lies;
Such as their gross poetic fables are,
Saturn's extrusion, the bold giants war,
Division of the universal realm,
To Gods that in high heaven steer the helm,
Others who all things in the Ocean guide,
And those who in the infernal Court preside,
Who there a vast and gloomy Empire sway,
Whom all the Furies and the Ghosts obey.
But not to name these foolish impious tales,
Which stifle truth in her pretended veils,
Let us in its own blazing conduct go,
And look no further than that light does show;
Wherein we see the present powers of hell,
Before they under Gods displeasure fell,
Were once endued with grace and excellence,
Beyond the comprehension of our sense, Lu. 10. 18.

Pure holy lights in the bright heaven were
Blazing about the throne, but not fixed there; Jude 6.

Where, by the Apostasy of their own will,
Precipitating them into all ill,
And Gods just wrath, whose eyes are far too pure 2 Pet. 2. 4.

Stained and polluted objects to endure, Hab. 1. 13.

They fell like lightning, hurled in his fierce ire, Lu. 10. 18.

And falling, set the lower world on fire: Jam. 3. 6.

Which their loose prison is where they remain, Joh. 8. 44.

And walk as criminals under Gods chain; Jud. 6.

Until the last and great assizes come,
When Execution shall seal up their doom. 1 Cor. 6. 3.

Thus are they now to their created light, Mat. 8. 29.

Unto all Truth, and Goodness opposite, Genesis 3. 15.
1 Pet. 5. 8.

Hating the Peace and Joy that reigns above, Job 1. 7, etc.

Vainly contending to extinguish love,
Ruin Gods sacred Empire, and destroy Rev. 12. 10.

That blessedness they never can enjoy.
A Chief they have, whose Sovereign power and place
But adds to'his sin, his torture, and disgrace. Mark 3. 22, 24, 25, 26.

An order too there is in their dire state, Rev. 20. 10.

Though they all Orders else disturb and hate.
Ten thousand thousand wicked spirits stand,
Attending their black Prince, at his command, Luke 8. 30.

To all imaginable evils pressed,
That may promote their common interest.
Nor are they linked thus by faith and love,
But hate of God and goodness, which does move
The same endeavors and desires in all,
Lest civil wars should make their Empire fall. Mat. 12. 25, 26.

An Empire which the Almighty does permit,
Yet so as he controlls and limits it. Rev. 20. 2, 7, 8.

Suffering their rage sometimes to take effect,
Only to be the more severely checked; Job 2. 6.

When he produces a contrary end, Col. 2. 14, 15.

From what they did maliciously intend,
Befools their wisdom, crosses their designs, Heb. 2. 9, 14.

And blows them up in their own crafty mines, Luke 22. 3.

Allows them play in the entangling net, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.

So to be faster in damnation set, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, etc.

Submits them to each others tyrannies, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

Who did Gods softer sacred bonds despise,
Lets them still fight, who never can prevail, Rev. 12. 12.

More cursed if they succeed, than if they fail,
Since every soul the Rebels gain from God,
Adds but another Scorpion to that rod,
Bound up, that they may mutual torturers be, Lu. 16. 24.

Tormented and tormenting equally. Rev. 14. 10, 11.

As a wise General that does design Mat. 25. 41.

To keep his Army still in discipline,
Suffers the embodying of some slighter foes,
Which he at his own pleasure can enclose,
And vanquish, that he justly may chastise
Their folly, and his own troops exercise,
Their vigilance, their faith and valor prove;
Endearing them thereby to his own love,
As he alike endears himself to theirs, Luke 22. 31, 32.

By his continual succors and kind cares:
So the Almighty gives the Devils scope, Joh. 17. 20.

Who though they are excluded from all hope Mat. 4.

Of e're escaping, no reluctance have, Heb. 2. 18. and 4. 15. and 7. 25.

But like the desperate villain they make brave,
To death pursue their bold attempts, that all Romans 16. 20.

Over whom they cannot reign, with them may fall.
And though Gods watchful guards besiege them round
That none can pass their strict prescribed bound,
Yet make they daily sallies in their pride, Rev. 12. 7, 8.

Which still repulst the holy host deride. Mat. 4. 11.

Their malice in it self and its event, Jude 9.

Being equally a crime and punishment.
Thus though sin in it self be ill, it is good
That sin should be, for thereby rectitude
Thorough opposed iniquity, as light
By shades, is more conspicuous and more bright.
The wonderful creation of mankind,
For lasting glory and rich grace designed,
The blessed angels looked on with delight,
Gladded to see us climb so near their height; Lu. 15. 10. and 16. 22.

Above all other works, next in degree,
And capable of their society. Heb. 12. 22.

But 'twas far otherwise with those that fell
Man's destined heaven, increased their hell,
While they burnt with a proud malicious spite
To see a new-made, earth-born favorite, Joh. 8. 44.

For their high seats and empty thrones designed;
Therefore both against God and man combined,
To hinder Gods decree from taking place,
And to divest man of his Makers grace;
Which while he in a pure obedience stood, 1 Pet. 3. 13.

They knew, not all their force nor cunning could,
But if they could with any false pretense
Inveigle him to quit his innocence,
They hoped death would prevent the dreaded womb
From whence their happier successors must come.
Wherefore the accursed Sovereign of hell
Thinking no other Devil could so well
Act this ill part, whose consequence was high Genesis 3. 1, etc.

Enough to engage his hateful majesty,
Himself exposes for the common cause,
And with his hellish kingdoms full applause,
Goes forth, putting himself into disguise,
And so within a bright scaled serpent lies,
Folded about the fair forbidden tree,
Watching a wished for opportunity,
Which Eve soon gave him, coming there alone
So to be first and easier overthrown;
On whose weak side, the assault had not been made
Had she not from her firm protection strayed;
But so the Devil then, so lewd men now
Prevail, when women privacies allow,
And to those flattering whispers lend an ear 2 Timothy 3. 6.

Which even impudence it self would fear
To utter in the presence of a friend,
Whose virtuous awe our frailty might defend.
Though unexperience might excuse Eves fault,
Yet those who now give way to an assault,
By suffering it alone, none can exempt
From the just blame that they their tempters tempt,
And by vain confidence themselves betray,
Fondly secure in a known desperate way.
As Eve stood near the tree, the subtle beast,
By Satan moved, his speech to her addressed
Has God, said he, forbid that you should taste
These pleasant fruits, which in your eyes are placed,
Why are the tempting boughs exposed, if you
May not delight your palates with your view?
God, said the woman, gives us liberty
To eat without restraint of every tree
Which in the garden grows, but only one;
Restrained by such a prohibition,
We dare not touch it, for when e're we do
A certain death will our offense ensue.
Then did the wicked subtle beast reply,
Ah simple wretch, you shall not surely die,
God enviously to you this fruit denies,
He knows that eating it, will make you wise,
Of good and ill give you discerning sense,
And raise you to a god-like excellence.
Eve quickly caught in the foul hunters net,
Believed that death was only a vain threat,
Her unbelief quenching religious dread
Infectious counsel in her bosom bred,
Dissatisfaction with her present state
And fond ambition of a godlike height.
Who now applies herself to its pursuit,
With longing eyes looks on the lovely fruit,
First nicely plucks, then eats with full delight,
And gratifies her murderous appetite;
Poisoned with the sweet relish of her sin,
Before her inward torturing pangs begin,
The pleasure to her husband she commends,
And he by her persuasion too offends,
As by the serpents she before had done.
Hence learn pernicious counselors to shun. Pro. 1. 10, etc.

Within the snake the crafty tempter smiled
To see mankind so easily beguiled,
But laugh not Satan, God shall thee deride,
The Son of God and Man shall scourge thy pride,
And in the time of vengeance shall exact 1 John 3. 8.

A punishment on thee, for this accursed fact. Joh. 16. 11.

Now wrought the poison on the guilty pair,
Who with confusion on each, other stare,
While death possession takes, and enters in
At the wide breach, laid open by their sin. Romans 5. 12.

Sound health and joy before the intruder fled,
Sickness and sorrow coming in their stead.
Their late sweet calm did now for ever cease,
Storms in all quarters drove away their peace;
Dread, guilt, remorse in the benighted soul, Esa. 48. 22.

Like raging billows on each other roll;
Deaths harbingers waste in each province make,
While thundering terrors man's whole Island shake.
Within, without, disordered in the storm,
The color fades, and tremblings change the form,
Heat melts their substance, cold their joints benumbs,
Dull languishment their vigor overcomes.
Grief conquered beauty lays down all her arms,
And mightier woe dissolves her late strong charms, Psa. 39. 11.

Shame does their looks deject, no cheerful grace,
No pleasant smiles, appear in their sad face,
They see themselves fooled, cheated, and betrayed,
And naked in the view of heaven made;
No glory compasses the drooping head,
The sight of their own ugliness they dread,
And curtains of broad, thin Fig Leaves devise
To hide themselves from their own weeping eyes;
But, Ah, these coverings were too slight and thin
To ward their shame off, or to keep out sin,
Or the keen airs quick piercing shafts, which through
Both leaves and pores into the bowels flew.
While they remained in their pure innocence
It was their robe of glory and defense:
But when sin tore that mantle off, they found
Their members were all naked, all uncrown'd;
Their purity in every place defiled,
Their vest of righteousness all torn and spoiled.
Wherefore, through guilt, the late loved light they shun,
And into the obscurest shadow run;
But in no darkness can their quiet find, Ps. 1 39. 11.

Carrying within them a disturbed mind,
Which does their cureless folly represent,
And makes them curse their late experiment;
Wishing they had been pure and ignorant still,
Nor coveted the knowledge of their ill.
Ah thus it is that yet we learn our good,
Till it be lost, but seldom understood,
Rich blessings, while we have them, little prize.
Until their want their value magnifies,
And equally does our remorse increase
For having cast away such happiness.
O wretched man! who at so dear a rate
Purchased the knowledge of his own frail state,
Knowledge of small advantage to the wise,
Which only their affliction multiplies, Eccl. 1. 18.

While they in painful study vex their brain,
Pursuing what they never can attain;
And what would not avail them if acquired,
Till at the length with fruitless labor tired,
All that the learned and the wise can find
Is but a vain disturbance of the mind,
A sense of man's inevitable woes,
Which he but little feels, who little knows;
While mortals, holding on their error, still
Pursue the knowledge both of good and ill, Prove. 1. 7.
Psalm. 11^. 10.

They neither of them perfectly attain,
But in a dark tumultuous state remain; 1 Cor. 1. 20, 21. and 2. 14.

Till sense of ill, increasing like nights shade,
Or has a blot of good impressions made, Jam. 3. 15, 16, 17.

Or good, victorious as the morning light,
Triumph over the vanquished opposite.
For both at once abide not in one place,
Good knowledge flies from them who ill embrace.
So were our parents filled with guilt and fear,
When in the groves they Gods approaches hear,
And from the terror of his presence fled;
Whether their own convictions caused their dread,
For inward guilt of conscience might suffice
To chase vile sinners from his purer eyes;
Or nature felt an angry Gods descent,
Which shook the earth, and tore the firmament,
We are not told, nor will too far enquire.
Lightnings and tempests might speak forth his ire.
For at the day of universal doom
The great Judge shall in flaming vengeance come;
An all-consuming fire shall go before, Ps. 97. 3, 4.

Whirlwinds and thunder shall about him roar, Es. 9. 5. and 66. 15, 16.

Horror shall darken the whole troubled skies,
And bloody veils shall hide the worlds bright eyes, 1 These. 1. 8.

While stars from the dissolving heaven drop down, 2 Pet. 3. 12.

And funeral blazes every Turret crown.
The clouds shall be confounded with the waves, Rev. 1. 7.

The yawning earth shall open all her graves, Joel 3. 15, 16.

Loud fragors shall firm rocks in sunder rend,
Cleft mountains shall hells fiery jaws distend, Mat. 24. 29.

Vomiting cinders, sulphur, pitch, and flame,
Which shall consume the worlds unjoynted frame,
And turn the Paradises we admire
Into an ever-boyling lake of fire. Rev. 19. 20.

But God then, in his rich grace, did delay
These dismalterrors, till the last great day.
Yet even his first approach created dread,
And the poor mortals from his anger fled;
Until a calmer voice their sense did greet.
Love even when it chides is kind and sweet. Heb. 12. 11.

The sense of wrath far from the feared Power drives, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33.

The sense of Love brings home the fugitives.
Souls flying God into despair next fall, Genesis 4. 14.

Thence into hate, till black hell close up all.
But if sweet mercy meet them on the way, Act. 9.

That milder voice, first does their mad flight stay,
And their ill-quitted hope again restore, Psalm. 130. 7, 4.

Then love that was forsaking them before
Returns with a more flaming strong desire
Of those sweet joys from which it did retire,
And in their absence woe and terror found, Lam. 3. 1, etc.

And all those plagues that can a poor soul wound.
While thus this love with holy ardour burns,
The bleeding sinner to his God returns, Mat. 27. 46.

And prostrate at his throne of grace does lie,
If death he cannot shun, yet there to die. Job 13. 15.

Where Mercy still does fainting souls revive, Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3.

And in its kind embraces keep alive
A gentler fire, than what it lately felt
Under the sense of wrath. The soul does melt,
Like precious Ore, which when men would refine
Does in its liquefaction brightly shine;
In cleansing penitential meltings so
Foul sinners once again illustrious grow,
When Christ's all-heating softning spirit, has
Their Furnance been, and his pure blood their Bath. Mal. 3. 2, 3.
Rev. 1. 5.

Now though Gods wrath bring not the sinner home,
Who only by sweet love attracted come, Rom 12. 1.

Yet is it necessary that the sense
Of it, should make us know the excellence, Joh. 16. 9, 10.

And taste the pleasantness of pardoning grace, Mat. 11. 28.

That we may it with fuller joy embrace;
Which when it brings a frighted wretch from hell
Makes it love more, than those who never fell: Luke 7. 47.

But mankinds love to God grows by degrees, 1 John 4. 10.

As he more clearly Gods sweet mercy sees,
And God at first reveals not all his grace,
That men more ardently may seek his face,
Averted by their folly and their pride,
Which makes them their confounded faces hide.
As still the Sun's the same behind the clouds,
Such is Gods love, which his kind anger shrouds, Lam. 3. 22, 23.

Which does not all at once it self reveal,
But first in the thick shadows that conceal
Its glory, does attenuation cause;
Then the black, dismal curtain softly draws,
And lets some glimmering light of hope appear,
Which rather is a lessening of our fear, Lam. 3. 26, 29, etc.

Than an assurance of our joy and peace, Hos. 2. 15.

A truce with misery, rather than release.
Thus had not God come in mankind had died
Without repair, yet came he first to chide,
To urge their sin, with its sad consequence,
And make them feel the weight of their offense.
To' examine and arraign them at his bar,
And show them what vile criminals they were:
But ah! our utterance here is choked with woe,
With tardy steps from Paradise we go.
Then let us pause on our lost joys a while
Before we enter on our sad exile.
Canto V.
SAd Natures sighs gave the Alarms,
And all her frighted hosts stood to their arms,
Waiting whom the great Sovereign would employ
His all deserted rebels to destroy:
When God descended out of heaven above
His disobedient Viceroy to remove. Genesis 3. 8.

Yet though himself had seen the forfeiture,
Which distance could not from his eyes obscure,
To teach his future Substitutes how they
Should judgments execute in a right way,
He would not unexamin'd facts condemn, 2 Samuel 23. 3.

Nor punish sinners without hearing them.
Therefore cites to his bar the Criminals,
And Adam first out of his covert calls,
Where art thou Adam? the Almighty said, Genesis 3. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Here Lord, the trembling sinner answer made,
Amongst the trees I in the garden heard
Thy voice, and being naked was afeard,
Nor durst I so thy purer sight abide,
Therefore my self did in this shelter hide.
Have thou (said God) eat the forbidden tree,
Or who declared thy nakedness to thee?
She, answered Adam, whom thou did create
To be my helper and associate,
Gave me the fatal fruit, and I did eat;
Then Eve was also called from her retreat,
Woman what have thou done? the Almighty said; ver. 13.

Lord, answered she, the serpent me betrayed,
And I did eat. Thus did they both confess
Their guilt, and vainly sought to make it less,
By such extenuations, as well weighed,
The sin, so circumstanc'd, more sinful made:
A course which still half softened sinners use,
Transferring blame their own faults to excuse,
They care not how, nor where, and oftentimes
On God himself obliquely charge their crimes,
Expostulating in their discontent, Romans 9. 19.

As if he caused what he did not prevent; Ez. 18. 2.

Which Adam wickedly implies, when he Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15.

Cries, 'Twas the woman That thou gave me;
Oft-times make that the devils guilt alone,
Which was as well and equally their own.
His lies could never have prevailed on Eve
But that she wished them truth, and did believe
A forgery that suited her desire,
Whose haughty heart was prone enough to' aspire.
The tempting and the urging was his ill,
But the compliance was in her own will.
And herein truly lies the difference
Of natural and gracious penitence,
The first transferreth and extenuates
The guilt, which the other owns and aggravates. Psalm. 51. 3, 4, 5. and 32. 5.

While sin is but regarded slight and small,
It makes the value of rich mercy fall,
But as our crimes seem greater in our eyes, 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10.

So does our grateful sense of pardon rise.
Poor mankind at Gods righteous bar was cast
And set for judgment by, when at the last
Satan within the serpent had his doom,
Whose execrable malice left no room
For plea or pardon, but was sentenced first;
Thou (said the Lord) above all beasts accursed,
Shall on thy belly creep, on dust shall feed,
Between thee and the woman, and her seed
And thine, I will put lasting enmity; 1 Pet. 5. 8.

Thou in this war his heel shall bruise, but He
Thy head shall break. More various Mystery Mat. 13. 25.

Never did within so short a sentence lie.
Here is irrevocable vengeance, here Jude 6.

Love as immutable. Here does appear Mal. 3. 6.

Infinite Wisdom plotting with free grace, Zac. 6. 13.

Even by Man's Fall, the advance of humane race. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

Severity here utterly confounds, Romans 11. 22.

Here Mercy cures by kind and gentle wounds,
The Father here, the Gospel first reveals,
Here fleshly veils the eternal son conceals. Esa. 7. 14.

The law of life and spirit here takes place, Romans 8. 2, 3, 4.

Given with the promise of assisting grace:
Here is an Oracle foretelling all, Act. 13. 10.

Which shall the two opposed seeds befall. Mat. 3. 7.
Psalm. 22. 30.

The great war has its first beginning here, Jer. 31. 22.

Carried along more than five thousand year, Ephesians. 6. 12.
Joh. 8. 44.

With various success on either side, Jude 9.

And each age with new combatants supplied: Genesis 6. 2, 4, 5.

Two Sovereign Champions here we find, Heb. 2. 10.

Satan and Christ contending for mankind. Act. 5. 31.

Two Empires here, two opposite Cities rise, Ephesians. 2. 2.

Dividing all in two Societies. Joh. 15. 18, 19.

The little Church and the worlds larger State Lu. 12. 32.

Pursuing it with ceaseless spite and hate. Ps. 105. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Each party here erecting their own walls,
As one advances, so the other falls.
Hope in the Promise the weak Church confirms, Esa. 9. 6, 7.

Hell and the world fight upon desperate terms,
By this most certain Oracle they know, Rev. 12. 12.

Their war must end in final overthrow. Joh. 16. 30.

Some little present mischief they may do,
And this with eager malice they pursue. Joh. 16. 20.

The Angels whom Gods justice did divide, Mat. 10. 34.

Engage their mighty powers on either side,
Hells gloomy Princes the worlds rulers made, Psalm. 2. 1.
Rev. 12. 7, 9.

Heavens unseen host the Churches guard and aid.
Till the frail woman's conquering son shall tread Dan. 10. 13, 21.

Beneath his feet the serpents broken head; Psa. 104. 4.

Though God the speech to man's false foe address, Romans 16. 20.

The words rich grace to fallen man express,
Which God will not to him himself declare,
Till he implore it by submissive prayer; Psa. 50. 15.

Sufficient it is to know a latitude Es. 41. 9.

For hope, which does no penitent exclude. Psa. 130. 4.
Luke 1. 74.

Had deaths sad sentence past on man, before
The promise of that seed which should restore Gal. 3. 8, 16.

His fallen state, destroying death and sin, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 57.

Cureless as Satan's had his misery been.
But though free grace did future help provide,
Yet must he present loss and woe abide; 1 Cor. 3. 15.

And feel the bitter curse, that he may so
The sweet release of saving mercy know.
Prepared with late indulged hope, on Eve Gal. 3. 13.
Genesis 3. 16, etc.

The almighty next did gentler sentence give.
I will, said he, greatly augment thy woes,
And thy conceptions, which with painful throes
Thou shall bring forth, yet shall they be to thee
But a successive crop of misery.
Thy husband shall thy ruler be, whose sway
Thou shall with passionate desires obey.
Alas! how sadly to this day we find
The effect of this dire curse on womankind;
Eve sinned in fruit forbid, and God requires
Her penance in the fruit of her desires.
When first to men their inclinations move,
How are they tortured with distracting love! Genesis 39. 7.

What disappointments find they in the end;
Constant uneasinesses which attend
The best condition of the wedded state, 1 Cor. 7. 34, 39, 40.

Giving all wives sense of the curses weight,
Which makes them ease and liberty refuse, 1 Pet. 3. 5.

And with strong passion their own shackles choose:
Now though they easier under wise rule prove,
And every burden is made light by love, Genesis 29. 20.

Yet golden fetters, soft lined yoaks still be,
Though gentler ourbs, but curbs of liberty,
As well as the harsh tyrants iron yoke,
More sorely galling them whom they provoke,
To loath their bondage, and despise the rule
Of an unmanly, fickle, froward fool. 1 Samuel 25, 25.

Whatever the husbands be, they covet fruit,
And their own wishes to their sorrows contribute. Genesis 30. 1. and 35. 18.

How painfully the fruit within them grows, Mat. 24. 19.

What tortures do their ripened births disclose,
How great, how various, how uneasy are
The breeding sicknesses, pangs that prepare
The violent openings of life's narrow door, Joh. 16. 21.

Whose fatal issues we as often deplore!
What weaknesses, what languishments ensue,
Scattering dead Lillies where fresh Roses grew.
What broken rest afflicts the careful nurse,
Extending to the breasts the mothers curse;
Which ceases not when there her milk she dries,
The froward child draws new streams from her eyes.
How much more bitter anguish do we find
Laboring to raise up virtue in the mind,
Then when the members in our bowels grew,
What sad abortions, what cross births ensue? Prove. 10. 1.

What monsters, what unnatural vipers come
Eating their passage through their parents womb; Pro. 15. 20.

How are the tortures of their births renewed,
Unrecompenc'd with love and gratitude:
Even the good, who would our cares requite,
Would be our crowns, joys, pillars, and delight,
Affect us yet with other griefs and fears,
Opening the sluices of our never dried tears.
Death, danger, sickness, losses, all the ill Luke 2. 48, 35.

That on the children falls, the mothers feel,
Repeating with worse pangs, the pangs that bore Mat. 2. 18.

Them into life, and though some may have more
Of sweet and gentle mixture, some of worse,
Yet every mothers cup tastes of the curse.
And when the heavy load her faint heart tires,
Makes her too often repent her fond desires, Genesis 27. 46.

Now last of all, as Adam last had been
Drawn into the prevaricating sin,
His sentence came: Because that thou did yield, Genesis 3. 17.

(Said God) to thy enticing wife, The field
Producing briars and fruitless thorns to thee,
Accursed for thy sake and sins shall be.
Thy careful brows in constant toyls shall sweat,
Thus thou thy bread shall all thy whole life eat,
Till thou return into the earths vast womb;
Whence, taken first, thou did a man become;
For dust thou art, and dust again shall be
When life's declining spark goes out in thee. Ps. 103. 14. and 104. 29.

In all these Sentences we strangely find
Gods admirable love to lost mankind;
Who though he never will his word recall,
Or let his threats like shafts at random fall,
Yet can his Wisdom order curses so
That blessings may out of their bowels flow.
Thus death the door of lasting life became, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

Dissolving nature, to rebuild her frame,
On such a sure foundation, as shall break 2 Timothy 1. 10.

All the attempts Hells cursed Empire make.
Thus God revenged man's quarrel on his foe,
To whom the Almighty would no mercy show,
Making his reign, his respite, and success, Lu. 18. 7, 8.

All augmentations of his cursedness.
Thus gave he us a powerful Chief and Head,
By whom we shall be out of bondage led. Zac. 9. 10, 11, 12.

And made the penalties of our offense,
Precepts and rules of new obedience,
Fitted in all things to our fallen State, Mat. 11. 29, 30.

Under sweet promises, that ease their weight.
Our first injunction is to hate and fly 1 John 5. 3.

The flatteries of our first grand enemy; Prove. 1. 10, etc.

To have no friendship with his cursed race,
The interest of the opposite seed to embrace, Ephesians. 5. 11.

Where though we toil in fights, though bruised we be, 1 Timothy 6. 12.

Yet shall our combat end in victory: Jude 3.

Eternal glory, healing our slight wound, Rev. 2. 10.
Mic. 7. 16, 17.

When all our labors are with triumph crowned.
The next command is, mothers should maintain
Posterity, not frighted with the pain,
Which though it make us mourn under the sense
Of the first mothers disobedience,
Yet has a promise that thereby she shall 1 Timothy 2. 15.

Recover all the hurt of her first fall,
When, in mysterious manner, from her womb Es. 9. 6.

Her father, brother, husband, son shall come. Heb. 2. 12, 13.

Subjection to the husband's rule enjoined,
In the next place, that yoke with love is lined, Ephesians. 5. 25, etc.

Love too a precept made, where God requires Luke 1. 35.

We should perform our duties with desires; 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2.

And promises to incline our averse will,
Whose satisfaction takes away the ill
Of every toil, and every suffering
That can from unenforc'd submission spring;
The last command, God with man's curse did give,
Was that men should in honest callings live,
Eating their own bread, fruit of their own sweat;
Nor feed like drones on that which others get: 1 These. 4. 11, 12.

And this command a promise does implie,
That bread should recompense our industry. 2 These. 3. 12.

One mercy more his sentence did include,
That mortal toyls, faintings and lassitude, Rev. 14. 13.

Should not beyond deaths fixed bound extend,
But there in everlasting quiet end; Mat. 10. 28.

When men out of the troubled air depart,
And to their first material dust revert, Job 3. 17, 18, 19.

The utmost power that death or woe can have Eccl. 3. 20.

Is but to shut us prisoners in the grave,
Bruising the flesh, that heel whereon we tread,
But we shall trample on the serpents head. 1 These. 4. 14.

Our scattered atoms shall again condense,
And be again inspired with living sense; Es. 26. 19.

Captivity shall then a captive be,
Death shall be swallowed up in victory, Job 19. 26, 27.

And God shall man to Paradise restore,
Where the foul tempter shall seduce no more 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22, 26, 54, 55,
57.

How far our parents, whose sad eyes were fixed
On woe and terror, saw the mercy mixed, Act. 2. 24.
Psa. 68. 18.

We can but make a wild uncertain guess,
As we are now affected in distress,
Who less regard the mitigation still Esa. 43. 2, etc.

Than the slight smart of our afflicting ill;
And while we groan under the hated yoke, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13.

Our gratitude for its soft lining choke. Jer. 30. 11, etc.

But God having the amazed sinners doomed,
Put off the Judges frown and reassumed Mic. 7. 18, 19.

A tender fathers kind and melting face
Opening his gracious arms for new embrace, Es. 49. 15.

Taught them to expiate their heinous guilt Jer. 31. 20.

By spotless sacrifice and pure blood spilt, Psalm. 50. 5.
1 Pet. 1. 19.

Which done in faith did their faint hearts sustain,
Till the intended lamb of God was slain, Heb. 11. 4.
Dan. 9. 26, 27.

Whose death, whose merit, and whose innocence,
The forfeit paid and blotted out the offense. Joh. 1. 29.
Ps. 40. 6, 7.

The skins of the slain beasts, God vestures made, 1 John 2. 2.

Wherein the naked sinners were arrayed, Rev. 1. 5. and 5. 9, 10.

Not without mystery, which typifi'd Romans 5. 10, 19.

That righteousness that does our foul shame hide. Col. 2. 14.

As when a rotting patient must endure Ps. 32. 1, 2.

Painful excisions to effect his cure, Rev. 19. 8.

His spirits we with cordials fortify, Romans 3. 22. and 13. 14.

Lest, unsupported, he should faint and die:
So with our parents the Almighty dealt, Gal. 3. 27.

Before their necessary woes they felt, Zac. 3. 4, 5.

Their feeble souls rich promises upheld, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.

And their deliverance was in types revealed,
Even their bodies God himself did arm
With clothes that kept them from the weathers harm, Mat. 6. 30.

But after all, they must be driven away, Psa. 89. 32, 33, 34.

Nor in their forfeit Paradise must stay.
Then, said the Lord, with holy ironie,
Whence man the folly of his pride might see, Genesis 3. 22.

The earthy man like one of us is grown,
To whom, as God, both good and ill is known,
Now lest he also eat of the other tree
Whose fruit gives life, and an Immortal be,
Let us by just and timely banishment
His further sinful arrogance prevent.
Then did he them out of the garden chase,
And set a Cherubim to guard the place;
Who waved a flaming Sword before the door,
Through which the wretches must return no more:
May we not liken to this Sword of flame Heb. 1. 7, 12, 18, 19, 20, 21.

The threatening law which from Mount Sinai came,
With such thick flashes of prodigious fire
As made the mountains shake and men retire:
Forbidding them all forward hope, that they
Could enter into life that dreadful way.
Whatever it was, whatever it signifies,
It kept our parents out of Paradise,
Who now returning to their place of birth
Found themselves strangers in their native earth. 1 Pet. 2. 11.

Their fatal breach of Gods most strict command Heb. 11. 13.

Had there dissolved all concord, the sweet band Psa. 39. 12.

Of universal loveliness and peace.
And now the calm in every part did cease;
Love, though immutable, its smiles did shroud
Under the dark veil of an angry cloud. Rev. 3. 19.

And while he seemed withdrawn, whose grace upheld
The order of all things, confusion filled Psalm. 75. 3.

The Universe. The air became impure,
And frequent dreadful conflicts did endure
With every other angry element;
The whirling fires its tender body rent.
From earth and seas gross vapors did arise,
Turned to prodigious Meteors in the skies;
The blustering winds let loose their furious rage, Psalm. 107. 25, 26, 27.

And in their battles did the floods engage.
The Sun confounded was with natures shame,
And the pale Moon shrunk in her sickly flame;
The rude congressions of the angry Stars Jud. 5. 20.

In Heaven, begun the universal wars,
While their malicious influence from above,
On earth did various perturbations move,
Droughts, inundations, blastings, killed the plants;
Worse influence wrought on the inhabitants,
Inspiring lust, rage, ravenous appetite,
Which made the creatures in all regions fight. Psa. 78. 45, 46, 47, 48.

The little insects in great clouds did rise,
And in Battalia's spread, obscured the skies;
Armies of birds encountered in the air,
With hideous cries deciding battles there;
The birds of prey to gorge their appetite,
Seized harmless fowl in their unwary flight.
When the dim evening had shut in the day,
Troops of wild beasts, all marching out for prey,
To the restless flocks would go, and there Psalm. 104. 20, 21, 22.

Oft-times by other troops assailed were,
Who snatched out of their jaws the new slain food,
And made them purchase it again with blood.
Thus sin the whole creation did divide
Into the oppressing and the suffering side;
Those still employing craft and violence
To' ensnare and murder simple innocence,
True emblems were of Satan's craft and power
In daily ambuscado to devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8.

Nor only emblems were, but organs too, Rev. 12. 8, 12.

In and by whom he did his mischiefs do,
While persecuting cruelty and rage
Them in his cursed party did engage.
Love, meekness, patience, gentleness, combined
The tamer brood with those of their own kind.
Wherefore God chose them for his sacrifice,
When he the proud and mighty did despise,
And his most certain Oracles declare, Romans 8. 20, 21.

They man's restored peace at last shall share:
But to our parents, then, sad was the change Es. 11. 7. and 65. 25.

Which them from peace and safety did estrange,
Brought universal woe and discord in,
The never failing consequents of sin; Es. 57. 20, 21.

Nor only made all things without them jar,
But in their breasts raised up a civil war, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13, 14.

Reason and sense maintained continual fight,
Urging the aversion and the appetite,
Which led two different troops of passions out,
Confounding all, in their tumultuous rout.
The less world with the great proportion held:
As winds the caverns, sighs the bosoms filled;
So flowing tears did beauties fair fields drown,
As inndations kept within no bound.
Fear earthquakes made, lust in the fancy whirled,
Turned into flame, and bursting fired the world:
Spite, hate, revenge, ambition, avarice
Made innocence a prey to monstrous vice.
The cold and hot diseases represent
The perturbations of the element.
Thus woe and danger had beset them round,
Distressed without, within no comfort found.
Even as a Monarchs Favorite in disgrace
Suffers contempt both from the high and base,
And the most abject most insult over them,
Whom the offended Sovereigns condemn;
So after man the Almighty disobeyed,
Each little fly durst his late King invade,
As Well as the woods monsters, wolves and bears,
And all things else that exercise his fears.
Methinks I hear sad Eve in some dark Vale
Her woeful state, with such sad plaints, bewail:
Ah! why does death its latest stroke delay,
If we must leave the light, why do we stay
By slow degrees more painfully to die,
And languish in a long calamity?
Have we not lost by one false cheating sin
All peace without, all sweet repose within?
Is there a pleasure vet that life can show,
Does not each moment multiply our woe:
And while we live thus in perpetual dread,
Our hope and comfort long before us dead?
Why should we not our angry maker pray Job 3.

At once to take our wretched lives away?
Has not our sin all natures pure leagues rent Jonah 4. 3.

And armed against us every element?
Have not our subjects their allegiance broke,
Does not each worm scorn our unworthy yoke?
Are we not half with griping hunger pined,
Before we bread amongst the brambles find?
All pale diseases in our members reign,
Anguish and grief no less our sick souls pain,
Wherever I my eyes, or thoughts convert,
Each object adds new tortures to my heart.
If I look up, I dread heavens threatening frown,
Thorns prick my eyes, when shame has cast them down,
Dangers I see, looking on either hand,
Before me all in fighting posture stand.
If I cast back my sorrow-drowned eyes,
I see our never to be recovered Paradise,
The flaming Sword which does us thence exclude,
By sad remorse and ugly guilt pursued.
If I on thee a private glance reflect,
Confusion does my shameful eyes deject,
Seeing the man I love by me betrayed,
By me, who for his mutual help was made,
Who to preserve thy life ought to have died,
And I have killed thee by my foolish pride;
Defiled thy glory, and pulled down thy throne.
O that I had but sinned, and died alone!
Then had my torture and my woe been less,
I yet had flourisht in thy happiness.
If these words Adams melting soul did move,
He might reply with kind rebuking love.
Cease, cease, O foolish woman, to dispute,
Gods sovereign will and Power are absolute. Psa. 115. 3.

If he will have us soon, or slow to die,
Frail worms must yield, but must not question why. Romans 9. 20, 21, 22, 23.

When his great hand appears, we must conclude
All that he does is wife, and just, and good; Ps. 119. 68.

Though our poor, sin-benighted fouls, are blind, Romans 3. 4.

Nor can the mysteries of his wisdom find, Psalm. 51. 4.

Yet in our present case we must confess Genesis 18. 25.

His justice and our own unrighteousness.
He warned us of this fatal consequence,
That death must wait on disobedience;
Yet we despised his threat, and broke his law, Romans 6. ult.

So did destruction on our own heads draw;
Now under his afflicting hand we lie,
Reaping the fruit of our iniquity.
Which, had not he prevented, when we fell,
At once had plunged us in the lowest hell;
But by his mercy yet we have reprieve, Genesis 6. 3.
1 Pet. 3. 20.

And yet are showed how we in death may live,
If we improve our short indulged space Joh. 11. 25.

To understand, prize, and accept his grace.
Did all of us at once like brutes expire,
And cease to be, we might quick death desire:
But since our chief and immaterial part,
Not framed of dust, does not to dust revert:
Its death not an annihilation is,
But to be cut off from its supreme bliss: Mat. 25. 41, 46.

Whatever here to mortals can befall,
Compared to future miseries is small, Luke 16. 21, 22.

The saddest, sharpest, and the longest have
Their final consummations in the grave, Mat. 10. 28.

These have their intermissions and allays,
Though black and gloomy ones, these nights have days,
The worst calamities we here endure
Admit a possibility of cure; Psa. 130. 1.

Our miseries here are varied in their kind, Psalm. 107.

And in that change the wretched some ease find.
Sleep here our pained senses stupifies, Esa. 29. 8.

And cheating dreams in our sick fancies rise,
But in our future sufferings it is not so,
There is no end, no intermitted woe,
No more return from the accursed place, Lu. 16. 26.

No hope, no possibility of grace,
No sleepy intervals, no pleasant dreams,
No mitigations of those sad extremes,
No gentle mixtures, no soft changes there, Romans 2. 8, 9.

Perpetual tortures, heightened with despair,
Eternal horror, and eternal night, Jude 13.

Eternal burnings, with no glance of light, Mat. 13. 50.

Eternal pain. O it is a thought too great, Lu. 16. 24.

Too terrible, for any to repeat, Mat. 8. 12. and 22. 13.

Who have not escaped the dread. Let Us not to shun Rev. 19. 20.

Heavens scorching rays, into hells furnace run:
But having slain our selves, let us fly to him Hos. 13. 9.

Who only can our souls from death redeem, Romans 3. 16.
Psa. 103. 4.

To undo what is done is not within our power,
No more than to call back the last fled hour.
To think we can our fallen state restore,
Or without hope, our ruin to deplore,
Are equal aggravating crimes; the first
Repeats that sin for which we were accursed, Ephesians. 2. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

while we with foolish arrogating pride,
More in our selves than in our God confide; Romans 3. 27.

The last is both ungrateful and unjust,
That does his goodness, or his power distrust.
Which wheresoever we look, without, within,
Above, beneath, in every place is seen,
Does Heaven frown? Above the sullen shrouds Psalm. 36. 5, 6.

God sits, and sees through all the blackest clouds
Sin casts about us, like the misty night,
Which hide his pleasing glances from our sight, Esa. 44. 22.

Nor only sees, but darts on us his beams Lam. 3. 44, 31, 32, 25.

Ministering comfort in our worst extremes.
When lightnings fly, dire storm and thunder roars,
He guides the shafts, the serene calm restores. Job 37. 11, 12, 13.

When shadows occupy days vacant room,
He makes new glory spring from night dark womb. Esa. 40. 1, 2. and 57. 18, 19.

When the black Prince of air lets loose the winds,
The furious warriors he in prison binds. Joh. 14. 18.

If burning stars do conflagrations threat,
He gives cool breezes to allay the heat. Esa. 25. 4.

When cold does in its rigid season reign, Psalm. 78. 16, 17.

He melts the snows, and thaws the air again;
Restoring the vicissitude of things, Psalm. 30. 5.

He still new good from every evil brings. Luke 8. 24, 25. Esa. 27. 8. Esa. 4.
6. Cant. 2. 11, 12. Genesis 8. 22. Psalm. 147. 17, 18. Esa. 45. 6, 7, 8.

He holds together the worlds shaken frame, Psalm. 75. 3.

Ordaining every change, is still the same. Jam. 1. 17.

If he permit the elements to fight,
The rage of storms, the blackness of the night; Psalm. 102. 26, 27.

It Is that his power, love and wisdom may Mal. 3. 6.

More glory have, restoring calm and day; Esa. 54. 11.

That we may more the pleasant blessings prize, Jer. 31. 35, 36.

Laid in the balance with their contraries.
Though dangers then, like gaping monsters stand 2 Cor. 4. 17.

Ready to swallow us on either hand; Esa. 54. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Let us despise them, firm in this faith still,
If God will save, they can nor hurt nor kill; Psalm. 46. 1, 2.

If by his just permission we are slain,
His power can heal and quicken us again. Esa. 8. 9, 10, 12, 13, 14.

If briers and thorns, which from our sins arise
Looking on earth, pierce through our guilty eyes, Esa. 51. 11, etc.

Let Us yet give thanks they have not choked the seed
Which should with better fruit our sad lives feed. Genesis 50. 20.

If discord set the inward world on fire, 2 Samuel 17. 14.

With have let us to the living spring retire,
There quench, and quiet the disturbed soul, Esther 5. 14. and 6. 13. and 7. 10.

There on Loves sweet refreshing green banks roll,
Where ecstasied with joy, we shall not feel Ezekiel. 37. 1, etc.

The Serpents little nibblings at our heel.
If we look back on Paradise, late lost, Esa. 19. 22.

Joys vanished like swift dreams, thawed like a frost, Jer. 30. 17.

Converting pleasant walks to dirt and mire,
Would we such frail delights again desire, Act. 14. 17.

Which at their best, however excellent, Joh. 7. 37, 38.

Had this defect, they were not permanent? Psalm. 23. 1, 2. 6. 7. Col. 3. 1, 2.
Psalm. 107. 35, 36, 34, 33. 1. Cor. 7. 31. Eccles. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 4. 18.

If sin, remorse, and guilt give us the chase,
Let us lie close in mercies sweet embrace, Psalm. 49. 4, 15.

Which when it us ashamed, and naked found
In the soft arms of melting pity bound; Rev. 3. 18, 20.

Eternal glorious triumphs did prepare, Psa. 32. 1, 2.

Armed us with clothes against the wounding air,
By expiating sacrifices taught, 1 John 2 2. 25.

How new life shall by death to light be brought.
If we before us look, although we see
All things in present fighting posture be:
Yet in the promise we a prospect have
Of victory swallowing up the empty grave; 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 26.

Our foes all vanquished, death it self lies dead,
And we shall trample on the monsters head. Hos. 13. 14.

Entering into a new and perfect joy, Romans 16. 20.

Which neither sin nor sorrow can destroy: Mat. 25. 21.

A lasting and refined felicity, Rev. 20. 4.

For which even we our selves refined must be. Mal. 3. 2, 3.

Then shall we laugh at our now childish woes, Col. 1. 12.

And hug the birth that issues from these throes. Joh. 16. 21. 22.

Let not my share of grief afflict thy mind,
But let me comfort in thy courage find;
'Twas not thy malice, but thy ignorance
That lately my destruction did advance;
Nor can I my own self excuse; 'twas I
Undid my selfby my facility.
Let Us not in vain each other now upbraid,
But rather strive to afford each other aid:
And our most gracious Lord with due thanks bless,
Who has not left us single in distress.
When fear chills thee, my hope shall make thee warm,
When I grow faint, thou shall my courage arm;
When both our spirits at a low ebb are,
We both will join in mutual fervent prayer
To him whose gracious succor never fails,
When sin and death poor feeble man assails,
He that our final triumph has decreed,
And promised thee salvation in thy seed.
Ah! can I this in Adams person say,
While fruitless tears melt my poor life away?
Of all the ills to mortals incident,
None more pernicious is than discontent,
That brat of unbellef, and stubborn pride,
And sensual lust, with no joy satisfied,
That does ing ratitude and murmur nurse,
And is a sin which carries its own curse;
This is the only smart of every ill;
But can we without it sad tortures feel?
Yes; if our souls above our sense remain,
And take not in the afflicted bodies pain,
When they descend and mix with the disease,
Then does the anguish live, reign, and increase
Which when the soul is not in it, grows saint,
And wastes its strength, not nourisht with complaint,
Submissive, humble, happy, sweet content
A thousand deaths by one death does prevent;
When our rebellious wills subdued thereby
Into the eternal will and wisdom, die; Gal. 2. 20.

Nor is that will harsh or irrational,
But sweet in that which we most bitter call,
Who err in judging what is ill or good, Mat. 11.

Only by studying that will, understood.
What we admire in a low Paradise,
If they our souls from heavenly thoughts entice,
Here terminating our most strong desire,
Which should to perfect permanence aspire,
From being good to us they are so far,
That they our fetters, yoaks and poisons are,
The obstacles of our felicity,
The ruin of our souls most firm healths be,
Quenching that life-maintaining appetite,
Which makes substantial fruit our sound delight.
The evils, so miscalled, that we endure
Are wholesome medicines tending to our cure,
Only disease to these aversion breeds,
The healthy soul on them with due thanks feeds.
If for a Prince, a Mistress, or a Friend,
Many do joy their bloods and lives to spend,
Wealth, honor, ease, dangers and wounds despise, Luke 9. 23, 24.

Should we not more to Gods will sacrifice?
And by free gift prevent that else-sure loss?
Whatever our will is, we must bear the cross,
Which freely taken up, the weight is less,
And hurts not, carried on with cheerfulness;
Besides, what we can lose, are gliding streams,
Light airy shadows, unsubstantial dreams, Psalm. 90. 5, 6, 9. and 49. 10, 11,
12, 13.

Wherein we no propriety could have
But that which our own cheating fancy gave;
The right of them was due to God alone, Lu. 12. 20.

And when with thanks we render him his own,
Either he gives us back our offerings,
Or our submission pays with better things:
Were ills as real as our fancies make, Job 1. 21 and 42. 10, 11, 12.

They soon must us, or we must them forsake;
We cannot miss ease and vicissitude,
Till our last rest our labors shall conclude.
Natural tears there are, which in due bound
Do not the soul with sinful sorrow drown,
Repentant tears too are no fretting brine, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

But loves soft meltings, which the soul refine,
Like gentle showers, that usher in the spring,
These make the soul more fair and flourishing.
No murmuring winds of passions here prevail,
But the life-breathing Spirits sweet fresh gale,
Which by those fruitful drops all graces feeds,
And draws rich extracts from the soaked seeds,
But worldly sorrow, like rough winters storms,
All graces kills, all loveliness deforms,
Augments the evils of our present state,
And does eternal woes anticipate.
Vain is that grief which can no ill redress,
But adds affliction to uneasiness;
Unnerving the souls powers, then, when they should
Most exercise their constant fortitude.
With these most certain truths let us wind up all,
Whatever does to mortal men befall
Not casual is, like shafts at random shot,
But Providence distributes every lot,
In which the obedient and the meek rejoice,
Above their own preferring Gods wise choice:
Nor is his providence less good than wise,
Though our gross sense pierce not its mysteries.
As there is but one most true substantial good,
And God himself is that Beatitude:
So can we suffer but one real ill,
Divorce from him by our repugnant will,
Which when to just submission it returns,
The reunited soul no longer mourns,
His serene rays dry up its former tears,
Dispel the tempest of its carnal fears,
Which dread what either never may arrive,
Or not as seen in their false perspective;
For in the crystal mirror of Gods grace
All things appear with a new lovely face.
When that does Heavens more glorious palace show
We cease to' admire a Paradise below,
Rejoice in that which lately was our loss,
And see a Crown made up of every Cross.
Return, return, my soul to thy true rest,
As young benighted birds unto their nest, Psa. 116. 7.

There hide thy self under the wings of love
Till the bright morning all thy clouds remove.
FINIS.

