To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of Archibald Marquess of Argyle.
Humbly Shows,
THat however your Majesty's most humble Petitioner, during the troubles of
your Kingdoms, and sad affliction of the Royal Family, has often had eminent
share in the management of affairs, and may have many times failed, and been
involved in diverse guilt common to many others. And however it has been your
Petitioners misfortune to have acted in several occasions, in matters and
ways, that were very obnoxious to misinterpretations, and has almost all
along never wanted passionate Censurers; yet as for many things committed by
him, he has recourse to your Majesty's Royal Clemency: So in many others he
is confident he shall make it appear, that his actions have not always
deserved the Censures, that have been put upon them, by some that could not
know the intimate Reasons, and true Motives, and carriage of things, and others
that were either not studious to be informed, or not unwilling to go along in
whatsoever might heap a disrepute upon your Petitioners Person or Actions.

And however your Petitioner may have been traduced, as guilty of the most
horrid and unpardonable crimes, of accession to the execrable murder of your
Royal Father, (whereof he has already purged himself by Oath in your
Parliament of Scotland) and hatred of your Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government: That your Petitioner wishes to be no freer from the deepest
torments reserved for the most heinous sinners, then he is of the one, and the
other: whatsoever may have been the aspersions thrown upon him, and the outward
appearance of many inevitable passages, and transactions of late.

That the nature of your Petitioners concernments, and condition being
singular, and as he humbly conceives such, as the consideration of them, will
most properly fall under your Majesty's own cognizance, in almost every
particular.

That the Royal Clemency, by which your Majesty has made way to your
Reestablishment upon your Throne, does not only most powerfully attract your
Peoples hearts, and cements to you, but will render your Majesty most
glorious, and formidable abroad, as being one of the noblest Beams sent down
from the Father of lights, by which Kings resemble most the King of Kings, with
whom Mercy rejoices against Justice, and is over all his works, as that
wherein he most deligheth.

That seeing your Petitioners case is an object of compassion, and his Family
has for many Ages, not only been untainted with the least shadows of
disloyalty, but most signally serviceable to your Majesty's most Royal
Progenitors in their great difficulties, and times of intestine, and foreign
Wars, and troubles.

That seeing your Majesty has both seen, and acknowledged the usefulness of
some of your Petitioners faithful endeavors, to serve you in matters that
concerned you nearly, not many years ago.

And seeing your Petitioner is perfectly resolved to acquiesce in, and submit
to whatsoever your Majesty shall be pleased to determine concerning him, and
willingly undergo, or do whatsoever your Majesty shall be pleased to lay upon
him.

Therefore your Majesty's most humble Petitioner, does most humbly beg your
Majesty may be pleased graciously to accept of this your Petitioners humble
Submission, and pardon all his guilt, weaknesses, and failings. And if so be
your Majesty require any further clearing in any thing concerns your
Petitioner, your Majesty may by spetial Commission appoint such persons as you
shall think fit, to let him know in what points it lies most upon your
Petitioner to clear himself, and then your Majesty having weighed all, may your
self speedily pronounce, whatsoever you shall think meet to determine
concerning your Petitioner.

And he shall not fail as long as he lives to pray, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1661.


