An Account of the Proceedings at Westminster Hall, on the 29th, and 30th. of
June, 1688. Relating to the Trial and Discharge of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of S. Asaph, Bishop of Chichester, Bishop of Ely, Bishop
of Bath and Wells, Bishop of Peterborough, and the Bishop of Bristol.
THE Indictment when read, was very much excepted against, on the account of
its Form, in that it did not mention all the Petition they were Indicted for;
there was not either the Title (...) expressing to whom it was directed ( Viz.
To the (...) Most Excellent Majesty, was omitted,) and the (...) afterward (
We therefore Pray, etc.) was not there; (...) being closely pursued by the
Bishops Council, seemed (...) ^^^lidate the whole business. Then it was not and
could (...) proved by the Kings Council, that the Bishops pre^^^^ the Petition
to the King. They had in the Corut the ^al, and subpoena'd some of the
Archbishops and Bi^^^^^ Chaplains, Servants, and others, to prove their hand^
was not done very clearly upon most of them; all the p^oof the Kings Council
had for the presenting the Pe^ ^o His Majesty, did not directly prove it upon
them: T^^ ^ost it amounted to, was either that the King told the^ he had it
from the said Bishops; or, that my Lord Cha^^^llor did ask them, if it were
theirs (when they were ^mou'd before the King and Council,) and that they ^^en
expressed an ^versness to own it; saying ^^^or^ the King, that if His Majesty
did insist on it, and that it should not be improved to their disadvantage, or
produced in evidence against them, that they would be plain, and leave it to
His Majesty. Upon this the Bishops Council had some ^^flexions which my Lord
Chief Justice told them he must (...) hear. But thi^ did not amount to a full
proof of the po^^t. Then the Bishops Council did greatly insist upon the
Ind^ctment being laid ^n a wrong County; for it was proved upon Oath, that the
Archbishop was not out of his House ^or a very considerable time before he was
summoned to t^^ King in Council. Now what was alleged against them was done at
Lambeth, and therefore in Surrey the Indict^^ent ought to have been laid, which
seemed much to affect ^^em. After this, the Bishops Council objected against
^^e term Publishing; whereas what was said to be done (...) them, was in the
privatest way that could be, and g^ ^ly to the King, which caused a long debate
between both P^rties, of things requisite to denominate a Publication, all did
still appear favorable on the Bishops side: and here things were going to a
conclusion, and the Judge was entered upon summing up the Evidence; but Mr.
Finch, (one of the Bishops Council) interrupted my Lord Chief Justice, saying,
there was one material Evidence remaining: Whereupon, my Lord desisted, tho
with some seeming dissatisfaction to the rest of the Bishops Council: For the
Judge was going on very favorably for the Bishops Cause; some of the Bishops
importuned my Lord Chief Justice to proceed, but he would not: And so it
brought on more discourse about the former subjects, and occasioned the sending
for my Lord President, who came into Court after it had stayed an hour for him:
The evidence that he gave upon Oath, could not fully prove the delivery of the
Petition to the King by the Bishops. When before, for the proof of this, the
Solicitor did v^ry greatly importune some Witness for the King, (that had upon
Oath delivered, what they knew about this matter, which was as aforesaid) by
putting to them very intricate questions; my Lord Chief Justice reproved him,
saying, it was not to be suffered; adding, that if he went on thus, he would
let the Bishops Council loose on him.

After these things, my L. C. J. asked the Bishops Council, what else they had
to plead; whereupon they proceeded to that part of the Indictment that called
the Bishops Petition A scandalous Seditious Label, etc. which occasioned very
great, solemn and most pleasing debates, For, hereupon they entered into and
discussed the lawfulness of the Declaration and the Dispensing Power, which
were harang'd by every one of the Bishops Council in most brisk, home and
admirable Speeches, for the space of three hours, showing the Declaration to be
against and contrary to Law, which no Power could dispense with or abrogate,
but that which made it, ( viz. a Parliament) and that the Ecclesiastical Laws
had the same foundation as the Civil, and could be therefore no more dispensed
with. That the Declaration did evacuate the Laws for Sabbath-breaking,
Fornication, etc. and (...) the re^s to (...) extravagant Sects and licentious
Practices; and that all Laws might be dispens^d with, as well as some: That the
Bishops were sworn to maintain the Ecclesiastical Laws; and in representing the
Case thus to His Majesty they had done both as the Law directed them, and
according to Prudence, Honor, and Conscience. There were hereupon publicly
read several Acts of Parliament, Records of the Tower, and Parliament Records;
among which, one Act of Parliament was observeable; that gave the King Power to
dispense with a Law for a stated time: So that what Dispensing Power he ever
had, was both given and bounded by Parliament. From what they produced out of
the Parliament Records and otherwise, they greatly confirmed what was said in
the Petition, of the Dispensing Power, having been often declared illegal in
Parliament, and particularly in the years 62, and 72, and in the beginning of
His Majesty's Reign, which was in 85, when the Parliament declared the Popish
Officers could not be dispensed with; but that is was contrary to Law to do so,
tho they were willing by Act of Parliament to indemnifie such as His Majesty
should nominate, etc. And they showed how the like Dispensing Power upon the
same occasion was accounted illegal in 62, and 72, both by Parliament and the
King himself, who offered the Seal to be tore off, and gave the testimony of
his disowning such a Dispensing Power. To which the Sollicitors chief Answer
was, that the King then lacked Money, and that such Acts as aforesaid (whatever
they might say) did confirm, not give the King's Dispensing Power. In short,
the Bishops Council behaved themselves in this weighty matter with a great deal
of gallantry and plainness, nowise inferior to most men's expectations and
desires. The chief of the managers for the King, was the Solicitor Wi.
Williams, who as was apprehended, did no great wonders for invalidating the
foregoing Arguments He was very hot and earnest (if not passionate) in proving
it a Libel; saying, It would be so, tho it were done by them to redress a
certain grievance: Whereupon, my L. C. J. asking what course then they should
take, or what they should do in such circumstances; he answered, Acquiesce.
(which occasioned a very great Hiss over the Court) He added farther to prove
it Libellous; the insinuating Expressions of gaining the Populace, by saying,
It was not for want of due tenderness to Dissenters, in relation to whom, we
are willing to come to such a temper, as shall be thought fit, when that matter
shall be considered and settled in Parliament and Convocation.] In Convocation,
said he, what is the meaning of that? But here my L. C. J. gave him a check, and
restrained what he seemed greatly disposed to vent against it. There was not
very much said by the rest of the Kings Council, at least, nothing more
considerable than his. The King's Attorney General was pretty moderate, Sir
Barth. Shores spoke a little, but was presently silenced, (in the vacancy of
stay for my Lord President, my L. C. J. said to Sir Barth. Shores, Now Sir
Bartholomew, we have time to hear your Speeches) Sergeant Baldock's Argument
against the Bishops, was chiefly upon their refusing, the King requiring such a
slender matter so easily to be done; for they were not enjoined to read, but
only to send about and disperse it: Yet this they would not do. It concluded
with the Kings Council.

Then my Lord Chief Justice summing up the business, was favorable to the
Bishops in the former part of the Trial, and could not say the matter of Fact
was fully proved upon them, but was inclined to make the Petition a Libel;
because of its accusing the King of Flaws in Government. He said but little to
oppose what had been brought by the Bishops Council against the Declaration and
Dispensing Power. After him spoke Judge Holloway, and very much in the Bishops
behalf, giving it as his judgment, that it could not be a Libel, being done
from a conviction of Conscience by such Persons in such an humble modest
manner. Then Judge Powel spoke to the same effect, giving it as his opinion,
that it could not be a Libel, being the only way to redre^^ themselves: He had
also some smart expressions to confirm what the Bishops Council had urged
against the Declaration and Dispensing. Power: So that Judge Powell gave his
opinion also in favor of the Bishops. Then Judge Allibon standing up, professed
he would not meddle with the Dispensing Power (tho it had been so much
canvass'd and pleaded against) but would only speak to the business of the
Paper being a Libel; and he did accordingly, urging it to be so, not barely
because it was a Petition: For, said he, Any one under grievance may Petition
His Majesty, but not about affairs of Government, for that would tend to very
bad consequences, and promote Discontents or worse in the Nation. Nor (as he
added) can the pretended fairness, as to the manner of it, be an excuse; for
the more it has that way, so much the worse; and so concluded it in his sense
a Libel. But urging a Precedent to confirm what he had said, he was partly
mistaken in it, as Judge Powell and the Bishops Council showed him, and he
himself acknowledged.

Then the Court broke up, the Jury went together, and the Bishops with all the
privacy they could, to their respective Abodes; but wherever the People met
with them, they huzza'd and humm'd them in a great abundance. There was a
prodigious full Court and Hall, a very great many of the Peers and Nobility
present, and also the Bishop of Chester, of whom they took no kind of notice:
The Bishop of Rochester did not meet with much better regard.

The Jury sat up all night, tho they were very soon unanimous in their
Verdict, which they prudently resolved to give in open Court; add accordingly,
next day about Nine or Ten they brought them in

Not Guilty.

The Names of the Lord Bishops COUNSELORS.
Sir Francis Pemberton. Sir Creswell Levins. Sir Robert Sawyer. Mr. Finch. Mr.
Pollixfin. Mr. Treby. Mr. Summers.
The Names of the JURY Sworn.
Sir Roger Langly of Westminster. Sir William Hill of Tedington. Robert
Jennings of Hayes, Esquire. Thomas Harriot of Islington, Esquire. Jeoffry
Nightingale of S. Giles Cripplegate, Esquire; William Withers of the same, Esquire.
William Avery of Enfield, Esquire. Thomas Austin of South-Myms, Esquire
Nicholas Grice of Neston, Esquire. Michael Arnold of Westminster, Esquire.
Thomas Done of S. Giles in the Fields, Esquire. Richard Shoreditch of Ickenham,
Esquire.
FINIS.

