AN ACCOUNT OF THE Proceedings at the GUILD HALL, September the 29th. 1681.
Upon the Choice of a LORD MAYOR, Together with the present Lord-Mayor's Speech.
THe Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen being met at Guild Hall, went in a Body
to St. Laurence Church, to hear a Sermon, where were great Numbers of the
Liveries; and after Sermon the Lord Mayor went up to the Court of Hustings,
where the Recorder made a Speech to the Common Hall, acquainting them with the
Work of the Day, and the Privileges granted by their Charter, for Elections;
and in the close acquainted them, that whereas it had been reported, that there
had been a Scandal or Reflection, made on Sir John Moore, that he had said, he
would be neither Clayton or Ward, and that he did not believe there had been,
or were any Popish Plot; that he thought he ought to do him right therein, that
he declared he never had such Thought, or said any thing tending thereto, or
could bear any such Construction; but as he had a great Esteem of those worthy
Persons, so had always expressed his Sense of, and Zeal against the Popish Plot,
as any other Person whatsoever.

Whereupon the Lord Mayor, etc. retiring to the Council Chamber, part of the
Aldermen under the Chair were put in Nomination; and in fine, a Poll was agreed
on, betwixt Sir John Moore, Sir John Shorter, and Sir Thomas Gold, which
continued till seven a Clock, when my Lord Mayor returning to Guild Hall, had
Report from the Sheriffs of the Poll, which was, viz. That Sir John Moore had
-- 1831 Sir John Shorter -- 1560 Sir Thomas Gold -- 1523
And declaring to the Hall that the Election fell on Sir John Moore, by the
Scrutiny in the Court of the two which was returned.

Sir John Moore made a short Speech pressing to Unity, etc.

After which the Present Lord Mayor made a Speech as follows.

THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD Knight. The Present Lord
Mayor of London.
Gentlemen,
THrough the Conduct of Providence, I am arrived to a happy Prospect of my
Harbor, having had (besides my great Sickness) a time to exercise all the
Faculties that God has endowed me with. I charged my self, at my entry into
this Service, with Resolutions of Endeavors according to the best of my
Understanding to make the Laws of the Land, and the Constitutions and Usages of
this City, my Rule; the Glory of God, the Honor of the King, the Maintenance
of the Protestant Religion, and the particular Concerns of this City, the End
of all my Administrations: Concerning which, my Conscience does not ^^^^se me
of any wilful Neglect, however I refer my self to the Things themselves, hoping
of a favorable Construction, and that my worthy Successor will supply or
repair all my Defects.

I thank God for my Support, my Brethren the Aldermen for their Assistance, and
every one of you, for your Love in your several Stations expressed and
experienced.

And what have I now to say, but to repeat my Requests? As I have earnestly
endeavored the abating of all Heats and Animosities; So I desire you will have
the best Thoughts of one another, and allow the fairest Interpretation, that
Words and Things will admit, and that those little Diversities about
Circumstances of Religion, make no difference of Affection, considering the
Charity of our Church esteems the controverted things amongst us but things
Indifferent; and I pray God Almighty to open our Eyes, to see the things which
belong to our Peace, that a mutual Forbearance may beget in us Good Will to,
and Considence in, each other.

We have both at home and abroad a common Enemy, the Papists, who blow the
Coal, and what they could not effect in burning the City, and manifold
Conspiracies, would by promoting Divisions and furious Passions, make us our
own Executioners: every one almost says it, and own it, and therefore I hope
will labor to defeat it, by practicing that excellent Rule, Fear God, Honor
the King, and love one another: to which let us all with heartiness say, Amen.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch in Cornhil, 1681.


