APPRENTICES no SLAVES. An ANSWER TO A Namelesse PAMPHLET Lately published as
an ACT, declaring what HABIT APPRENTICES Are to wear.
With an Additional Order forbidding their wearing of Points, Ribbons, and
other Trimmings whatsoever.
THE Scribler of this Pamphlet, for he is not the Author, except in some
nonsensical places of his own intercalation and Addition seems to be the
Tell-Stripe Clerk of Bridewell, or the Keepers man of Little-Ease, who having
by the corruption ruption and Bribery of a Pot of Ale, got some idle Clerk to
turn over some musty Rolls, got these Moth-eaten Orders of Apparel to be
transcribed, and then with a bold Title at Random, not assigning any Time when
they were Enacted by the City, supposes (as his intention is to impose upon
the Reader) the Prentices (as it is in Law) will take uncertain time for the
Present, and buy it out of Curiosity or Indignation; and then his turn is
served.

The whole drift of this Libell looks very like the Story of the Gibeonites,
who with moldy bread and clouted Shoes, came to make Indentures with the
Israelites, and by them were made Hewers of Wood and Drawers of Water.

The manner of this Libellous design is a little different from the Gibeonites,
he pretends not to come a far of from antique, obsolete, and old Customs, but
obtrudes these mad Whimseys, as of the present times and newly fitted and
furbish'd up for the next mode and fashion, and that from no less Authority
then Be it Enacted, etc.

But before we come to that let us consider the Preface, which should by
custom show the Reasonableness and ground of such an Act. It Is this, For
Reformation of many abuses growing by reason of Excess, and strange fashion of
Apparel used by many Apprentices within the City of London and the Liberties
thereof; [Good Mr. Gravity] and for satisfying such others [mark the Wisdom of
the Law-giver] who being well disposed are contented with such Apparel as is
fitting, and their Masters well;l able to afford them. Be it Enacted, etc.

Sure this came out of the Oracle of the black Pot especially the Hinder Part
or Rump end of it; it is a pretty doubsul and ambiguous sentence betwixt sense
and English, to satisfy such as are contented already with their Clothes.
Mighty man of Reason! Could he find no better dress of words for the Cities
meaning, or was it on purpose to cloth their Intentions with the same
Impertinencies and absurdities as these Orders would the Apprentices. Indeed he
graceth the City in the same manner as the odd and antic kind of Habit,
enjoined in the ensuing orders, would, if received into monstrous use again,
out of which for Forty years last past it has been exploded and dismissed.

But this Cato talks of Reformation, a dangerous word, and mainly driven on
lately by Shoomakers and Tailors, and we all know what it proved. It is a
maxim of State, that even evils of Custom, and which are deep rooted in the
minds of men, are rather to be endured then to substitute new ones in their
places, which might bring danger to the Commonwealth by the alteration of
them. (Add hereto the long prescription to the contrary) and that the
Reformation of the Apparel of Prentices as the case stands, may not be of as
evil consequence as may appear by several reasons) we refer it to the Reader to
judge. For London is no Algier, where the captive slaves have their several
Badges by which they are to be known, though it may be presumed the rigidnesse
of some Masters cared not even in this City if there were Brands put upon
Servants as they do upon Horses, to show their absoluteness and Propriety. Nor
are the Apprentices like the Helots to the Lacedaemonians at the unlimited
unbounded will of their Masters, having no power of their own, not so much as
of the faculties of their understanding. Nor have their Parents by committing
them to the care of their Masters, wholly quitted and resigned their right and
Interest in their Children, by their Indentures. No there is no such matter,
they are English men born, and cannot lose that natural Freedom, and it is as
absurd, that a municipal Franchisement, the freedom of one City should
swallow up and annul that of the whole Nation and Kingdom, as it is for a
smaller thing to contain a greater, for a Gudgeon to devour a Pike. Besides
this Common Liberty there are many and those thousands which can and justly do
pretend to greater Privileges by their Birth and Descent which as well by
Custom as the Courtesy of England are due to them; so that as to these
persons who as is said are so numerous, it is impossible these Orders should
take effect. And the exception of them out of this yoke, will and must be
stretched to those who make up the lack of Gentile Fxtraction by Wealth and
Estate, of which there is near one third of the Prentices. This likewise maugre
all opposition will fall into the Imitation of those who being of as honest
Parentage, will ambitiously think in some degree to follow the Fashion; so that
it will be a work of more difficulty to reduce them then a bare be it enacted.

On the contrary side see what Honor this handsomnesse and fashionable of
Apparel worn now by the Apprentices has done to this City and the whole
Kingdom. [It is the happiness (as it was the acknowledgement of one of the
best and greatest of them) of the Kings of England that they rule not over
Slaves but Subjects.] It was generally confessed and spoken by Strangers, that
the Auxiliary Regiments of London, the last general Training day, were the
finest, bravest, Sight they ever see, being equally mixed with terror and
delight; so that London which was reported to them for a Hell, seemed plainly
to be a Heaven for Servants; and that it was no little addition to its former
glories.

Indeed the Buffe Doublet better becomes such brave Spirits then Leather
Breeches, and it is known to whom the City was beholding for her Safety, during
all the dangers of the late Anarchy, and it would be a very ill requital to
give them a Fools Cap, who never feared to expose their heads without Helmets
for their Security.

This City is now another place then what it was formerly, not only to the
Gentility and Wealth of those that are bred in it, (many persons being sent
hither as Sir -- Bollen Lord Mayor of London Ancestor to Queen Eliz. ad
Aedificandum domum Antiquam to build up and repair their ancient Families) but
also in regard of its Potency and Commerce; we deal now in our own Shops with
most People of the World, from whom we have learned Civility with their
fashions, and therefore it is fit Apprentices should not be in that despicable
Habit as to cause men to disdain converse with them, which is the only means of
promoting Trade. Whereas formerly the Easterlins managed all the foreign
business, very few English Merchants being then resident here, but were
content to truck as it were under those Forraigners. So that it is requisite
that to this opulency there should be a suitable bravery, and it is the most
innocent (as it is a natural) pride that flows and arises from Plenty.

'Twould be a mad antic Sight to see now out Dames and Mistresses in their
wide Fardingales, with which they could scarce enter in at a Church door, and
the Apprentices in their close order, in a Jack a Lents pair of Breeches, ready
to run in at a Mouse hole, instead of civilly becoming their Shops. And sure
the world especially London, has been frantic long enough and needs none of
Tom Bedlams Guegawes for their divertisement, unless they will profess
themselves Quakers, as well as they stiffly say they will be P --

For the rest of this Pedlery, it will raise so much dust if we brush it,
having lain so long by, that though it was thought fit at first to beat it,
that it might foul no Fingers, it shall now rot with this Epitaph on these
Monuments and Records of the Tyranny used formerly to Apprentices, that the
Kent Street Warchouse compared with it is a Complete Wardrobe.

In sum, It is supposed that Pamphlet was intended to beget some broyl in the
City, by those who are restless in their endeavors against our present, and we
hope, perpetual peace, which has therefore obliged this Answer thereto.

FINIS.

