An ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY, On
February the 28th. 1682.
Against Christopher Urats, George Boriskie, John Stern, the principle
Murderers of Tho. Thin, Esquire; who was Shot in his Coach in the Pall Mall, on
Feb. 12. With what relates to Count Charles John Koningsmark, lately
apprehended in disguise at Graves-end, and against whom a Bill of Indictment
was found, as the first contriver of the Bloody Tragedy.
ABout nine in the Morning, the Court being set, the Jury was Impannelled for
the Trying of these Notorious Offenders, being called over were half English,
and half Foreigners. The Prisoners were brought up by Order of Court, and
severally Arraigned for the Murder, and demanded to Plead Guilty or not
Guilty; as likewise Charles John Coningsmark, who was put upon the same Jury,
he as well as the rest having an Interpreter allowed him; when they had so
Pleaded: and put themselves upon God and their Country, the Jury were Sworn,
and they ordered to look to their Charges. Whereupon the Count made a
Peremptory Exception against 17 or 18, but at last a Jury of English and Aliens
were Sworn, and the Indictment Read, which was that George Borisky, had on Feb.
12. last, with a Musquettoon, Charged with Powder and Bullet, Shot and Killed,
Thomas Thin, Esquire; and the said Christopher Urats, was aiding and assisting in
the same.

After which Sir Francis Withins opened the matter and manner of the Barbarous
Murder, as likewise Sir Francis Winnington and Mr. Williams, Council for the
King, whereupon the Evidence were called, and the first that were Sworn were
two of Esquire Thinn's Men, who gave Evidence, That their Master having been in
his Coach at the Countess of Nothumberland, and returning home, though the Pall
Mall, on the day aforesaid in the Evening, three persons came riding up to the
Coach, one stopping it, and another Firing into it, and then ^^d with what have
they could, and although pursuit was made after them, they could not be taken:
Next the Examinations which were taken by Sir John Risby and Mr. Bridgman were
sworn to by the said Justices, who gave the substance of them as follows.
That Borisky had confessed he shot into the Coach at the command of Urats, and
that Urats had confessed he went to compel Esquire Thinn to fight him, and that
for his affronts put upon Count Konningsmark, he desired Stern and Forisky only
to see fair play, saying that the latter fired without his Order, but it being
proved fully, not only by their Examinations before the Justices, but likewise
they in Court confessed the same; the Council proceeded to prove that the Count
was the Principal contriver of this Murder, whereupon one Mr. Hansoy, Tutor to
the Counts Brother was called, who gave Evidence, that he had entertained
Borisky in his Service, but the Friday before the Murder, and that he had
bought him a Sword and other Acoutrements for Horsemanship.

Dr. Frederick Harvey being Sworn, testified, That the Count was his Patient,
and that he had a breaking out in his Breast, which caused him to disguise
himself, because he would not be obliged to Drink or Sort himself with any
Company. A Foot Boy of his was likewise Sworn; who testified, That Urats was
commonly with his Master, and that the Night the Murder was done, he came
thither, and the Count the next Morning fled, having shifted his Lodgings three
or four times. The Sweed at Rotherith, at whose house he lay, was called, who
gave Evidence, That he came to his House, telling him he was in some Danger,
desiring to have some Change of Apparel, which he lent him, and the next day he
hired a Skuller, and was 3 days Crusing upon the River of Thames, between that
and Graves-end. The next was Mr. Gibbons, and Mr. Kid, who took him, Their
Evidence was, That they having Notice, from a person, that the Count absconded
at Rotherith, they got a Warrant and pursued him to Graves-end, where they had
notice he was gone, and there seized him. That after various Discourses, he
said, That this business might prove a stain to his blood, but that a brave
Action in War might recover it. After which the Jury went out and considered
the Evidence. When they returned, They found Urats, Borisky, and Stern, Guilty
of Wilful Murder; but the Count is deferred till next Term. Whereupon the
Court proceeded to give Judgment of Death, upon those that were found Guilty.

LONDON, Printed for Roger Evans. 1682.


