THE MARQVESSE OF ARGYLE HIS SPEECH

CONCERNING The King, the Covenant, and Peace or War between both Kingdoms.

ALSO, A Letter to the Parliament of England, from Mr. Marshall. Some Votes
past in Scotland, and the particular parties which would engage against
England, and who are against it

London, Printed by Barnard Alsop, 1648.

THE MARQUESS OF ARGYLES SPEECH.
CONCERNING. The KING, the Covenant, and the present state of both Kingdoms.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
THe work of Reformation in these Kingdoms, is so great a work, as no age
nor history can parallel since Christ's days, for no one Nation had ever such a
Reformation set forth unto them, much less three Kingdoms, so that this
Generation may truly think themselves happy, if they can be isntrumental in
it. And as the work is very great, so it cannot be expected, but it must have
great and powerful enemies; not only flesh and blood which hate to be reformed,
but likewise principalities and powers, the Rulers of the darkness in this
world and spiritual wickednesses in high places. As the dangers are great we
must look the better to our duties, and the best way to perform these, is to
keep us by the rules which are to be found in our National Covenant,
principally the word of God, and in its own place, the example of the best
reformed Churches; And in our way we must beware of some Rocks, which are
temptations both upon the right and left hand, so that we must hold the middle
path. Upon the one part, we would take heed, not to settle lawless liberty in
Religion, whereby, instead of Uniformity, we should set up a thousand Heresies
and Shismes which is directly contrary to our Covenant. Upon the other part, we
are to look that we persecute not piety and peaceable men, who cannot through
scruple of Conscience, come up in all things to the common Rule; but that they
may have such a forbearance as may be according to the Word of God, may consist
with the covenant, and not be d^structive to the Rule it self, nor to the Peace
of the Church and Kingdom, wherein I will insist no further either to insist
your Lordships patience or judgments, who I doubt not will be very careful to
do every thing according to our covenant. As to the other point, concerning the
peace and union of the Kingdoms, I know it is that which all profess they
desire, I hope it is that all do aim at; sure I am, it is that which all men
do study and endeavor, and I think it not amiss to remember your Lordships
of some former experiences, as an argument to move us to be wise for the future.

If the Kingdom of England in the 1640. year of God, then sitting in
Parliament, had concured, as they were desired against the Kingdom of Scotland,
no question we had been brought to many difficulties which blessed be God, was
by the wisdom of the, Honorable House apreuedted: so likewise when this
Kingdom was in difficulties, if the Kingdom of Scotland had not willingly, yea
cherfully sacrificed their peace to concur with this Kingdom, your Lordships
all know what might have bin the danger.

Therefore, let us hold fast that union which is so happily established betwixt
us, and let nothing make us again two, who are so many ways one, all of one
Language, in one Island, all under one King, one in-Religlon, yea one in
Covenant; so that in effect we differ in nothing but in the Name, as Brethren
do, which I wish were also removed, that we might be altogether one, if the
two Kingdoms shall think fit; for I dare say hot the greatest Kingdom on the
earth can prejudice both so much, as one of them may do the other.

I will forbear at this time to speak of the many jelousies I hear are
suggested, for as I do not love them so I delight not to mention them, only
one I cannot forbear to speak of, as if the Kingdom of Scotland, were too much
affected with the Kings interest. I will not deny but the Kingdom of Scotland,
by reason of the Reign of many Kings his Progenitors over them, has a natural
affection to his Majesty, whereby they wish he may be rather reformed then
ruined, yet experience may tell, their personal regard to him has never made
them to forget that common rule, The safety of the People is the supreme Law.
So likewise their love to Monarchy makes them very desirous that it may be
rather regulated then destroyed, which I hope need not to mention further to
your Lordships, who I trust are of the same mind.

A Letter from a Gentleman from Edinburgh to his friend at London.
SIR,
THe convention of the estates of Scotland are breaking up and the Parliament
meet on Thursday next, the house is like to be full the first day, and great
are the expectations of the people on all sides, and the rather because so
little as yet is known concerning the buisinesse which the English
Commissioners come about which is wholly referred to the Parliament, to whom
their papers are directed, many bills are prepared in a readiness to be passed
when the Parliament is convened, the Marquess of Argyle (with whom David
General De^^^^y also cideth) and a great part of the Clergy and honest
peaceable Presbyterians joined in a Declaration, that they disclaim to adhere
to or associate themselves with Malignants and disaffected persons in making
any war against England, to these there is a great party which would have had
some respect to tender Consciences yet it is reported here by Malignants of
which there are store that they shall have another day and that the King shall
be brought again, etc. These are likewise the hopes of the Remainder of those
which the Mar. of Huntly commanded formerly, by which we may perceive that for
the present the division is great amongst these, so is it in their Army; some
are for Episcopacy, and setting up the King in as great power as ever he had
heretofore; others say, then to what purpose have we hazarded our lives, and
entered into Covenant, etc.

Thus are we as men in a maze what will become of these things; especially,
seeing some of our Commissioners slighted, even by those which most favor
their Cause, but the rest have now very good reception, and are well
accommodated.

Upon the large Report of the Scots Commissioners which were in England,
wherein some of them wanted not words to make good their actions at London, and
laying open the proceedings of the Parliament to their best advantage, the
Convention of Estates voted their approbation thereof: yet when the Declaration
and Papers on the other side, come to receive a debate in a full House of
Parliament, where its like all things will be well pondered and laid in an
equal balance, it may happily prove otherwise; at which the Hamiltonians, and
all those which are now puffed up with hopes of division, would with shame hang
down their heads. Mr. Marshall has sent a Letter to the Parliament of England,
to desire leave to return again to London, which is all for the present from.

Your humble servant, J. M.

Imprimatur,

G. Mabbot.

FINIS.

