THE ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT Guild Hall On the 19th Instant, 1682. For
the Election of a SHERIFF To Stand with Mr. NORTH For the Ensuing Year; by the
Livery of the several Companies of the CITY of LONDON: Giving an account of the
most remarkable Transactions and Speeches that were in the Common Hall, during
their being Assembled on that occasion.
Guild Hall, Sept. 19.
THIS being the day of Election appointed by the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, upon their Siting on Thursday last; in order
thereunto Precepts being Issued out, the Livery of the several Companies
Assembled in Common Hall, where (after some Tarrience) the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, with the Aldermen, attended by Mr. Common-Serjeant, Town Clerk, and
Mr. Common Crier, came upon the Hustings according to the custom of this City,
and the late Order, for Electing a person to stand with Mr. North for Sheriff
for the ensuing year; when after some had cried Election, Election, and others
on the contrary, Chosen, Chosen, Papillion, Duboice, no Confirmation, no new
Election, etc. then Silence being proclaimed, the Common-Cryer came forward,
and made Proclamation, viz.

All Gentlemen, Citizens of London, who upon Precept have been summoned this
day to Assemble in Common Hall, for the Electing a person to stand Sheriff with
Dudley North Esquire; for the ensuing year. -- He would have proceeded, but was
interrupted by loud Shouts, and crying No, no, no, no new Election, etc. Then
Mr. Common-Serjeant came forward with a Paper in his hand, in which were the
names of such as was intended to be put up, but such was the clamor of no
North, no new Election, that although he read them, yet few could hear him; so
that he was forced to retire: and then the present Sheriffs came forward, and
put the Question to the Common Hall, whether they would stand by the choice of
Tho Papillion and John Duboice, or proceed to a new Election? Whereupon there
was a cry of Papillion, Duboice, no new Election, for near a quarter of an
Hour, mixed with Hisses on the other part, many Voating for a new Election; the
which Mr. Common-Serjeant perceiving, nominated Mr. Rich, whereupon the Hall
was divided, but the noise such that nothing could be heard: So that after many
Proclamations for silence, and none could be procured, though the Sheriffs were
not wanting to use their utmost endeavors to procure it, the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor gave order for dissolving the Court, which was accordingly done
by Proclamation: Whereupon the Lord Mayor caused the Sword to be taken up, and
departed the Court, together with the Aldermen, most of them retiring into the
Council Chamger, when as Mr. Sheriff Shute gone out of the Court, was called
back, and according to the Sheriffs direction, the Pole adjourned for an Hour,
to consider whether the Common Hall would Pole for a Confirmation of Thomas
Pappillion and John Duboice, according to the former Election, against such as
were nominated in opposition: After which the Sheriffs left the Court, no
person being by them nominated to Pole in competition with Mr. Pappillion and
Mr. Duboice, the persons formerly standing in competition with Mr. North and
Mr. Box.

When about an Hour after, the Common Hall again Assembling, Clerks were
ordered by the Sheriffs to take the Pole for John Duboice, Themqs Pappillion,
Dudley North Esquire; and Mr. Peter Rich; so that the Books being prepared, they
Sealed them themselves at either end of the Common Hall, being about Twelve in
number: but it was observed, though many Poled for Mr. Papillion and Mr.
Duboice; yet but very few, and those most of them not present at the dissolving
of the Court, Poling for Mr. North and Mr. Rich, the rest aledging, that the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor had dissolved the Court, and therefore they
looked upon their Poling as ineffectual; yet the Pole continued till the
Evening, and great was the disproportion of Hands, Mr. Papillion and Mr.
Duboice having the majority, by reason of small opposition.

LONDON: Printed for J. Heathcoate, 1682.


