THE SPEECH of the late Marquess of Argyll upon the SCAFFOLD May 27. 1661.

Being a True and Perfect COPY.



Printed at Edinburgh, and Reprinted at London, Anno Dom. MDCLXI,

THE SPEECH of the late Marquisse of ARGYLL upon the Scaffold, May 27. 1661.
Gentlemen,
MAny will expect, that I will speak of many things, and according to their
several Opinions and Dispositions, so will be their expectations from me, and
constructions of me, but I resolve to disappoint many, for I came not either
to justify my self, but the Lord, who is holy in all his ways, and righteous
in all his works, holy and blessed is his Name; neither come I to condemn
others; I know many will expect that I should speak against the hardness of the
Sentence pronounced against me, but I will say nothing to it, I bless the
Lord, I pardon all men, as I desire to be pardoned of the Lord my self; Let the
will of the Lord be done, that is all that I desire. I hope that you will have
more Charity to me now, than ye would have had at another time, since I speak
before the Lord, to whom I must give account shortly. I know very well that my
words have had but little weight with many, and that many have mistaken my
words; many have thought me a great enemy to those great works that have of
late been brought to pass^ But do not mistake me people, I speak it in the
presence of the Lord. I entered not upon the Work of Reformation with any design
of advantage for my self, or prejudice to the King, or his Government, as my
Will (which was written in the year 1655* and then delivered to a friend in
whose hands it still remains) can show. As for those Calumnies which have gone
abroad of me, I bless God I know them to be no more, and as I go to make a
reckoning to my God, I am free as to any of them concerning the Kings Person or
Government. I was real and cordial in my desires to bring the King home, and in
my endeavors for him, when he was at home, and I had no correspondence with
his Adversaries Army, or any of them, the time His Majesty was in Scotland, nor
had I any accession to His late Majesty's Murder, by Counsel, or Knowledge of
it, or any other manner of way: This is a truth, as I shall answer to my Judge;
And all the time H^s Majesty was in Scotland, I was still endeavoring his
advantage, my conscience bears me witness in it; That is for that; At this
he turned about, and said, I hope Gentlemen ye will all remember this.

I confess many looks on my Condition as a suffering-Condition, but I bless the
Lord that he that has gone before me has trod the Winepress of the Fathers
wrath, by whose sufferings I hope that my sufferings shall not be eternal. I
bless him that has taken away the sting of my sufferings. I may say my Charter
was sealed this day; for the Lord has said to me, Son be of good cheer, thy
sins be forgiven thee: And so I hope my sufferings shall be easy; and ye
know the Scripture says* That the Captain of our Salvation was made perfect
through sufferings. I shall not speak much to those things that I am condemned
for, lest I seem to condemn others; it is well known it is only for
Compliance, which is the Epidemical Fault of this Nation, I wish the Lord may
pardon them, I say no more. There was an expression in my Submission presented
to the Parliament of the Contagion of the times, which may be mis-construed,
as if I had intended thereby to lay Imputation upon the work of Reformation;
but I declare I intended no such thing, but it was only in relation to the
Corruptions and Failings of men, occasioned by the prevalency of the usurping
Power.

Now Gentlemen, I think there are three sorts of people that take up much of
the world, and this Nation: There are 1. The openly profane; and truly I may
say though I have been a prisoner, yet I have not had mine ears shut: I hear
assuredly that swearing, drinking and whoring were never more common, and never
more countenanced than now; and truly if Magistrates were here, I would say to
them if they lay forth their power for the glor^fying of God by the restra^ning
of this they would fare the better, if they continue in not restraining of it,
they will fare the worse; I say no more, but let either people shun prophanity,
or Magistrates restrain it, or assuredly the wrath of God will follow on it.

2. Others, they are not openly profane, every one will not allow that, but
yet they are Gallioes in these matters, if things go well as to their private
interests, they care not whether Religion, and the Church of God sink or swim:
But what ever they think, God has laid Engagements upon Scotland, we are tied
by Covenant to Religion and Reformation, those that were then unborn are
engaged ^o it, and in our Baptism we are engaged to it; and it passes the
power of any under heaven to absolve a man from the Oath of God, they deceive
themselves, and it may be will deceive others that think other ways. But I
would caveat this; people would be ready to take this as a kind of instigation
to Rebelion, but they are very far in the wrong that think so and tha^ Religion
and Loyalty are not consistent; if any man separate them, Religion is not to be
blamed, but they: It is the duty of every Christian to be Loyal, yet I think
the order of things is to be observed as well as their nature; ^he order of
Religion as well as the nature of it, Religion must not be the Cogboat but the
Ship, God must have what is his as well as Caesar what is his. And those are the
best Subjects that are the best Christians. And that I am looked on as a friend
to Reformation is my glory.

3. There are another sort that are truly godly, and to those I must say, what
I fear, and every one has reason to fear (it is good to fear evil) it is true
that the Lord may prevent it, but if he do not, these times are like to be
very sinning times, or very suffering times; and let Christians make choice;
there is a sad Dilemma in the business, sin or suffer, and truly he that will
choose the better part, will choose to suffer, others that will choose to sin,
shall not escape suffering, they shall suffer, but it may be not as I do here
(turning him to the Maiden when he spoke it) but worse, mine is but Temporal,
theirs shall be Eternal, when I shall be singing, they shall be howling;
bewa^e therefore of sin, what ever ye beware of, especially in such times. Yet
I cannot say of my own condition, but the Lord in this providence has minded
mercy to me, even in this world* for if I had been more favorably dealt with,
I fear I might have been overcome with tentations, as many others are, and I
fear many more will be, and so should have gone out of the world, with a more
polluted Conscience, than through the Mercy God now I have; and hence my
Condition is such now, as when I am gone, will be seen not to have been such
as many imagined. It is fit God take me away before I fall in those
Tentations, that I see others are fallen into, and I fear many others will
fall, I wish the Lord may prevent it. Yet blessed be his Name that I am kept
both from present evils, and evils to come.

Some will expect that I will Regrate my own Condition; but truly I neither
grudge nor repine, nor desire I any Revenge. And I declare I do not repent my
going to London, for I had always rather have suffered any thing, than lie
under such Reproaches as I did. I desire not that the Lord should Judge any
man, nor do I Judge any but my self; I wish that as the Lord has pardoned me,
so may he pardon them for this and other things, and that what they have done
to me may never meet them in their Accounts. I have no more to say, but to beg
the Lord that since I go away, he may bless them that stay behind.

His last words immediately before he laid his head upon the Block were the
vindication of his Innocence from that horrid Crime of the Kings Murder in
these words:

I desire you Gentlemen, and all that hear me again to take notice, and
remember that now when I am entering on Eternity, and am to appear before my
Judge, and as I desire salvation, and expect eternal happiness from him, I am
free from any accession by knowledge, contriving, counsel, or any other way to
his late Majesty's death. And I pray the Lord to preserve our present King his
Majesty, and to pour his best blessings upon his Person and Government: And
the Lord give him good and faithful Counselors.

FINIS.

