A LETTER FROM THE MARQVES of ARGILE and Sir WILLIAM ARMYN, In the name of
themselves and their Confederates, to Sir Thomas Glemham, Dated at Barwicke,
January, 20. WITH THE ANSWER OF SIR THOMAS GLEMHAM And the Commanders and
Gentry of Northumberland, Dated at Newcastle, January, 23.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley. 1643.

Gentlemen,
ALthough we justly presume, that the solemn mutual Covenant entered into by
both Kingdoms, has long since come to your hands, and likewise that you have
had notice of the raising of this Army desired by the Parliament of England,
for the prosecution of those Ends therein expressed, ( viz.) The preservation
and Reformation of Religion, he true Honor and happiness of the King, And the
the public Peace and Liberty of His Dominions. Yet that it may appear both
to you and all the world, how unwilling we are to make a forcible use of those
Arms, we have been constrained (by the disappointment of all other means of
safety) to take up: We the Commissioners and Committees of both Kingdoms, have
thought sit beside that Declaration, (a Coppie whereof we herewith send)
lately emitted in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, for the satisfaction of
the people concerning the Entrance of this their Army; To take more particular
notice of you the Chief Gentlemen and Commanders, hoping likewise that things
of so great and considerable consequence, will find with you such an
entertainment, as will answer the weight and importance of them.

We will not so much wrong the Cause we have undrtaken, as to go about after
so many Demonstrations of the necessity of our present Posture, to dispute it
with you, but rather instead of Arguments, we think it reasonable to acquaint
you with our well weighed resolutions which are through the assistance of that
God in whose cause we are engaged, and whose strength alone we trust in, with
our utmost industry and hazard, to endeavor the prevention of that imminent
danger, not only of Corruption, but of Ruin, which we see evidently intended
to the true Protestant Religion, by the Popish and Prelaticall Faction,
who^ever wanted Will, but now think they want not strength and opportunity to
accomplish it, as also the Rescuing of his Majesty's Person and Honor, so
deeply and unhappily entangled in the Councels and Practice of them whose
actions speak their ends, to be ^ittle better then Popery and Tyranny, and
the redeeming the Peace and Liberty of his Dominions, in which the Irish
Rebellion, and the sad and unnatural Divisions in England have made so great a
breach.

To the accomplishment of those so just and Honorable Designs we have reason
to expect the concurrance of all men, who either owe, or pretend a due love to
their Religion, King, and Country, and shall be very sorry to want yours; but
if misinformation or any other unhappy grounds shall so far prevail with
you, as to reckon us in the number of your enemies, which certainly we are not,
if you be friends to those ends mentioned in our Covenant: And in stead of that
concurrance with us, which we with and hope to deserve we find from you
opposition, and Acts of Hostility, the Law of nature and your own reason will
tell you what you are to expect.

We only add, that though it will not a little trouble us, to see men
withstanding not only us but their own good and happiness; yet it does in
good measure satisfy us, that we have not neglected this, or any other means
to the best of our power, or understanding, to prevent those inconveniences
and mischiefs that may arise from those Acts of force which we shall be
necessitated unto.

Subscribed at Barwick the 20. of January, 1643. by the Warrant, and in the
name of the Committee of both Kingdoms.

By us your friends, W. Armyn. M. Argyll.



My Lord, I have this day received yours, together with one to the Gentlemen of
the Country, and having communicated with them, We return you this Answer,
THat without the sight of that Letter, we could not have been induced by any
flying rumors to believe, that the Scottish Nation or a prevailing Party for
the present in that Nation, would have attempted an invasion of England: So
contrary to the laws of God, of Nations, of both Kingdoms, and especially to
the late Act of Pacification: So opposite to their Allegiance, and Gratitude to
his Majesty, to that neighbourly love which they pretend, to that discreet care
which they should have of their own safety.

We could not otherwise have imagined, that they who by his Majesty's goodness
enjoy a settlement of their Church and State, according to their own desires,
should needlessly and ingratefully imbroile themselves in a business that
concerns them not, forfeit their rights, disoblige His Majesty, and hazard the
loss of their present happiness.

No Order of any Committee or Committees whatsoever of Men, or Angels, can give
them power to martch into the bowels of another Kingdom, to make offensive War
against their natural Sovereign, upon the empty pretense of Evil
Councillors, who could never yet be named. And for the English Agents we
cannot believe them to be any Commissioners, lawfully authorized, either by the
Parliament, or by the two Houses, or yet by the House of Commons, where so many
of the Members are expelled by parciall Votes, so many banished by seditious
Tumults, so many voluntarily absent themselves out of conscience; where
desperation or want of opportunity to depart, or fear of certain plunder, are
the chiefest bonds which hold the little remnant together from dissepation;
where the venerable name of Parliament is made a stale to countenance the
pernicious Counsailers, and Acts of a close Committee.

For Subjects to make Foreign Confederacies without their Sovereigns assent,
to invade the Teritories of their undoubted King, to go about by force to
change the Laws and Religion established, is gross Treason without all
contradiction: And in this case it argues strongly, who have been the
Contrivers and Fomenters of all our troubles. No Covenant whatsoever, or with
whomsoever, can justify such proceedings, or oblige a Subject to run such
disloyal courses. If any man out of ignorance, or fear, or credulity, have
entered into such a Covenant, it binds him not, except it be to repentance,
neither is there any such necessity as is pretended of your present Posture,
your selves cannot allege that you are any way provoked by us, neither are we
conscious to our selves of the least intention to molest you.

Those ends which you propose are plausible indeed to them who do not
understand them: The blackest designs did never want the same pretenses. If by
the Protestant Religion, you intend our Articles which are the public
Confession of our Church, and our Book of Common Prayer, established by Act of
Parliament, you need not trouble your selves; we are ready to defend them with
our blood. If it be otherwise, it is plain to all the world, that it is not the
preservation, but the innovation of Religion which you seek, howsoever, by you
styled Reformation. And what calling have you to reform us by the sword? We
do not remember that ever the like indignity was offered by one Nation to
another, by a lesser to a greater. That those men who have heretofore pleaded
so vehemently for liberty of conscience, against all Oaths and Subscriptions,
should now assume a power to themselves by Arms, to impose a Law upon the
consciences of their fellow Subjects; A vanquished Nation would scare endure
such terms from their Conquerers: But this we are sure of, that this is the
way to make the Protestant Religion odious to all Monarchs, Christian, and
Pagan.

Your other two ends, that is, The honor and happiness of the King, and the
public peace and liberty of his Dominions, are so manifestly contrary to your
practice, that there need no other motives to withdraw you from such a course,
as tends so directly to make his Majesty contemptible at home and abroad, and
to fill all his Dominions with rapine and blood. In an Army all have not the
same intentions, (we have seen the Articles agreed upon, and those vast sums
and conditions contained in them, as if our Contrymen thought, That England
was indeed a Well that could never be dry. And whatsoever the intentions be, we
know right well what will be the consequents: If it were otherwise, no
intention or consequent whatsoever, can justify an unlawful lawful action.
And therefore you do wisely to decli^^ all disputation about it. It is an easy
thing to prete^^ the Cause of God, as the Jews did the Temple of (...) Lord,
but this is far from those evident Demonstratio^^ which you often mention,
never make.

Consider that there must be an account given to G^^ of all the blood which
shall be shed in this qu^rrell. T^^ way to prevent it, is not by such
insinuations, but to ^^tire before the sword be unsheathed, or the breach made
too wide: You cannot think that we are grow^^ such tame creatures, to desert
our Religion, our Ki^^ our Laws, our Liberties, or Estates, upon the co^^mand
of Forreiners, and to suffer our selves and (...) posterity to be made beggars,
and slaves without (...) position. If any of ours shall join with you in t^^
action, we cannot look upon them otherwise, then (...) Traitors to their
King, Vipers to their native Co^^trey, and such as have been Plotters, or
Promoters this design from the beginning. But if mis-infor^^tion or fear has
drawn any of yours ignorantly or ^^willingly into this Cause, we desire them
to with-dr^^ themselves at last, and not to make themselves acce^^ries to that
deluge of mischief, which this seco^^ voyage is like to bring upon both
Kingdoms.

Subscribed at Newcastle, January 23 Tho. Glemham. etc.


FINIS.

