THE ARGUMENT OF A Learned Counsel, UPON AN Action of the CASE Brought by the
East-India-Company, AGAINST Mr. Thomas Sands, an Interloper.

LONDON: Printed, for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, 1696.

De Termino Paschae, Anno xxxvi. Caroli II. Regis: In Banco Regis. Gubernator
and Societas Mercator' de London in Oriental' Indiam negotiant'. against Tho.
Sands.
AN Action upon the Case, wherein the Plaintiff declares, That, Our Lord the
King, 3. Apr. 13 C. II.
by his Letters Patents, reciting that the Company of Merchants trading to the
East Indies, have been long a Corporation, and enjoyed diverse Liberties and
Privileges, by diverse Grants from Queen Elizabeth and King James.

That the King was informed, that diverse Inconveniences and Disorders were
committed, to the Prejudice of the Company; at the Petition of the Company, the
King grants, ratifies, and confirms to the Governor and Company of Merchants
of London, trading to the East Indies,

That they should for ever be a Body-Politique by the Name of Gubernatoris and
Societatis Mercator' de London in Oriental' Indiam negotiant'.

Ac eos per Nomen Gubernatoris and Societatis Mercator' in Oriental' Indiam
negotiant' Vnum Corpus Corporal' and politicum in facto and nomine realiter in
perpetuum fecit, ordinavit, constituit, stabilivit, and declaravit per Literas
Patentes illas.

With Powers to purchase, sue, and be sued by the Name of Governor and Society
of Merchants of London, etc.

And that they, and all those that then were, or should be of the said Company;
and all their Sons at their Ages of 21 or more; and all their Apprentices,
Factors, and Servants, who should be employed by the Company, in the said
Trade, to the East Indies, beyond the Seas, might traffic and use the Trade of
Merchandise by Sea, by the Passages and Ways discovered to the East Indies.

Beyond the Cape de Bona Speranza, unto the Straits of Magellan, in such Order,
Manner and Form, Freedom and Condition, as from time to time, at any public
Assembly or Court, holden by or before the said Governor and Company; by or
betwixt them of the said Company, or the greater Part of them present at such
Assembly or Court, shall be limited or agreed, and not otherwise; any Diversity
of Religion, notwithstanding; so as the Trade be not with any Christian Prince
or State in League with our King, who shall not accept of their Commerce, but
refuse to accept the same.

And that the Company, their Factors, Servants, and Assigns in the Trade of
Merchandise, shall for ever have the whole and sole Trade and Traffic, and the
whole Freedom, Use and Privilege of trading and merchandising, to and from the
East Indies, in such manner as before mentioned.

And that the East Indies, or the Isles and Places thereof, shall not be used
or haunted by any of the King's Subjects, against the true Intent of the
Letters Patents.

And by the same Letters Patents, the King commands all his Subjects, that none
of them shall visit or frequent, or trade in the East Indies, unless with the
License and Agreement with the Company, first had under their common Seal.

That by Virtue of this Patent, the Plaintiffs have been, and still are a
Corporation, trading to the East Indies, with the Inhabitants thereof; who, at
the Time of the Letters Patents granted, were not, nor yet are Christians, nor
Subjects of any Christian Prince or State, but Infidels, Enemies, and
Adversaries of the Christian Faith: And that their Trade has been to the
Profit of the whole Kingdom, and Increase of the King's Customs. That this
Trade cannot be carried on but by a Company or Body Politic.

And that from the making the Letters Patents, they have had, and ought to have
had the sole Trade there.

That the Defendant Sands, being a Subject of the King's, but no Member of the
Company, nor being Son, Factor, Apprentice, or Servant, or Assignee after the
Letters Patents (viz.) 19 Jan. 34. Car. nunc, to the East Indies, beyond the
Cape de Bona Speranza, and this Side the Straits of Magellan, in certain Places
called Atcheon, Mecklapaton, and Porto Novo, with a Ship called the
Expectation, has traded and merchandized.

And diverse Wares in the said Ship, to these Places transported, there
bargained and sold, and other Merchandise there bought, and into this Kingdom
Imported, without the License, and against the Will of the Company, in eorum
praejudicium and depauperationem manifestam, and against the Form of the
Letters, Patents, ad damnum of the Company, 1000 l.

Plea. The Defendant demands Oyer of the Letters Patents, which are set forth
in haec verba. And thereby, after the naming the Governor, the 24. and
constituting a general Court of Assembly, and the Powers of Elections of their
Officers.

That the King does grant, as in the Declaration, so far as there mentioned.

But then in the Clause of Grant of sole Trade, at the End thereof, they have
omitted this,

And that the said Governor and Company, and every particular and several
Person that now is, or hereafter shall be of the Company, shall have full and
free Liberty and License, in form aforesaid, to and from the said East Indies,
according to the Orders, Ordinances and Agreements hereafter to be made at
their public Courts.

In the Recital of the Clause prohibiting others to trade without License under
the common Seal, they leave out a Part of that Clause, which is this.

Upon Pain that every such Person that shall trade to or from the East Indies,
shall incur the Forfeiture of his Merchandise he shall bring into the King's
Dominions, contrary to the Purport of this Charter; or which the Company shall
find in the East Indies, where they traffic; and also of the Ship wherein the
Merchandises are transported, one half to the King, the other to the Company,
and Imprisonment of the Offender.

Then follows a Clause of Grant.

That the Company, for any Consideration or Benefit to be taken to their own
Use, may grant License to any Stranger or other, to trade to or from the Indies.

Then the King grants to the Company,

That the King will not, without the Consent of the Company, give License to
any to or from those Places.

Then there is a Clause,

That none of the Company shall have a Vote in the general Assembly, unless he
have 500 l. in the Stock.

And after Oyer, the Defendant pleads the Statute of the 5 E. 3. c. whereby
it is enacted,

That the Seas shall be open for all Merchants to pass with their Merchandises
wherever they please.

And that he, by Virtue thereof, did trade as in the Declaration alleged,
prout ei been licuit.

To this the Plaintiff has demurred.

Before I come to state the Points and Questions, upon which this Question
truly depends; I desire to show what are not the Points or Questions in this
Case.

1. It is not the Question, whether the King, by Law, can restrain any of his
Subjects to go out of the Kingdom.

For the King may so do, and this without Distinction of Christian or Infidel
Country, pro hic and nunc, as Occasion may be.

2. It is not the Question, whether the King can restrain all his Subjects to
such a Country or City.

It may be done upon particular Occasions, as of War or Plague.

But from hence to argue, that the King can grant you and your Successors for
ever, a sole Trade to such a Country or Place, excluding all other his
Subjects, except with your Leave or License: Because he can restrain this or
that Subject, therefore he can grant a sole Trade to the Plaintiff, and exclude
all others, but you, and such as you, license for ever: Because he can, upon
particular Occasions, as of War or Plague, restrain or prohibit his Subjects to
go or trade to such a City or Country: That when there is neither Plague nor
War, the King should grant a sole Trade to any particular Person, whether Body
Politic or Natural, and restrain all others for ever.

Can this be by the Law done?

If this Foundation will warrant it, though in this Case this be with Infidels;
and upon that ground, some difference imagined betwixt an Infidel and a
Christian Country: Yet remember your Reason or Foundation does not distinguish
or make a Difference.

For if because the King has Power to restrain or prohibit Subjects to go out
of the Realm: Or by Occasion of War or Plague, all his Subjects from trading to
such a City or Country; since this Power (you must agree) extends as well to
Christian as Infidel City or Country;

The granting of sole Trade to one Subject or Body Politic, and restraining
all others, is the same; whether it be to Christian or Infidel City or Country.

And when you cite the of Statute 3 Jacc. 6. which enacts,

That the King's Subjects shall freely trade to Spain and Portugal,
notwithstanding the Charters of Incorporation granted to some Merchants, and
the Prohibitions in those Charters:

And from thence argue, that because there were Prohibitions or Restraints by
Charters, as to those Countries which were Christian, therefore such a sole
Trade to an Infidel Country is well granted:

You must have it admitted, that such a Grant to those Countries is good and
legal; or else you argue from that which you grant not to be lawful, to prove
another like Grant to be lawful. Or at least by the same Arguments and Reasons
maintain such a Grant of sole Trade to be good, whether made to Christian or
Infidel Country.

If then it not being the Point or Question in this Case,

Whether the King can restrain his Subjects from going beyond the Seas? Nor,

Whether the King can lawfully restrain his Subjects to trade to a particular
Country or Place, whether Christian or Infidel?

Then the Questions plainly and shortly are,

1. Whether this Grant of sole Trade to the Plaintiffs, be a good Grant or not?

2. Supposing that it should be, then whether this Action be maintainable or
not?

1. By the Common Law, Trade is free and open for the King's Subjects. And this
I shall endeavor to show from Authorities.

Commercium jure Gentium commune esse debet and non in Monopolium and privatum
paululorum questum convertendum. 3 Inst. 381.
Iniquum est, aliis permittere, aliis inhibehere Mercaturam.

The Taylers of Ipswich's Case, That no Trade, Mechanic nor Merchant, 1 Rols
Rep. 4.
can be hindered by the Patent of the King; a Patent that only 100 Persons
shall use such a Trade, is void.

F.N.B. 85.
Note, that by the common Law, every Man may go out of the Realm for
Merchandise, or travel without demanding Leave of the King.

Stat. 5R. 2. c. 2. Prohibited all but Great Men and Merchants to pass out of
the Realm without the King's License: But this Statute is repealed by 14 Jac.
c. 1.

Dyer, 165.
That every one may, at his Will, go with his Goods; and cites F. N. B. for it.

2. And in the next place, That appropriating Merchandise and Trade to a
particular Person or Persons, or a Body Politic, excluding others, is an
engrossing such Trade: And that all engrossing Trade is against the common Law.

3 Inst. 196.
That engrossing any sort of Merchandise is an Offense at common Law.

Dom' Rex verse. Crisp. and al.
In this Court lately, an Agreement betwixt diverse Coprice Makers and Coprice
Merchants, for the buying of all Coprice, that the Coprice Makers should, for
three Years, make at so much a Tun, and restraining them from selling to any
others.

Adjudged an engrossing upon an Information in this Court.

And if a Company of Merchants should buy up, in like manner, all the
Merchandise of Spain or Portugal, or the Canaries, or other Town or Place for
three Years to come: This I think would be an engrossing, and the Contract
against Law.

For the Consequence of it must be, that they would sell at their own Price,
and thereby exact upon the King's Subjects. And your Patent, for the sole Trade
to the East Indies, invests you in all the Merchandises of those Countries, and
ingrosseth them all into your Hands.

And if a Patent grant to any the engrossing of Merchandises; this Patent is
against Law, and void. Engrossing is in Truth but a Species, or another Name
for monopolizing; for all the Difference between them is, that engrossing is
commonly by Agreements and Contracts made betwixt Subjects one with another,
without the King's Grant; but Monopolies are Ingrossings by Color of the
King's Grants.

3 Inst. 181.
The Case there of John Peachy, who 50. E. 3. was severely punished for a Grant
under the Great Seal, for the sole selling of sweet Wines in London.

Case of Monop. 11 Rep. 84. Moor. 673. and in Noy.
This was engrossing by Color of the King's Grant, and a Monopoly.

Darcey had the sole importing from beyond Seas, and selling of Cards, granted
him by Patent for 21 Years, under a Rent, prohibiting all others to sell; and
this, Trin. 44. Eliz. adjudged a void Grant.

And the Statute, 21 Jac. c. 3. declares all Monopolies to be against the
common Law. So that this being so; If this Grant be a Grant to you, to ingross
or monopolize, then by the common Law this Grant is void.

3. That that this Grant of sole Trade is against Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. Mag.
Chapter c. 30.
and diverse other the ancient Statutes.

All Merchants (if they were not openly prohibited before) shall have their
safe and sure Conduct to depart out of England, and to come into England, to
buy and sell without any manner of evil Tolls, by the old and rightful Customs,
except in Time of War.

My Lord Cook says, 2 Inst. 57.
That the Words in this Act [nisi public prohibeantur] are intended a
Prohibition by the public Council of the Kingdom by Act of Parliament.

This Act then being general, all Merchants to have safe Conduct, to go out,
and come into England, if not prohibited by Act of Parliament, is probably a
Declaration of the common Law.

Stat. 2 E. 3 c. That all Merchants Strangers and Privy, may go and come with
their Merchandises into England, according to the Form of the Grand Charter.

Stat. 9 E. 3 c. 1. That all Merchants Strangers and Denizens, and all other,
and every of them, of what Estate soever they be, shall sell their
Merchandises, from whencesoever they come, freely, without Interruption: Except
the King's Enemies. And that this Act shall be observed and performed
notwithstanding any Charters to the contrary. And that Charters to the contrary
are of no force, but are to the King's Damage, and to the Oppression of the
Commons.

But your Charter gives you the sole Merchandising to and from the East Indies.

Stat. 14 E. 3. c. 2. Recites Magnae Charta, and enacts, That all Merchants,
Aliens and Denizens may, without Let, safely come with their Merchandises,
safely carry, and safely return.

Stat. 25 E. 3. c. 2. Confirms the former Statute of 9 E. 3. and enacts, That
if any Letters Patents, Proclamation or Commandment be made to the contrary, it
shall be void.

Stat. 2 R. 2. c. 1. and 11. c. 7. Both confirm the two former Statutes, and
enact, That all Letters Patents, and Commands to the contrary, shall be void.

By these four Statutes, the Freedom of Trade and Traffic is amply
established, and all Letters Patents, Grants, Proclamations, and commands to
the contrary made void, if they had not been so at common Law.

2 Inst. 63.
And my Lord Cook, upon Consideration of Magna Charta, and these Statutes, after
Examination of several Grants of Tolls and Duties to be paid upon Merchandise,
says, That upon this Charter this Conclusion is necessarily gathered, that all
Monopolies concerning Trade and Traffic, are against the Liberty and Freedom
declared and granted by this Great Charter, and diverse other Acts of
Parliament, which are good Commentaries upon this Charter.

And then cites the other Statute that I have before cited.

Object. But say they, tho we have the sole Trade, yet we are no Monopoly.

Resp. To prove it to be a Monopoly, 3 Inst. 181.
let us see how a Monopoly is described.

My Lord Cook, in his Chapter of Monopolies describes it; An Institution or
Allowance by the King's Grant to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, of or for the sole buying or selling, or using of any thing, whereby
any Person or Persons are to be restrained of any Freedom or Liberty that they
had before, or are hindered in their lawful Trade.

This Description, I think, exactly suits with your Patent. For,

1. By your Patent you have the sole Trade granted to you.

Sole Trade is sole buying and sole selling: for Merchandising consists in
buying and selling.

The sole using any thing, is another general Part of this Description. Is not
sole Trade, sole using or merchandising?

And for the latter Part of it, whereby any Person is restrained or hindered in
his Liberty,

2. Your Patent grants to you to seize the Ships and Goods of any that come
thither.

And your bringing this Action, shows you are sufficiently a Hinderer of the
Liberty of others to trade.

So that I think you cannot deny but that you are comprehended under this
Description.

But for further Evidence of its being a Monopoly, let us see what the Evils
and Mischiefs are that were in Monopolies which the Law speaks so hard of.

The Evils and Mischiefs are:

First, That the Price of the Commodity they sell, shall be kept and risen
higher than otherwise it would be.

For, he that has the sole Trade, will keep up the Price as he pleases. And
this is one of the Evils mentioned in the Case of Monopolies, 11 Rep. 86. b.

The Truth hereof I think is evident enough, and no Man in Reason thinks but he
that has the sole Trade, trades for his Advantage: And the highest and dearest
Rates he can sell at, and the cheapest he can buy at, are his Advantage.

Secondly, A second Mischief or Evil is, that Monopolies or sole Trade is pro
privato paululorum quaestu. So it is said to be in the Margent of the Book
before cited, 3 Inst. 181.

No Man will doubt hereof, that considers the present State or Condition of
this Company.

Thirdly, Another Evil or Mischief of Monopolies or sole Trade, is the
Impoverishment and Oppression of the King's Subjects.

Trade is not in its own Nature fixed and stable, but varying and altering,
sometimes better, sometimes worse. Sometimes one Trade beneficial, another not;
according as Wares, Sicknesses, Scarsity of this or that sort of Commodity or
Merchandise in this or that Country; Modes, Fashions, Customs and Habits of Men
do occasion.

And the Merchants, by their Education and Observation, manage and govern this
Trade, for the Maintenance of themselves and their Families, and the general
Good of Men. And direct and employ their Estates, and traffic into this or
that Part of the World, as Time and Occasion shall give them best Encouragement.

But sole Trade into this or that Part of the World, granted to one Company,
and of another to another, sets up the particular Men that head the Companies,
but destroys all other Merchants and inferior People.

Such Patents must undo all other Parts of this Kingdom besides London. For,
the Companies cannot drive these great Trades, but must manage them in London,
and consequently, the other Parts of the Kingdom, must be excluded. All
shipping must be subjected to the Rates and Prizes these Appropriators of Trade
will give them; or else lie still and be destroyed. And so must all Masters of
Ships, Mariners; all Artificers, Laborers, Factors, and Servants, whose
Employments depend upon these Trades, must all be subjected to their Wills.

And of how great Consequence that may be, deserves Consideration.

The Instances of your Oppressions and Dealings with your Factors, Captains,
Servants, and Seamen that got any thing in their Service, are well known.

So that if the Evils and Mischiefs which the Common Law forbids and endeavors
to prevent, by judging all Monopolies, Ingrossings, and sole Trade unlawful, be
to be avoided; The Evils and Mischiefs attending your Patent and sole Trade,
are perhaps the greatest, because your sole Trade is the greatest that ever
England knew.

That every Grant of the King has this Condition implied in it, viz. F. N. Br.
222.
Quod Patria per talem donationem magis solito non oneretur seu gravetur.

Grant le Roy al charge ou prejudice del Subject est void. 13 H. 4. 14.


And if the Evils and Mischiefs of this Grant be as I have stated them; It Is a
Grant to the Oppression and Prejudice of the Subject: And therefore the King is
deceived in it, and the Grant by the common Law void, as I have before shown.

Object. But perhaps it may be objected, that this Patent is granted for good
Government and Order, and Preservation of this Trade, which will otherwise be
destroyed, and for the Good of the Kingdom: And there have been in all Times
such Patents, as to Turkey, Barbary, Guiny, and others.

Resp. 1. Remember what our Books say.

2 Inst. 540.
That new Corporations, trading to foreign Countries, under the fair Pretense of
Order and Government, in Conclusion, tend to the Hindrance of Trade and
Traffic, and in the End, prove Monopolies.

11 Rep. 28. b.
In the End of the Case of Monopolies. Privilegia quae revera sunt in
praejudicium Reipublicae, magis tamen speciosa habent Frontispicia and boni
publici praetextum, quam bonae and legales concessiones. But praetextu liciti
non debet admitti illicitum. The Words of that Book.

And there also it appears, and is taken notice of, that Darcie's Patent had a
glorious Preamble, viz.

That the Subjects might exercise their Husbandry and lawful Employments, and
not be corrupted to Idleness by the wicked thing called Cards, the sole Sale
and Trade of Cards is granted to Darcey.

Observe, says the Book, what a glorious Preamble and Pretext this odious
Monopoly had.

That Patent which (made 3 Years after this, Horn and Ivy, Mich. 20. B. 2. c.
403.
and dated 17 of March, 17 Car. 2. in Imitation of this) erected the Canary
Company, and granted them the sole Trade, Recites, That the Trade to the
Canaries, was of greater Advantage to the King's Subjects formerly, than at
that Time: That by reason the too much Access and Trading of Subjects thither,
our Merchandises were decreased in their Value, and the Wines increased to
double Value; so that the King's Subjects were forced to carry Silver and
Bullion there to get Wines.

And that all this happened for want of Regulation of Trade.

And thereupon the Patent constituted Sir Arthur Ingram, and about 60. Persons
more by Name, and all others of the King's Subjects, Merchants or Factors,
trading, or that had within seven Years, traded to those Islands, to the Value
of 1000 l. per Annum, and all others that after should be admitted should be a
Body Politic.

That there should be a Governor, a Deputy Governor, 12. Assistants, and names
them; but to be continued by Election.

That they should have the sole Trade to these Islands. And that none other
should haunt or visit those Islands, under Pain of Forfeiture and Imprisonment:
With non obstante to the Statute of Monopolies.

Judgment was given against this Patent.

Here is in this Case, the same Pretense and Preamble, as in yours. The Abuse
of the Trade, and the Regulation of it, for the general good was the thing
pretended, but few Men doubt what was intended.

Under the Name of Regulation and Government, to ingross all into the Hands of
10 or 12 Men, is most excellent Regulation and Government.

Resp. 2. And as to other Companies and Charters that have been granted.

Supposing that all these Grants were such as this, and practiced and used as
this; yet it is no Argument that they were legal or good Grants.

Have not there been in all Ages and Times, Patents and Grants, such as by Law
were void and of no Force? If it be so; it is no Argument that because there
have been many such Grants, therefore this is good.

But to keep my self to Monopolies.

Monopolies have been frequently in all Times granted; even in the best of
Times; many by Queen Elizabeth. Darcy's was granted by her. In the Recital of
it appears, that there had been granted before it, diverse others of that
Monopoly of sole selling and making Cards.

But when it came in Question, it was condemned.

Stat. 9 E. 3. c. 1. And the other Statutes before cited. The Clauses that say
that all Patents granted or to be granted, contrary to the Freedom of Trade in
these Statutes mentioned, Prove,

1. That such Patents had been.

2. That they did foresee and provide against those that would be.

43 Eliz. c. 1. Sect. 9. That Proviso shows that there were Monopolies granted;
but yet so far from receiving any Allowance, that that Statute made in the End
of her Reign, for confirming her Patents, by special Proviso, excepts and
provides,

That that Statute shall not extend to make good any Letters Patents made or
granted, of and concerning Licenses, Powers, or Privileges, commonly called
Monopolies.

The Statute of Monopolies, and this Statute, sufficiently show that there were
such Grants, and that they were not allowed. This therefore is no Argument.

But on the contrary, it has not, nor cannot be shown (as I believe) that ever
any had any Judicial Allowance in any Times past for any sole Trade, or sole
buying or selling, which is a great Argument to the contrary. And further,

The Practice of these Companies has been generally to the contrary; and till
within these late Years, no sole Trade practiced amongst them.

This and the Charters to the Companies of Turkey, and the rest perhaps are in
this particular alike (viz.) that there is in Words granted to them the sole
Trade: But the Use and Management of these Charters vastly differ.

For the great Companies, Turkey, Muscovy, Russia, and Hamborough Companies,
they trade not by any joint Stock, but the Members of each Company, every Man
uses his own Trade, buys and sells his own Commodities, has his own Servants,
Factors, and Imployers.

They take care, by sending out Consuls and Agents, to preserve the Trade; and
by small Imposts, maintain such Consuls and Agents.

They take care that the Market be not overstock'd or glutted with Commodities
they send out; and therefore only order what Ships shall go, but leave to every
one of the Company to send his Merchandise at his own Will and Pleasure.

They trade not upon any Joint Stock, or the Stock of the Body-Politick. If you
deal with any of them, you know your Chapman: No Man is refused to be free of
their Companies that has a mind, paying some small Sum for his Freedom.

But this Company of the East Indies, are of quite another Nature, and use
their Patent to quite another End.

The East India Company trade only upon the Company's Stock; every Man, whether
Merchant or not, if he can buy such a Share in their Stock, is of their Company.

The Committee manage, and the rest must submit to their Pleasures and
Distributions: Those few of them that have the most Shares, have the Disposal
of the whole Stock: No Member trades, buys or sells, or has any thing that he
calls his own, but only such a Share in the Stock: No Member of theirs either
buys or sells his own Merchandise, or imploys any Factors or Servants. The Body
Politic, the invisible Corporation trade, perhaps for 1000000 l. per annum.
They get into their Hands, and sell perhaps 7. or 800000 l. worth of
Merchandise at a time: The three last Sales that they made, came to 1800000 l.
No body has these Commodities but they.

Is this trading, and no engrossing or no monopolizing? It Is their wonderful
Virtue, their Hatred and Contempt of Riches that makes them not to raise and
increase Values and Prizes, and be as rich as they please, if they do not do
it. No Man is admitted to come into their Company by their Patent to have a
Vote, unless he have 500 l. in their Stock, which values above 1500 l. to be
bought: So that by the very Foundation, they can have no more Persons in their
Company, than they have 500 l. Shares, and those Shares being engrossed into
few Hands, the few Hands have all, and call themselves the Company.

So that Men that will not be deceived by Words, but distinguish things
different one from the other, will distinguish betwixt one Company and Society,
and another, who are Ingrossers and Monopolizers, and who not.

The Turkey Company, and the rest like it, may truly be said to be Managers,
Regulaters, and Improvers of Trade. They have no joint Stock that they trade
upon; they ingross not; they admit every Man that will, to be free of their
Companies, to trade with his own Money, his own Credit, and buy and sell his
own, and to employ whom he pleases, and none amongst them, under Pretense of
Government, Regulation and Preservation of Trade, makes unreasonable Advantages.

But the invisible East India Merchant, the Body Politic covers and
countenances some few Men amongst them, to engross, buy and sell at their own
Rates, and excludes all others from the great and excessive Advantage of the
few.

The other Companies, as the Turkey, etc. have not any sole buying or selling;
nor exercising any sole Trade or engrossing. Every Member of these Companies,
which are a Multitude, and every one that is not, may, if he will, be a Member;
no Man is excluded.

But this Company quite contrary; and therefore if ever any was, these are
great Engrossers and Monopolizers of Trade.

I do not argue or speak against Companies, nor regulating or managing Trade
(which was the true intent of this Patent) such as I have mentioned, and is
virtuously and commendably practiced in the great Companies of Turkey, Muscovy,
Hamborough and others, where the Members of the Company trade upon their own
particular Stocks and Estates, and no Merchant hindered or denied to be a
Member, that desires it, paying his ordinary Fees of Admission.

But against the Invisible Merchant, this politic Capacity trading in joint
Stocks.

Suppose a like Patent to any one, or two or three Men, Farmers or Partners, in
their private Capacity, of this sole Trade, and they had the Management of it,
and thereby Possessors of such vast Wealth and Merchandise.

What would this politic Body (I mean the principal Members; for the Body
cannot think or have Sense) judge of it?

Perhaps yours is much worse, there a Man should know with whom he dealt, who
were his Debtors, and how to come to them; but dealing with you is a kind of
dealing with Spirits, an Invisible Body subsisting only in intelligentia legis.

Therefore being so unlike the other Companies, and so contrary to them, you
ought to have no Countenance from them; and though they are good and
commendable, you are Ingrossers and Monopolizers.

3. But to proceed and consider the Statutes made against Monopolies.

Stat. 21 Jac. c. 3. By which it is enacted, That all Monopolies, Commissions,
Charters, and Letters Patents, granted, or to be granted to any Person or
Persons, Bodies politic or corporate, of or for the sole buying or selling, or
using any thing within this Realm.

And all Proclamations, Inhibitions, and Restraints, and all other matters and
things, any way tending to the instituting, erecting, furthering or
countenancing the same, are contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and shall be
utterly void and of none effect.

And that all Persons, Bodies politic and corporate, which now are, or
hereafter shall be, shall stand and be incapable to have, use, exercise, and
put in use any Monopoly, or any such Commission, Charter, Letters Patents,
Inhibitions, and Restraints; or any Liberty, Power, or Faculty granted upon
them.

Then follow Clauses of Forfeiture of treble Damages to the Party grieved by
the using any such Monopoly.

Then the Provisoes for new Inventions, and several other things

Then the Proviso concer^^^ng Corporations, which, as to this Case, is thus;

Provided also, and be it enacted, that this Act shall not extend, or be
prejudicial to the City of London, or other City or Towns corporate, for or
concerning any Charters granted to them, or any Customs used within them.

Or unto any Corporations, Companies, or Fellowships of any Art, Trade,
Occupation, or Mystery.

Or to any Companies or Societies of Merchants erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade or Merchandise.

But that the same Charters, Corporations, Companies, Fellowships, and
Societies; and their Liberties, Privileges, Powers, and Immunities, shall be
and continue of like Force and Effect as they were before the making of this
Act, and of none other; any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

The next Proviso extends to Patents, granted or to be granted for Printing,
making Salt Peter, Offices, etc. which do not concern the Case in Question.

By the Description of a Monopoly, which I have before, out of my Lord Cook,
stated and expressed; This sole Trade granted to you, and the Exclusion of all
others, is a Monopoly within that Description, as I have before shown.

That your Charter is directly contrary to the enacting Clause of this Act. For
you have by your Charter granted,

Sole buying.

For all others are prohibited as much as to come or go into the East Indies.

Sole selling.

All others are prohibited to import into this Realm; and they cannot sell here
unless they can import.

Sole using.

For you have granted to you the sole Trade, which includes all buying,
selling, sole using. That appropriates all to your selves, and excludes all
others.

How can your Letters Patents and this Statute stand together?

When the Statute says, That all Letters Patents, granted to any Body
politic, of or for the sole buying, selling, or using any thing, shall be void;

How can yours be good?

When the Statute says, That all Inhibitions, Restraints, and other things any
way tending to the instituting, erecting, furthering, or countenancing any such
sole buying, selling, or trading, shall be void;

How can yours be good?

When the Statute says, That all Bodies politic and corporate shall hereafter
stand and be incapable of having, using, exercising, or putting in ure any such
Charter, Inhibition, or Restraint;

How then can the Plaintiff, in this Case do it?

3 Inst. 182.
In the Comment upon this Statute, it is there said, that this Act is forcibly
and vehemently penned for the Suppression of all Monopolies.

And the Words [Sole using] is there said to be so general, as no Monopoly can
be raised, but will be within the Reach of this Statute.

The Word [any thing*] shows also the general Scope and Intent, that nothing
should be excluded that was a Monopoly.

Object. But the Proviso excepts Charters to Companies or Societies of
Merchants, erected for the Maintenance, Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade
or Merchandise.

Resp. 1. This Proviso extends not to this Charter, or any Letters Patents
granted after the making of that Act. And this appears from the penning of the
Proviso.

The enacting Clause says, That all Letters Patents, granted or to be granted
for sole buying any thing, shall be void.

The Proviso says,

That this Act shall not extend to, or be prejudicial to Towns Corporate
concerning any Charters granted to them, or Customs used by them.

Or to any Companies or Societies of Merchants, erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or Ordering of any Trade or Merchandise.

This extends to those that were granted and erected. Here is no Words of
salving for any that should be hereafter granted or erected: the Words
[hereafter to be granted,] would have been in this Clause of salving, as well
as in the enacting Clause, if ever so intended. But the following Words
concluding this Proviso, further show it,

That the Charters, Corporations, Companies, Fellowships, and Societies, and
their Liberties, Privileges, Powers, and Immunities shall be and continue as
they were before the making of this Act.

This governs and concludes the whole Proviso, and extends only to those that
then were, to leave them as they were. That is,

To leave the Charters and Companies, their Powers and Privileges in the same
State and Condition as they were before this Act.

The Beginning of the Proviso says, this Act shall not prejudice them; the
Conclusion says, they shall be as they were before this Act was made.

Therefore those that were excepted* must have a Being before this Act: No
Words therein extend to those that then had not a Being.

The next Proviso for Printing, Saltpeter, Offices, etc. expressly provides for
Patents granted or to be granted.

This (if so intended) would no doubt in like manner have been penned.

Resp. 2. But suppose it should be construed to extend to Companies,
Privileges, and Immunities erected and granted after this Act.

Yet you are not within this saving.

1. For it extends only to Companies and Societies erected for the Maintenance,
Enlargement or ordering of Trade or Merchandise, and to their Powers and
Privileges that they have for that End.

Not to Companies and Societies erected to have a sole Trade by a joint Stock,
or a Stock of the Corporation, excluding all others.

The Turkey Company, Russia and Hamborough, and other Companies, that trade not
as Bodies politic, or upon joint Stocks, but every Merchant that will, may be
thereof a Member, and every Member thereof trade upon his own private Stock and
Account of a Merchant.

The Companies only order and consult for Maintenance and Preservation of it,
and not for the engrossing and cousening their Members of it.

These are the Corporations that are within this Exception and Proviso.

But we must be as silly as the Infidels you deal with in these Matters, not to
distinguish betwixt these Corporations and their Management, and yours.

They exclude none from Trade; they trade not in a public Capacity, in a sole
Stock, but every Member is a Trader upon his own peculiar Stock.

But you take upon you in your politic Capacity, as you have expressed in your
Declaration.

Totum integrum and solum Commercium and negotiationem habere uti and gaudere.

And to exclude, not only all Strangers, but all your own Members to have any
distinct or separate Trade upon their own account (except a little to excuse
you to pay off Charges) and thereby ingross all that vast Quantity of
Merchandise.

The many 100000 l. worth you bring in and carry out: In whom is the Property?

In the Corporation.

Who buys and sells all?

The Corporation.

Who are the Debtors for the Money, that buys and provides these Merchandises?

The Body Politic, the Corporation, the invisible Body.

Who shall be sued for these Debts?

The Body Politic.

Sue them as you can, they will either be too rich and great to contend with,
or else in that Condition as you know not how or where to have them; they are
an invisible Body, subsisting only in intelligentia legis, a Body Politic,
without Soul or Conscience, as the Law says it to be.

We have seen them in a Years time in both these Qualifications; so great as
scarce any Man will contend with them; so invisible at another time, as a Dun
could scarce find them.

This surely cannot be for the Maintenance or Enlargement of Trade, to deal with
I know not whom, where no Security or person is subject.

It is indeed for the Maintenance of the Company's Trade, to enable some of
them to get 10 or 20000 l. per Annum by it, and to keep this vast Trade in a
few Hands.

But sure this is not the Trade the Proviso intends.

Restraining to the Body Politic, which is but one Person or Man in
Partnership, is quite contrary to the Enlargement in the Proviso mentioned.

And therefore, to say that you are within the saving, by this Proviso; a
Company erected for the Maintenance and Enlargement of Trade, when you restrain
all but your selves to trade, seems to be a Contradiction.

And for the following Words in the Proviso,

[Or ordering of any Trade or Merchandise,]

If you say you are saved within the Extent of these Words, then must you make
a Construction of these Words in this Sense.

That ordering Trade and Merchandise is excluding all others, and taking the
whole to your selves.

A most excellent ordering indeed.

But the true Sense of these Words in this Proviso, is to save the Corporations
and Fellowships of Arts, Trades, Occupations, and Mysteries, and to Companies
of Merchants, the Powers and Authorities that they had for the Maintenance,
Enlargement, or ordering of Trade.

By taking care that the Commodities were honestly and rightly made, without
Fraud or Deceit in their Measures or Quantities.

That the Servants and younger sort were honest, and industriously educated in
their Trades and Mysteries, by the Masters and elder sort.

To place and keep good Order and Decorum amongst those of the same Mystery and
Trade.

For assembling and consulting for the common Good, and Management of their
respective Trades and Employments.

This is that which the Proviso excepts and provides for.

Not for a sole Trade in a Company, in a joint Stock, excluding all others as
this is.

The Company there made a By-Law, Tailors of Ipswich Case, 11 Rep. 54.
to exclude Tailors from using their Trades within that Town, unless by the
Masters and Wardens of the Company, or three of them admitted to be a
sufficient Workman.

In this Case here seemed to be a good End and Meaning, to exclude insufficient
Workmen, and encourage good Workmen; a good Order one might think.

Yet so jealous and careful they then were, lest, under any Pretense they
should exclude Men from their lawful Trades that they adjudged this a void
By-Law, as tending to restrain Men of their Freedom in using their Trades, and
introducing Oppression of the young Tradesmen, by the old and rich Tradesmen.

And in that Case adjudged,

That Ordinances for the good Order and Government of Men of Trades and
Mysteries are good, but not to restrain Men in their lawful Mystery.

To the same purpose is Norris and Stop's Case, Hob. 211.

So that this being the Sense of this Proviso, to except Powers and Authorities
that Companies have to regulate Trade, for the Maintenance and Enlargement of
it, but not to restrain any from their Trades or lawful Mysteries, it extends
not to salve or preserve such Authority or Power in you to have a sole Trade,
excluding all others.

2. For another reason, it cannot be the Sense of this Proviso, to except or
save to any Body Politic, the buying in their public Capacity, a sole Trade.

The Proviso then will be repugnant and contradictory to the enacting Clauses.
For taking the Proviso as they would have it;

To save to Bodies Politic the having the sole buying and selling, and using
any Merchandise or Trade as a Corporation, and then compare the Proviso with
the enacting Clause, and it will be just thus,

Enacted, That Letters Patents to any Body Politic, for sole buying, selling,
or using any thing, shall be void. And that no Body Politic shall be capable
of having, using, or exercising any such Patent, Inhibition, or Restraint.

Provided that Bodies Politic may have the sole buying, selling, and using any
Trade:

Is not this in plain English, repugnant and contradictory? Examine it as much
as you can, and it will be no other than a downright Contradiction.

Suppose the Statute that enacts, that no Man shall use a Trade that he has
not served an Apprentice to, by the Space of seven Years, had a Proviso.

That Men might use a Trade that they had not served an Apprentice to by the
Space of seven Years.

This had been a void repugnant Proviso.

This is as plainly repugnant,

That no Body Politic shall be capable of having a sole Trade,

Provided that a Body may have a sole Trade.

And repugnant Provisos are in Law void.

1 Rep. 46. Pl. Com. 563.
Statute gives the Land of J. S. to the King: Then a Proviso comes to save the
Right of all Persons.

This shall be construed, all Persons besides J. S. not to destroy the Premises.

Therefore when the Act says, That all Patents granted to Bodies Politic for
sole buying and selling or using any thing, etc.

Shall the Proviso that says, That it shall not extend or be prejudicial to
Companies of Merchants erected for the Maintenance, Enlargement, or ordering of
Trade,

If construed in the same Sense that they would have it, to give the Companies
sole buying, selling, and using any thing as Companies in their Corporate
Capacity, it is repugnant and contradictory.

But to give the Companies the Management, Order, and Government, is the Sense
as I conceive.

And this is the general Practice of the Societies and Companies allowed in all
times.

But a sole Trade, under the Color and Pretense of Order and Management,
never, as I believe, has had any judicial Allowance.

Object. Another thing that the Counsel of the other side, have objected to
evade this Act, has been this. The Proviso is;

That the Act shall not extend to Companies of Merchants erected for
Maintenance and Ordering of Trade, but that their Charters, Liberties, and
Privileges shall be of like Force as they were before the making this Act.

And therefore, say they, Patents to Companies of Merchants for ordering Trade,
if good before this Act, shall be good still; and therefore, say they, the Act
cannot hurt us.

This is curious, but if examined, is but the same Objection in other Words.

For the Conclusion of this Proviso extends no further than the Charters
mentioned in the Beginning of it: It extends but to the same Charters; so are
the very Words.

What Charters or Patents then shall remain in the same Force they were before
the Act?

Those that are excepted.

What are excepted?

Those that are for Order and Management; as I have before shown.

Not those that are for sole Trade granted to a Body Politic. That is
repugnant to the enacting Clause; therefore those (as I have said) are not
excepted or within the Proviso.

If then not excepted, you are most plainly and fully within the enacting
Clause, and your Patent quite contratrary to, and void by this Act; unless the
matter of Infidel will save you.

Object. But this is a sole Trade with Infidels, and such a Trade the Subject
had never any Right to have without the King's License. And to prove it, they
cite Michelburne's Case.

2. Brownlow 296.
Wherein Mr. Brownlow being Prothonotary, does relate what my Lord Coke said,
That no Subject of the King might trade with any Realm of Infidels, without the
King's License.

And that the Reason was because he might relinquish the Catholic Faith, and
adhere to Infidelism: And that he had seen a License in the Time of E. 3. where
the King recited the Confidence that he had in his Subject, that he would not
decline his Religion; and so licenced him.

And that this did arise upon the Recital of a License made to trade to the
East Indies.

They cite also Calvin's Case, 7 Rep. 17. where it is said, That Infidels are
perpetui inimici; there is perpetual Hostility, there can be no Peace; an
Infidel can maintain no Action, nor have any thing within this Realm; and to
prove this there is cited, R. 282. 12 H. 8. 4.

1. Supposing the Law to be as these Books intend, and as the other side urge
them, and the Consequence will be, that the Plaintiff cannot maintain this
Action, but that the Charter granted to them, is void.

The Reason that is given in Michelburn's Case is grounded upon this: That the
King has the Care and Preservation of Religion by the Law vested in him: That
his Subjects shall not trade with Infidels, lest thereby they may be brought to
relinquish the Catholic Faith, and adhere to Infidelism: And that the King
shall take care, that Licenses to trade be only given to such as the King has
Confidence in, that they will not decline their Religion.

Supposing this, then your Patent must be naught, for then it is only grantable
to Persons in whom such Confidence may be.

1. Your Corporation or Body Politic is indefinite as to Persons; the Members
thereof are daily changeable; some go out, sell their Stocks, or dye; others
buy their Stocks, and are daily coming in to be Members of your Company.

I doubt you do not much examine, nor care how fixed or certain those are in
Religion, that come into your Company.

How then can there be any Confidence in a Body Politic?

The Law says, that a Body Politic has neither Soul nor Conscience: What
Confidence then concerning their Religion can there be in a Body Politic?

2. It Is not only the Members of the Company that were at the Time of the
Corporation, but those that after should be Members, and their Sons, their
Apprentices, Factors, and Servants that are licensed by this Patent.

If licensing to trade with Infidels be a Trust and Prerogative in the King, to
be given to such Persons in whom the King can have Confidence, that they will
not be conversing with Infidels, change or prejudice;

This cannot be granted to a Body Politic and their Successors, which may have
Continuance for ever; or to their Sons, Factors, Apprentices, and Servants,
Persons altogether unknown, not born, nor in rerum natura, when the Patent was
made.

Suppose such a License to you to trade with Enemies. I say,

3. Supposing it to be in the King's Prerogative, in Preservation of Religion
to license; yet he cannot grant this Prerogative to you, that you shall have
Power to grant License to whom you will.

Yet all this is done by your Patent; for you have not only thereby Power
granted you for your Apprentices, Factors and Servants, which are Persons that
you your selves nominate and appoint at your Discretions; and undoubtedly very
religious:

But by your Patent it is expressly granted, that the Company, for any
Consideration or Benefit to themselves, may grant Licenses to any Merchant,
Stranger, or other, to trade to or from the Indies:

And that the King will not, without the Consent of the Company, license any
other to trade.

Can this be a good Grant? Can the King grant from himself his Kingly Care and
Trust for Preservation of Religion, to you, that you shall manage it, and that
the King will not use such his Power without your Consent?

So that supposing that there is, by the Law, such a Trust reposed in the King,
for Preservation of Religion, as you would have it; yet the Grant to you is
void in it self, and then you have no more Right than we, and consequently can
maintain no Action against us.

2. To consider the Books that you have cited to maintain this religious Point.

1. Brownlow's Reports, a Book printed in the late Times, not licensed by any
Judge or Person whatsoever.

The Roll is, Mich. 7 Jac. B. C. Rot. 3107.
Michelburn against B^thurst, setting forth, that the King had granted the
Plaintiff his Commission to go with his Ship Tiger, to the East Indies, to
spoil and suppress the Infidels, and to take from them what he could. That
there were Articles betwixt the Parties for Account and Shares of what should
be got, and upon those Articles a Suit in the Admiralty.

And what is it that is in the Case? Nothing to the purpose; but the Book
mentions only what my Lord Coke said upon the Motion for the Prohibition: Only
a sudden occasional Saying, not upon any Argument or Debate, nor to the then
Case.

So that a Man must be very willing that will much rely upon such a Saying, I
cannot call it an Authority.

2. For Calvin's Case;

That an Infidel is perpetuus Inimicus, and can maintain no Action, or have any
thing, and that we are in perpetual Hostility, and no Peace can be made with
them.

It is true, that this is said in Calvin's Case; but there was nothing there in
Judgment that gave Occasion for it, so that I cannot think that it was much
considered before it was spoken.

The Books there cited to prove it are, Reg. 282. And all that I can find
therein, is, that in a Writ of Protection, granted to the Hospitallers of the
Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, it is said, that the Hospital was founded
in Defense of Holy Church against the Enemies of Christ and Christians.

But does this prove, that Infidels are perpetui Inimici, with whom no Peace
can be made, that can maintain no Action?

The other Book cited is, 12 H. 8. 4. a Trespass brought for taking away a Dog,
and in the debating whether this Action did lie or not; it is said,

That if the Lord beat his Villain, an Husband his Wife, or a Man outlawed, or
a Traitor, or a Pagan, they shall have no Action, because they are not able to
sue an Action.

So that this also is but Discourse and sudden Thoughts and Sayings, where the
thing was not in Question: And what Authority is there in such Sayings? It is
true, that Christian Religion and Paganism are so contrary one to the other, as
impossible to be reconciled, no more than Contradictions can be reconciled.

But because they cannot be reconciled that therefore there should be perpetual
War betwixt them and us, perhaps is an irreligious Doctrine, and destroys all
Means of convincing Infidels to the Faith.

And besides, these extrajudicial and occasional Sayings in these Books cited,
are of little Authority: For I cannot find any Book or Case, much less Judgment
or Authority for such Opinions in so great a Point as this is.

But on the other side, if a Man considers the general Course and Practice,
Trade and Commerce, and legal Proceedings; a Man would think, That my Lord Coke
could not be in earnest in what he has said about Infidels.

For let a Man consider what a great Part of the World we have Commerce with,
that are Infidels, as Turks, Persians, the Inhabitants of Barbary, and other
Countries.

Spain and Portugal were also possessed by the Moors, who were Infidels, till
about the Year 1474. about 200 Years since they were driven out, for till then,
for near the Space of 700 Years the Moors possessed both Spain and Portugal.

Have we not Leagues and Treaties with the Princes and Inhabitants of the
Infidel Countries, receiving Ambassadors from them, and sending Ambassadors to
them, and Ministers always residing with them? Have we not from Time to Time,
Peace or War with them in like manner, as with Christian Kings and Countries?

If Infidels be perpetui Inimici, if in perpetual Enmity, then we may justify
the killing of them, as those that we are in Hostility with, wheresoever we
meet with them.

17 E. 4. 13. b. 2 H. 7. 15. Adjudged that any Man may seize and take to his
own Use, the Goods of an alien Enemy.

It Is the Price of his Adventure and Victory over his Enemy.

If an Infidel be any Enemy, any Man may then take away the Goods of an
Infidel, and have them to his own Use: And this would be a good Trade if this
be so.

Mr. Solicitor, in his Argument, was pleased to cite many ancient Rolls out of
H. 3. and E. 1. and about those Times, concerning those Princes handling the
Jews.

In Mr. Pryn's Book that he calls The second Part of a short Demurrer to the
Jews long discontinued Remitter into England; printed in 1656.

In which Book, I believe, an hundred Records and Histories are cited to show
how they were about those times handled.

The Time that they did exact, and much enrich themselves by Usury, to the
great Impoverishment of the People: And that the Princes of those Times polled
them, taxed them, and took it from them again at Pleasure.

But besides Mr. Pryn,

Stat. of Merton, C. 5. made 20 H. 7. was, my Lord Coke says, 2 Inst. 89.
principally intended against the usurious Jews.

Stat. de Judaismo 18 E. 1. Recites, that the King's People were disinherited
by the usurious Jews: And enacts, That no Jew, for the future, shall take Usury.

2 Inst. 507.
My Lord Coke says, that 15060 Jews thereupon departed the Kingdom.

But for the Use that in arguing is made of this matter of the Jews and of the
King's seizing their Estates, and pardoning for dealing with them.

1. As for those ancient Records in general.

Time has hidden the Knowledge of the Laws, and Transactions of those Times: It
is impossible to know what the Laws of those Times were, or rightly to
distinguish betwixt legal and violent Acts: And to bring Inferences from
thence, to conclude in Judgment now, is Notum per Ignotius: Or like
Dependencies, which, unless latter Times have concurred or agreed with, are
only fit to make Disorder and Confusion.

2. But that which is deducible from thence is not, as I conceive, what has
been endeavored.

That is, that they had no Property, because the Princes of those Times took
from them their Estates when they pleased, or taxed them how, and in what
manner they pleased.

But perhaps the Reason was because those People lying under the Curse, and
being a vagrant People, without Head, Prince, or Governor, or Country; it was
no Difficulty to tax, or take from them at Pleasure, being hated of the People
where they lived.

For it could not be as they would have it, that they should be amongst us as
alien Enemies; for an alien Enemy can make neither Bargain nor Contract, nor be
capable of Property.

But the Subject may, at his Will and Pleasure, fall upon and take all that he
has to his own Use, as upon the King's Enemies; and what he can take from him
is his own Acquisition, as the Prize of his Adventure, and Conquest over his
Enemy: And to prove this, two Books are cited, 17 E. 4. and 2 H. 7.

But by what is admitted by them, that they were great Usurers, and had great
Estates,

It is evident that they were treated as alien Amies: How could they else, in
such Multitudes, live amongst us? How could they be Usurers or get Estates if
they could not make Contracts? How is it possible they could preserve their
Bodies or Estates against the King's Subjects, unless they had the King's
Protection, and treated as alien Amies?

And of latter Times, how many of them have lived amongst us, driven great
Trades, have had, and have, at this present, considerable Estates?

Let it be now adjudged, that any Man that will, may take away their Estates,
that they can have no Remedy or Action for any Debt owing to them, but instead
thereof, may be beaten and imprisoned as Enemies to the King: And we shall
probably see what the Success of such a Judgment will be.

12 Car. 2. cap. 18.
The Act of Navigation, made the 12 Year of the King, concerning Trade, shows,
that Infidels have the same Liberty of Trade as others.

That Act being made for Increase of Shipping and Navigation, and prohibiting
Goods to be imported by any foreign Ships, except the Ships of the same Country
where the Goods do grow or arise, distinguishes not betwixt Infidel and
Christian Countries: But expressly says, That Currants, nor Commodities of the
Growth of the Turkish or Ottoman Empire, shall be imported but by English
Ships, except Ships of the Built of that Country or Place where the Growth is,
and whereof the Master of the Mariners is of that Country or Place.

This Clause shows plainly, that the Infidels of the Turkish and Ottoman Empire
have Liberty of Trade here.

And the Acts of Tunnage and Poundage tax all their Merchandises without saying
brought in.

In Southern and How Is Case, 2 Cr. 469. where a Man employed another to sell
Jewels for him in Barbary, as true Jewels, and he sold them to the King of
Barbary for 800 l. as true Jewels, when they were counterfeit, and thereupon
the King of Barbary finding himself cheated, imprisoned the Plaintiff that sold
them, to him, till he repaid his Money

In that Case 'twas of all sides admitted, and not as much as objected, that
this Contract was void, because the King of Barbary was an Infidel.

So that this Opinion, that Infidels are perpetual Enemies, and in perpetual
Hostility, can maintain no Action, nor have any thing amongst us, has no
Authority for its Foundation, but only some extrajudicial Sayings, without
Debate or Consideration: And is against all the continual Practices of Princes
and People at all Times.

Perhaps it is no small Part of Religion, that Men should speak and deal plainly
and uprightly one with another. We do know that Religion has been too often
made a Cloak and Vail for other Ends and Purposes. It should not be so: And I
hope, will not be so used in this Case.

The Statutes that I have cited of Magna Charta, c. 9. E. 3. 25 E. 3. 2. and 11
R. 2. All declare and enact the Freedom of Trade in general Words, except only
such as are in War with the King. In none of them is there any Exception of
Trade with Infidels.

Can it be imagined, that in those Days we had no Trade with Turkey or Barbary?
Our Kings went with Armies to the Holy Land. King had made War and Peace with
the Turks. Had we no Trade there but with our Swords?

But to look nearer home, Spain and Portugal were Infidels, and in the Hands of
the Moors, until anno 1474. which was 14 E. 4. Can it be thought that in all
those Times betwixt Magna Charta, H. 3. and E. 4. we had no Trade with Spain or
Portugal?

Stat. 12 H. 7. c. 6. was made in the Year 1497. which is but 23 Years after
the Moors were driven out, and in that Statute it is Recited,

That the Merchants Adventurers, dwelling in diverse Parts of England, out of
London, did show,

That whereas they have had free Passage, Course and Recourse with their Goods,
Wares, and Merchandises in diverse Coasts and Parts beyond the Seas, as well
into Spain, Portugal, Venice, Danzick, East-land, Frize-Land, and diverse, and
many other Regions and Countries in League and Amity with the King;

That they were imposed upon by the Company of Merchants in London, and forced
to pay Duties.

I only make use of this Recital, to prove the free Passage there mentioned, to
Spain and Portugal, and to other Countries and Regions. There is no Distinction
of Infidel from Christian Country, though Spain and Portugal had been so lately
Infidel; and though most probably, the Trade they had then, was with Turkey and
Barbary, as well as with Venice: The Words [other Regions and Countries,] seem
to imply as much, and the Freedom equal.

So that I think, as to this Objection, that Infidels are perpetual Enemies,
that we have no Peace with them, nor they maintain any Action, or have any
Property by our Law; I think the Authority to maintain it is none at all; The
constant Practice, as well by Princes as People, has been always against it.

But be that Point of trading with or without License, how it will;

That Point cannot be sufficient to found a Monopoly upon, that cannot warrant a
Grant of a sole Trade, sole buying, and sole selling, to be granted to you and
your Successors, your Sons, your Servants, your Apprentices and Factors, and
such as you shall license for ever.

Here is a License in Perpetuity, not only to those that then were, but to
their Sons and Successors, and those whom they shall license for ever: And this
into a very great Part of the World: And by the same Reason all Turkey and
Barbary, a great Part of the West Indies, and other Parts of the World may be
monopolized, and perhaps all Christian Countries.

The Statute of Monopolies has no Allowance or Exception for monopolizing to
Infidel Countries.

That Statute is against all sole buying, sole selling, or sole using any thing.

And the Turkey Trade was used long before that Time, as by the Charter granted
23 Eliz. So was the Barbary, as by the Charter thereof; and I believe to the
Indies also.

And the Statute of Monopolies being so general (the Proviso not reasonably
construable, to except this Company out of the Extent of that Statute, unless
all Patents that may be granted to Companies of Monopolies are, by that
Exception or Proviso, out of the Statute) and deserving for the suppressing so
great Evils as Monopolies are, and always have been accounted:

I hope it will not be avoided upon an imaginary Difference in Law betwixt
Infidel and Christian Countries, to monopolize thereby the Trade, perhaps, of
the greater Half of the World; as Turkey, Persia, Barbary, East and
West Indies; for those of the West Indies, a great Part, I think, are Pagans.

Exch. 4. C. 1. Lane 24. 2 Inst. 63.
In the great Debates that were about 3 and 4 Car. 1. about the King's Power of
imposing Rates, Subsidies, or Impositions upon Merchandise, in Bates his Case;
and in the Parliaments are many things said concerning the King's Power of
prohibiting Trade.

Restraining by a Ne exeat Regno. And from these Arguments they reason the
Lawfulness of Imposition upon Merchandise.

The Arguments and Reasons in those Debates did not distinguish betwixt Infidel
and Christian Countries. But betwixt Native and Foreign Commodities or
Merchandise. And did endeavor to have a Prerogative to tax foreign Commodities.

And their Reasons run thus,

The King can prohibit or restrain any Merchant to go out of the Kingdom: He
can restrain any sort of foreign Commodities to be imported: If he can
restrain, then none can go or import contrary to such Restriction or
Prohibition without License. Then the License is grantable upon Payment of such
or such Duty or Imposition, or as it can be agreed for and had; and
consequently such Imposition, Farm, or Rent lawful.

And in the Argument of those Matters, it appears that a Restraint in its
Consequence may import a Tax, or an Imposition, or Rent or Farm.

If Licenses be requisite, whether that will introduce Rates to be imposed
otherwise than by Act of Parliament, may be considered.

Suppose it true, that there have been Licenses granted, to go into Infidel
Countries. So there have been to go beyond Seas.

But it is no Consequence, that because such have been granted, that therefore
it is unlawful to go or trade without Licenses.

Much less does it follow from thence, that such a Patent as this to any one or
few Subjects to have the whole and sole Trade into any one Place, can be
warranted.

I do not question but the King may restrain the Passage of Merchants and
Merchandise in some Cases, and Embargue Ships in some Cases. But these are upon
several Reasons.

1. In Cases of War.

2. In Cases of such Merchandises as are necessary for the Safety or Defense of
the Kingdom, to restrain their Exportation.

3. In Cases of Plague from particular Place to import.

But then these Prohibitions are general, and their particular Reasons and
Grounds are apparent.

But if under any Pretense, any sole Trade to some one Person, Body politic,
or Natural, be granted, excluding all others, That Grant is, I conceive, in
Deceit of the King, and to the Prejudice of his Subjects, and void.

Never any such Grant has hitherto had any judicial Allowance; but so far from
that, that as far as I could observe, no Opinion has been, till within 4 or 5
Years, that such Grants were good to exclude others: Nor any Action or Suit
ever adventured before now to be brought upon any such Ground.

But if the Law should be so, and that the Defendant ought not to have traded
there without License,

Then he may be punishable at the King's Suit, by Fine and Imprisonment.

But that you should maintain an Action against him; what Cause of Action, or
what Damage or Loss to you have you laid in your Declaration?

You say in your Declaration, That the Defendant Sands, not being a Member of
the Company, nor Son, Servant, Factor, Apprentice, or Assignee of the Company,
traded and merchandized in the East Indies, within the Places granted to you by
your Charter, and has there bargained and sold Wares and Merchandises, and
there bought others, and imported and sold them in England, against the Will of
the Company, to their Prejudice and Impoverishment, against the Form of the
Letters Patents, to the Damage of the Company, 1000 l.

1. You have not alleged that he had no License from the King.

2. You have not shown any Loss or Damage that you have.

Did he buy so much Merchandise in the Indies, as that he left not there
sufficient for you to furnish your Ships withal, so that they came home empty?

No such thing is alleged.

Or did he here export, to sell so much Merchandise, as not sufficient left for
you to buy here?

No such thing alleged in your Declaration.

Or did he bring home here so much as that there were not Buyers sufficient for
his Goods and yours also?

No such thing is alleged.

Or is the Truth so, as that hereby your imposing your Prizes upon your own
Commodities, selling at your own Rates, and exacting what you thought fit, was
hindered; and for this you would maintain an Action?

It will be the first Time, I think, that a Man did ever recover Damages for
being hindered of imposing and exacting his own Prizes, or having the Advantage
of his Monopoly.

A Commoner may bring an Action of the Case against a Stranger, who puts in his
Cattle into the Common; provided that thereby the Common be impaired, and the
Commoner have not sufficient Common, as before, but have a Damage; otherwise he
can maintain no Action.

Resolved, Co. 9 Rep. 113.
that for every feeding of the Beasts of a Stranger in a Common, the Commoner
shall not have an Assize or Action upon the Case, but the feeding ought to be
such, that thereby the Commoner cannot have Common of Pasture for his own
Beasts.

It Is the Consequence, the Loss of his Common that gives him Cause of Action.

It Is not alleged in the Declaration, that your Trade was any thing the worse:
No Damage to you appears by it.

What Reason is there that you should recover Damages where you have not
sustained any Loss? And if you have alleged none in your Declaration, how can
your Declaration be good? It then contains no Cause of Action.

11 Co. Rep. 88. b. Rols Abr. 1 part. 106.
The last Point in that Case is there resolved, that admitting the patent good,
yet no Action would lie.

In that Case the Queen, by her Letters Patents, had granted to Mr. Darcey,
that he, his Servants, Factors, and Deputies, the whole Trade, Traffic and
Merchandise of Cards for 12 Years should have and use: That none else should
use the Trade, nor buy or sell Cards: That the Defendant did, contrary to this
Patent sell Cards.

1. Adjudged that this was a Monopoly, and the Patent void.

2. That if the Patent had been good, yet no Action would have lain against the
Defendant upon it.

2. But for another Reason you cannot maintain this Action.

It is grounded upon the Restraint and Prohibition of others to trade,
contained in the Letters Patents.

That Restraint or Prohibition is not an absolute Restraint or Prohibition, but
sub modo, under a Pain of Forfeiture of Ship and Goods; One half to the King,
another half to you that are the Company.

Now supposing all that you can desire; That this Patent should have the Force
and Virtue of an Act of Parliament, yet such an Action as this could not be
maintained upon it; but you must sue for the Forfeiture.

For whenever a new Law is made, you must take that new Law as it is, and it
cannot be extended.

Co. 7 Rep. 37. 11 Rep. 59. and Pl. Com. 206. All prove it.

Stat. E. 6. gives treble Damages for not setting out of Tithes.

Can the Party wave this Way, and bring an Action of the Case? Yet here the
Damages are given to the Party.

The like of all other penal Statutes; a Man must forfeit only the Penalty the
Statute inflicts.

So that this Action cannot, as I conceive, be maintained.

So that to conclude:

1. That which this Company claims in this Case by this Patent, to have the
sole Trade to the East Indies in their Politic Capacity, excluding all others,
is a Monopoly and engrossing against the common Law; the ancient Statutes; the
Statute of Monopolies 21 Jac.

And therefore they have no Right to have what they claim.

2. That what the Defendant has in this Case done, he has lawfully done, and
therefore not to be punished.

3. That though the Company had a lawful Claim to the Trade in such manner as
in their Declaration set forth, and the Defendant have done what he ought not,
yet they cannot maintain this Action.

And upon the whole matter, Whether best for the Company to have Judgment for
them or against them, may deserve their Thoughts.

And this being so great in the Conseqence, as the whole Trade of the Kingdom
depending upon it, I have labored the more.

The ancient Laws, the ancient Ways, is what I endeavor, and against new Ways
upon any Pretense whatsoever.

Some Books printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
THE Works of the Most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing Fifty four Sermons and Discourses on Several Occasions;
together with the Rule of Faith. Being all that were published by his Grace
himself, and now collected into one Volume: To which is added, an Alpabetical
Table of the Principal Matters. Price 20 s.

Six Sermons; viz. Of Stedfastness in Religion. Of Family Religion. Of
Education of Children. Of the Advantages of an early Piety. By his Grace, John,
late Archbishop of Canterbury. In 12o. price 18 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper;
also by his Grace, John, late Archbishop of Canterbury, in 12o. Bound 6 d. or
Stich'd in 8o. 3 d. or something cheaper to those that are so Charitable to
give away Numbers.

The Holy Bible, containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations and
very exact Parallel Scriptures. To which is annexed the Harmony of the Gospels;
as also the Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to our English
Standards. And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel Clark, Minister
of the Gospel. Printed in Folio on a very Fair Letter; the like never before in
one Volume. To which is newly added, a very exact and useful Concordance. Price
30 s.

The Works of the Learned Isaac Barrow D.D. late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge. Published by the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, late Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Third Volume. Containing Forty five Sermons upon several
Occasions, completing his English Works. Price 14 s.

Now in the Press, and will be published in Michaelmas Term, an Exposition of
the Apostles Creed, by the learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge; (never before printed, being very different from his
Volume of Sermons on it;) to which will be added, his Exposition of the Lord's
Prayer and the Ten Commandments, etc.

Practical Discourses upon the Consideration of our Latter End, and the Danger
and Mischief of Delaying Repentance. By Dr. Isaac Barrow, in 8o Price 18 d.

The Four Last Things, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: Practically
considered and applied. By W. Bates, D. D. in 12o. Price 2 s.

Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. On Psalm 130. v. 4. Also by Dr. Bates,
Price 18 d.

Enchiridion Medicum: Or, a Manual of Physic. Being a Compendium of the whole
Art. In 3 Parts, viz. I. Of Diseases of the Head. II. Of Diseases of the
Breast. III. Of the Diseases of the Belly. Wherein is briefly showed; 1. The
Names. 2. The Derivation. 3. The Causes. 4. The Signs. 5. The Prognostics. And
6. A rational Method of Cure. Comprehending the substance of the more approved
Authors both ancient and Modern. Published for the Benefit of all Persons,
being fitted to the meanest Capacity. By R. Johnson, Med. Profess. Price 2 s. 6
d.

FINIS.

