AN APOLOGY FOR A YOVNGER BROTHER OR A DISCOVRSE PROVING that PARENTS may
dispose of their Estates to which of their Children they please.

By I. A.

Written for the general good of this Kingdom.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD for Edward Forest, 1641.

TO ALL FATHERS AND SONS OF WORTHY FAMILIES Whom Virtue, Birth, and Learning
have justly styled GENTLEMEN, Health, Happiness, and Increase of the best
Knowledge.
AS in the Front of this brefe Discourse, there is (Right Worthy Gentlemen)
already delivered unto you some light of that which concerns the Quality,
Reason, and Scope thereof: so do I here sincerely profess, that J did not
privately write it at First but for private satisfaction; neither do I now make
it public, but with due relation to the general good of Great Britain, and
for the exercise of Honorable Spirits, in this our much-speaking and
paradoxicall age.

Not upon the least presumption of a selfe-sufficiency, to confront thereby any
received custone (if any such be) nor to diminish the natural reverence due by
Younger brothers to to their Elder; not to enkindle Emulations in Families nor
to innovate any thing to the prejudice of public or private quiet (which none I
hope will be so ill affected as to suppose,) neither mine in offensive zeal
for Younger Brothers (amongst whom I am rancked one) nor the absolute consent
of Imperial and Ecclesiastical Laws (which J having a little studied do not
a little respect) nor the particular honor I bear to the vsages in this point,
of our ancient Britains (from whom J am decended) nor desire to maintain and
justify an act in this kind, done by a friend (whom I must ever reverence)
nor yet the hope of bettering my private fortunes (which moves men much in
these our times) has drawn me to this Undertaking: but principally (as before
is somewhat touched) the singular respect which (as a Patriot) I bear to the
glory, and good of Gentlemen's houses, whose best original, surest means of
maintenance, and principal Ornament is Virtue,, or force of Mind: The want
whereof, is a common cause of Ruin. The free power therefore of You who are
Fathers, is here in some special cases argued and defended, to give you
occasion thereby to consider with the clearer Eyesight, for the establishment
and continuance of Families. Here also the natural Rights of us that are
Children be so discoursed and discussed, as that We younger Brothers may have
caves and courage, to endeavor by virtuous means, to make our selves (without
the least wrong to any) capable (if need shall be) of the chiefest uses. And
Both, and All are so handled, as that no offense can reasonably arise in any
respect: much less, for that the whole is conceaved and written in nature
only of an Essay or Problem, to which I bind no man to afford more belief,
then himself has liking of: being free to refute the whole, or any part at
his pleasure, as he feels himself able and disposed.

If I may seem to some, to have handled this Subject with more earnestness
and Acrimony then they think expedient: let them be plealed to weigh the
Decorum of Disputes, which is principally herein observed: their nature
absolutely requiring quickness and vehemence, on whether side soever.

As for the remedies of Evils, by way of enacting Laws, that is the proper
office of Magistrates, and Courts of public Counsel: nevertheless to speak
and treat of them (under the favor and correction of Superiors, to whom I
do always very dutifully submit) is a thing which may well belong to every
man. But, for those grave and Learned Censors, to home I may seem to have
bestowed my pains in very needless Arguments, because no less then I my
self, they hold the case (as here it is put) to be most clear and out of
controversy: to such I answer, that I writ it not for them, unless perhaps to
confirm their judgments; but for others, who are not altogether so principled
or persuaded. Nor to any, as to prescribe, or bind further then their own
consciences shall think good. For that were far too peremptory

Finally, nothing being here defended but by Authority, Reason and Example; nor
any person taxed, nor particular personal Vices; if neverthelsse I have not
performed my part in the work so well as J desire, or as the Cause deserves
(which I fear I have not) yet my hope is (Right Worthy Fathers and Worthy
Sons of Right Worthy Families) that for my honest meaning, and good
Intntentions sake, you will ever conceave well of, and take in your special
Protection,

Your unfeigned Well-wisher, J. A.

THE CONTENTS
CHAP. 1. The occasions and scope of this Appoligie; to prove that Fathers may
in some cases dispose their Estates to which of their Sons shall reasonably
please etc. and that to be lawful by the law of God, of Nature, and of
Nations. CHAP. 2. That the grounds of good Constitutions being in Nature, yet
she neither before nor after the law of Propriety established, did command,
that all should lle left to any one more then to another. CHAP. 3. That the
breach of some written Laws of God, upon warrant of the primary Law of Nature,
is without siinne: and that therefore, there can be no such Right in
primogeniture, which is not in the Fathers power to avoid, though there were a
precept to the contrary, as there is not. CHAP. 4. That Nations beginning to
devise sundry Forms of settling Inheritances, the Romans especially therein
respected the free power of Fathers: the right of Children to their Fathers
estates, beginning only at their Fathers death. CHAP. 5. That the present
custom in our Country of giving All, or almost All to the Eldest, was never so
begun, that it meant to exclude just Remedies for such Evils, as should grow
out of the abuse of that Custom, when it may make Fathers guilty of their
Sons faults, and of their Families ruins. CHAP, 6. That it is no offense
before God, for a Father being Tenent in Fee-simple, to disinherit the Eldest,
or to parcel his estate upon cause: and that extreme vices of Heirs
Apparent, together with the fewer means which younger Brothers have now to
live on, then heretofore; cries out against the contrary opinion. CHAP. 7.
That Fathers being Tenants in Fee-taile, may likewise without scruple of
Conscience, discontinue the State-taile upon cause; and devise the same at
their reasonable pleasure. CHAP. 8. That Unthriftiness is one known name of
many hidden sins; and is alone a sufficient cause of disinherison; proved by
the Law of God and Man. CHAP. 9. The main points of the Premises exemplified
indiuers particular Facts, as well of Princes, as of private persons. CHAP. 10.
That the Law of Natural Equity and Reason confirm Disinherison: and that the
riotous lives of Elder Brothers deserve that vehement Increpation with which
the Author closes up this Treatise.
THE YOVNGER BROTHER HIS APOLOGY. CHAP. 1.
The occasion of writing this Apology, is to prove that Fathers may in some
cases dispose their worldly Estates to which of their Sons shall reasonably
please, etc. for so much thereof as they will; and that to be lawful by the
Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations.

NOT many Months since being invited by a dear Friend of mine to a solemn
Feast, made by him to many of his well-deseruing Friends, it was my fortune at
that Meeting to acquaint my self with many Gentlemen of no mean discourse:
Whereby I feasted as well my Understanding with their pleasant Society, as my
Taste with the variety of most excellent Meats.

With what our senses were delighted, I let pass to recompt, since neither
profit, pleasure, nor praise can arise thereof, either to the Writer or Reader.
Only my intent is, to make my Reader acquainted, what accident caused me to
write this small Treatise, and emboldned me to publish the same to the common
view of this all-reprehending Age. In which nevertheless I rather hope for
Allowance, then in any sort fear Displeasure.

For though my subject be New, yet I hope it shall want at the first rather
Age, and Strength, which grows by years; then probable Arguments, yea
forcible Reasons to defend it self. As for Friends, I trust, it will find
some, and peradventure more then Enemies, if it deserve well. For, as younger
Brothers be more in number then Elder, so are they generally more free in
bestowing their deserved Love. For Want breeding Understanding, makes them know
and prize their Friends Some friends stick closer then a Brother, Prove. 18.1.24.
according to their Worth. Whereas the Elder, either seated in his Fathers
Wealth or Possessions, with more then hopes to enjoy their Fortunes, do
sometimes neither love truly themselves, nor any man else; but abusing that
which indeed might gain the love of God and Man, and easily maintain their
hereditary Honor, loose themselves in Vanity and most idle courses; yea in
their Fathers lives, so strangely carry themselves (presuming rather on
precedence of Birth, then Worth) as though the Law of God, of Nature, and all
other Canon, Civil, and National Laws, Constitutions, and Customs sprung
from them, could not either in Reason or Religion bar them of that which they
expect; or give to a well-deseruing younger brother any little The harsh and
malevolent disposition of some Elder Brothers, is graphically delineated by our
Savior in the Parable, Luc. 15.28. [See verse. 32. the Fathers Apology for the
younger.]
hope lawfully to share with them the least part of their Fathers Inheritance:
much less to expect an Elder Brothers Fortunes: or on any terms, or for any
cause, by a Fathers favor, to step before them.

Which Argument among many others, was then handled by the Company pro and
contra so doubtfully, that it gave me occasion to write this present Discourse
concerning the free power of some Fathers. Wherein I intend not to displease or
inconciliate Elder Brothers; no not them, who not inheriting their Fathers
Virtues, strive not to maintain their Ancestors Honor, in preserving their
Noble Names Amongst all Gods tempoporall blessings promised as Rewards to his
faithful servants, I find none greater in holy Writ, the^ the spreading of
their Family. So God to Abraham, I will make of thee a mighty people. What God
prizes as so great a guerdon to his best Favorites, shall Unworthy Man esteem
a Trifle? Carpenter. Achitophel. part. 3.
and Familes, by which as a reward to their Virtues and Travels, Men have
always labored to live to all succeeding Ages, in their Posterity.

But my intent is to show, how Opinion and Inconsideration make oft-times the
Wise to be scrupulous, and through superstitious Zeal, not only to fear to
do that which Reason may or might have commanded; but in their erroneous
Judgments rashly to condemn other men's Acts as unlawful and irreligious,
which according to Reason and Religion have been done and ratified; using
themselves THAT CUSTOM for the overthrow of their Families, which was indeed
only devised for their preservation; and being hoodwinkt with false conceits,
do wittingly leave that, which they and their Ancestors had gotten, as the
reward in this life of their virtues, to be the future Fuel of all inordinate
Desires and Bestiall sensuality, which in their providence they could willingly
otherwise have disposed of.

All which I doubt not but to make clear to the impartial Reader: proving by
the Law of God and Man, that a Fathers freedom is such, that he may Lawfully
and Religiously give his Lands and Goods, or other his Fortunes, to any of his
Children, for the preservation of his Name, and comfort of his Posterity,
without all scruple, as right Reason, or the better Deserts of a Son shall
persuade him, void of all tenderness or blindness of Affection, which
oftentimes leads a Fathers Will, and corrupts his Understanding: so as he be
true Lord thereof, not tied by consideration of Money received, or Contract made
by Marriage of his Son, which may alter the case, and make the Son Lord,
and the Father to have but the use only during his life, as all our common
Lawiers well know. In which case, we also have experience, that our Law permits
many times to alter the Title, and to undo what by former times was held not
to be controlled. But of this point I will not treat. Only I mean to argue,
whether a Father possessed in Fee-Taile, may in law and equity, upon the
former considerations, make any child which he has, his Heir, leaving to the
rest a competency; and do an Act which according to Equity and Religion may
stand good and valuable.

In this my present Discourse let not any expect many Quotations of Authors;
for I never read any of this subject. What I bare away of my friends
Conference, I will set down; and what other Reasons my understanding shall
afford; which I hope shall prove so Demonstratiue, that they shall be of
Authority sufficient It Is one thing, to convince an error: another, to make men
forsake it: A third, to win them to the truth. vid. page 117.2. part of divine
Essence and Attributes; by Reverend D. Iackson, worthily honored with the Elogie
of an Incomparable writer; by M. Pinke of pious memory. See his Trial of
synceritie: sermon. 4. p. 57.
to satisfy any Reader; or incite some better Pen to treat of the same more
largely and substantially; and lastly and chiefly, to clear some of my Worthy
Friends from those imputations, which I find the Ignorant to lay upon them.
Which done, I shall think my Time and Pains well employed.

CHAP. 2.
That the grounds of all good Constitutions being in Nature, yet she, neither
before, nor after the Law of Propriety established, did command, that All
should be left to any one, more then to another.

SUch are the wise and temperate Works of Nature, Natura, Divinitatis fulgor,
Valles. de sa^. phil. c. 1. p, 22.
that nothing is done by her rashly or unadvisedly. For though in the Infancy
of the World, she had an invincible power to produce all effects which then
had their Original in her: yet, being studious to please Mankind not only
with variety, but also with raritie, she successively discouers and daily
discloses to the searching Wits of the World her Secrets, as Time and Place
either has or does daily beget Occasion; still as it were keeping in store her
heavenly Treasure, till Man's necessity best moves her Liberality.

For what can the Wit of man devise, or what does Time or Art make known which
good is; that Nature, from the first time she began to work, has not in
her (though to her self only known) the ground thereof, either to produce the
particular or general effect, which wisely she left to be tempered,
according as the Reason of Man (whose glory she pretends) should think fittest
to give the Form, as Time, Place, and the nature of the Thing should require?

For though Marriage, as it is a conjunction of Man and Woman, containing an
inseparable society of life, be of Nature it self, and had its Original in
the state of Innocence, which (as Divines and Canonists hold) was undoubtedly
ordained for Issues sake, whereby a Lineall succession was also intended: yet,
until necessity enforced Man to make Division of the Blessings of God and
Nature, the Claims and Rights which follow Lineall succession to Inheritance,
were not discovered. For all communicable things being common amongst Men, many
Ages were numbered from the Worlds beginning, before any man laid proper claim
to any thing, as due to himself alone. Whereby it well appears, that
hereditary succession, or Title to a Parents Lands or Goods, could not then be
in use, or so much as thought of.

This, I persuade my self, was the Law of Nature vndepraved. Which I incline
my Will the sooner to credit, because I find that all sorts of people, as well
Christians as others, who have perfection in Natural society, or a perfect and
Religious life in a Natural and worldly conversation of Me^, have and do
daily embrace this natural and See Acts 2.44.
blessed Community.

Which happy Law of Nature (as I have said) for many ages endured, and without
doubt had longer continued, had not sin (which breaks all union, and
depraues all Natural perfection) gotten such dominion in the minds of Men,
that in Natural Equity all things could not longer be used in common.

For as some being possessed with an insatiate desire to get, rule, and reign;
sought the oppression of others, by taking from the^ that freedom which Nature
had given them: So others given to sensuality and idleness, sought to live of
other men's labors; whereas by Natures laws every one ought to live by his
proper industry, within the rules of Justice and Honesty. Whereupon natural
Reason persuaded, that all things being divided, every Man should know his
own: otherwise, no peace or concord could be maintained in Humane society. For
all things being common, the way lay open to every man at his pleasure to abuse
others, and as it were to rob them of God his Blessing.

Hereupon, Aristotle judged the Division of all worldly Goods, to have been
agreeable to the law of Nature, which the precept of our Decalogue seems to
approve, Thou shall not steal. For the Law of God is never contrary to the Law
of Nature: neither does Nature ever contrary it self, though some may perhaps
think that herein she has. For albeit at the Creation of all things together
with Man in the state of Grace, a fraternall and amicable Community was
intended: yet was it not so absolutely resolved of by Nature, but that by
Necessity (I mean by the fall of Man from Gods Grace) she did dispense with
this Law, and left free to Man's choice to embrace, upon her warrant, either the
One or the Other, as best might fit the Time, Place, and Natures of Men, which
ever since the World began, have given occasion of making of all Laws.

Whereby we see, that though Nature give the grounds to Laws, yet Man's
understanding still gives the particular Form. For Nature creating Man, gave
to him those worldly blessings to use well, with Warrant either to hold them in
Common, or in Proper, as reason from time to time could best persuade his Will.

But, when Reason and Will had agreed, that it was fit that every Man should
enjoy his Part in Proper; Nature moved Man further, and told him, that now he
might lawfully think on his succession; and not only live in his species, but
breath, as it were, to the Worlds end, in a lineall Posterity by honorable
Deeds and Virtuous Acts; with which Desire, Nature, as a wise mother, so
inflamed Man (her Noblest Child) after his Fall from Grace, that some Men by
Natures light only, have done Acts almost above Nature; and none have hardly
been so base, but desirous to live, and leave an honorable memory behind them.

Which that they may the better do, Nature has not only given them power to
leave their welgotten Wealth, but in a manner their habitual They which are
descended of ancient Nobility, have in them an implanted complete Generosity
(or virtuous Disposition) (...). Dio Cas. Hist. To. l. 44. ex Orat. M. Antonii.
Virtues to their Issue; in which, this worldly Honor (the Souls worldly life,
and Virtue's temporal Reward) may live free from all-killing Time. Yet, did
she not then by any Command, leave it to any one in particular, but giving a
general suggestion of the Fitness of the Thing, left the Form to their best
Discretion. For had she not done so, all Nations had been tied to observe one
Form, in leaving their goods and Fortunes to their Posterities; for Nature
being One, without change to all, of necessity prescribes no binding Rule to
any in particular, but to all in general; no man being able to say; This,
Natures Law commands me to do, and yet binds not any other to do the like.
Which is evident in the Matter of Succession, Consule Clariss. V. D. Zouch, de
Iure Feudali. p. 18. and. 21.
or Claims of Inheritance; no one Country observing the Form held by another;
or tying it self without control to observe its own, as I shall hereafter
declare.

For albeit (as I have said) the Conjunction of Man and Woman (which we call
Matrimony) together with the Desire of Issue, be of Nature, from whence also
are sprung not only a Division of the Goods and Fortunes of this World, but
also a laudable Desire to preserve a Family and Name, by the ordination of
Heirs to well-gotten Possessions; yet did Nature never set down as a Law, that
those Fortunes should be left to the Elder Brother or Younger, or to any One in
particular; or to All; but to whom the Father, being true and free Lord
thereof, should best devise by Will guided by Reason. For it was never yet
averred by any sound Divine, Philosopher, or Lawyer, that Nature makes
immediately Heirs, but Men, whom the positive Laws of every Country ordain by
that Form and Power of Law, where such an Act should be done. And this is (I
presume) without control, what the Law of Nature commanded touching the Matter
in Question. Next, let us see, what the Laws of God do command.

CHAP. 3.
That the breach of some written Laws of God, upon warrant of the primary Law
of Nature, is without sin: and that therefore, there can be no such Right in
Primogeniture, which is not in the Fathers power to avoid, though there were a
precept to the contrary, as there is not.

IF Nature, being taken for the principal and all-producing Cause of the whole
Frame of the Universe, with all Creatures therein, being nothing else but the
working Will of the Highest and first Mover (as Divines and Philosophers hold)
then surely must Natures Law be his Will, which he cannot contradict or
counter-mand, except he should be contrary to Himself, which he cannot. For,
what is in God, is God, therefore Constant and Immutable. Out of which
Principle, it is easily proved, that if the Law of God teach that which the Law
of Nature has ordained, the Right of Inheritance cannot be tied to any other
person or persons, then to those which the Fathers Will approues, according to
the Power given him, by the Laws of Nations where he lives. Which Power
derived from Natures Law, cannot err from the Law of God. For whosoever shall
consider but of Gods Commandments given to Man, shall well find, that God
thereby has still seconded his former Ordinances given by Nature. For so long
as Mankind lived in a sort, after the Innocence which Gods Grace in his first
Creation had wrought in him, God gave him no other Law: But when as by sin
those sparks which remained after his Fall, were quite extinguished; he gave
him New Laws, yet agreeable to Nature.

As for example in our present Affairs: When Man had made by Natures privilege
partition of Gods and Natures Blessings, then God said to his People by the
mouth of Moses, Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
house, his Wife, his Ox, his Ass, or any thing that is his. As also, Thou
shall not kill. Which with all other his Commandments teaching what sin is,
are agreeable to the Law of Nature, yet are dispensed withal, as far as the
Laws of Nature ever permitted. For, though that the express Command of God
be, thou shall not covet any thing that is thy Neighbors, nor kill; yet, in
some Cases, Both may lawfully be done. The one, in extreme Want of present
Food: the other, in defense of Life and Goods; In which, the Law of God, is
good by the Original Law of Nature, which made All for the sustenance of Man;
and gave leave to defend Life with with the loss of another Blood, yea Life,
if otherwise it cannot be. Upon which Ground, I argue thus.

Suppose the Law of God did at this present command (which indeed it does not)
that the Inheritance should be left to any one particular Person, and namely to
the Elder-Brother, yet in some Cases it would not bind the Father to observe
it. For as in the former Commandments, upon some considerations the
Commandment may be dispensed withal, so in this. For it is not sufficient to
be the Elder-Brother, or the nearest in Blood to gain an Inheritance in the
Case which I have now proposed; for other Circumstances must concur, which if
they be wanting, bare propinquity or ancienty of Blood may justly be rejected:
and he that is second, third, fourth, fifth, or last, may lawfully be preferred
before the First, and this, by all Law, Divine and Humane, and by all Reason,
Conscience, and Custom of Nations Christian.

For if it should happen that the next in Blood, should be a Natural Fool, or
a Madman, or being taken by the Turks or Moors in his Infancy, and educated
in their Religion, would maintain the same: or if any other such Accident,
ministering cause of just Exception should fall out; is it likely that any Law
would allow, that such a man should be admitted to the Inheritance? Wherefore
how idly should they talk, that would have it to be his Birthright, or that
God and Nature had made him Heir; since neither God nor Nature does immediately
make Heirs, as before is declared. Upon which Ground, our Common Lawyers say,
that No Heirs are borne, but Men and Law make them.

I confess, that in Holy Writ, great In allusion hereto, the Church Triumphant
is styled, The Church of the Firstborn. Heb. 12.23.
Respect is had of the first-begotten, and a Blessing is held to come to
Parents thereby. But this Blessing I presuppose to be, that thereby the Fear
of sterility was taken away, which in the Old Law was held to be a great
Punishment of God; and in respect thereof, Parents had of themselves, and by
the National Laws and Customs, a great Regard of their First-begotten, and
preferred them to the better part of their Possessions: yet, not by any Command
from God, as a Precept to bind his Elect people under pain of sin. For had
any such Law bound them under such a Penalty; then should it bind all
Christians now, on the same Conditions. But we see it by General Practice of
all Countries to be otherwise. Therefore it follows directly, that it was not
Gods Command, but a National Law. For God both is, and ever was One, without
change to all his People, and so ever were and will be his Laws Positive, made
for them that truly worship him.

The Claim which Esau made to his Birthright was not by the Law of God, as
some ignorantly affirm, but by the Laws of his Country. For, should the
Divine Law have commanded it, it had been sin in his Mother and Brother, by
Cunning to have got it from him. Neither could the Father or the State wherein
they lived, upon no just cause known but to God alone, without sin have
settled the same upon his Brother Jacob, as it was, and as it may seem, Jacob
praelatione divina and primogenituram and benedictionem promeruit (Ita Eximius
Praesul. D. Episc. Cicestr. Apparat. I.)
by allowance from God, and as it may be judged by the success. Whereby it is
thought, that God ordained it, as a Punishment of the One, and Blessing of the
Other: which by the permission of sin to be committed, God never does.

Neither did the National Law or Custom of the Jews (as it is said)
absolutely command the Father to leave to his first begotten, all, or the
greatest part of his Goods and Fortunes. But in case he died, not disposing
thereof by Act in his Life, or Will at his death, then the Custom Viz.
Grounded on the Right of Primogeniture. See Deuteronomy. 21.17. and the Geneva note
there.
of the Nation, laid a double Portion on the Eldest or First-begot, providing
for the rest proportionally.

By all which you may collect, that neither the Law of God or Man, in this
case, commanded that Esau should have the Inheritance; but Power to do the
contrary, was given to the Father in his Lifetime, even by the Law it self.
For many Divines hold that Esau selling his Birthright (as it is termed) sold
not Goods, or Lands, but his Claim of being At first, Fathers and their first
borne after the^, were both Kings and Priests in their own houses: but in
Moses days, this Prerogative of Primogeniture ceased: Aaron and his Progeny
being invested in the Priesthood, and Moses being as King. Deuteronomy 33.5. (As
judicious Mr. Godwyn in his Moses and Aaron. Lib. 1. c. 1)
High Priest after his Father, which by Custom was to come to him being his
Fathers Eldest Son. For which Dignity God seeing him unfit, permitted him to
pass away his Right in his Fathers life, as we read in Holy Writ, and which
God seemed to approve. And thus I hope this Objection is answered.

Further, if it were true, that the effect of Eldership were such by the Law of
God, as some passionately defend, that is, that the whole Inheritance should of
Right pertain to the Eldest; then sure it follows by good Consequence, that
there should, nor ever could, have been but one Temporal Lord of all the
World. For of Necessity Adams Inheritance should have gone still to the next in
Blood: which how absurd it is, let all men judge.

Moreover, we read, that Noe having three Sons, and the whole world to leave
unto them, gave it not All to the Eldest, but equally divided it among them and
their Posterity, as all Authentike Histories do witness.

Again, God requiring Obedience of Children to Parents, promised a Reward,
saying, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the
Land which the Lord shall give thee; Which surely was not spoken to one, but to
all the Children of men. For with God there is no Exception of Persons, but as
a just and pious Father, he gives every one according to his Deserts. Terram
autem dedit filiis hominum.

We read also in Holy Writ, how the Prodigal Son being weary of his Fathers
house, Luke 15.12.
came to him and boldly said, Pater, da mihi portionem substantiae meae quae me
contingit: This child of which the Gospel speaks, was the younger Brother:
yet you see how boldly he said: Give me that Portion of Goods which belongs to
me. By which words it is evident, that a Division or Partitio^ of a Fathers
Fortunes was then As is further evidenced Luke 12.13. where our Savior was
willed by One, to require his Brother to divide the Inheritance with him. Which
was the suit of a younger Brother (aggreeved at the churlish Iniquity of his
Elder.) The Judgment of that Illustrious and Religious Divine, M. John Ha^^^
the most exquisite Illustrator of Chrysostom, published by the Right Noble
Knight Sir Henry Savile, (...) in Glory.
in use: and that any child as well younger as elder had power by law to demand
his Legitimate, or Child's part, according to the nature of the Civil and Canon
Law, as you have heard. For the words following in the sacred Text are these,
Et divisit substantiam illis. And he divided unto them his Living. Thus we
see, that the privilege of Eldership was then excluded; which now in our
Country by Custom only, is gotten to be of such Force.

But it may be objected, that this was a Parable only (as indeed it was) and
cannot be alleged as Law. True it is; yet it cannot be denied, but that all
Similies, Parables, or Examples, which ever were alleged by the wise and
learned to represent the Truth, have ever been derived from the custom and
nature of Things, according to the known Truth in that time, and place, and to
those persons to whom the Speech or Discourse is directed. And shall we think
that our Savior Christ being Wisdom and Truth it self, treating of so
important an Affair, as he did then in the Gospel, would use an unknown
Discourse, or strive to make the Truth appear to our weak Understanding by a
Parable which in Equity could not be true? No surely. For it appears by
Solomon his succeeding his Father David, that David had power by the Laws of
God and Man, to give his Kingdom to the worthiest; which he deeming to be
Solomon, gave to him his Kingdom, though he was the youngest Son.

Neither was there any just exception made against Adonias his Eldest Brother,
or against some other of his Brethren, why they should be disinherited by their
Father David contrary to the common practice of those Times in settling
Inheritances. But the only known reason of this Act in Scripture, was David's
Promise, 1. Kings. 1.
made to Solomon's Mother, together with her great Entreaty made to David to
perform it. Which surely he would not not have done, had he not found a
lawful Power in himself, to have executed the same.

Lastly, it is invincibly proved out of the Book of Job, who was contemporary
with Moses (by attestation of judicious Theologians) that there was in those
Times and Countries no such Law or Custom, that the Eldest should play at
Sweep-stake, and all the rest be left to the four Winds: for it is expressly
recorded in the last Chapter, and the 15 Verse; that Job gave his Daughters,
Inheritance among their Brethren: Job. 42.15.
Which comes home to the point in Question, and irrepliably evinces a Fathers
Power and Right to make such a Partition of his Estate among his Children, as
upon emergent occasion, he shall judge expedient.

And thus much concerning what may be said out of Scripture, or Law of God, in
our present Question.

CHAP. 4.
That Nations beginning to devise sundry Forms of settling Inheritances, the
Romans especially therein respected the free power of Fathers: the right of
Children to their Fathers estates, beginning only at their Fathers death.

Having now declared what the Laws of God and Nature determine of our present
Question: we intend to examine in brief, what is commanded by the Law of Man,
as well Civil, of other Nations; as Common, of our own Country. And first
concerning the Civil Law.

Though all Law, which ever had but the Name or Credit of Law, does surely
derive her Original from the Law of Nature, whereupon Cicero many hundred
years since said, that the Ground of all Law-making, is to be taken from the
chief Law, which was made before any Law was written, or City builded: yet do
they differ much in Form. For as it is no Law, but Tyranny, which wholly
disagrees with the Law of Nature, as Aristotle says: so if it agree in All
with the Law of Nature, without limitation or difference, it must of Force be
the very Law of Nature it self; and not the Law of Man. Which surely is
nothing else, then a Temper or Form of Equity drawn by right Reason from the
Grounds of Natures Laws; according as Time, Place, and the Natures of Men
either gave, or shall give Occasion. For though new Laws be daily made of new
and several Accidents; yet all are agreeable to the old and ancient Grounds of
Reason in Nature, the Grandmother of all Law. Wherefore having before
specified what the Law of Nature is touching the Point in Question, I shall now
declare, what Temper or Form has thereto been added by the Civil Lawyer.

After that Mankind was enforced (yet by Natures Warrant) to make (as I have
said) a partition of the Blessings of God and Nature: and that Men were possessed
by the same Right of Goods and Lands which they desired to leave to Posterity;
Lawmakers, and in particular, the Civilian, devised by little and little
certain Forms of Inheritance, and ordination of Heirs, at first somewhat
rigorous, giving to Parents power of Life and Death over their Children, and a
free disposition of all their Fortunes to any one of them in his life: but
dying intestate, then all which was the Fathers, to be equally divided among
the Children, as well daughters as sons. Which Constitution was afterward
upon good grounds altered: the Father being bound to leave every child a
Portion, which the Civilian calls a Legitimate, Others a Patrimony; which at
first, was the eight part of the Fathers substance, equally to be divided (as
has been said:) which after a while seeming little, the Law commanded that the
Fourth part should be left without Control: except upon just cause the
Testator did disinherite him or them who by course of Law were to succeed him:
still upholding the former Laws, that as well daughters as sons, should
equally succeed their Parents dying intestate; Herein assigning fourteen
causes why an Heir might lawfully be disinherited.

Many hundred years passed from the establishing of the Civil Law, before it
was ordained by force of Law, that Parents should leave a Child's part (as it is
now called) or that they could not disinherit, without expressing the cause
thereof in their last Will: yet, in all this Time, nor till this present Day,
the Privilege of engrossing all by Primogeniture was not once heard of, or at
lestwise not admitted, but rather excluded; as by many Text in the same Law it
well appears: The End of the Imperial or Roman Civil Law, being only to
maintain Moral Justice in three short Precepts; Live honestly. Hurt no Man.
Give every one his own. So that he who observes these three, fulfills this
Law, yea the Law of Nature, whence this Law is derived. Now, if any Brother can
prove, that his Father either in his life by Deed, or by Will at his Death,
disposing of his Goods and Lands no otherwise then I have declared, does no act
against these three; why should he not content himself, either with the Fruits
of his Fathers love, or his own Deserts what ever they be.

True it is, that in Natural Justice, children during their Fathers life, have
Ius ad rem, not Ius in re to a Fathers Goods: Whereupon the Law calls them
quasi bonorum Patris Dominos. Which their Right only takes effect after their
Fathers Death. For during life, he has power to alter, alien, sell, and give,
as it shall please him, according to form of Law: but being dead without Will,
or disposition thereof, they fall upon his children, according to the Law of
Nations. This Law embraces a twofold Justice, the one in Exchange, the other
in Distribution. The first has not to do with our cause: The other This
warrants not the injurious Abdication of unnatural Parents; (irremediable by
the common Law: as is also the oppression of Orphans by lewd Step-fathers and
sharking Executors.) See D. Ridleys View (republisht by a learned Student of
the Royal College of Christ Church Oxon.) part. 4. Sect. 1. and 2.
rather commends then condemns a Father, who upon good Occasion, that is, for
the bad Demerits of his Eldest Son, and for the preservation of his Family,
shall give or convey his Lands or Goods to the Younger. For the Nature of
distributive Justice, is not only to give proportionally to the well-deseruing:
but also to forbear to place Benefits upon any one who shall abuse them: or
use the^ to any other end, then to that good for which they were lent, and he
shall leave them. And this is Ius suum vnicuique tribuere. For no man can give
or sell his Goods to an evil end, or to any one, who he assures himself, will
use them to the Dishonor of God, or the Wrong of those who shall live with
him, or by him: whereof I will treat more in the seventh Chapter; being then to
handle, what a Father may in Conscience do or not do, in our present
Question, with sin and without sin. And thus much of the Civil and Canon
Lawyers Averment of an Elder Brothers Right to his Fathers Fortunes.

CHAP. 5.
That the present custom in our Country of giving All, or almost All to the
Eldest, was never so begun, that it meant to exclude just Remedies for such
Evils, as should grow out of the abuse of that Custom, when it may make
Fathers guilty of their Sons faults, and of their Families ruins.

I Have purposely reserved to treat of the Laws of our Country in the last
place, because (I assure my self) they are of most force to sway the Point in
question. For many things may be permitted by the Laws of God and Nature, and
yet contrarily prohibited, or practiced by course of Law, in several States of
the World, as the Lawmakers and Customs of Countries allow or command. I
confess, the general practice of our Time among Parents, is to leave either
All or most part of their Lands to their Eldest Son. This questionless (as
has been said) was first devised in former Ages, for the preservation of a
Family, and to raise One who might be a Comfort to his Brothers, Sisters, and
Family, and in whom his Progenitors Virtues might live to the World. And I will
not deny, but the Partition of Lands, may reduce in the end, a goodly Estate to
Nothing, or to so little, as it may be like an Atome in the Sun; yet I find in
Natural Reason, that, ex nihilo nihil fit, or at lest, that Haud facile
emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi. --
But if Men fail of those happy Ends, Cessante ratione, cessat Lex,
to which this general Custom should guide, then could I wish, that they would
not use That for their Destruction, which was meant for their Preservation. For
who sees not, in these our Times, many unbridled youths so violently carried
away with the humor of spending, that they neglect Brother and Sister; yea,
bring to extreme misery their Natural Mothers after their Fathers Death, by
their unthriftiness. What help for this has Law left unto us? No means to
bridle these unruly Colts, if they become Heirs according to the custom of
our Time? No truly. For some starting-hole will be found, to vnty the Knot
which a Fathers care once tied. How then? Must many a hopeful and
well-deseruing Brother and Sister, be left to the Mercy of this Whirlewinde?
There is no Necessity. For our Law has given Power to a Father, and Free Will
to dispose of his Own, according as Reason shall guide his Will, without all
obligation to his Heir. Besides, this Custom takes place only after a Fathers
Death, if he dispose not what is his, by Deed in life, or by Will at his
Death. But lest my Words be more generally taken, then they are meant; I mean
those Fathers, who are possessed of their Lands in Fee, or Fee-taile: that is,
are absolute of themselves, and have not upon good Consideration convaied their
Lands from themselves. For all our Lawyers agree, that such Parents may alien,
sell, and give, by power of our Law, their Lands to whom they will, without
respect of Person or Eldership.

But may some say, the Custom is otherwise, and this Custom is a Law. True,
it is the Custom: But let us see, whether it bind sub peccato, or as a
Custom, which rather invites then commands. There was never any Command to tie
a Father under a Penalty which admits no limitation; but it was ever left
indifferent, and then only to take place where former Provision according to
course of Law is not made. Then surely a Parent is free from this devouring
Custom, and may considerately prevent what Evil it may bring to his
posterity: yea, Reason commands it should be so. For, Interest Reip. vt
quilibet re sua been vtatur: It concerns the public State that Men be Good
Husbands; says the Civil Law. For if a Man can neither sell, nor set, much
less can he give any thing to another, which he thinks in his Conscience,
will use it to the Dishonor of God, and the Ruin of himself, or others.

Divines hold, that it is not lawful to sell or let a house to any that he
thinks assuredly will make thereof a Stews; or to sell, give, or lend a
Weapon to a man who intends therewith to do murder. Excommunications are
imposed on them, who sell Arms Offensive, or Defensive to Turks, though they
be not assured, they will use them against Christians.

Thus, we see, the Rule of Conscience, not only commands a man to use well
those Fortunes which God has bestowed on him; but forbids him, either upon
Affection, or Gain, to part with them to others who will abuse them, lest he
partake of others sin: which a Parent may do after death, who leaves his
Lands to a desperate Unthrift. But, what Religion and Conscience commands,
shall be declared in the following Chapter. In which, upon Principles drawn
from the former Conclusions, shall be argued, what sin may be contracted by
the parting an Estate among Sons, or by disinheriting an Eldest son upon just
Cause; and to whom the Father is only tied by the Custom of the the Country,
without Obligation of Promise, or Contract in Marriage, which may alter the
Case.

CHAP, 6.
That it is no offense before God, for a Father being Tenent in Fee-simple, to
disinherit the Eldest, or to parcel his estate upon cause: and that extreme
vices of Heirs Apparent, together with the fewer means which younger Brothers
have now to live on, then heretofore; cries out against the contrary opinion.

THE Right of these insociable Inheritors, of which we now treat, may grow (as
I conceive) from three Titles or Claims, which they may pretend to a Fathers
Inheritance, and whereby it may be deemed (as they think) sin in a Father,
upon what Desert soever, to bar them of the said Right. These three Titles,
are Purchase, Custom, and Entaile. Of each severally. And of the first, which
is Purchase. Surely in the Judgment of the Good and Learned, there is no
question in Law, or Conscience, but that a son joined Purchaser with his
Father, has Ius in re, and by Equity must, surviuing his Father, inherit such
Lands as were purchased in their Names.

Now of the other two, though it be as clear as Noone-light, that a Lord in
Fee-simple, or Tenent in Tail, may sell, or give by course of our common Law,
at his pleasure all such Lands held by him, in that kind, according to those
forms of Law, which the learned in our Laws have, and can set down: yet
there seems to arise a great Difficulty, how such an Act or Acts may in
Conscience be executed. I have heard some say, in this our Case, summum Ius,
summa injuria.

Of these Points therefore I will speak (Salvo meliori judicio) what may in
Conscience, upon good and just Occasion given by the Son to his Father, be
put in Execution. It is well known to all Divines (as I have said) that Holy
Writ has not prescribed any direct or precise Form to the Children of God,
whereby they are bound in Conscience to dispose of their Lands and Goods, but
has absolutely left them to the Customs of their Country, where any Act of
that kind shall be executed; only as confirming all Forms of Devises which by
public Consent, and Authority, either have, or shall in rightful manner be
devised or ordained.

Out of this Ground and others prementioned, let us examine, whether a Father
parting his Fortunes by Power of Law, and on just Cause; shall do a wrongful
and sinful Act, as some would make it. I confess, that every Act in it self,
or by circumstance evil, and which upon no occasion can be justified, is both
before God and Man, sin, and by no means to be executed by a Christian. But
that the parting of an Inheritance, or Disinheriting of an Eldest Son, upon
just, and evident cause of incapacity, and according to Course of Law, is an
Act of that Nature, does not appear. For I find not, that either the Law of
Nature or Grace, nor yet the Laws of Man, Common, Civil, or Canon, ever for
bad such Acts, whereby sin may be imputed to those who do them on good
Considerations. Sure I am that the Canon and Civil Law are so far from
forbidding them, that they command, as a Thing in Equity, the Father either to
divide his Inheritance, or allow him according to his Affection, to give to one
more then to another: yet with this Proviso, that he who has the lest, have
his Or lawful Portion: See page 61. of Dr Ridleys View illustrated by the
judiciously ^e^^ined Mr Gregory.
Child's part; which the Law does also assign, except on just desert he
disinherit any one: which at this day may, yea must be by Will, with the cause
of Disinherison therein specified. Of which Causes the Imperial Laws have set
down fourteen, as may well appear to them who are desirous to understand
more thereof. So it is evident, that by these two Laws, no sin can grow upon
such Acts, being done upon their Warrant, and upon on such Consideration, as is
formerly delivered.

As for the Common Laws of our Realm, sure it is, they allow no less, and
with a greater Privilege. For a Man may by this Law, give his Lands held in
Fee, either by Deed in his life, or by Will at his death, to any of his
Children; yea to a stranger, without rendering a Reason why he does so. True it
is, that a Father not disposing thereof in such sort, Custom gives the whole
Estate to the Eldest: yet in some part of our Country, the youngest Brother,
by custom is to have the Land, held by some kind of Tenure, if the Father in
his lifetime dispose not thereof.

As yet therefore I cannot see, how any sin is committed, or contracted by
the former Acts, being neither done against the Law of God or Man, as we have
proved: unless it should be said to be sin, not to leave it to the Power of a
Custom: which cannot be, except the former Law shall be proved not to be of
Force, and not to be executed; which can no way be done: Though I must
confess, that the Custom of leaving the Child-estate to the Eldest son,
has of latter Times been much embraced by our Gentry, for the preservation of
their Families, for which it was invented. For the Times have so ruled, that
Men of sort, being either idle, or not possessed with a covetous Humor, have
contented themselves with their Fathers Fortunes, and preferred their younger
sons by those means which the Times did afford: namely, by many commendable
Courses; as either by service of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Persons,
whereby many were raised: or by professing a spiritual Life, whereby the
younger Brother has oft-times in Honor stepped before the Elder. But this
manner of Life, is not so grateful to our English Gentlemen's Natures, as
anciently it has been.

The Trade of the Merchant, the Military profession, the Courtiers life,
advanced many more, then now they do; and lastly, Elder Brothers in former
Ages were (generally) of better Temper in spending: and if they had no humor
to get, yet had they a care to keep what was left them: and ever held
themselves bound by Religion to provide for their younger Brothers and Sisters
left to their Dispose, which now is far otherwise. For some Elder Brothers are
found to spend more in a year idly, then would prefer or maintain a whole
Family Nobly: and to suffer their Brothers and Sisters to shift, which as these
Times shape, is oftentimes to live either lewdly, or most miserably: Strenue
esurire.
being forced either to forget their good Education, or to lay aside all Badges
of Gentry; who otherwise with some reasonable helps, might do God, their
Country, and Family much Honor.

Since we have gone so far, let us see, on what Ground this Custom first
has risen. Surely for the maintenance of a Family, yet led with an Ambition at
the Example of Princes, who finding some difficulties in the admitting of many
to a Government, and feeling what Inconveniences the parting of an Estate,
brought; devised that One should govern: sometime the Worthiest, sometime the
Eldest was Elected, according as the Order was agreed upon, and yet the other
Brothers were maintained like Princes. And this Custom also among them has
been broken, without Imputation of sin: For to go no further then our late
Times: it is well known, that Ferdinand (Charles the fifth his Brother) being
settled in the Empire, divided his Estate. To Maximilian his Eldest son, he
left the Empire, with Austria, Hungary, and Bohemia. To Charles his second
son, Stiria, Carinthia, and other Dominions. And to Ferdinand the youngest,
he gave the Earldom of Tyroll. All which, if in his lifetime he had not
disposed, had come to the Eldest. Also Philip the second, late King of Spain,
gave to his Daughter the 17 Provinces, which were of Right to have descended to
his son after his Death, if otherwise he had not disposed in his life. And
this was adjudged lawful by Grave Divines, otherwise surely they would never
have done it.

But does this Custom in meaner Degrees work that Effect which it has done in
them? No truly. For as we have proved, it is rather the Overthrow then the
Preservation of many Families. Let us see withal, whether Families flourished
not as much, and more then now they do, before this Custom was received.

Livy says, that three hundred of the Fabij, Vna dies Fabios ad bellum miserat
omnes Ovid. Fast.
all of one Name and Family, issued out of Rome Gates at one time, on their
own Cost, for Defense of their City: which was done, before this Custom was
dreamed of.

In Scotland three hundred of the Name and Family of Frasers, Gentlemen, were
at one Time slain in Fight by their Enemies Neighbors: and 140 Gentlemen of
one Name in Yorkshiere, waited on their chief or principal Man of their House,
at that time High Sheriff. In other Countries, many Noble Families from the
Romans downward, have continued where this Custom has been deemed unjust,
as by their Laws is manifest: whereas in our Country, in these our Times, if
there be one Family in a Shire, which is of three hundred years continuance,
very many others are scarce of five Descents in a Blood.

Why should our Age then, seeing the Fruit of this Custom to be so small,
embrace it with such Zeal as to deem the Breach thereof, being warranted for
Good and Just by the Law of God, Nature, and Man, to be a sin? Is it held
both lawful and expedient (in some Countries) for the preservation of a
Family, that Degrees of Kindred should be dispensed with to marry, contrary to
Ecclesiastical Canons and the General Practice: and can it be lawful before
God and Man, for the preservation of our Goods, to venture our Lives, and to
kill a Thief, who shall assault us, and that perhaps for a Trifle; and yet
that for preservation of our whole Estate, and perpetuity of a Family, it shall
be reputed sin, to break a bare Custom, under no Penalty Obligatory, yea
always allowed by Law? Never was it heard, that a Custom Customs against
Laws, are void by the Civil Law.
was of such force, to abrogate a Law so far, that it should be deemed a
sin to follow the said Law, though it have Power to dispense with the Law,
which otherwise to infringe, were sin: especially when as the the Law is both
more pious and more natural then the Custom is. For how far is it from the
Law of Nature, and from the Practice of Paternall Piety, the Father dying
intestate, the Eldest son to become Lord Paramount of all his Fathers Lands,
and not to be bound by Law to provide for Brother or Sister, but at his own
good liking? Aliud Tempus, alios mores postulat. Men of Virtue, Men of Learning
and Virtue, both now and in former Ages, in this our Country, have brok this
Custom, This Custom is contrary to the judgment and practice of the
Primitive Church: as is clear in Salvianus; who intimates, that aequa
haereditatis portio was usually left by Christian Parents to their Children,
and that to do otherwise, were Gross Iniquity: Ad Eccles. Cath: page: 422.
425. Edit: Oxon: Floruit: Ao 480.
as the World knows, upon good Consideration, and just Causes; not upon
spleen, or false suppositions persuaded to leave their Fortunes to Strangers,
or to a lustful Issue, as some have done.

CHAP. 7.
That Fathers being Tenants in Fee-taile, may likewise without scruple of
Conscience, discontinue the State-taile upon cause; and devise the same at
their reasonable pleasure.

HAving treated largely, and (as I presume) proved sufficiently, that Lands
held in Fee-simple, may either be parted, or upon just Cause wholly given away
to a younger Son: I intend now to speak of the lawful Freedom of a Father
in like sort, and on the same causes, moved to dispose of his Lands entailed:
of which there seems more Doubt then of the former.

Every humane Act, which of it self is not forbidden by the Law of God or
Nature, is to be judged Good or Evil, Lawful or Unlawful, either by the
Laws of the place where the Act is done, or by Intention of him who shall do
the Act. For as the Divine Law commands somethings to be done, and other things
to be avoided, under pain of sin: so the third sort of Actions are left
free (by the said Authority) from sin; except the Law of Man prohibit the^,
and so make them sin: or else evil Intention make them (being of themselves
lawful) to be a sin, and unlawful; according to that Principle of Moral
Philosophy, Finis specificat a^ctum. For as an Act of it self lawful, done
against Law is Sin: so a good Act commanded by Law, yet done with an evil
intention, may be sin.

From these Grounds, let us see, whether the Common Law of our Country, and the
Intention of a Father (which are to be the Judges of our Cause) can allow the
cutting off an Entaile, the parting of an Inheritance, or (upon proportionable
cause) the disinheriting of a Son. First it is clear, that the Act, of it
self, by Law may be done: But whether such an Act be summum Ius, which may be
summa injuria, that is the Doubt. What shall be the Trial? By other Laws, it
is either made lawful, or left indifferent. Our Law which makes this Tie,
gives leave to undo it without any exception. Ergo, to a good End, and upon
just Cause, it may be done. It will be replied, that the Eldest son, during
this Entaile, is quasi Dominus: Yet, having neither Dominium directum, nor
indirectum, he, during his Fathers life, has only Ius ad Rem, and not in Re:
Whereby no change is forbidden to be made by the Father, according to the Form
of the Law under which he lives, and by which, the son is to make claim, if
the Father create no new Estate in his life. For it is lawful for every Man to
dispose of his Own, as far as the Law shall permit him, if it be not
forbidden by some other Law: but such an Act is not forbidden by any other Law,
Ergo it is lawful, and no sin.

But it may be said, that the Intention of him who entaild the Land, was, that
it should not be untied, or the state changed. I answer: No Act done by law,
can be free from Change, further or longer, then the Law that made it a binding
Act, shall allow. And it is well known to the learned in our Laws, that every
Man's Intention is to be construed according to Law, by which, his Act and
Intentions are directed. Whereupon, Civilians say in like Cases, Valeat quantum
valere potest. Neither is it thought, that any man who convaieth his Lands by
Entaile, can intend an Act beyond Law, or desire that his son whom he makes
Tenent entaile (as our Lawyers term him) shall in no Case, no not for the
preservation of his Family, or Relief of many other of his Children, have
power to cut of this Entaile, and to be able to alien, sell, or give his Lands,
as Reason, Law, and Religion shall permit. For it may be judged, that he who
does an Act to a good End, as namely to preserve his Family, will always
assent to another Act, which shall with better assurance then his own,
strengthen his Intendment.

To the former Considerations we may add, what Inconveniences may follow this
General Position. For if in conscience the whole Inheritance of the Father, is
to come without control to the Eldest son, then must it of necessity be
inferred, that the Father, without his Consent, Agens per medium, est minus
efficax in agendo.
cannot give to pious Da quae no^ potes retinere, vt consequaris ca quae non
potes amittere.
Uses, or set out for the Advanceme^t of his other Children any thing after his
Death. So that if God should bless a Father with many children, and cross him
with as many Misfortunes; his other Children, and all other his charitable
Intentions should be provided for only at his Sonne's or Heire's curtesy. Which
how Pedissequa enim plerumque novi honoris, est Arrogantia Salv. Ep. 2.
absurd it is, all men know. For hereupon all Donations to pious Uses, and to
younger Brothers for their preferment, may be called in Question.

It is an ordinary thing in these our Times, when the Land is left to the Heir
General, to alter the Estate, if the Land so co^vaied shall come to Daughters,
and to leave it to a Brothers Hebrews call a Male-Child Zacar, a memorial:
because the Fathers memory is preserved in the Son, See 2. Sam. 18.18
Son, or some other of the same Name (though peradventure many Degrees
removed) for preservation of the Name and Family. If this may be deemed
lawful, and no sin, being done against a well deserving Child, for whom,
Nature and her Deserts plead her worthy to be her Fathers Heir: then without
all compare, if the preservation of a Name and Family, may justly be labored
for, according to Power given by Law of God and Man; the same may be lawfully
acted, against a debauched Heir, who in any reasonable Man's Judgment, is
likely in his shroud to bury the Memory of all his Ancestors Virtues, which
should live in him, and his Progeny, as his Progenitors did in theirs.

It is neither new, nor strange, in the Practice of our Times, in Causes of
this Nature, to overthrow intended Perpetuities, and by Act of Parliament to
give leave upon some good considerations to sell lands, which otherwise by no
Laws can be sold from the Heir, the Father being but Tenent only for term
of life. Which surely by no Power under God could be done, were the Thing in it
self, unlawful and sin; for See Salvian ad Ecc. Cath. l. 4.
Omne peccatum est Divinitatis injuria: Whence may be argued a Fortiori; If
power may be given to a Father being Tenent for Term of life, to sell his
Sons lands, only to pay his own Debts (peradventure idly made) though it be
to the Overthrow, or extreme Diminution of his Family; because Natural Equity
does will, that every one should be relieved with his Own, (for so it may be
deemed, though in love to his Child he has passed the Estate, yet ought he to
be therewith preserved from Thraldom in his Necessity:) Which if it be so, (as
confessedly it is) how reasonable a thing, yea how commendable, and far So
Salvianus: Non unjust testator sapiens non relinquit, quod haeres impius non
meretur. Ad Ecc. Cath. l. 3.
from sin is it, for a Father truly Lord of his own, without all Tie of
Law, Divine, or Humane (as I have proved) to dispose his Lands, to the Honor
of God and Comfort of his Family, to a Younger Son, when in all probability,
the Elder will neither use it to the One nor the Other, but rather, to wallow
in Riot and Sensuality.

CHAP. 8.
That Unthriftiness is one known name of many hidden sins; and is alone a
sufficient cause of disinherison; proved by the Law of God and Man.

Having upon good Consideration enlarged my self beyond my first intention, I
have resolved, under my Readers Favor, and on the precedent Principles, to
Argue one Question more, for the accomplishment of this Discourse: viz: Whether
a Father may disinherit his Eldest Son or Heir at Common Law, for such an
Unthriftiness, as in most men's Viz: Grounded on the concurrence of great and
violent Presumptions.
Judgments, is like to be the Ruin of his Family?

Though many foul sins, besides the Abuse of Gods Blessings, be concomitant
to unthriftiness, yet because they are not apparent to the World (and de
absconditis non judicat Praetor) I will briefly argue, Whether in Reason, or
Conscience, a desperate Unthrift may be disinherited.

It is well known to all the Wise and Temperate, whose Judgments Passion does
not ouer-sway, how great an Enemy Prodigality or Unthriftiness is to all
manner of Goodness: and how cunningly she not only hinders the Increase of all
Virtues in those in whom she reigns: but also unjustly ofttimes cuts off the
virtuous reward of many a worthy Predecessor; yea, gives occasion to the Evil
to detract, to the Good to suspect their Deserts. All which, how great a Wrong
it is to a Noble Family, I leave to the indifferent Reader to censure. I will
not deny but there may be many sins in a Man, which in the sight of God, and
judgment of Men, of themselves are more heinous, and deserve a far greater
Damnation then Prodigality does: Those sins more punishable, which are more
offensive to common Society; though less heinous in their par^^^ular nature.
yet are sins in this World to be punished, not as they are in themselves,
but as by Circumstances they are offensive to the Society, Peace, and Honor of
Mankind, which God and Nature, ever as the Reward to all Moral Virtues, and
as the chief End of Man's Life, intended. For otherwise, Usury, Detraction,
Forgery, Adultery, Fornication, Swearing and Drunkenness, with many more,
which are as greevous offenses in the Eye of Heaven as Theft, should be punished
with Death, as Theft is. But since they offend not so much the Peace of a
public Weal (at which the Civil Magistrate aims) as Theft does; they are
not censured with such severe Punishment as it is. All which shows directly,
that Offenses by Circumstance are made in a Civil Society against which they
are committed, either greater or lesser; and are accordingly to be punished: and
no less does the Reason and right Rule of State command.

Out of which Grounds it is evident, that all Forms of Government do most
punish that Offender, who directly or indirectly seeks to disturb the Peace,
or overthrow the Liberty, or disgrace the Dignity of the State where he lives:
yet many greater Offenses then these may be committed, as Incest, and Apostasy,
which are not so sharply punished by the Civil Magistrate. For every one to
whom God has given power on Earth, does chiefly seek the End, for which his
Power from above, is given to him; and does censure and punish in the highest
Degree, those Offenses, which tend to the Overthrow of a well-setled State, by
good and lawful Power confirmed.

Now to descend from these Premises to the Point in Controversy, and to apply
what has been said, to our purpose. It is well known to the World, that a
Family is a Civil Society, yea the only Commonweal which God and Nature
first ordained; from which, all Societies, Republikes, and Species of Regiment
took their Original. For the maintenance of which Society, there is no
Question, but God has given many Fathers of Families had power to bless,
curse, disinherit and punish with death; as appears by the Examples of of Noe
toward Cham, Abraham toward Hagar and Ismael, Jacob toward Simeon (...)
Levi, and of Judah toward Thamar. Genesis 38.24. See Mr. Godwin, vbi supra
Privileges to a Father, as well to reward the well-deseruing, as to punish an
evil child or member of his Body: not only by depriving them of their expected
Fortunes; but by cutting them off from his Body, either by Abdication or Exile,
or Death it self. For it is clear by the Civll Law, that a Father had for
many years, not only free Power to disinherit, but also Power of Life and
Death over his Children, who should greivously offend him or his, living under
his Civil Government. But since that Things unknown are grown out of Use,
and may seem as well incredible, as strange, I cannot in prudence pass over
the Matter in Question so lightly, as that it may be worthily subject to sharp
Censure, or rashly branded with the Mark of Untruth.

Therefore laying aside the Testimony of the old Roman Laws, in the case of a
Fathers Sovereign Power over the life of his child, given to him by the Cap.
3. Dio. Halicar. l. 2. Antiq.
Twelve Tables, where it is written: Pater familias habeat jus vitae: yea, --
terque filium venundandi potestatem; I will breefly and effectually prove out
of the Sacred Text it self, what I affirm. There then it plainly appears,
that Fathers had Power among the Jews, to cause their children for Riot,
Disorder, or Unthriftiness, to be stoned to Death: Ergo, power to disinherit:
For the Greater ever includes the Less. Not to seem to speak without Book,
it shall not be amiss to set down Moses words, which are as follow.

If a Man have a stubborn and rebellious son, that will not obey the Command
of his Father or Mother: Deuteronomy. 21.18.
and being chastised, shall be vnreclaimable; they shall apprehend and bring
him to the Seniors of that City, and to the place of Justice: and they shall
say to them: This our son is incorrigible and disobedient, contemnes our
Monitions, abandons himself to riotous Excess, and is a Drunkard. The
Citizens shall then overwhelme him Stoning was appointed a Death for Blasphemy
and Idolatry: which (by co^currence in this case) argues how execrable a Crime
Disobedience to Parents is in Gods sight.
with Stones, and he shall dye; that ye may take Evil from among you, and
that all Israel hearing it, may fear.

Whence we may collect, how odious a Crime Unthriftiness was among the People
of God; and what ample Power the Father had to punish the same in his Child.
For if we observe well the Manner of the Process between the Father and the
Child, in this Case, we shall find that the Father was Accuser, Witness, and
as it were Judge of his own Cause. For we read not that the Senators of the
City did give sentence, or further examined the Proofs of the Fathers
Accusation: but their Presence giving as it were Allowance to a Fathers Power,
and Intention to punish his Son, the People might without more Enquiry, stone
to Death so evil a deserving Child. Which being well considered, my Hope is,
that it will never hereafter seem unlawful, though somewhat strange, that a
Father should disinherit his Eldest, or any other son of his, for the Cause
only of Unthriftines.

And although the World of Men is grown to that Greatness, that it is
necessary, One General Father, or Politic Head should be in a Kingdom, or
State, which may justly abridge some of these Privileges, and abate a Fathers
Power (all Fathers being Children to the Father of their Country, their Lord
and King, under God) yet the Power to advance and maintain a Family by good
and lawful Means, is still both allowable and commendable in a Parent; who
may from time to time reward according to distributive Justice, all those which
live under him, by leaving his Fortunes to them, as in Justice they shall
deserve, and Law shall allow. So that, there is no Question, but he may still
disinherit, according to the power of that Law under which he lives. For no
other Ty is over him: God and Nature The Law of Nature, or (as Civilians style
A) of Nations [on which a Fathers Plenary Power is founded] is by S Paul
expressly termed The Law of God. Romans 1.31.
allowing that, at this day, and for ever, which once they gave unto him. Which
Authority he not only may, but ought also to execute, as far as the Law of
Man shall permit: otherwise he shall err in his Paternall Justice.

For a Father is not only to beget and nourish his Children in his life, but by
Natures law must provide to his Power, that they live both in his life and
after his death, to the honor of God, the service of their Country, and
comfort of their Family: which were the only Ends for which God created Man a
Civil and rational Creature. All which, if it shall assuredly be thought by
a Father, that any Child of his will wholly neglect, or rather execute the
contrary; then no question, a Father is not bound to leave him any more then
shall honestly suffice the Necessities of Nature. For (as before is said) no
Man may give or lend his Goods to any one, who will in all Men's Judgments
assuredly abuse them.

But let us see, whether a desperate Unthrift may be arraigned, and adjudged
Guilty of these Accusations. Surely, it is clear, that all unthrifty To play
away our Praedecessors labors; is a greater dishonor, then to piss on our
parents ashes (...) raze their monuments. Carp. Achitoph. p. 3.
courses are displeasing to God, and contrary to to his Honor. And how can he
be able to serve his Country, who in short time will not be able to serve
himself with Necessaries wherewith to live, but must of force be maintained
like a Drone in a Common Wealth, out of others Labors. As for his Family, what
greater Discomfort can it have then an absolute Overthrow? Whereby, the Noble
Acts and Honor gotten to it by virtuous Predecessors, are buried in Oblivion;
and the present and future Hopes of all worldly and lawful Honors (Virtues
temporal Reward) are quite taken away. And shall not ALL THIS deserve
Disinherison? Can there be a greater sin committed against the Honor and
Essence of a Family, as it is a Family, The life and soul of a Family.
then to be spoiled of its Honor, and Life it self? For in these our Times,
well gotten Goods, and used as they ought, are the only Soul, by which a
Family, and all the virtuous Acts which it has done, may live.

Since therefore so great a mischief is sought and aimed at in this sin,
surely according to the proportion of distributive Justice, the greatest
punishment is in Equity due to the same, according to the reason of the
Precept, Ius summum vnicuique tribuere. Nature teaches the silly Bees in their
Common Wealth to do to death their Drones, who live of others Labors: and
shall it be thought unlawful for a Father, so to punish an incorrigible
Unthrift, who will not only live of others Labors, but also subvert the
honorable Endeavors of his Noble Ancestors?

Thus if Sons may be deemed, and doomed by the offended, having power to do
both, according as the Offense done against them shall (by circumstance) be of
Quality (as we have proved they may and ought) then certainly it is lawful
for a Father so to do, as I have formerly demonstrated.

But because Examples in all Controversies of Fact, are the best
Fortifications; I will, in illustration of the Premises, add some few to the
former, drawn as well from Royal Precedents (by whose Patterns -- totus
componitur Orbis) as from inferior Persons, whose Qualities best fit the
condition of our present subject. And if Kingdoms and Commonweals have
favored it, then certainly, by all Arguments a majori ad minus, it may much
rather be done, and ought to be suffered in private Families.

CHAP. 9.
The main points of the Premises exemplified in diverse particular Facts, as
well of Princes, as of private Persons.

IT is not fit perhaps to urge the better Acceptance with God of Abels Offering
above Cain's the Elder Brother; Temporis praelationem tulit improbitas:
Dignitatis praerogativa^ Virtus. Philo. de Caino and Abele. Abel. Iaphet.
but that Estate which Abel had in Adams Patrimony. Nor will I reinforce
Iaphets share in his Fathers Right to the whole World, though he being the
youngest Son of three, had Europe for his Inheritance, which in all Arts, and
Uses of Life, far excells Africa, Asia, and all the rest of the Earth.
Whereas, according to the pretenses of those customary challenges, Sem should
either have had all, or been Sovereign Lord of all, and Cham and Iaphet with
their Posterity, but Farmers, or Freeholders under him.

I will not also (as if there were penury of Resemblances) produce again
Esau's Disinherison, though that In this case God said expressly, The Elder
shall serve the you^ger. See Genesis 25.23. and Mal 1.3. (with the Geneva Note
there.)
were enough for our present purpose. For, had it been Sin (which neither
Scripture, nor Josephus in his Antiquities says) the Mother could not have
procured it, God would not have prosper'd it; nor Jacob himself, being a good
man, have accepted it, nor Esau (whose anger Jacob feared) have left it
vnrevenged. Neither is there in Scripture, nor in any written Law under Heaven,
any Command to restrain the Fathers Power, but rather the contrary. For such
is the Law of Nature, that they who are ex aequo one Man's Children, should, if
not ex aequo, yet not ex iniquo, be provided for.

Against which Partiality, the Imperial Laws admit so forcible a Remedy,
under the Title of an inofficious Testament, as it shall enable the younger
Child, to a certain proportion of estate, whether the deceased Father would or
no; if he had no just reason for omission, or disavowment in his last Will.
Ruben. See Genesis 49.4. and 1. Chro. 5.1. Ephraim.
The Example certainly of the same holy Patriark, Jacob, in depriving his
eldest son Ruben of the dignity of Birthright (for his enormous offense) and
in preferring Ephraim before Manasses, the younger son before the Elder,
being his Grandchildren, against the set Genesis 48.18.
Purpose of Joseph their Father, seems unanswerable on behalf of Grandfathers
are usually called Fathers in Scripture; specially in respect of such as
inherit after them.
Parents Power for transferring, or distributing their Blessings. Of which it
may be verified: Qui prior in Benedictione, est potior in Iure.

Of Solomon I have spoken before, who was not David's Eldest, but Adonias, after
Absalon was slain: as David himself was not the Eldest son of Iesse his
Father, but the youngest, and yet See 1. Chro 28.4.
chosen by God (who sees not as Man does, for with him is no respect of
Persons) to govern Israel, though he was not set before his Brothers in the
private Inheritance of the Family. And in the Gospel it is apparent by the
Parable of the Workmen, who came at unequal hours into the Vineyard, and yet
had equal Wages, that First and Last are to him alike; who though he created
Things in number, Weight, and Measure, yet he squares not his Favors by
priority of Being, Witness Ismael disinherited, and Isaak (the younger)
preferred by Gods Award. See Genesis 21.12. where ver. 10. and 11. it is clear,
that Abraham had (otherwise) divided his inheritance betwixt them. [Can the
World yield a better Precedent?] N.B.
but of well-deseruing.

Augustus Caesar, the most Illustrious of all the first Emperors, settled the
Imperial succession, not upon his only Grandchild Agrippa Posthumus, the
son of his daughter and sole Heir, the Lady Iulia, though Tacitus says, he
was nullius flagitij compertus (then what, if he had indeed been a notorious
Unthrift?) but upon Tiberius, Tiberius.
a stranger in Blood, and his son by no other, but by a Civil Title of
Adoption, because he reputed him far the fitter to govern.

Chosroes King of Persia, Medarses.
made Medarses his younger son, Consort in his Empire, leaving out his Eldest
Sinochius.

But to omit foreign Examples (for Brevity sake) wherewith (of all Times and
Places) Books are full: In our Country we might allege the Fact of Brutus, the
Protoparent of our Nation, Brutus.
who divided Albion (afterward called Britain) to his three sons, leaving
only the best England.
Portion to Locrinus, anciently called Loegria; Albania (now Scotland) to
Albanact; and Cambria, or Wales, to Camber.

Leir, long after, knew he had so much Power in himself as a Father, even
against the Evidence of his own Act of Partition, by the Original Law of
Nature; as for the Ingratitude of his own Children, Cordeilla.
to confer the Kingdom wholly upon his younger Child Cordeilla, in prejudice
of his Grand-sonnes, Morgan and Cunedage, borne of his Eldest daughters.

I know some will give no credence to Brutus Story, which in this case they
might with the more Reason do, if the ancient Weal, or British Custom, were
not responsible in the Practice thereof, to that Act of Brutus. Roderik.
For, not only King Roderik divided his Kingdom of Wales to his three sons,
(according to that distinction of the Country into North Wales, South Wales,
and Powisland) but Others since have done the like among them.

As for Brutus History, as it has some Enemies, so also has it many Friends,
and those of Eminent Worth and Esteem. Henry Archdeacon of Huntington, Matthew
of Westminster, and others among the Ancient. Of latter Times, Sr John Price,
William Lambert, Humfrey Lloyd, Dr White of Basingstoke, Count Palatine in
right of the Civil Law Chair (an Honor due to the just Number of years by
him passed) and innumerable others. Above all the rest, Edward the first, King
of England, with all the Earls and Barons of this Realm, by their Authentike
Deed or Instrument, confirmed in Parliament. But to proceed.

They who know the old Fashions of Ireland, either by Tradition, or by printed
Statutes of that Nation, can testify of their most ancient Tenure, or
Fundamental Custom, which there is called Tanistry. By which, Irish Tanistry
the Land and Cheefty of a Name, after the Predecessors Death, is not awarded
to the Eldest son, but to the Worthiest (if I mis-remember not) the Judgment
whereof is left to the People, and such Tenants as have Interest and Right of
Suffrage: (as Alexander the Great, though as it is apparent in the Maccabees, 1.
Macc. 1.7.
very falsely is said to have left his Empire.) And the Custom of equal
shares may be in other places also, which never borrowed their equal
Partitions from Gavel-kinde: A Custom, I grant, which some have lately altered
in their private Families by Parliament.

To omit a Number of vnexceptionable Precedents and foreign Examples; If All
must necessarily have gone to One, how came it then to pass, that in this
Kingdom, there were at one time, so many Great and Honorable Families of one
Blood, disjoined in their seats, and distinguished in their Armories, by
different Arguments? Or, who is so meanly seen in our Antiquities and
Stories, as not to know it was so? And that many renowned Houses (to speak as
de magis notis) Plantagenets, Sundry great Families of one Blood at a Time.
Mortimers, Beaufords, Beauchamps, Dela-Poles, Nevils, Graies, and the like,
have grown and flourisht out of one common common Ancestor? It can never be
refelled.

Of Disinherisons in Worthy Families, Mr William Camden Clarenceaux King of
Arms (the singular Ornament of England) gives us two Eminent Examples. (And
who is he, that remembers not one or other, in his own Knowledge, or
Acquaintance?)

Carew^.
Jane, Daughter of Hugh Courtney, and Heir to her Mother, wife of Nicolas Lord
Carew, disinherited her Eldest son Thomas, cum minus reverenter matrem
haberet, for his irreverent Demeanor; and parted her Lands (which were goodly)
among her three younger sons: of whom are sprung three several Worshipful
Houses of the Carewes; called Haccombe, Anthony, and Bury. So that God by the
success crowned the Fact, and confirmed the Lawfulness of Partage.

And this is the first of Mr Camdens Examples.

The other is this. Bryand Lyle, or Fitz-Earle, Lord of Abergevenny, Brientius
de Insula.
having two sons, both Leprous, built for them a LaZaretto or Spittall: and
gave to Miles Earl of Hereford far the greatest part of his Patrimony from
his Children. The One of these Examples is in the Description of Devonshire;
and this other in Monmouthshire. And this may suffice for clearing the former
Document (the subject of this Whole Discourse) by Exemplification.

CHAP. 10.
That the Law of Natural Equity and Reason confirm just Disinherison: and
that the riotous lives of Elder Brothers deserve that vehement Increpation with
which the Author closes up this Treatise.

LET us now look into the Nature of Equity, and examine whether in Natural
Reason (which is the Law of all Laws) the Temperate ought to be subject to
Intemperate: (I mean, within the Verge of private Families.) Fools and
Frantiks, to whom no Law imputes Voluntas crime non habet, vbi furore peccatur.
Salvian.
Sin, are not punished for Theft or Murder, or for any other Offense which
they do, being mad, or unreasonable. And though humanely they cannot offend;
yet, in THIS SORT according to Equity, they may be punished. The Reason is: All
Law being grounded on Natural Equity (otherwise it is no Law) does not only
punish Offenses committed; but also prevents Offenses which may be done, by
rational or irrational Creatures. And since Fools and Madmen cannot offend
to be punished, or by punishment be reformed; and yet they with whom they live,
shall inevitably be offended, if not overthrown by them having Nothing more
dangerous then armed Madness.
power, (as namely Brothers, Sisters, and their whole Family put in danger of
extreme Misery and Ruin) the Law according to all NATVRALL EQVITIE takes all
Power from them.

I have inserted this clause [according to Natural Equity] for, that it is
against Nature, that Men should be subject to Beasts, or insensible Creatures.
Whereupon Aristotle disputing the Nature of Rule and Subjection, says: that
None are borne Servitude proceeds not from the Law of Nature, but from Nature
corrupted See Mr Downings Discourse of the State Ecclesiast p. 68.
slaves, but such as Nature has abridged of the Use of Reason, who being truly
slaves, are utterly unfit to govern. Upon which Ground, the same Great
Philosopher, prefers that Form of Polity, where the Wisest and Best are
admitted to the Manage of State-Affaires: (as at this day is most conspicuous,
in the Blessed Reign Consule Plausus and Vita Illustrissimi Equitis, D.
Henrici Worton; Viti omnium literatum, linguarum, ac Virtutum laud
florentissimi.
and Regiment of our Most Gracious and Glorious SOVEREIGN; whom God preserve.)

But it may be said, What is all this to our Purpose? Yes: thus far it may
be well applied: If Natures Intent to make all Mankind, Reasonable, according
to their Species, being hindered by some inevitable Accident, shall so blemish
and maime Those, in whom such Defect and Natural Weakness shall be found that
They (according to Divine and Humane Law) may and ought to be deprived of all
Right and Claim to any Thing, (more, then to sustain Nature) and debarred
from all Superiority and Seniority, which by Law or Custom might otherwise
have fallen on them; (because, according to Natural and Divine Equity, MAN
ought not to be governed by BEASTS; such as Idiots and Frantiks seem to be:)

If This be so, as according to Natures Rule it cannot be otherwise, what
punishment shall we think due to That Reasonable Creature, The Prodigals
Character.

See more of this Subject, in that Reverend and Illustrious Author Democritus
Junior. Part. 1. Sect. 2. Memb. 3. subsect. 13.


borne in a Civil Society of Men, to whom Nature has not been a Step-dam in
bestowing her Blessings; and whose Name, and Family has been ennobled and
enriched by the Virtue and Industry of many Worthy Predecessors; who shall
through Disorder, and inordinate Desires, habituated in him by Custom and
Evil Conversation, become an Unreasonable and unmeasurable sinful and
shameful Creature, a debauched The Civil Law appoints Curators for Prodigals
(as for Madmen) and Guardians likewise of their Estates: the Want whereof, is
the Ruin of many great Houses in England. See D. Ridley, vbi sup. p. 268 where
he notes a Defect in our Laws, which have no provisionall order therein.
Bedlem, a wild American, a wilful and most intolerable Madman, a Thing
unworthy the Name of Man; a Prodigal shall I say, or a PRODIGY? who contrary
to all Rule, Law, or Order of the most Barbarous Society of Men, takes away (by
his outrageous Impiety) the Soul (as I said before) of all his Ancestors; who
being dead, yet long might live in their Immortalitatem spondet [Deus Abrahae]
cum Genus promittit. Ambros. Ariotous heir a Civil Monster.
Posterity: and consumes the Womb of his Family (Viper-like) wherein he was
borne: and without all Remembrance of his obligement to the Dead (whom, as
having his Being from them, he ought to honor) or Respect to the Living (to
whom he should be a Comfort) devoures in some sort, them of his own Species,
Society, and Blood: All which, the Canibals do not: For though they feed on
their Species, which are Men like Themselves; yet they hunt after Strangers,
and nourish themselves with Others Flesh, observing still some Law of Society
among Themselves, which our CIVIL MONSTER does not. For he, contrary to all
Course of Nature, sucks oftimes the Blood of his nearest and dearest Friends:
namely his Children, Brothers, and Sisters: yea, some of these furious Fiends
have brought their all-tender-hearted Parents to the Greatest of all Woes,
Beggary in their old Age. And all this, to maintain by Force, or Fraud, a
damned Crew of Roaring Devils in the shapes of Men. Of eich of whom, we may say,
dividually; Tali Bacchus erat, tali Gargantua vultu;
Tale triplex Of the Family of the Treble-chins.
mentum Pantagruelis erat.
So did old Bacchus, or Gargantua swell;
And such a Bull-chin, was Pantagruell.
And of the whole Mad-cap. Fraternity (for they will needs be Fratres in malo:
or fraterrimi (as was said of Friars.)
Sworn Brothers) Pestis, qua gelidum Boreae violentius Axem
Nulla vel infecit, nulla vel inficiet:
A greater Plague to this our Northern Clime
Never yet came; nor can, in After-Time.
But to return, from the pursuit of these Salvages. Nature has given, yea
she has so strongly inhabituated a laudable Desire in all Creatures to
Salvianus excellently demonstrates this in Bees. De guber Dei l. 4. p. 120.
preserve their Species; that directly or indirectly to attempt the Contrary,
were more then Monstrous Immanity. Families, be they Princely, Noble, Gentile,
or Vulgar, are in a sort particular Kinds, or Species allowed of by Natures Law
to be raised, Totus namque mundus, and totum humanum genus, pignus est
creatoris sui. Salvian. vbi sup.
and maintained, under, or in their chief Genus, Mankind Universal: which to
defeat or overthrow, by irregular, extravagant, and exorbitant Courses, let the
Philosopher, either Natural or Moral; the Lawier either Civil or Canon; the
Divine, Schoolman, or Casuist; judge how punishable.

Moral Lawmakers in ancient Times praetermitted to make Laws against
Offenders of this nature. Being asked Why? They answered: That no Man could be
so impiously ingrate, or inhumane. Whereby is evidenced, how transcendently
heinous the Offense was adjudged by them, and how severe Punishment (were they
to make Laws in these our corrupt Times) they would prescribe for such
Cardinal Criminalls.

Thus much for the Ventilation of the present Point in Question. In the arguing
whereof, if what I write in defense of Younger Brothers (as here the Case is
put) I seem to have received Ex traduce, rather then Ex certa scientia, the
wiser sort will (I hope) not blame me. For my Intent was only, (as at first I
promised) to set down a Table-Discourse, and not a Controversy discust in
Schools. If I have spoken according to Dialecticall Reason (as I believe) then
may I safely think, that my Discourse is armed with strong Authority. For what
has been spoken heretofore truly, which Reason has not dictated to all
Salvianus in this Case may speak for All: Nam (...) omnes admodum filij membra
parentum esse videantur, non putandi sunt tamen membra eorum esse a quibus
affectu caeperint discrepare: quia morum degenerantium pravitate pereunt in
talibus beneficia naturae: Though all Sons be equally Members (or Portions)
of their Parents, yet are not They so to be reputed, that shall by (...)
Courses wilfully dismember themselves from them: for, degenerate Conditions
tender such Children unworthy of the Benefits of Nature. Salvian de gubern.
Dei. lib. 3o.
Authors Pens? If therefore I were able to cite a Thousand Great Authors for
what I have said, yet All would amount to no more, but that which Natural
Reason has, or may teach daily. All which, with my Self, I entrust to the
gentle and equal Censure of my Courteous Reader.

FINIS.
Implumis ales nunquam Coelum Omnivago penetret volatu. LAVS DEO ET IESV MEO.

