THE SPEECH AND PLEA Of Archibald Marquess of ARGYLE To the Parliament of
SCOTLAND At Edinburgh on the 5. of this instant March. In answer to the Charge
of High Treason against him.

LONDON, Printed by H. Lloyd, and R. Vaughan, for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden
Key in St. Paul's Churchyard 1661.

Edinburgh. 5. March. 1661. At the Parliament House.
The Marquess of Argyle being called in, gave in a Bill, containing several
weighty reasons, desiring a continuation till the meeting of Parliament the
morrow. His Lordship being removed, after long debate it was refused, and his
Lordship being called in, my Lord Chancellor told him, it was refused; and
ordered his Lordship to produce his defense, vvhereupon he spoke as follovveth.

May it please your Grace,
MY Lord Chancellor, This business is of very great concernment to me, and
not small in the preparation of it to the whole Nation. Yea, it may concern
many of your Lordships (who are sitting here) and your posterity; and therefore
I desire to have your Grace (my Lord Commissioner) and the remanent Members of
this Honorable Meeting your patience to hear me a few words, without prejudice
or misconstruction, which any thing I can say is obnoxious to.

I shall, my Lord, begin with the words of that godly king Iehosaphat, that
good King of Judah, (after he was come back in peace to Jerusalem) in his
instructions to his Judges, wherein he bad them take heed, what they do, for
they judge not men but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment, 2 Chronicles.
19.17. My Lord, I shall speak another word to many young men, who were either
not born, or so young, that it is impossible they could know the beginning of
those businesses, which are contained in the libel against me, being all that
has been done since the year 1638. So that they might have heard by report
what was done, but not why, or upon what ground, and what some have suffered,
but not what they have deserved. Therefore I desire your Lordships charity,
until all the particulars and several circumstances of every particular be
heard, without which no man can judge rightly of any action. For as it is well
observed by that incomparable Grotius, that Aristotle asserts, That there is no
certainty in the Mathematics, or morals; for as Grotius has it, The
Mathematics separate forms from matters; as betwixt strait and crooked there
is no midst, but in Morals even the least circumstances vary the matter, they
are wont to have something betwixt them with such latitudes, that the access
is near sometime to this, sometime to that extreme; so that betwixt that which
ought to be done, and that which ought not to be done is interwoven, that which
may be done, but is never: Now to that other part whence ambiguity arises,
often the particular instances are so obvious to every understanding man, that
I need only to mention them.

Polybius, My Lord, makes much of his History depending upon these three,
Concllia, Causae, and Eventus. And there are likewise other three, Tempus,
locus, and personae, the change whereof makes that which is lawful duty,
unlawful; and on the contrary, so likewise in speaking or repeating words, the
adding or payring from them will quite alter the sense and meaning; as also in
wrighting, the placing the Comma's or punctions will quite alter the sense,

This is my Lord another Maxim, which I do not maintain as always undeniable;
but when there is no lawful Magistrate exercising power and authority in a
Nation, but an invading Usurper in possession, esteeming former laws crimes, in
such a case (I say) the safety of the people is the supreme law.

There is another Maxim which is not questioned by any, and it is Necessity has
no Law: For even the Moral Law of God yields to it, and Christ's Disciples in
David's Example. For this Seneca says, Necessity and humane imbecillitie breaks
every Law. So he that Answers that Libel -- ( The long Parliament Revived)
speaking of this last Parliament (which his Majesty calls a blessed healing
Parliament) he says, The necessity to have it may dispense with some
formalities. For Ravanella so much esteemed in matters of Scripture) divides
necessity, into absolute and hypothetick necessity, and makes that of
submitting to Powers of absolute necessity. Josephus also (my Lord) that famous
Historian, when he mentioned David's Speech to his Children, after he had made
Solomon (being but younger Brother) King, he exhorts them to unity among
themselves, and submission to him, and his Authority; For if it should please
God to bring a Foreign Power amongst you, you must submit to them, much more
then to him who is your Brother, and one of your own Nation.

There is another Maxim (my Lord) Inter arma silent Leges, and it is well
known, that diverse Laws in Scotland were ordained with consideration of times
of War, and times of Peace.

Another Maxim, Ex duobus malis minimum eligendum est, cum unum eorum nequit
evitani, says Arist. Cicero and Quintilian, cum diversa mala inter se
comparantur, eorum minimum locum boni occupat.

There is another Maxim, No man's intention by the event of any action, there
being oftentimes so wide a difference betwixt the condition of the work, and
the intention of the worker. Man's cause being only of Duty, the event is the
Lords.

I shall only add another Maxim; It cannot be admitted Virtue to abstain from
Vice, but where it is in our power to commit the Vice, and we meet with a
temptation.

As I have named shortly some Maxims, (My Lord) I shall humbly tender some
weighty considerations to your Lordships thoughts.

First Consideration is, that there is different considerations of Subjects
actions, when their lawful Magistrate is in the exercise of his Authority by
himself, or others lawfully constituted by him, and when there is no KING in
Israel.

Second is, That there is a more different consideration bewixt the Subjects
actions, when the lawful Magistrate is in the Nation, and when he is put from
it, and so forced to leave the People to the prevalent Power of a Foreign
Sword, and the Invader in possession of Authority.

Thirdly, That there i^ a difference betwixt Subjects actions even with the
invading Usurper, after the Representatives of a Nation have submitted to, and
accepted of their Authority and Government, and they in possession several
years, the Nation acknowledging their Constitutions, and all the Lawyers,
presenting, and pleading them as Laws.

Fourthly, The actions of Subjects are to be considered when assisting the
lawful Magistrate to their power, and never submitting to the invading Usurper,
until they were Prisoners and could do no better.

Fifthly, That there is likewise consideration to be had of the actions of such
Subjects being still Prisoners upon demand, under Articles to that purpose.

Sixthly, It is to be considered likewise of the actions of such a Subject, who
was particularly noticed and persecuted by the Invaders, for his affection to
the lawful Magistrate, and his Government.

Seventhly, It is to be considered, that there is a great difference betwixt
actions done ad luerum capiendum, and those done ad damnum evitandum; that is
to say, actions to procure benefit, and actions to shun detriment.

Eighthly, It is to be considered, that there has ever been a favorable
consideration had (by any Prince) of any person coming voluntarily, and casting
himself upon a Prince 's clemency.

Ninthly, It is to be considered, that his MAJESTY himself has a glorious
natural inclination unto Clemency and Mercy, which has been so abundantly
manifested to his Subjects in England, even to all (except some of the
immediate Murderers of his Royal Father) that it cannot be doubted, that the
same will be wanting to his People in Scotland, who suffered by them (whom his
MAJESY has gracious^y pardoned) even for their dutyful service, and affection
to his MAJESTY. Therefore, without thought of any prejudice to the Parliament,
or honorable Meeting, I must make use of my Lord Chancellor of England his
words, though in another case, saying, there cannot be too much evil befall
those who do the best they can to corrupt his MAJESTY'S good nature, and to
extinguish his Clemency; For his MAJESTY'S self Declared his natural
inclination to Clemency in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament in England,
wherein he has with all his People conjured, desired, and commanded to abolish
all Notes of discord, separation, and difference of parties, and to lay aside
all other animosities, and the memory of past provocations, and to return to a
perfect Unity amongst themselves under his MAJESTY'S protection, which he
hopes all your Lordships will concur in, having so worthy a Pattern to
follow: And as there is his MAJESTY'S inclinations expressed, so it is most
suitable to the Arms he bears as KING of Scotland, which is the Lion, whose
Motto is known to all -- Nobilis est ira Leonis,

Parcere Subjectis and debellare superbos: which is to say, to vanquish and
subdue the proud, and spare such as are submissive: Of the which number I am
one, and for that effect in all humility present this humble Submission to his
MAJESTY, and your Grace my Lord Commissioner in his MAJESTY'S Name.

SUBMISSION.
FOr as meckle as I Archibald Marquess of Argyle, am accused of Treason, at
the instance of his Majesty 's Advocate, and being altogether unwilling to
appear any ways in opposition to his Sacred Majesty, considering also that
this is the first Parliament called by his Majesty after his happy return to
his Kingdoms and Government, for healing and repairing the distempers and
breaches made by the late and long troubles and debates, that the great affairs
of his Majesty, and these Kingdoms, shall have no interruption upon occasion of
any Process against me.

I will not represent the contagion and fatality of these times, wherewith I
with many others of these three Kingdoms have been involved, which has
produced many sad consequences and effects fallen contrary to our intentions,
nor will I insist upon the defenses of our actings in these Kingdoms before
the prevailing of the late Usurpers, (if examined according to the strict
interpretation and severity of laws) which may be esteemed a trespass of his
Majesty's Royal Commands, and a transgression of the Law, but (notwithstanding
thereof) are by his Majesty's clemency covered as with a vail of oblivion by
diverse Acts of Parliament, and others to that purpose, for the safety and
security of his Majesty's subjects, and that my actings since, and compliance
with so prevalent a party, (which had wholly subdued this and all his
Majesty's other Dominions, and was universally acknowledged) may be looked upon
as actions of mere necessity which have no law: for it is known, that during
that time I had no favor from the Usurpers. It was inconsistent with, and
repugnant to my Interest, and it cannot be thought (unless I had been
dementate and void of reason) that I should have had freedom or affection to
be for those conspired enemies to Monarchy, who could never expect or tolerate
Nobility. And whereas that most horrid and abominable crime of taking away the
precious life of the late King of ever glorious memory, is most maliciously and
falsely charged upon me. If I had the least accession to that most vile and
heinous(...)


