Mr. JOHN ARNDT (that famous German Divine) His Book of Scripture.

DECLARING That every Child of GOD ought and must

1. Daily die to the old Adam, but to Christ live daily. 2. And be renewed to
the Image of God day by day. 3. And in the New Birth live the life of the New
Creature.
Translated out of the Latin Copy,

By Radulphus Castrensis Antimachivalensis.

LONDON, Printed by Mat. Simmons for H. Blunden at the Castle in Cornhill,
1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDMOND, Lord SHEFFIELD, Baron of Butterwick, Earl of
Moultgrave, and Knight of the most Honorable Order of the Garter.
RIght Honorable and thrice Noble Lord, pardon my sudden and abrupt encounter
in so saluting you without preamble; yet true it is, thrice renowned, for three
remarkable and noble actions: 1681.
First, for the encounter of the French Geryon, Francis de Valoise, Duke of
Alonson, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth, and giving him the Buffe at the
Barriers. 1686.
Secondly, your faithful and valorous encounter of the Irish John Gerond
Desmond in the Gerondine war of that kingdom, managed by your brother-in-law,
Thomas Bot^eler, Earl of Ormond and Osserie, you being his true Patroclus in
arms, to the utter ruin and extirpation of the Gerardine rebels. The 1581.
third, your adventurous assistance given to your thrice noble Uncle Charles
Howard Earl of Nottingham, in the encounter and overthrow of the Spanish
Armado in 88. termed Invincible in their high conceit, that intended the ruin
and overthrow of the Realm of England, the true Religion, and destruction of
Queen Elizabeth of famous and long-fasting memory, your dread Sovereign and
Mistress. For these thrice-noble and threefold actions, counted worthily one
of her Majesty's Worthies; and elected the year following to be one of the
thrice noble Order of the Garter. If I said no more, it were sufficient, I
might here pause; your government, being Lord President of the North, for the
space of sixteen years, holding the Bucklers against the Espaniolized
undermining Jesuits of the North, sowing even then the seed of this unnatural
war, the Ashes of the Powder Treason, as one terms it, will speak if I were
silent, your open protestations and endeavors to discover the continual
undermining practices of the hellish Locusts, still seeking the subversion of
Religion, Laws, and Liberty of the Subject, to bring this Kingdom into the
thraldom of Pope and Spaniard, is not to be forgotten by him that was a
continual eare-witnesse of it; nor likewise your safe and faithful counsel
during this unnatural war, now of late years broken forth, The intelligence
sent to Mendosa anno 1588.
after so many years hatching and contriving. Nor can I pass, by, without
remembrance, your ever to be remembered constancy and perseverance in your
virtues for Faius the reader of divinity In Geneva, secund. Iacobi.
the true Christianity the most part of eighty years; wherein I flatter not,
as many both at home, and even in forain parts, can and do bear witness.
After sixty years experience of your particular favors and love extended
toward me, I should show my self ungrateful, if I at this time were silent
to you, when the Divine Providence did incite me to this which follows: The
changing of this work of Reverend John Arndt, entitled, True Christianity,
into our homespun habit, being a work so well approved of in forain parts, so
often printed and translated out of the German tongue, as I shall need to say
nothing thereof, the work will approve it self. Only I beseech your Honor
to accept in good part of this my aged, trembling, and halfe-forgotten faculty;
such as it is, full of defects, even such as I could: which if the garment be
not fitting the person of reverend John Arndt, I wish him hearty good will that
shall amend it: and humbly entreat your Honor to accept of this my labor, as
your accustomed manner is, with the good will you have ever showed me, and
entertain it as a token of my thankfulness unto your Honor, for your
long-continued love (ever to be remembered) whose property is to change the
lover into the beloved; and so desires to continue your Honors obliged servant
unto death,

Radulphus Castrensis Antimachivalensis.

To the Courteous Readers.
COurteous and loving Readers (for to you only do I write) in stead of an
eloquent Exordium, I humbly entreat you would be pleased to extend your
patience until you have read my part-impertinent narration: in which doing,
for Conclusion, let the Critics think what they please. And thus I begin.

In the time of William Rufus and Henry Beauclark Kings of England, there lived
one By some called Iohannet Anglicus after his death.
John of the Town of Beverley in the County of York, who when the Churches of
all the Archbishopric of York were indicted by the Pope from saying Service,
and their doors shut up for many years, by reason of the strife between
Langfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas, Archbishop of York, concerning
the preheminency and prerogative of those two Archbishopricks: such was the
eager contention for and concerning the ambition in them both, that they could
be content to discontinue the open-church-service of God, for many years,
rather then to yield to each other after the humble example of Jesus Christ;
nor could the strife be ended or determined by any godly or learned Bishop, or
men of this Kingdom, until by appeal to the Pope, his thunderbolt of
excommunication was sent against Thomas, his Monks and Clergymen in all his
Dioceses. During which time of suspension from the Sacerdotiall Function, this
John was debarred from his Church office; in the mean time he bethought how to
employ himself in some laudable exercise for avoiding of Idleness; which
moved him to write the British, Roman, and Saxon Story from tbe entrance of
Brute until his time, compiled in one volume, concurring in substance with
Galfridus Monumetensis the Welshman in the following Age, who writ and lived
sixty years after the said John. Which being so, the said Walter of Cale^^,
Archdeacon of Oxford, delivered a History written in the British tongue, from
Bru^e to Cadwalladar, to Ieffrey of Monmouth to translate, as writes R. W.
Jeffrey of Monmouth was not worthy of, neither is guilty of that aspersion
laid upon him in these latter times, as being an inventer of the Welsh Story,
and not before his time ever heard of by any. Which two Historians being so
far distant as Beverly and Monmouth, and being by their originals and births,
from several people descended, the one a Britain, or Welshman, the other a
Yorkshire man (by ancient Writers termed Brigantes) for distance from each
other both in language and place, does imply that they (agreeing in the
substance of the Story) had some former Historians, as Coleman 1140. the Saxon
Gildas Historicus, or Gildas As writteth V. P.
Poeta, who lived and writ in the time of A^^eri^^ ^ene^ensis. 890.
Claudius Caesar, or some others to be their guides. Whosoever doubts thereof,
may read Pitheus for further satisfactio in British and Saxon Writers. But what
is this to the Translator of Reverend John Arndt the German Writer de ve^o
Christianismo, or true Christianity? Yea, this is something in imitation of
John of Beverley, the Translators Countreyman: John of Beverley so called at
the But afterward Io^n H^^nes, Anglic^^.
first, being a Clergyman, to avoid idleness, having no employment, in his
John de Oxe^ford writ a British Story again unto him. 1174.
vacation took upon him the collection of the British, Roman, and Saxon Story
of England. So this Translator of reverend John Arndt his True Christianity,
being a Lay man, and a guardian of the Peace, through envy and distraction of
these warlike times, having no employment, for avoiding of idleness, and
desire to benefit his Contrymen in what he may in his old age, took upon
him the translation of True Christianity, to give it thereby some more freedom
to pass here amongst us, then it had this twenty years past, when it past
amongst us in a Roman habit. Moreover, have we now no ambitious Prelates, or
covetous Clergymen answerable to them of those times foretold and spoken of
long ago by Math. West. 1307. Polycro^ieo^ 1360.
Hildigardis, Egelfreda, Henry of Huntington, and others Saxto^ and others
more. 1484.
that for the retchlesnesse of Gods house, they should be overcome and cast
out: and is now in action under the Scottish Covenant, and demonstrated and
fulfilled Abbot of Saint Albons, John Weathamsteed. who lived anno 1440. was
the first that accused Ieffrey of Monmouth for Fables.
in the Directory now confirmed by Parliament. And that these times as well
formerly acted, as at this present time before they came to pass, and the
contentions of our elder Bishops were foretold; as was the ambition of Austen
the Romish Monk foretold by Marlin Ambrosius when he said, Pallium Londini
induet Dorobernia, Dover shall put on the Cloak of But enough has been said
before to clear him of that aspersion
London: And fulfilled when Austen procured of the Pope that the priority that
London had, should be translated to Dover, and from thence to Canterbury. The
Bishops of those times seeking themselves, and the things of this world, before
the performance of their duties in their callings, Five times have they been
chastised: First, the Britains by the Romans, the Romans by the Saxons, the
Saxons by the Danes, the Danes by the Normans, the Normans by these present
wars: a purging war for the retchlesnes of Gods House, according to the
prediction of Hildigardis. Such were the late Bishops of Scotland, not long
since, risen from the dead. Such were our late Bishops drawn in their Chariots
with six Horses, imitating and going about to renew unto us again the demeanor
of the Roman Clergy, together with the swarms of Locusts lately permitted and
increased amongst us, to eat up the verdure of our Land. And our supine Bishops
to their last confusion, suffering their flocks to be devoured by the Wolves,
and the shavelings to walk in triumph by Candlelight in open streets, in the
bright Sunshine. Whosoever doubts of this, may have further satisfaction if he
read the illaudable practices of our last Archbishop of Canterbury, together
with his brother of York, the endeavors of Con tbe Popes Agent, the discovery
of Thomas Abernethie, the Scottish Jesuit, and many more practices of these
times; neither is there wanting a cloud of witnesses, foretelling and declaring
the fall of the A monster ^ith two heads.
Roman Beast, which draws near, as witnesses Ironeus Ignostes, saying,
Bestia quarta amittet unum caput: 1640.
Tobias Snawber the German, declaring the same to the Emperors face, The
Uropian Harold his Precusser, Our English Prophet Brightman, Napier the Lord
Marqueston, the Author of the Scottish Banner, whose Motto is, Tandem bona
causa triumphat; The Pythagoriall Monk of Westminster, who shows the rise and
fall of Antichrist in Hieroglyphicall demonstrations, and by whom, to wit, the
North-Islanders, that is, the Britains and Swedes; but none of these declare
the manner how; yet this Author in his Hieroglyphics shows, The Cardinals
Hat shall cover the Flower du Luce of France for a season, before that come to
pass. After which the Cardinals Hat shall make a nest for the Owl to hatch
her eggs in: and the Popes M^ter shall be thrown upon the dunghill; in it
shall breed, and out of it shall crawle Toads and Serpents, the doleful seed
of the old Serpent the Devil, and fruits of the the carrion flesh, so much
adored and beloved by that generation, the spiritual Babylon. But what is this
to the works of reverend John Arndt the German Author of the True Christianity?
Very much by your good favor and patience, if you observe the Authors drift:
First, the name or title of the book, does intimate that there are false
Christians, or outside Christianity; such as have born sway (and yet do bear
rule) amongst the Romanists a very long season; which this Author reproves
likewise out of the substance of his works: you may find his endeavor is to
teach the inward, spiritual, and true Christianity in these times, so much
slubbred over even amongst the professors of the reformed religion, in so much
as the hypocrites who can wipe the outside of the platter, do obtain the
chief rooms and greetings in the market of the world, as it is said in the
Gospel. Such were our Bishops. This is that which this reverend man of God
teaches, how to overcome the great Antichrist so much detested, and of few
known, even our selves; and endeavors how to beat down in his works, and in
the room thereof to plant the true vine and word of God, by the true knowledge
of God, the chief and sovereign good, and to know our own vileness, to deny
our selves, by faith, humility and prayer, to obtain true repentance in Christ
Jesus; and to acknowledge true faith to be the work of God alone, and to rely
upon the promises comprised in the word of God, by a steadfast faith in Christ
Jesus, the propitiatory sacrifice once offered up unto the Father for the sins
of all men, and by him alone, and through his merit, to obtain eternal
salvation, the free gift of God alone, without any merit in men. This is that
which casts down the Devils strong bold, the Popes Miter and glory of the
world into the dunghill; which whosoever well observes the works of reverend John
Arndt, shall find therein, not only this heavenly doctrine, but also the rich
pearl, tree bearing humility, patience, meekness, and long-suffering, with the
hidden treasure in the field, more to be valued then all the world, and of
higher price and esteem then can be valued or expressed by any tongue; with
many more unspeakable gems of our Savior Jesus Christ. And whereas most men in
the frontispice of their labors do commend them to some Patron of power to
defend, or protect them from injury, oppression and detraction; so, I knowing
nothing of worth (in these evil times) can escape detraction and oppression,
do commend these works of John Arndt concerning true Christianity, to God the
only patron and defe^der of his own profession, and no earthly protector;
assuring my self, that as they have escaped the envy of his own contrymen,
and have been protected by the heavenly power, from the fire of persecution,
sword and injury; so likewise, I do assure my self, these books shall here
continue in our native tongue, and be preserved to a long-lasting memory to
Gods glory, and his countries good, which is the translators only aim and
desire: O these do hang out before the door of the house, an encomium or
title of praise, as it were an Ivy-bush to draw custom to the Wine-celler. The
name of this book is instead of an Ivybush to all good Christians, and better
wine then is within it, cannot be had, even that wine for which we contend
with so much loss of British blood, and we the laymen do stand up for with
hazard of our lives and fortunes: I say, that heavenly pearl, or hidden
treasure in the field, which by most, if not all the Bishops since the days of
Langfrank and Thomas, has been defaced or neglected even to this day; wherein
the Bishops still with their Prelatical faction, do labor after the ^^^
example, who fought for pre-eminence, honor, wealth and wine for the belly,
preferring it before the true vine and wine of John Arndt in this body
comprised, which undoubtedly is the best, unless it may be impaired something
in the Celler through the default of the Drawer: yet seeing it retains the
true taste and spirit, and in it self is found good and wholesome, and by your
good favors (gentle Readers) covered and conveyed in the cup of charity, which
makes the good will more acceptable then the Simon Castrensis Machivelenum
Auglicanum edidit.
gift; it may easily draw from the Translator the remainder of the vessel in
such expressions as Philopatiris is able. So rests your devoted servant to be
commanded,

Radulphus Castrensis Antimachivalensis.

THE FIRST BOOK of true Christianity.
CHAP. I. Of the Image of GOD.
EPHESIANS. 4. Be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put on the new Man,
which is created after God in justice and in the sanctity of truth.
THE Image of God in Man, is a conformity or similitude of the Man, concerning
th^e Soul, Understanding, Spir^t, Mind, Will, and all the faculties both of
Body and Mind, with God or the holy Trinity, and with all his divine
Attributes, virtues, will and proprieties, said, Faciamus, Let us make (which
are words, as I may s^y, of the Man the Image of the Trinity.
sacred Senate of the holy Trinity, Genesis 1.) man, after our image and
similitude, and let him rule over the fishes of the sea, and fowls of heaven,
and beasts of all the earth, and every creeping thing that moves on the earth.
Whereby evidently appears, that the holy Trinity planted his Image in man; so
as mere divine holiness, justice and goodness might shine and send forth
light in his soul, understanding, will, and hearts des^^e, yea even in his
life, and all his actions nothing but divine love, virtue and purity be found
in him no otherwise then in the blessed Angels. This Image God had made in man
to take delight in, and rejoice as it we in his soul. Truly, even as one
becoming a father, and beholding himself, or an other self in his
offspring, cannot but rejoice with an inward joy hardly to be expressed: So
Gods delight and chief pleasure was, to be with the sons of men, or our
first Parents, Prove. 8. For although God rested in all his works, yet he did
take singular and chief delight in man, because in him his divine Image did
most perfectly and exactly appear or shine forth by his innocence and
excellency, The Image of the Trinity in the soul.
or inward beauty. For ^^at cause God had planted three chief faculties, as a
most ample dowry, in the soul of man, to wit, Intellect, Will, and Memory;
and those the same holy Trinity does produce and preserve, sanctify and
illuminate: and lastly, does most beautifully adorn them with his graces,
gifts, and works. Certainly it is the property of every image whatsoever, to
set forth the like form and figure, neither can it be thought worthy the name
of an image, unless it be as like as it may be to that body that it ought to
represent. Let us take for example of what we say, a looking-glass in this, an
image cannot appear unless it draw a similitude or like form from elsewhere,
and as I may so say, conceive it, then also by how much purer and clearer the
glass is, so much the more evidently does the image of God appear in it. In
like manner, the more clearer and pure the man's soul is, so much the clearer
does the divine Image show forth it self. And therefore to this end our great
God created man altogether pure, without blemish or spot, endued with faculties
of soul and body, blameless and unreproveable, that the image of God might be
seen in him, and not so as in a glass a vain and livelesse shadow appears,
but a true and a living Image and likeness, or similitude of the invisible
God, and of his inward hidden immense beauty; I say, an Image of the divine
wisdom, the understanding of man, of long suffering, goodness, meekness and
patience of God in the spirit of man, of love and mercy in the affections of
the heart, of justice, sanctity, sincerity, and purity in the will, of
lowliness, gentleness, humanity and virtue in all his actions and words, of
power in his Dominion and rule over the earth, and fear of The true use of the
image of God.
all living creatures granted unto him: last of all, of eternity in the
immortality of the soul. Moreover, out of this Image man should or ought
first of all, know God, and then himself; I say, God his Creator to be all
things, the chief and only being, of whom all other created things have their
being, and all those essentially, whose image should shine in man. Therefore
seeing that he should carry the image of God is all goodness essentially.
the divine Goodness, it consequently follows, that God is the chief and
universal goodness essentially, and also the essential love, life, and
holiness: wherefore to God alone all honor, praise, glory, magnificence,
wherefore to God alone honor and glory is due.
fortitude, power, and virtue is due, because he is all these essentially; but
to any creature none of all these is due. And thereupon it is, Matthew. 19. to a
certain man thinking Christ to be only man, and therefore saying, Good master,
what good shall I do that I may have eternal life? answer is made, What do
thou call me good? None is good but only God alone, that is to say,
essentially; and but for, and without God, no good can be. Yet further is to be
noted, that man out of this Image, should learn to know himself, to wit, that
there The Image of God ought to represent nothing but God.
is a very great difference between him and God, and man not God himself, but
his Image, similitude, likeness, or proportion, in whom God alone should be
seen. And therefore besides God, nothing should live, appear, work, will,
love, think, speak, and rejoice in man; but if any thing else besides God
should move and work in him, then the man cannot be the Image of God, but his,
contrariwise, by whom he is moved, driven, and carried away. And to speak
briefly, the man ought to suffer himself wholly to be delivered up, devoted,
and resigned up to God, fulfilling the divine God will be all things in man.
will by a passive manner, by denying his (...) proper will, and suffering God
alone to do and work in him: this truly is the accomplishment of God, so that
the man may be a more pure and holy instrument of God and his works and will,
by which it comes to pass, the man does not move his will, but has the
divine will for his own, he loves not himself, but God; he seeks not his
own honor, but Gods; he challenges no goods to himself, being contented to
possess God, and consequently without the love of the world, and the
creatures. In brief, naught should be in man, live and work in him, but God
alone, wherein consists the chief innocence, purity, and holiness of man:
for what greater The chief innocence and simplicity.
innocence can be thought upon, then that the man should not do his own proper
will, but to suffer God in him to work, and finish all things? what greater
simplicity can there be, then that in little children void of all ambition and
self-love? The Kingdom of God in man both without and within, Christ Jesus
showed a most perfect ^xample of in his life time, which was the most absolute
Image of God, by sacrificing Christ the perfect Image of God.
and consecrating his will to his heavenly Father in perfect obedience,
humility and meekness, dispoyling himself of all honor and self-love, all
pleasure and joy, permitting God alone to think, speak, and do all things in
him by himself alone. In a word, he had the will and pleasure of God for his
own, that which God himself testified by a voice sent from heaven, Mat. 3.
This is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; this Jesus Christ, I
say, is the true Image of God, out of whom nothing did appear and shine forth,
but God himself, that is to say, mere love and mercy, long-suffering,
patiences, meekness, mildness, love toward man, holiness, cons^lation, life
and blessedness eternal, by him the invisible God would be seen, manifested,
God manifested in Christ.
and known to men, who also yet after a more sublime manner, is the Image of
God, according to his Divinity, as being God himself, and his essential
Image, a splendour or clearness of the uncreated light, as it is, Heb. 2. of
which I will say nothing now, but only of his appearing and manifestation
according to his humanity in his life and most holy conversation, such an Image
of God, or most perfect innocence also Adam had, which I would to God he in
true humility and obedience had kept, and had acknowledged himself not to be
the chief good; but yet to be the express and perfect Image of the chief
good. Now seeing he would be the chief good, and God himself; herewith he
contaminated himself with the greatest and most detestable of all sins.

But there was another part of knowing himself through the Image, to be
desired, that he was made capable of the benefits of this divine Image, and
most sincere pleasure, of flowing love, joy, peace, life, rest, fortitude,
virtue, and light, that God alone in him should be all things, and alone live
and work, self-will being excluded, and the love, and honor, and praise of
himself denied, only God should be his glory, and praise and honor: for
e-every like is capable of his like, not of his contrary, and in that rejoices
and is glad: In this wise God had decreed to infuse himself with all the
treasures of his goodness into the man, and so goodness is most of all
communicative of it self. Last The chiefest tranquillity is the union of God.
of all, by the image of God, the man ought to understand, that he is by it
united to God, and in this union the true union of the man does rest, peace,
joy, life, and everlasting happiness: contrariwise, the chief unrest of the
mind, torment and vexation, cannot happen otherwise then by ceasing to be the
Image of God, or giving over to be the Image of God, turning himself from God
to the creature, and consequently hereby is frustrated or deprived of the
chief and eternal good.

CHAP. II. Of the fall and apostasy of Adam.
Romans 5. As by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one also, many are made righteous.
THe sin of Adam is disobedience against God, by which the man turned from God
to himself, became a thief of the divine honor, whilst he went about to make
himself God, deprived himself of the divine image, and perfect hereditary
justices and holiness, blinded in his understanding, in will undutifull and
contumelious against God. Lastly, as concerning the affection of the whole
heart, from God alienated, and in hostiall manner opposite. Which abomination
in all men, is propagated by carnal generation, and passes by hereditary
necessity, and brings to pass that man is spiritually dead, and the son of
wrath and condemnation, unless Christ redeem him; and therefore let poor
simple Christians take heed lest they extenuate the fall of Adam in their own
interpretation, The fall of Adam was the greatest sin.
and account it as a light matter, and the eating of an Apple, but rather let
them believe, that Adams and Lucifers was one and the same offense, and that
most grievous one, and extremely to be detested, even a tyrannical affectation
of the divine Majesty. This sin in the beginning was conceived in the heart,
soon after by eating of the forbidden apple, broke forth into light; of which
the sin of Absalom gives us a fair and elegant example or pattern: for as
he was not content first of all to be the son of a King; then to be the most
beautiful amongst men, without blemish from the head to the sole of the foot;
thirdly, most dearly beloved of his parents, (as may be gathered by the tears
of David) unless actually he were a King by thrusting his father out of his
Kingdom by violence; which opinion once confirmed in the mind, he did after
profess himself the enemy of his father, and began to lie in wait for his
life: So when man did not account it sufficient to be the Son of God, that he
was the fairest of all creatures in body and mind, without fault: and lastly,
that he was in the favor and love of God, unless he should be God himself:
hereupon he conceived hostile hatred against God, being ready, as far as in
him lay, utterly to deface and extirpate God. A more detestable sin then
this, can no man think. Then afterward it followed, Adam and the Devil
Lucifer committed one fault.
that the man concerning his heart and mind, became like unto the Devil,
because they both committed one fault, and now was no more the son of God,
nor the Image of God, but of the Devil, and the instrument of the Devil,
capable of all Devilish malice: to this add, that he became of a divine
celestial and spiritual Image, altogether earthly and carnal, and a beastly
creature: for the Devil, that he might erect his own Image in man, durst first
by enticing, deceitful and crafty speeches, sow his seed in man, that is to
say, self-love, ambition, self-will and affectation of the Divinity;
whereupon the Scripture calls all selfe-lovers a Generation of vipers, Matthew.
3. and those that be of a Devilish nature, The seed of the Serpent: I will put
enmity between the seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. And
from this seed of the Serpent, or seed of Vipers, nothing, or no offspring can
come, but terrible fruit, as the Image of Satan, the offspring of Belial, the
children of the Devil: for as even as in any other seed, be it never so small,
yet after a wonderful and hidden manner, all the qualities and properties,
stature, thickness, length, breadth, with boughs, leaves, flowers and fruits,
and so the whole tree with innumerable fruits of the whole stock and plants is
contained, so in this pestilent and The pestilent seed of Adam.
fatal seed of the Serpent, I say, in the selflove of Adam and his
disobediences, so often as we delivered it by carnal generation, there lies the
death deadly bearing tree, the innumerable fruits of malice; and lastly, the
image of Satan, with all his marks and properties. For show me any child, and
behold even from his mothers womb and first swaddling clothes, this native
Scandal called an action originally sin.
corruption, and especially disobedience and self-love, do grafie or sow it
self; and so soon as it grows up, regard and you shall see a violent
natural self-love, ambition, a desire of glory, covetous of revenge and lying,
and by and by as an Army marching, comes on disdain, arrogance, pride,
blasphemy, oaths, fearful dire imprecations, deceits, contempts of God and
his Word, contempts of his parents and Magistrates: to these add wrath,
brawlings, hatreds, envy, dissimulations, revenge, homicide, and all kind of
cruelty, especially, when scandals, and occasions do happen therewith, which
as Midwives do help to bring forth the offspring of Adams and the Devils
corruption: for you shall see break forth impudency, shamelessness, lust,
venereall cogitations, whoredoms, obscene and filthy speeches, shameless
behavior, both in words and deeds, drunkennesses, gluttony, intemperance in
food and apparel, levity, effeminacie: Besides all these, covetousness,
usury, deceits, frauds, fallacies, craftiness, impostures, and juglings: and
to speak all at once, all kind of wickedness and naughtiness; and so various
and abounding, that cannot be declared, Scandals of doctrine
according to that of Jeremy 17. The heart of man is wicked and inscrutable,
who shall find it out? But if you add thereunto the seducing and heretical
spirit, then you shall hear renouncing of God, forsaking of him, idolatry,
hatred of the truth, and persecution, the sins against the holy Ghost,
faith-breakings, corruptions of the faith, depraving of Scriptures, and
terrible seducings. All which are no other then the fruits of the Serpent, and
the image of Satan in the man. And who could even suspect in the beginning, in
so weak and feeble an Malice is hidden in man.
infant, such a heap of wicked deeds, or a heart so pestililent, and that such
a Basilisk did therein lurk, and hide it self thereunder; but he that is in
life and conversation worst of all, and in the cogitation of his heart
intentive to evil at all times, even from his tender infancy, as it is Genesis 6.
written, who could have produced these things to light, and expressed them, if
trial had not manifested it; therefore wicked and extreme evil is that root
from whence so deadly and pestiferous a tree does grow. O terrible seed of the
Serpent, and of vipers, from whom so deformed and stinking an image does arise
and increase! for within all evils are fomented, and from thence do arise and
grow, provoked, nourished, and set forward by external provocations, for what
cause it is to Why offenses were for bidden by Christ.
be th^ught, Christ Jesus did so seriously prohibit, that children should be
provoked by evil example: for in whom this seed of the serpent lurketh, and the
beginning of all wickedness and flagitious acts, their beginning and entrances
are closely hidden, and are deceiveable, no otherwise then cruel poison in a
pestilent worm. Learn therefore, O man, of me, that the sins of Adam, and
original corruption of Original sin unexpressible.
our kind, is not lightly to be regarded, or slighted, because this infection
and depravation, is greater then any words can express, or human intellect can
search into, know thy self, and what thou becamest to be after the fall of
Adam, consider how thou from the Image of God became the Image of the Devil; a
compendium I say, and an epitome or an abridgement, to receive all Devilish
nature, malice and wickedness into a little room: for even as in the Image of
God all virtues and divine The Image heavenly and earthly.
properties were contained: and as before the fall, man did carry the celestial
Image, that is to say, he was all heavenly, spiritual, Angelical and divine;
so now after his apostasy, he carries about with him the image of The man is
a beast,
the earthly, and is become altogether and fundamentally earthly, carnal, and
beastly. And why so? This thy fierce wrath, is it thine? Is it proper to a
Lion, or to a Man? Thy envy and covetousness insatiable, do not Dogs and
Wolves the same? Thy intemperance and shamelessness is hoggish; yea, if thou
look rightly into thy self, thou shall find within, even in thy heart, a
certain world of beasts, yea even in thy tongue alone, in that least of thy
members, as St. James says, Chapt. 3. a lake and a sea of venomous worms, a
harbor of unclean spirits, a biding place or cage of unclean birds, as
witness Isa. 3. and Apoc. 18. but we often increase so much in malice that in
wrath we exceed all kind of beasts; the Dogs in envy, the Wolves in covetous
ravening, the Foxes in craftiness, the Basilisk in poison of the eye: and last
of all, the very Hogs in filthiness: And from this beastly nature Christ
(Mat. 3.) calls Herod a Fox, and the impure, Dogs and Hogs, Matthew. 7.
Furthermore whosoever amendeth not the corruptions of our generation, and is
not renewed in Christ, but dies such a beastly man as we have described, this
man shall everlastingly retain his Satanicall nature, arrogant, disdainful,
proud, and shall remain a cruel Lion, an envious Dog, a ravenous Wolf, a
venomous worm, and a Basilisk never to be reformed; he carries about with him
always the image of Satan in everlasting darkness, to bear witness he lived
not in Christ, nor was renewed according to the Image of God, according to
John, Apoc. 21. Without be Dogs, Idolaters, and all Inchanters, that love and
tell lies.

CHAP. III. How the man is renewed in Christ to life eternal.
Galat 6. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new Creature.
REgeneration is the work of the holy Ghost, by which the man, the son of
wrath and eternal condemnation, is made the son of grace and salvation, and
of a sinner a just man, through Faith, the Word, and the Sacraments, by which
our hearts, both sense, mind, understanding, will and affections, are renewed,
illuluminated and sanctified in Christ, and according to Christ, unto a new
creature. Therefore regeneration is conceived chiefly in two benefits and
graces. I say, in Justification and Sanctification, or Renovation, Cap. 3. ad
Tit. Wherefore the original of every Christian is twofold, his line, or
Twofold birth.
nativity and generation, the one carnal, defiled with sin, damned and
accursed, descending from Adam, by which the seed of the Serpent, the image of
the Devil, and the earthly and beastly man is propagated: The other
spiritual, holy, heavenly, happy and blessed new birth or regeneration,
through Christ, does plentifully grow forth, by which the seed and image of
God, and the man of God, so heavenly, and like unto God, is after a spiritual
manner begotten and produced: for even as the stem of old Adam is in us, so is
it necessary also, that the new stock, progeny and kindred of Christ be truly
in us. And this is that old and new man, old and new birth, old and new Adam,
The word of God is the seed of the new birth.
the earthly and heavenly image, the old and new Jerusalem, the flesh and the
spirit, Adam and Christ in us: lastly, the outward and inward man. Now go to,
let us see how we are regenerated by Christ: Even as the old birth is
propagated carnally from Adam, so regeneration is made spiritually from Christ,
through the word of God, which is like unto a seed of a new creature, born
(says Peter, Epist. 1. cap. 1.) not of a corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, living and remaining for evermore. And
blesed John, Cap. 1. For he begot us voluntarily by the word of his faith, tbat
we might be a certain beginning of his creatures. Therefore this Word produces
Faith, which apprehends in like manner the Word, and in that Jesus Christ,
together with the holy Ghost, and by that virtue, force, and efficacy, the man
is regenerated. Briefly, regeneration is made first by the holy Ghost, John 3.
and this does Christ call, or term, to be born of the Spirit. Secondly, by
faith, John 5. He that believes Jesus to be Christ, is born of God. Thirdly,
by Baptism, John 3. Unless one be born again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot Faith is the means of the new birth.
enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Of which things let us see further: By Adam
the man came by the greatest and chiefest of evils, sin, abomination, wrath,
death, devil, hell and damnation: for these are the fruits of the old descent,
and original: but in Christ the man recovereth, and receives the chiefest
good, as justice, grace, blessing, The fruits of both births.
life, and eternal salvation. From Adam the man has a carnal spirit, and the
ru^e and dominion of wicked spirits: contrariwise, from Christ he has the holy
Ghost, with his gifts, and a most quiet reign and Kingdom; for such as the
spirit of man is, such is his original nativity and propriety. You know not of
what spirit you are of, says Christ, Luke 9. From Adam the man has an
arrogant spirit, swelling and proud, who if he have a desire to be regenerate,
and born again, and to be renewed, then it will be necessary for him to receive
an humble spirit, plain and simple from Christ by A new spirit from Christ.
faith. From Adam we receive an unbeleeving spirit, blasphemous and
ungrateful; therefore it behooves us by faith in Christ, to attain to a
believing spirit, faithful, acceptable, and well pleasing unto God. From Adam
a disobedient, fierce, and rash spirit is given unto us: from Christ we must
take the spirit of obedience, meekness and modesty, through faith in Christ.
From Adam we possess the spirit of wrath, hostility, revenge, and homicide;
but from Christ, by faith in the place thereof, is to be gotten the spirit of
long-suffering, love of man, and goodness it self, which is charity. From
Adam by our nativity, and carnal offspring, the man has a covetous heart, and
spirit churlish, seeking only his own commodities and profits, snatching, and
catching, that which is another man's; but from Christ by faith, is to be
obtained the spirit of mercy, piety, and liberality. From Adam by carnal
propagation does proceed the spirit of shamelessness, uncleanness, and
intemperance; against which it is meet to seek to obtain a chaste spirit, clean
and temperate. From Adam is communicated to him a lying spirit, speaking
nothing but falsenesse and calumniation: from Christ we ought to participate
the spirit of truth, integrity and constancy. Last of all, from Adam does From
Adam all evil, from Christ all goodness.
pass the spirit of beasts terrene or earthly, and mere brutish: and
contrariwise, there is to be conceived from Christ, a spirit from heaven,
celestial and divine: and for that cause it was behoovefull for Christ to take
humanity upon him, to be conceived by the holy Ghost, and to abound with the
same spirit above measure; yea, for this cause it was convenient that the
Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and fortitude, the Spirit of knowledge and the fear of God should
rest upon him, as says Isaias, Chap. 11. that the humane nature in him The
human nature is renewed by Christ and his Spirit.
and by him, should be renewed, and that we in him, and by him, and through him
should become a new offspring and a new creature, receiving from him the
spirit of wisdom and understanding for the spirit of foolishness; the spirit
of knowledge in room of our natural and inbred blindness; the spirit of the
fear of the Lord, in stead of the spirit of impiety: in which permutation
consists the new life, and the fruit of the new creature, or regeneration.
For as in Adam we were all spiritually dead. neither could we expect other then
death and works of darkness it self, in Christ In Christ by faith we are
restored to life again.
we must be raised again to the works of light. As by carnal generation we
entered into the sin of Adam, so by faith through Christ, we must attain unto
righteousness. As by the flesh of Adam, pride, covetousness, lust, and all
kind of uncleanness is begotten, born, and grows old in us; so by the holy
Spirit our nature ought to be renewed, sanctified, and repurged from all pride,
covetousness, lust, and envy. And it is needful that we from Christ should
draw a new spirit, a new heart, sense and mind, in the same manner as we drew
from Adam our fleshly subject to sin. And as concerning regeneration, Christ
says, Isai. 9. Our Al good works ought to proceed out of the new birth.
Father is eternal. After this manner then are we renewed in Christ to life
eternal, regenerated by Christ, and in Christ become a new creature: by this
regeneration by Christ, and the holy Ghost, and Faith, it is necessary works
must flow and proceed, which we desire we should please God in, so we live in
the new birth, and the new birth does live in us, so we in Christ, and Christ
in us: so last of all, we live in the The description of the new birth* and the
fruits* thereof.
Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ in us. This regeneration and the
fruits thereof Paul Ephesians. 4. calls and terms thus, To be renewed in the
spirit of our mind, to put off the old man, to be transformed into the Image
of God, 2 Cor. 3. To be renewed and known according to his Image that made you,
to the Coloss. 3. Regeneration and renovation of the holy Ghost, to Titus 3.
Last of all, to take away the stony heart, and to give us a New birth is from
Christ.
fleshy heart, Ezekiel. 11. And by this appears, how by the incarnation and
humanity of Christ, regeneration is raised, or proceeds; that is to wit,
because man out of his ambition, pride, and disobedience, offended and turned
himself from God: this Apostasy could not be amended, or put away, but by
extreme humility, lowliness of will, and obedience of the Son of God. And as
Christ in his conversation upon earth among men, was most humble, it is
necessary that he should be the same in thee, to live in thee, and to renew the
Image of God in thee. See now and behold the most amiable, the most lowly,
courteous, the most The life of Christ in us. The example of Christ is the rule
of our life.
obedient, and most patient Christ, and learn of him, or even as he is, live in
him. For what was the cause, say thou, why he so lived? Truly, that he might
be thy example, looking-glass, and rule of life. He (I say) and no St. Bennets
rule, nor of any other man commended unto thee, but the example of Christ, I
say of Christ, which his Apostles with one consent and direct finger did alone
point at. And this is the reason of his passion, death, and resurrection; that
is to say, that thou with The new life is the fruit of the death and passion of
our Lord.
him may die from thy sins, and again in him, with him, and by him, may
rise spiritually, and walk in a new life; of which argument thou may see more
hereafter in the 11. and 31. Chapters: therefore our regeneration arises out
of, and disperseth it self, from the healthful fountain of the passion,
death, and resurrection of Christ: whereupon S. Peter (1 Epist. 1.) says, God
has regenerated us to a lively hope, through Jesus Christ: and thereupon it
comes to pass, that the Apostles every where do lay the foundation of
penitence and the new life, to be the passion of Christ, as Romans 6. 1 Pet. 1.
Spend your time in reverent fear, knowing that you are not redeemed with
corruptible gold or silver, but with the precious blood, even the Lamb the Lord
Jesus. Where thou see the most precious ransom of our redemption, to be the
cause of our holy conversation. The same Peter (Epist. 1. Cap. 3.) writes,
Christ bought our sins in his body upon the Cross, that being dead unto
sin, we might live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. And
Christ himself (Luke 24.) says: So it behooved Christ to suffer and rise
again from the dead the third day, and preach repentance and remission of
sins in his name. By which words it is manifest, that from the fountain of
the passion, death, and resurrection of Christ, does flow both preaching and
repentance. Therefore the passion of Christ is both satisfaction for our
sins, and the renewing of man by faith, both which together, and at once, are
required to the redemption and reparation of mankind, because this is the
fruit, and this is the efficacy of the passion of Christ, working in us
renovation and sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. This lastly, is the means whereby we
are born again, and renewed in Christ; neither is the laver of regneration any
other thing wherein we are dipped to the death of Christ, to wit, to die with
Christ from our sins, by the help and efficacy of his death, and arise from
sin by the grace of his glorious resurrection.

CHAP. IV. What is true Repentance, what also is the Cross, and Yoke of Christ.
Galat. 5. Those which are of Christ, have crucified their own flesh, with the
vices and concupiscence thereof.
REpentance and true conversion is the work of the holy Ghost, through which
the man acknowledging his faults by the Law, and together therewith the most
just wrath of God against sin, does earnestly grieve for the same, and would
not have committed those things he has done: and through the Gospel
understanding the grace of God by faith in Christ, obtains the remission of
his sins; and by this penitency, the mortification and crucifying The property
of true repentance.
of the flesh, and all carnal pleasures and concupiscences of the heart, is
accomplished, and together with the same quickening of the spirit, whereby it
follows, that Adam with all his corruptions, dies in us, and Christ
contrarily lives in us by faith, because these two neceslarily do grow
together; so as the resurrection or renewing of the spirit, does follow the
mortification The old man's death is the life of the new
of the flesh at the heels; and the quickening of the new spirit follows the
abolishing of the old man: although the outward man decay, yet the inward man
is renewed daily, 2 Cor. 4. Mortify your earthly members. Coloss. 3. and so
think your selves dead in sin, but alive in God through Christ The flesh is
mortified by true repentance.
Jesus our Lord, Romans 6. But let us consider why the flesh is to be mortified
by true repentance: We said even now, by the fall of Adam, that the man became
even devilish, earthy, carnal, without God, and without love, that is,
without God and charity, changed from divine love to worldly love, so that
every where in all things, he studies himself, favors, counsels, applauds
himself, and sets forth and provideth for his own honor and glory. And
this as I say, is the effect of the fall of Adam: whiles he studieth to make
himself God, he involved all mankind, in one and the selfsame calamity. And
this corruption and depravation of human nature, must be changed and amended by
serious repentance, that is to say, by true and divine contrition, by faith
apprehending the remission of sins, and by the mortification True penitence
changes the heart.
of carnal pleasures, self-love, and pride: Neither does true repentance
consist, that you put away the great and outward sins, but that you descend
into your self, and look inward, into the inward of thy heart and mind, turn
over the secrets and closets thereof, change and renew them, and convert thy
self from self-love to divine love, from the world and all worldly
co^cupiscences, to a spiritual and heavenly life, and participating the merits
of Christ by faith; whereupon it follows that a man must deny himself, as it
is Luke 9. that is, to The property of true repentance is to die to the world
and himself.
tame his will, and suffer himself to be carried wholly by the divine will, not
to love himself, to account himself the unworthiest of all mortal creatures,
to renounce all things he has, Luke 14. that is, to contemn the world, with
all the pomps and honors thereof, to pass by his own wisdom, and all
endowments or gifts of nature To hate ones own life.
with closed eyes, to trust in no creature but God alone, even to hate his own
life, that is, carnal will and pleasures, concupiscence, pride, covetousness,
lust, wrath, envy, to mortify these, to displease himself to set naught by
all that is his own, to boast To die to the world.
in nothing, to attribute nothing to himself or his proper strength, to die to
the world, that is, to the concupiscence of the eyes and the flesh, to the
pride of life, and to be crucified to the world, Gal. 6. This, this, I say, is
true repentance and mortifying of the flesh, without which no man can be the
disciple of Christ: this is the true conversion from the world, from himself
and the Devil, to God; without which, no sinner can have remission of sins,
nor attain salvation, Acts 26. This penitence and conversion is the denial of
himself, and the true cross and yoke of Christ, of whom himself speaks,
Matthew. 11. Take up my yoke upon The yoke of Christ is easy to the spirit, to
the flesh a cross.
you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. As if he should say,
by earnest and inward humility is thy self-love and ambition to be tamed; and
by courtesy wrath and desire of revenge, is to be kept under: that which indeed
to the new man is an easy yoke, and light burden, howsoever to the flesh it
seem a most heavy and bitter cross. And this is indeed to crucify ones
flesh, The true cross of Christ what it is.
with the vice and concupiscence thereof, Gal. 5. Therefore they err, and do
greatly err, which know no other cross then tribulations, and worldly
afflictions, being ignorant of inward repentance and mortifying of the flesh to
be that true cross, which we ought to carry after Christ daily, in bearing our
enemies with great patience, and in overcomming the disdain and arrogance of
our slanderers and adversaries with mildness and humility, after the pattern
and example of Christ, who was willing to die to the world and all
worldliness, most perfectly; (I say) this What it is to die to the world.
yoke of Christ is our true cross, which we are bound to bear; which when we
do, then we die to the true world: and not if we hide our selves in
Monasteries; and if we make singular orders and rules of living, being in the
mean time inorderly in the heart, full of the love of the world, spiritual
pride, pharisaical contempt of others, lust, envy, and secret hatred. I say,
this is not to die to the world, no it is not; but to mortify the flesh, with
all things which are pleasant to it, and daily within, and secretly to be sorry,
and to turn himself from the world inwardly to God, [whereby it cannot but
come to pass, that the outward life and manners be renewed and changed; what
if now one should only do outward repentance or penance, abstaining from great
and enormous offenses for the fear of punishment, and the inward man do keep
his old spots still?] and daily inwardly in heart to die to the world, and to
live to Christ by faith in sincere humility, and lowliness: and lastly, to
confide in the grace of God in Christ Jesus, always doing such and so great
things. To this repentance are we called by Christ: I say, that true and inward
conversion from the Without true repentance Christ profits nothing
world to God, to whom also alone the imputation of his justice, and
righteousness, and obedience, through the efficacy of faith, together with
the remission of our sins is promised; so that without this inward
repentance, Christ profits man nothing, that is, he shall not participate of
his grace, and favor, and merit. The reason The fruits of the death and
passion of Christ.
is, because they are to be comprehended by a contrite heart, faithful,
humble, penitent. Truly this fruit of the passion of Christ is in us, that we
may die to sin by true repentance; and of his resurrection, in that Christ in
us, and we in Christ, might live: And hereby comes the new creature True
repentance inward.
in Christ, and regeneration, which only is available with God, Gal. 6. Vide
infra, Chapt. 33. Therefore let us learn the nature and constitution of true
repentance, and let us not err in the common error, but let all of us esteem
and believe to bid adieu to external idolatry, blasphemy, homicide, adultery,
whore-hunting, thefts, with all such enormities and vices external, to be the
true and only repentance: neither yet do I deny that this external
repentance is forbidden by the Prophet, as Esaias 55. and Ezekiel. Chap. 18. and 33.
who likewise with the Apostles most certainly do command and give charge to
level at the inwards and heart it self, even another repentance inward, more
noble then the outward, even that whereby the man dies to pride,
covetousness, and lust, denies and hates himself, renounceth the world,
despoyleth himself of all his own, commits himself to God, crucifieth the
flesh, offers a daily contrite heart, humbling and trembling, as the best and
well-pleasing sacrifice unto God. And last of all, does live with a heart full
of tears and groans; which Character of inward repentance, the Psalms of
David do every where set forth: So it remains that this is the true
repentance, when inwardly in the heart with earnest sorrow, and most assured
feeling of heaviness, we be made contrite and afflicted; and again be made
holy and joyful, purged and changed, and amended by remission of sins by
faith in Jesus Christ, whereby it cannot but come to pass, that the outward
life and manners be renewed and changed. What if now one should only do
outward penance or repentance, abstain from great and erroneous offenses for
the fear of punishment, and the inward man do keep his old spots still, and
take no care to enter into the inward and new life in Christ, shall not such a
one nevertheless be damned? neither shall it profit him a straw to cry, Lord,
Lord, but he shall be constrained to hear that terrible voice, I know you not:
For certain and sure it is, not all that say, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but only those that do the will of the heavenly Father.
Under which terrible sentence of the Divine Majesty, it is manifest, men of all
orders are comprised: for as many as do not inwardly and from the heart truly
repent, and become new creatures in Christ, those surely Christ will not
acknowledge for his.

CHAP. V. What is true Faith.
1 John 1. 5. Every one that believes that Jesus is Christ, is born of God.
FAith is a solid trust, and a firm and cernain persuasion of the grace of God
promised in Christ for the remission of sins and life eternal, kindled
through the word of God, and the holy Ghost in our hearts: by this faith is
conferred unto us the remission of our sins, and that gratis, or freely, for
no merits of ours, but Christ's alone; and that of mere grace, that our faith
may remain fixed, or unmovable, upon a firm and solid foundation. And this
absolution or forgiveness of our sins, is our justice or justification, and
that true, solid, and eternal, before God: For neither is it of Angels, but by
the obedience of the Son of God, his merits and ransom, which by faith we
appropriate unto us, fixing and applying the same to our selves; therefore
neither is the imperfections Properties of a true faith.
of our life, or any sins left remaining to withstand us, but they be covered
with the veil of grace, for Christ's sake, Psalm. 32. Furthermore, by this solid
and firm trust, this follows, that the man does dedicate his whole heart
solely to God, in him he rests alone, to this one is he glewed or fastened,
with this alone he enters society, and is joined to God, and participateth all
things that are of God, and Christ, and is made one spirit with God, takes and
collecteth from him power and strength, a new life, new joys, many
recreations, peace, lightness of heart, the souls Sabbath and rest. Lastly,
justification and holiness, or sanctification in the holy Ghost. What other
thing then is it at the length, but to be regenerated through faith? for where
true faith is, there is Christ with all his justice, holiness, redemption,
merit, grace, remission of sins, adoption, and inherttance of life eternal.
And this is the new life and regeneration, New birth.
through faith in Christ, whereupon the Apostle to the Hebrews, Cap. 11.
calls faith a Substance, that is, the undoubted, solid and firm trust of
things which were hoped for, and a certain manifest and notable conviction and
experience of things invisible: And finely, so great and powerful is the
consolation of a true living faith in our hearts, as it cannot but convince by
arguing most firmly from experience and taste of the sovereign good in his
soul, that is, from the quietness and peace in God, Justified faith where
peace.
whereby that preservation remains most certain, which a Christian doubts
not to seal with his death: and this is that strength of spirit and inward
man; this is vigor and alacrity of faith, or Parrhesia, Ephesians. 3. Phil. 1. 1 John
2. and 3. this joy in God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. Lastly, this Plerophoria, and immovable
The certainty of faith.
and firm certainty, 1 Thessalonians. 3. even for which I shall dare to dye, that truly
cannot but first be persuaded in my mind most firmly, through the H. Ghost
infixed and impressed in my inward understanding; also it behooves to be lively
and inward in most powerful consolation, whereby that comes to the mind which
is supernatural, divine, and a celestial strength to overcome the fear of
death, and the love of he world to be uttetly extinguished in me: I say, so
great and so solid Prolepsis, or persuasion To be born of God, is no dead work.
and union with Christ, is needful, that neither death nor life can dissolve
it, Romans 8. whereupon B. John pronounces, That he that is born of God, has
overcome the world. But to be born of God cannot be any vain, or shadowed
thing, it ought to be a lively thing, and very powerful: For it were
wickedness to believe that the living God did beget a dead offspring,
frivolous an^ dead members, or instrumentss: but It is living and overcomes,
so it be true faith.
rather it is for a certain rule that God cannot, being a living God, but beget
a living man, no other then new. Now seeing our faith is the victory, by which
we overcome the world, who can doubt that it should overcome, being endued with
powerful strength, and greatest force, and that our faith, which is commanded
by God to overcome the world, ought to be lively overcomming, and affections
working divine faith, a certain force and influence, yea Christ himself
apprehended by faith, and fixed in our minds, and graffed in our understanding:
and by this virtue of God What we are with Christ, and without him what.
we return into God, and become intimate and one with God. And from Adam as
from a cursed Vine, we are transplanted into Christ that living and blessed
Vine, John 15. So in Christ we possess all his goods, and in him are
justified. Even as a Scien, or a plant graffed in a good tree, grows,
flourishes, and bears fruit; without it, it withers: so man without Christ
is a cursed vine, and all his works are sinful, the grapes of it are
bitterness and gall, Deuteronomy. 32. but in Christ blessed and justified; wherefore
St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 5. that he that knew no sin, for us became sin,
that we might be justified before God in him. By this it appears manifestly,
that works do not justify, because we must be graffed in Justification is not
by works.
Christ by faith, before we can do any good work; and so thy justification is
the gift of God, freely given before, and preventing all our merits; we may as
well say, a dead man may see, stand, and do good of himself. I think so
indeed, but he must first be raised from death: so thou likewise that art dead
in sin to God, can not perform any work to God; unless thou be first
raised by Christ to life: which being granted, it follows, thy justification
only proceeds from faith in Christ: And faith is like But in Christ.
a newborn babe, newly come into the world, weak and naked, set before the
eyes of his Savior, from whom, as from his parent, he receives justice,
honesty, holiness, grace, and the holy Ghost. And after this manner is the
naked child, by the mercy of God clothed, and both his bracelets being taken
away, he receives of God grace, health and holiness: This alone therefore,
this only receiving, makes him godly, holy, and happy, and our true
justification, only through faith, and not What our justification is.
through works: I say, by faith, which apprehending Christ, be it what it may
be, with all his goodness, he challenges and makes it his own properly, then
of necessity sin, death, Devil, and hell, must Sin and death, and hell are
subject to faith
give back and vanish away: and so powerfully, lively, and effectually does the
merit of Christ through faith work and abound, that even the sins of the
whole world cannot hurt them. Now seeing that Christ by faith lives and
dwells in thee, let us never think or believe, that this his habitation is a
dead work, but rather a certain living thing, not idle; powerful working, or
as I may say in one word, a renewing: for faith performs two things; first,
it transplanteth thee into Christ, and gives him freely unto thee, with all
that he has: secondly, it renews thee in Christ, that thou may grow green
and flourish, and live in him: neither is the graffe brought into the stock for
other purpose, but that it should flourish and bring forth fruit in it. And
even as by the Apostasy of Adam, and by the deceit and seducing of the Devil,
the seed of the Serpent, and the Diabolical corruption of his nature, is sown
in man, growing up into a tree bearing the fruits of death; so by the word of
God, and the holy Ghost, the faith is sown in our hearts, as the seed of Faith
is the seed of God.
God, in which after a wonderful manner, are shut up all divine virtues and
properties; from whence in a like manner does flow forth a most glorious and
new Image of God, and brings forth a new tree, whose fruits are obedience and
patience, humility, courtesy, peace, charity, justice, a new and another man;
and so the whole Kingdom of God: for true and saving faith renews the whole
man, makes clean the heart, joyneth and uniteth it to God, purged anew, and
set free from earthly things, it hungreth and thirsts after righteousness,
it works love, it brings peace, joy, patience, strength, moderation in
adversity, it overcommeth the world, it makes us the sons of God, and heirs
of all celestial goodness, and coheirs with Christ. If it happen any to be
without, or to be ignorant of this joy which is by faith, acknowledging
himself to be of little faith, let him beware he distrust not therefore, but
rather let him trust in grace Consolation of those that have little Faith.
promised by Christ; which promise remains certain, immovable, and
everlasting. And although we through humane infirmities, do often fall and go
backwards, let us in the mean while always account it sure and certain, that
the grace of God remains solid and firm, whenever by true and serious
repentance we arise from our fall; for Christ is and will be Christ and
Savior, although you take hold of him by a firm or weak faith, for he
imbraceth both alike, and Christ is alike to all. Moreover, the promise of
grace is universal and perpetual, upon which it is necessary our faith be
founded, without difference, firm or weak, and in the mean time erect and fill
thy heart with hope, God will in his good time, and in his own season, bring
that sincere and sensible joy unto thee, although he hide himself a while in
the inwards of thy heart, Psalm. 37. 77. Of which Argument I shall say more,
Lib. 2.

CHAP. VI. How the word of God by faith in man, ought to spread forth and live.
Luke 17. For behold the kingdom of God is within you.
BEcause in Regeneration and Renovation of the man, all things are in us,
therefore our great Gods will was, that those things which by faith in man,
ought All the new man is set forth in the Scripture.
to be done spiritually and fulfilled, should be outwardly set forth in
writing, and the whole new man painted and fully set forth in his word: for
seeing that his word is the seed of God in us, certainly it is necessary that
it should bring forth fruit, and out of that seed to grow by faith, which the
Scripture outwardly does teach and bear witness of, or certain it is, that
the seed and embryon is dead: I say, in faith and spirit I ought to taste,
prove, and joyfully in the inward sense perceive, hear, see, and touch even
those things the Scripture does dictate The word of God is to quicken in us.
and declare most truly; neither did God the Father in his counsel manifest
the Scripture, that as a dead letter it should lie hid in paper and ink, but
that it should receive life in faith and Spirit, or as we vulgarly say, be
turned into our juice and blood, and spring up and grow young in us, to another
new and inward man, because I say all things ought (and it is meet so to be) to
be fulfilled and performed in faith and spirit through Christ, whatsoever the
Scripture does outwardly teach. Let us show it in the example of Cain and Abel,
whose natures, manners and actions, if you call to mind, you cannot but
understand that History: If you suppose in the place of Cain and Abel, the
names of the old and new Man to be in the like manner to be done and iterated:
for what is the displeasure of both? what is that lying in wait that Cain laid
against Abel? What others are all those, then the daily strife of the flesh and
the spirit? what other enmity then the seed of the new man, and the seed of the
Serpent? Neither is there other reason in common sense: for by the food from
heaven the corruption of the flesh is to be drowned and washed; but just and
faithful Noe is to be preserved in the Ark, and a new Covenant is to be made
between thee and thy great God. Moreover, the Tower of Babel, or Confusion,
ought not to be built in thee. Thou must, with Abraham, go forth of thine own
Country, or knowledge, and all things are to be left, even thy life it self,
that thou may walk perfectly before God, carry out the victory, and go into
the land of promise, and Kingdom of God. And Christ means no other thing
Matthew. 10. Luke 14. If any come unto me, and hates not his father and mother,
his wife and children, his brothers and sisters, yea and further, his own life,
he cannot be my Disciple; that is to wit, he must bid all these adieu The
strife of the flesh and spirit is the mystical faith of Abraham. Mystical
Sodom.
rather then Christ. Furthermore, with Abraham, as Abraham did, thou must fight
against five Kings which are within thee. I say, the Flesh, the World, Death,
Devil, and Sin. And with Lot t^ou must go out of Sodom and Gomorrah; that
is, thou must renounce thy wicked and worldly life: neither must thou with Lots
wife, look back, as Christ commands, Luke 12. Briefly, our great God has
composed all the holy Scriptures for faith and the Spirits sake: And it all
ought to be fulfilled in thee spiritually. And to this belongs all the wars
and battles of Israel against the The type of the old Testament is to be
fulfillled by faith.
Infidels and Heathen people. And no other thing covered under the bark of the
letter and the history, then the continual strife between the flesh and the
spirit. Of this place and to this purpose is whatsoever is extant of the
Mosaicall Priesthood, the Tabernacle, the Ark of Covenant and Propitiatory: all
which do pertain unto thee to whom it belongs to pray in faith and spirit,
to burn incense, and to kill the Sin-offering, Christ Jesus will have all these
to be done and performed in thee, who has contracted these in the new Man and
Spirit, as an epitome and words abbreviated, to be fulfilled in thee by faith,
and sometimes in one sigh: for the man is a breviary of all natures, is the
Center and little world; so is it a compendium of the sacred All the new
testament is to be fulfilled in man.
Scripiure, and abridgement of the Word. And to come to the new Testament, what
other thing is it according to the letter, the^ an external testimony and
pattern, because all things in like manner are to be iterated and fulfilled by
faith in man? I say all, even all the new testament, so much as it is, ought to
be in us, and this one thing it does require and look for at our hands, because
the kingdom of God is in us: Therefore even as Christ by the holy Ghost in the
faith of Mary, was conceived and brought forth; so ought the Son in me
likewise be conceived after a spiritual manner, and begotten, increase, and
grow up. Furthermore, because I am become a new creature in Christ, it
remains The life of Christ in us.
and it follows, that I should live and walk in it, in it and with it to fly
into exile, with it to exercise humility, contempt of the world, patience,
loving kindness, and charity, and to pardon or forgive our enemies their
injuries, to use mercy, to love our enemies, to do the will of the Father,
being tempted of Satan to carry away the victory from him, by reason of the
truth that is in me, derided, despised, and contemned; and if necessity
require, to die for, and with him after the example of all the Saints, to bear
witness before him, and all the elect, that he is in me, and I in him was
joined by faith, and so lived. And this is that which is spoken, saying, To be
conformed to the image of Christ; for example, to be born with and in Christ,
to The death and resurrection of Christ in us.
put on Christ, to grow up and wax strong in him, to live in exile, to be
dipped in his baptism, with him to be derided, to die together, and to be
crucified together, to arise together from the dead, and reign together, and
not that alone by the cross, and patience, and suffering adversity together;
but by daily repentance, and inward contrition and grief for his sins
committed: I say, after this manner to die daily with Christ, and by crucifying
our flesh, if we be minded to be joined with him as with our Christ ought to be
in us.
head, and to be united therewith: if it be otherwise done, then is it not in
thee, but without thee, far from faith, heart, and spirit, otherwise it will
profit thee nothing; for he would have thee to be inwardly retained, so to
live, to be inwardly consolated All things ought to be fulfilled in faith.
and kept safe. All which faith in Christ performed, whilst the word of God
does live within us, and it is as it were a living witness in us of those
things which are spoken of in the holy Scripture. And after this manner faith
is called Hypostasis, or a Substance, Heb. 11. And out of this which we have
said, it does appear manifestly, all the Sermons and Epistles of Christ, the
Prophets and the Apostles, and the Scriptures so general, do belong to one
man, The whole Scripture belongs to man.
yea to us all, with all the Parables and Miracles the history of Christ is
replenished; therefore neither was it necessary those things should be
appointed and to come to pass written to the knowledge of all people, unless
they were spiritually in us to be fulfilled. Therefore when I read that Christ
cured others, I do promise to my self the same, because we live one with
another: when he cured the blind, I am in good hope that he will give unto me,
being spiritually blinded, by his grace and blessing, a spiritual sight, I
mean other miracles, seeing there is the same reason of all, and then being
blind, lame, palsy, leprous, and dead in sin, do thou understand it by The
letter of the Scriptures by faith is to be fulfilled.
thy self, acknowledge it, and confess, and he will make thee whole in him,
that thou may have part in the first resurrection: the sum is, the
Scripture does bear witness outwardly to those things which inwardly by faith
the man should fulfill: So it painteth out the image of God outwardly,
according to which inwardly within thee by faith thou ought to be so. So is
the Kingdom of God according to the letter, Christ according to the spirit, as
speaks the Apostle, 2 Cor* 5. So Adam his apostasy and redemption, the new
Jerusalem, regeneration; finally, another creature; he describes outwardly all
within thee by faith; yea thou thy self ought to be so, or the Scripture
profits thee nothing. And thus much of faith, and the work of it in us, yea
of God himself, and the reign of Christ in our heart.

CHAP. VII. How the Law of God is written in the hearts of all men, that they
be inexcusable at the day of Judgment.
Romans 2. When the Gentiles that have not the Law, do naturally the things of
the Law, shening the work of the Law written in their hearts.
When God made man after his Image in perfect justice and holiness, he
adorned him with divine virtues of all kinds, as some pattern of Art, and an
unimitable work, and most accurately set it forth: three things he infixed in
his conscience so firmly, and imprinted them, that Three things notable
implanted in the soul
they could never be put out or defaced. The first, is the natural testimony
of God: the second is an inbred knowledge of the last judgment, Romans 2. The
third, is the Law of Nature, or natural justice, by which honest and dishonest
are commonly discerned, whereby both joy and sorrow are discerned and
reconciled. For there was never The light of nature.
any Nation so barbarous and c^^ell, which did not acknowledge some God to be,
nature arguing and convincing this by both inward and outward reasons most
firmly: yea, they did acknowledge not only there was a God, but taught by their
own conscience, because therein sometimes they were cruciated with sharp and
terrible things, and sometimes they did find an inward pleasure and
tranquillity, thereby collecting that God was just, and ought so to be; and
that he was the revenger of ev^ll things, and the rewarder of good things; by
which knowledge they went further, to find the knowledge or doctrine of the
immortality of the soul, as appears by Plato, who most gravely has
discussed and treated of this business. Last of all, by this law of Nature, or
inbred light, they gathered that God was the author and cause of good,
according to whose nature the best and true worship was the study of virtue,
and a mind purged from vices: wherefore they defined the sum or chief good
by virtue, virtue is the chief goodness; and there were for that cause
Schools of Moral virtues founded and maintained by Socrates and other
Philosophers; which things do serve us for instruction, that God has left in
man a spark of the light of nature, and as it were a certain token of footstep
of inbred knowledge and understanding Sparks of natural Theology.
of God, that thereby he might be admonished of his offspring, and by
following these footsteps, might so come to his Maker: neither was many of the
Ethnickes ignorant of this, and amongst those, Aratus the Poet spoken of by
Saint Paul, Acts 17. We are the offspring of God. And Munilius, who thus
says: Is there any doubt that God dwells in our hearts, and that our souls
return to heaven, as they came from heaven? Moreover, because the Gentiles had
this natural testimony of God, and a conscience besides, which is a convincing
argument, that he is our maker; and hereupon through their own fault and merit,
man shall be condemned, and shall be altogether without excuse. And St. Paul
Ethnickes are inexcuseable.
to the Romans argues thus, Chap. 1. He who knows that God is, and does not
study to know him aright, and him to worship, he shall be inexcusable at the
day of judgment. Seeing then that the Gentiles did know the justice of God,
that is to say, taught by their natural conscience; because they that do evil,
are worthy of death, not only because they do evil, but because they are
delighted therein, and thereby have condemned themselves. And in Chap. 2. he
speaks of their consciences in themselves in like manner accusing or excusing
themselves, will be a testimony at the future day of judgment, when God shall
judge the hidden thoughts of men, which if the Gentiles for that cause shall be
inexcusable, because being endued with the natural knowledge of God, against
their consciences they have not sought God, what shall they say for themselves
to whom God has manifested his Word, and by Jesus Christ his only begotten
Son, has invited them to repentance, that is, that they should abstain from
sin, and decline from the works of malice, to participate by faith False
Christians less excuseable then Ethnicks.
the merit of Christ, and obtain thereby eternal salvstion? Wherefore every
half Christian in that day shall be condemned of two most grievous witnesses,
by their conscience, I say the law of Nature, and by Two witnesses shall co^demn
the wicked.
the revealed word of God: Whereupon the terrible sentence will follow, Christ
saying, In that day it shall be easier (or better) for Sodom and Gomorrah,
then for them; and that the Queen of the South shall arise to the condemnation
of the wicked generation. The reason is, because our great God made the
Whereupon comes the eternal vexatio^ of the soul.
soul immortal, and in that soul a conscience, which can neither forget God,
nor come at God: and hereupon follows the terrible vexation and unrest of the
soul, and the everlasting pains of the damned, which also will be so much more
heavy hereafter, by how much more by impenitency of heart they have heaped up
the wrath of God against the day of judgment, 2 Thessalonians. 2. for even as our
great God, Why amongst Christians be wickedness unknown to the heathen.
by a most just judgment, has given over the Gentiles into a reprobate sense,
because they contemned the inward Law of Nature and their conscience, and the
Law of God written in their hearts, and contemptuously resisted it, as God
himself; whereby they become blind in their understanding, they fell violently
into filthy and abominable heinous offenses, thereby heaping up the just wrath
of God: So false Christians, because they have contemned both, as well the
inward as the outward testimony of God, in not repenting, do resist the holy
Ghost, and blaspheme God: For this cause God gives them over to a reprobate
sense, worse then Ethnickes and Turks: And moreover, suffers them to fall
into terrible errors, to believe lies; and that all those should be punished
that are delighted in unrighteousness. Whereupon it is, that such filthy
abominable offenses do creep abroad among Christians, and do bear rule,
pompous and Satanicall pride, unsatiable covetousness, abominable
intemperance, beastly lust, and every kind of most inhumane wickedness; all
which do arise from wilful blindness, hardness of heart, and are in a
reprobate sense: and the reason is, because Christians in their life and They
that will not follow Christ follow Satan.
conversation will not follow poor, courteous, meek, lowly Christ, and are
scandalized in him, thinking it a shame to them to lead his most holy life,
whom God has given to the world, that they might live after his example, as in
the light, and walk in his steps. Hereupon the the same most just God
suffers them to follow Satan, taking the life of Satan upon them, full of all
abominable wickedness, lying, and unmercifulness, to execute all the works
of darkness, because they resolved in their minds, not to walk in the light,
according to that of Christ, Walk in the light while you Joh. 12.
have the light, that the darkness do not overtake you. Lastly, if God did
punish the Ethnicks with such terrible blindness and reprobate sense, because
they contemned the Law of Nature, being like unto the snuff of a Lamp smoking;
and the remainder of the darkness of the light of Nature and Conscience, or as
the words of Paul to the Romans, Chap. 1. they did not approve it to have God
in their knowledge: so that by their own fault they went without their own
salvation: how much more true is it, The new covenant written in our hearts.
that those do not attain to salvation, in whose hearts not only by nature,
but by the word revealed and the new covenant, the word of God is written, and
yet do despise and cast behind them this grace and favor? Of which new
Covenant Jeremy says, Chap. 3. This shall be my compact, I will put my Laws
into their inwards, and I will write it in their hearts, and a man shall not
any more teach his neighbor, and a man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for
all men shall know me, says the Lord, even from the least to the greatest,
because I will forgive their iniquity, and I will not remember their sins any
more. Hear what is said, Heb. 10. To those that voluntarily offend or sin
against God after the knowledge he has received, for such there is no
sacrifice left for him, but a certain terrible expectation of judgment, and
offering by fire, which consumes the adversary. He that breaks the Law of
Moses, without any mercy, by the mouth of two or three witnesses, shall die the
death; how much more and worse do you think, do they deserve death, which
have contemned against the Son of God, and polluted the blood of the
Testament in whom he is sanctified, and contumaciously despised the spirit of
grace; for we know who has said, Vengeance is mine, and I will return it upon
them. And again, because the Lord will judge his people, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God. With which heavy sentence without
doubt those are not stricken, which fall through humane frailty, but those that
wittingly and willingly sin against the tru^ knowledge, and persevere in
impenitencie.

CHAP. VIII. Without true repentance no man can challenge Christ and his merits
to belong unto him.
Numb. 9. The unclean may not celebrate the Passover.
THe words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 9. are, The healthy has no need of the
Physician, but the sick: I did not come to call the just, but the sinners to
repentance; whereby we are clearly taught that Christ indeed did call sinners,
but to repentance, neither can any come unto him without repentance, without
conversion from sin, and What is true repentance.
faith: for repentance is no other thing then by true contrition and sorrow to
die unto sin, and by faith to obtain forgiveness for sin, and to live unto
righteousness in Christ, so that in true repentance, necessarily serious and
divine contrition must go before, a heart as I may say, broken, and c^ucifying
the flesh, whereupon in Cap. 6. Epist. ad Hebr. Repentance is said to be, or is
called the work of dead men, because by it we abstain from those works whose
reward is death; which if it be not done, then the merit of Christ profits
not us one hair: For seeing Christ proffereth himself to be the Physician of
our souls, and his holy blood to be the only and most true medicine of our
sins, and no medicine, although it be most precious, can cure the sick man,
which will not refrain from hurtful thin^s, and things resisting the power of
the medicine: so it remains that the blood of Christ and death can profit
nothing those that purpose not to abstain from sin: Whereupon blessed Paul,
cap. 5. ad Galat. says, Whosoever does such things (the works of the flesh)
do not obtain the Kingdom of heaven, nor shall have any part in Christ.
Moreover, if Christ by his blood is become our medicine, who can doubt that
first we must be sick? for the whole have no need of a Physician, but the
weak. And none is spiritually sick, who is not penitent, and who is not
sorrowful from his heart for his sins, who has not a contrite heart and
humble, who is secure as concerning the wrath of God, who has not resolved,
and firmly in his mind decreed to fly all worldly concupiscence; who lastly,
seeking after honor, wealth, and pleasure, takes no knowledge of his sins,
such as are so, those are not sick, and consequently need no Physician, and
Christ profits them nothing, it is manifest. Therefore again and again, let
this be remembered, that Christ called sinners, but it was to repentance,
because a penitent heart, contrite, pensive, and faithful, only and alone is
capable of the most precious blood, death, and merit of Christ. I account him
happy whosoever he be, that hears this holy calling inwardly, and in his
heart; I call that a divine sorrow and anguish for sins, which works
repentance God works spiritual sorrow.
to steadfast salvation, as the words be, 2 Cor. 7. The holy Spirit does produce
this divine sorrow by the Law, and serious meditation of the passion of the
Lord, because it not only abounds with the documents of grace, but also
withal has in it an earnest exhortation to repentance, and a most terrible
glass of the divine wrath. For if we seek into the cause of his The Passion of
Christ efficie^t to repentance.
most bitter death, what else can we say was the cause, but our sins? If you
join the divine love, out of which he most willingly gave his Son for us, as
also you shall have his singular example both terrible and wonderful of his
divine justice and clemency; which seeing they are so, who then sincerely
loving Christ, can be affected and delighted with sin, which he knows Christ
had with his blood washed and purged? Consider also with me, O man, which art
subject to pride, and art slave unto ambition, with what contempt, and how
great humility, Christ Jesus ought to repair our pride and insolency, think of
his poverty, that he might satisfy for thy covetousness; The fruits of Christ's
passion.
surcease at last, through God, so studiously to seek after wealth, and
insatiably to thirst after riches most wretchedly. He with incredible grief of
mind and anguish not to be uttered, does satisfy and abolish the pleasures and
concupiscence of the flesh: and thou contrariwise continually do give thy
self to pleasure and lust, how evil is thy preposterousnesse, pravity and
wickedness, to take delight and pleasure in those things which to Christ were
so wonderfully bitter; he died to expiate thy wrath, hatred, enmity, rancor,
bitterness, desire of revenge, and implacability, with extreme mildness and
patience, and wilt not thou even for the least cause, be very angry, and
account revenge more pleasant then life, even for which thy Redeemer did drink
the most bitter cup of death? wherefore so many as aspire to the name of
Christians, and do not abstain from sin, those (I say) do even crucify
Christ, and do make a mock of him as it is said The impenitent do even
crucify Christ.
in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. Therefore it is unpossible that those
should participate of the merits of Christ, which indeed they do tread under
foot, as it is in the same Epistle Chap. 10. And because they do pollute the
blood of the Testament, neither believe truly that their sins are expiated by
him, or much esteem his death, or think he died for his cause, because they
contemn the sptrit of grace, that is, they despise it and repel it, even for
that they by their wicked life they deride and contemn Christ his blood
calls for revenge against the wicked.
the mighty grace of God offered: so that the blood of Christ shed for them,
cries for revenge against them, and that by the just judgment of God (which
is most terrible to hear) all which they do offer up and draw upon
themselves: for truly it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, as it is written in the same Chapter: for God even our God, is a
living God, not a livelesse Idol, that will not, or is not able to revenge
this refusal and contempt of his grace: which revenge and divine wrath, even
their own conscience does threaten them, and follow them at the heels, who
hearing that the Son of God did die a most terrible death for sin, yet do
not take any care to abstain from sin. And this is the cause wherefore
presently after the death of Christ, repentance Why God requires repentance of
all men.
was preached over all the world, both because he died the death for the sins
of the whole world, and in all places of the world men should repent, as it is
written, Chap. 17. Acts, and that they might receive that Panacea, that
sovereign herb that cures all diseases with a contrite, penitent and
faithful heart, lest the grace of God should be frustrated and made void:
Without repentance sins are not forgiven.
for after this serious repentance remission of sins does follow immediately
after; neither is it possible he should have his sins remitted that repents
not, grieveth not, that has sinned, and yet rejoices in sins: as also nothing
is more fooolish and preposterous, that those sins should be pardoned, the
which thou never did think to abstain from, or challenge the merit of Christ
to himself, and in the mean time to wallow in his sins, which was the cause
of Christ's death. And yet there be many, who although all their life they never
repented seriously that they had sinned, nor have abated a hair of their wrath,
covetousnes, pride, hatred, envy, hypocrisy, and unrighteousness; but rather
have grown and augmented their sins more and more, and yet dare require
remission of their sins, The false faith of false Christians.
and challenge the merit of Christ to belong unto them, which indeed is their
blind and deplorable impudency. These are such as flatter themselves to their
exceeding evil, persuading themselves through their own foolishness, that
they are good Christians, because for sooth they know and believe, that Christ
died for their sins, and by this means they do believe sted fastly they
shall be saved: but thou art an unhappy, and after a most miserable manner
bewitched false Christian; for neither does the word of God teach, that by this
means life eternal is to be obtained, neither any of the Prophets or Apostles
did any time so preach; but this is the unanimous consent: Thou which requirest
to have thy sins pardoned, first repent, abst. in from thy sins; and then
grieving from thy heart, and earnestly, that thou have sinned, believe in
Christ. But how should he be sorry for his sins, who never thinks how to
eschew sin? or how should he eschew his sins which is not sorrowful for
the committing of them? Wherefore Christ with all his Apostles and Prophets,
does teach thee that thou must What it is to die to the world.
dye to the world and sin, as to pride, covetousness, lust, wrath, hatred,
and that thou must return with all thy heart to the Lord, and ask pardon of
him; which being done, now thou art absolved and free from thy sins, and now
the heavenly Physician respects thee, who only heals contrite hearts; if
thou insist upon any other way, Christ profits thee nothing, and in vain, and
of no value, or belonging to salvation, is the boasting of thy faith: for true
faith, which renews the man, it extinguisheth and mortifieth sins in man,
and quickneth him in Christ, that is, makes him to live in Christ, in faith,
and in his charity, humility, meekness, and patience. And after this manner
Christ is to thee the way to life, and thou in like manner art a new creature
in him. But if thou intend to sin, and have not yet determined to leave thine
iniquity, but applaudest all thy old sins or actions of old Adam, let it be;
how can thou be another creature, or how can thou belong to Christ, when
thou do not crucify the flesh with all the desires thereof, and
concupiscences? as the Apostle says, Galat. 5. Go then, and daily hear ten
Sermons a day, and every The vain worship of God.
month confess thy self and communicate: for all these things are far
unworthy of remission of sins; because a penitent heart, contrite and
faithful, which makes thee capable of this wholesome medicine, thou do not
bring with thee. Truly and indeed, the Sacraments and Word of God, which are
the most powerful remedies and helps, yet but only to those that repent of
their sins from the bottom of their hearts, and that with daily faithful
mourning do detest the way of their old and former life: For what profits it
to anoint a stone with precious ointment, or a medicine? Or what harvest shall
thou reap if thou sowest amongst thorns and briers? Therefore thou must first
pull up all these young thorns that choke the good seed, and all things that
hinder thee from reaping Whom Christ profits nothing.
a good harvest. Last of all, whosoever cleaves to his sins, it is sure that
Christ profits him nothing; the nativity of Christ helps him nothing, who
cares not to be born with him; nothing the death of Christ, him who has not
determined firmly in his mind to die unto sin; nothing the resurrection of
Christ, him who refuses in him to arise from sin: lastly, the ascension of
Christ profits nothing to him that will not lead a heavenly life. But if
converted with the prodigal, thou deplore, hate, and slye sin, and then
prayest to obtain pardon of God, and beholding by faith Christ crucified, and
his wouuds, like unto the true Israelite, thou may say, Good God have mercy
upon me a most grievous sinner; then pardon is at hand, what and how great
soever thy sins be thou have committed, so great truly is the perfection in
the redemption gotten by the blood of Christ, and so is the perfection of
applying the grace and imputation of the whole merit of Christ by faith: and it
is most true, that is in 12. Sap. God gives place to repentance for sins, that
is to say, pardoning ^reely and perfectly, and wholly, the penitent for Christ;
yea, it is the great good pleasure of God to exercise mercy, and to pardon
sins freely. My bowels are troubled within me as toward them, I am
merc^f^ll, and I will have mercy of them, says the Lord, Jer. 31. For then the
death of Christ is effectual, and comes to perfection, or brings forth his
fruits; and therefore the Angels of God in heaven rejoice, because the blood of
Christ is become profitable to sinners for whom it was shed.

CHAP. IX. The Antichristian life of men of this time, does deny Christ and the
true faith.
2 Timoth. 3. They have a certain form of godliness, but do deny the virtue
thereof.
BEcause no man does boast himself that he is no Christian, although he do no
part of a Christian; it follows that by Christ is derided by a wicked life.
those manners he denies Christ, or Christ is denied, contemned, derided,
blasphemed, whipped, crucified, slain, and buried according to the Apostle, who
says, that certain men crucified the Son of God again, and do boast
thereof: and also according to Daniel, who in the twelfth chapter foretells
that Christ shall be pulled up by the roots; which Prophecy is vulgarly
expounded of Christ crucified at Jerusalem by the Jews crying, Away with him,
Away with him, crucify him: which exposition I would to God it were true, and
that Christ were not yet daily by the Antichristian life taken from amongst us,
so that his life truly holy and excellent at this day, is no where Where the
life of Christ is not, there is no Christ.
to be found: for what dare thou speak of thy faith and doctrine? where the
life of Christ is banished, there is no Christ, that is more true then may be
doubted: or what is faith without a Christian life? even a barren tree without
fruit, according to blessed Jude, who calls the false Apostles, Summer trees
without fruit, twice dead: of which sort the world is full. That which Christ
foretold would come to pass, Luke 18. When the Son of Man comes, do you
True faith.
think he shall find faith upon the earth? He speaks of faith, not this faith
of which the world is full, and which we profess in our mouths, and deny the
same in our works, as if it consisted in this, to love Christ in words, and
not in deeds and truth; but the new man is another man, regeneration, a good
tree, with his fruits, a man renewed by faith, in whom Christ lives and
dwells by faith. This is the faith that our Savior meant, which according to
his prophecy, is almost no where to be found at this day. For where true faith
is, there Christ and his life must needs be: even so contrariwise, whosoever
does not imitate the life of Christ by faith, in him is neither faith nor
Christ. The words of our Savior are, Luke 12. He that shall deny me before
men, I will deny him before the Angels of God. This denial Denial of Christ.
is not only done in words, or by the mouth, as when we renounce our faith and
Christ, but much more and more powerfully when in deeds and life we resist
Christ and the holy Ghost voluntarily: that which St. Paul calls denial in
works and deeds. For it is most certain, that Christ is no less denied by a
wicked and Diabolical life, then if he were denied openly by open words: even
so it is with hypocrisy, with a specious and verbal holiness, as if it were
by doctrine: to which purpose the Parable is extant, Matthew. 21. of two sons, to
one of which his father said, My son, go work to day in my vineyard: but be
answered and said, I will not; yet afterward he repented him, and did go. And
coming to the other son, he said in like manner to him, who answered, I go
Lord, and went not; which of these two did the will of his father? They said,
The first, who denied to go, yet afterward did go and labor. But the other,
that said he would, and lied, or deceived, did not he The greatest contempt of
God is in or by a wicked life.
mock and deny his father? And so there are many at this day of our false
Christians crying, So, so, Lord, Lord, the worst of all others, not any of them
doing the commandment of the Father. And to this belongs the saying of
Saint. Paul, They have indeed a show of godliness, but deny the power
thereof. And what else is it to deny the power of godliness, then to betray
False Christians.
and violate their faith toward Christ, and to play the Ethnic under the name
of a Christian? whom therefore St. Paul rightly calls Infidels, the children
of infidelity, having no faith. Lastly, those that usurp a Christians name, and
do nothing; and therefore Christ says, Depart from me ye accursed, because I
know you not: And worthy it is that I should deny you, who first durst and did
deny me.

CHAP. X. The modern life of worldly men is against Christ, and is false
Christianity.
Matthew. 12. He that is not with me, is against me.
IF any will examine the life and manners The life of the worldly
of these times, after the square of the life and doctrine delivered by Christ,
shall not he find the life of most men to be Antichristians; because they have
no other thing more then covetousness, the study of getting, usury,
concupiscence of the flesh, and of the eyes, pride of life, ambition, pomp,
hunting after fame and glory, disobedience, wrath, strife, war, disorder,
displeasure, thirsting after revenge, secret hatred, envy, implacability,
unrighteousness, uncleanness, falsenesse, frauds and backbitings. In brief,
we are all for the most part, selfe-lovers, seekers of the world, greedy, The
life of Christ and Christians.
affecters of honors and our own proper gain: when contrariwise the life of
Christ is nothing but the most pure and sincere love of God and man, courtesy,
mildness, humility, patience, obedience to death, mercy, righteousness,
truth, chastity, holiness, contempt of the world, of honors, wealth and
pleasures, denial of our selves, to bear the cross continually, trouble and
affliction, daily study and thirst after the Kingdom of God: and lastly, an
unexpressible desire to fulfill the divine will: seeing Christ says, He that is
not with me is He that has not the Spirit of Christ is Antichrist.
Antichrist. But the modern life of worldly men has no community with Christ,
but most men are at discord with Christ, and dissent with their whole heart,
will, mind, and spirit, from Christ, (Paul 1 Cor. 2. commanding another thing,
But we have the will of Christ; and to the Phil. 2. Have ye the same manners
with Christ) it is agreeable that all worldly men should be adverse to Christ:
what every one does, this is Antichrist, not in doctrine, but in manner of
life; which being so, in what place shall we find true Christians? Seeing then
this flock should be lowly in their own eyes, Luke 12. to whom the Prophet
Isaias agrees, who compares the faithful assembly and true Church to a
little Cottage in a Vineyard The paucity of true Christians.
and a Watchtower in a garden of Cucumbers, and to a wasted City. And Micah
compares it to a cluster of grapes; which grapes the gatherers left by
negligence in the vineyard, saying, cap. 8. Woe is me because I am become as
one that gathers grapes to make wine in Autumn. And blessed David likeneth
it to a solitary Turtle, to a little Sparrow, hiding it self under the eves of
the house; and to a night-crow in the desert, and to one remaining amongst the
rubbish of a destroyed City: but where, where they are, the most high knows.
Certainly Christ is and will be with them even unto the end of the world;
neither will he leave them without succor, or desolate: For the Lord knows
his, and those that be his Christ's. Amongst whom whosoever is to be reckoned,
the Apostle declares, Let all depart from their iniquity which usurp the name
of Christ; and they that are not so minded, let them get unto themselves
another name.

CHAP. XI. He that does not imitate the life of Christ, and does not repent, is
neither Christian nor the Son of God: then what the second, or new birth is;
and what the yoke of Christ is.
1 Pet. 1. Christ left us an example, that we may follow his footsteps.
OUr great God gave unto us his Son, to be our Prophet, Doctor, and our Master,
whom in like manner he commanded us to hear him by a voice from heaven; which
office the Son of God did execute, not in words only, but in examples also
of a most innocent life, valiantly and boldly, and as it was worthy such a true
teacher: Whereupon Saint Luke, Acts 1. The former Treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all things which Jesus began to do and to teach, even unto the
day he was taken up; where it is to be observed, that the blessed Evangelist
joyneth the deeds and doctrine together, by a most certain counsel that cannot
be separated: for it behooves a true Teacher, which would teach others, first
to do the things himself, and such a teacher Christ showed himself to be by
his example, whose life is the true doctrine and book of life. And for that
Christ is the light of our life.
cause the Son of God became Man, and was conversant amongst men on earth,
that he might show unto us a living example of a heavenly life, divine,
innocent, and perfect, that we might follow him as a light in the dark; for
which cause he calls himself the Light of the world, which if we follow, we
do not walk in darkness, as witnesses John, Chap. 8. Whereby it evidently
appears, that all those do remain in the dark, and will never attain to
the light of life who do not follow Christ in faith and life. And what this
darkness is, St. Paul teaches us, Romans 12. commanding to lay down the works
of darkness, and to put on the Armor of light, as if the Mystical darkness
should say, Repent. But we have sufficiently declared before that true and
divine repentance, together with true faith, does utterly change the man,
crucify the flesh, and impose and beget a new way of life through the Holy
Ghost. Therefore, lest we being seduced by error, should believe Christianity
to be words only, and not a reality or real being; and that there should be a
living example of the quickened Spirit or new man, God Christ is the shape of
the new man.
set before our eyes his own Son, not only as a ransom and Mediator, but as
a glass of true piety, and shape of the regeneration, or new man, in whom not
the fleshly Adam through sin, but God himself did reign, that we might daily be
renewed in him, according to his own Image, of which many things remain to be
spoken. We know every one of us, and find by daily experience, our nature
offending; that is to say, our blood, our flesh, body and mind to be polluted
with all kind of uncleanness, malice, sin and wickedness; all which are both
the works of the Devil, working powerfully in the carnal and natural man:
The original of all sins.
as also more especially, the wicked and depraved will, because the depraved
will is the root of all sins, which being taken away, there would be no sin;
for the evil will is it which turns him from God and his will: for
whatsoever differs from God, or the chief good, that cannot but be evil. And
this aversion, or falling away of both, was, I say, of the Devil, and the fall
of man, and thereby sin came into the world, which we deliver one unto another
by carnal propagation; whereby it appears, that our flesh and blood by
nature, and offspring, does nourish our aptness to evil, and the seed of the
Devil and our flesh will be infected with the venime of Satan, as indeed pride
is, lying, lust, and every wicked work condemned of God: And for this
inclination so wicked, Christ calls the Pharisees, sons of the Devil, Joh.
8. and many other their disciples, by the name of Satan; no otherwise then, as
if covetousness, lying, pride, and all wicked concupiscence were the Devil,
wherewith the natural and carnal man is infected; whereupon it follows
further, that as many as lead their life without repentance, full of pride,
covetousness, lust and envy, all those do live in the Devil and do
participate of the inclination and nature of the Devil. In which number all
those which take upon them any work, having an outward show of integrity, or
honesty of their own inducements, or bringing up, and yet are in their heart
and inwardly, full of the Devil, or that the Devil remains within,
according to the saying of Christ to the Jews, which, although it be a terrible
thing to speak, yet it is really so, no conjecture; Our extreme wickedness to
be amended by the chiefest good. Why Christ was incarnate.
wherefore, seeing, as it is confessed, our nature is so extremely and
miserably depraved, it is behoofefull without doubt, that it should be
corrected and amended, which by no means could be obtained or effected, but by
this; that is to wit, that the chief good should destroy the chief evil; and
that God himself should become man. Now then the Son of God became man, not for
his own cause, but for ours, that he might reconcile us by himself unto God,
and make us partakers of the sovereign good; and being purged, sanctify us;
for what is to be sanctified, that of necessity is to be sanctified through God
and with God; and as God is personally in Christ, so we with God by faith must
be united, that we may live in him, and he in us; Christ in us, and we in
Christ. We must be united to Christ by faith
Lastly, the divine will in us, and we in it, which is the only means by which
Christ Jesus becomes our medicine to our most corrupted nature, of which so
much as is in man, so much is his depraved inclination His nobility in whom
Christ lives. Christ is the new life of the new man.
amended. Happy and most noble is that man in whom Christ is all, and does all,
whose noble thoughts, mind and words are the will of Christ, the thoughts of
Christ, and the mind of Christ, (according to that of Paul, 1 Cor. 2.
We have the mind of Christ.) Lastly, whose words are Christ's. And so it needs
to be indeed, because the life of Christ is that new and another life in man;
neither is the new man any other thing, then he who lives in Christ, according
to the Spirit; whose life, I say, courtesy, patience, and humility, is no
other then that of Christ: And this the new creature, and the life of Christ in
us, according to that of Paul to the Galatians, G^l. 2. I live, but not I, but
Christ in me lives, this also is to follow Christ truly, and truly to repent,
for by this method the old man is destroyed, and the carnal life declineth,
the new spiritual and heavenly life arises and breaks out of the clouds.
This who ever does, he truly is a Christian, not in title only, but in work and
truth, a true son of God, begotten of God and Christ, renewed in Christ, and
quickened by faith; and so long as the inward man dwells in flesh and blood,
we may wish so much perfection, rather then attain unto it; but it is as meet
and necessary to endeavor and to aspire thereunto, and study the same, and to
wish it from our inward mind, and to strive that the life and kingdom The
strife and daily fighting with corrupt nature.
of Christ may be in us, and not the life of Satan; let all our counsels
respect this, all our cares and inward groans be sent this way, and let this be
our only strife and warfare, that we may mortify the old man by daily
repentance: For how much every one dies to himself, so much does Christ live
in him; how much corruption How the man is daily renewed.
departs from our nature by the Holy Ghost, so much divine grace comes in;
how much the flesh is crucified, so much is the spirit quickened; so much of
the work of darkness as is destroyed, so much is the man illuminated; by how
much the exterior man is lessened and wasted, so much the inward is renewed, 2
Cor. 4. so much as you lose of your vain affections and carnal life, and are
wasted, as self-love, ambition, wr^th, covetousness, and voluptuousness, so
much Christ lives in you; the further a man's heart is set from the world, from
concupiscence of the eyes, flesh and pride of life, so much more of God,
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, does flow into him. Last of all, the more nature,
flesh, darkness, and the world do bear rule in man, so much less grace,
spirit of light, God and Christ, is found in him. Moreover, this new kind of
living, is to the flesh The new life is the cross of the flesh.
an enemy and bitter cross, because it is that by which it is subjugated and
brought under, and crucified with all the desires and concupiscences thereof,
but yet is that wherein the whole power and fruit of penitency consists. This
is the inward desire of the flesh and blood, that it had rather lead a free
life, dissolute, according to its own will, and among pleasures and all kind of
voluptuousness; for it only knows this to be sweet and pleasant; as
contrariwise, the life of Christ to the flesh and the old man, is a heavy
cross; but to the new man, and him that is spiritual, it is an easy yoke, a
light burden, and a most quiet Sabbath; truly the true rest is sought for in
vain, else were they in the faith of Christ, and in his sweetness, humility,
patience, and love of Christ; whereupon it is said, Mat. 11. You shall find
rest for your souls. Truly he that loves Christ will not think it bitter to
suffer death it self for him. This therefore is that sweet yoke of Christ,
which we are commanded to take upon us, that our souls might be refreshed, and
come into his rest; which command, if we determine to obey, and mean to put on
Christ his life and yoke, then we must shake off the yoke of the Devil, our
way of carnal life, wicked and dissolute, nor must we suffer the flesh as a
Lady to insult and disquiet the spirit, but all things are to be brought under
the Law, obedience and yoke of Christ, will, I say, reason, understanding, and
all carnal What the yoke of Christ is.
appetites, which the concupiscence of Adam, and this flesh of ours is well
pleased to be honored, worshipped, and to be praised of men, to abound in
riches and pleasures, to bring all which on the other side, under the yoke of
Christ and his discipline, nothing regarding his ignominy, contempt and
poverty, to think himself unworthy all things that the world gapeth What the
life of Christ is.
after; and for which other men do contend, that truth is the cross of Christ
wherewith the flesh is delighted. I say, that extreme humility of Christ, and
his most noble life, which to the spirit is a most easy yoke and a most easy
burden; for what other was the whole life of Christ then holy poverty, extreme
contempt, and vile persecution, who came not into the world to be attended on,
but to serve us himself, and spend his life, and shed his dearest blood to
redeem our offenses. It is the property of The natural man and the spiritual.
the natural man to seek after honors, and hunt after great things: The
spiritual on the other side loved the humility of Christ, and desires to
become nothing; And whereas most men do desire to go before, or excel others,
scarce one coveteth to be reputed as nothing, of whom the one belongs to the
square or rule of life of the old Adam, the other to the rule of Christ. The
carnal man, and he who has not yet learned what Christ is; that is to say,
mere humility, courtesy and love, accounts it folly to live as Christ
lives, and thinks those only wise that live after their own The false and
true light.
will, delicately and easily; not knowing that then he chiefly lives in the
Devil, when most foolishly he applaudeth himself, and esteems his own life
as the best and most pleasing, which most miserable men, being fast bound in
the lust of their own carnal wisdom, do enforce others to follow the like
errors: contrariwise, those whom the true and eternal light has enlightened,
those are touched at the heart, when they do see the pomp and disdain, pride,
pleasure, wrath, revenge, and such kind of fruit of the carnal life, which
causes them to sigh from the bottom of their hearts, saying; How far is
this from Christ and his knowledge, from true repentance, from genuine
Christianity, and lastly, from the fruits of the new birth of the sons of
God? for he lives yet in Adam, in the old creature, and in the Devil
himself: for to offend boldly, and willingly to sin, is nothing else then to
live in the Devil. In whom therefore the life of Christ is not, this man is
without repentance, neither is a true Christian, nor the son of God; nay,
Christ knows him not. He who will rightly know him as a Savior and example
of life, it is meet he know him to be mere love, mere courtesy, patience and
humility; which virtues of Christ it behooves thee to have, and love them from
the bottom of thy heart, and fasten them to thy self. As a plant by its favor
and smell that it sends forth, bewrayes its own nature: so thou ought to
know Christ, and by experience be certain, that he is a certain most fragrant
The true knowledge of Christ.
stock, from whence thy soul does draw and obtain admirable strength and new
vital spirits, as also singular joy and solace. And after this manner is
tasted how sweet the Lord is, so is the truth known, so is the chief and
eternal good perceived, and then does he know certainly that nothing is better
then the life of Christ, nothing more pleasant, sweet, precious, or more full
of tranquillity. And lastly, nothing can be more likened, or be compared to
life eternal. And do we doubt that because it is better then all, it should be
more desirable? for in whom the life of Christ is not, this man cannot know
what the peace and tranquillity of eternal life is, nor what the chief good
is, nor everlasting truth, nor what is true peace and joy, the true light, and
true charity, seeing Christ is all these himself; whereupon John Ep. 1. chap.
4. says, Every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God; he that
loves not, knows not God, because God is love. Whereby the fruits of the new
birth which is of God, appears, and also life and a new creature; not to be
words and an external form, but a substance, but the Queen of virtues, and
which is God himself, that is to say, Charity: for of whomsoever any is born,
it is meet he should have the same properties; and he that says he is born of
God, let him show that by charity, because God is charity. In like manner, the
knowledge of God rests not in words, and shadowed or vain knowledge, but in
lively, amiable, pleasant, and most sincere pleasure, which ought to flow into
the bottom of our heart and mind, and there to dwell, when we taste by faith
inwardly in our hearts, the sweetness of God. This, I say, this is the true,
lively, and efficacious knowledge of God, of which David, in Psalm 84.
speaks, saying, My heart and my flesh rejoices in the living God: and Psalm
63. How pleasant is thy mercies over our lives! where it is presently
manifested, the joy and sweetness of the knowledge divine, which is infused
into the faithful heart: and so at length the man lives in God, and God in
him; so is truth known, and so the same truth knows man.

CHAP. XII. The being of a Christian man is to die to himself and the world,
and to live unto Christ.
2 Corinthians. 5. Christ died for all men, that those which live, might not now
live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again.
OVer and above this, that this sentence is full of consolation, whilst it is
manifested that Christ died for all men, as also it contains a most wholesome
doctrine concerning the way of a Christian life, how we ought to live, that is
to say, not to our He that will live in Christ; must die to the world.
selves only, but to him who died for our cause: but this by no means can be
done, unless first we die to our selves and the world: Therefore if thou have
purposed to live in Christ, necessarily thou must die to worldly concupiscence:
but if thou mind to live to thy self and the world, it will profit nothing to
be with Christ. But there be 3. kinds of death; one spiritual, when the Death
is three fold.
man daily dies to himself, that is, to the concupiscence of his flesh,
covetousness, pride, voluptuousness, wrath, and such like: the second
natural, the third everlasting: of the second speaks Paul to the
Philippians, ch^p. 1. To live to my self it is Christ, and to die it is gain;
as if he should say, To a Christian desiring to die, Christ is his life, and
death gain: for when he changes this short and miserable life for a better
life, and this earthly and frail goods for stable and eternal goods, this is a
most gainful exchange: and he who shall be well pleased with this saying, and
fit himself to the first sort of death, in my judgment he shall not err: For
that soul is thrice and four The life of Christ.
times happy, to whom to live is Christ, that is, wherein Christ lives, or
that has the life of Christ, that is, follows his humility and lowliness.
But alas, most men The life of the Devil.
at this day have taken upon them the life of the Devil, and their life is the
Devil. As for example, covetousness, pride, concupiscence, wrath, blasphemy:
for this is the life of the Devil. But thou, O man, walk carefully, and look
about thee again and again; and see who lives in thee, and thou What it is to
die to themselves and the world.
shall be most happy, if thou can truly say, To me to live is Christ, not in
the other life only, but also in this present life; and so truly it is needful
also in this present life now, that for thee to live is Christ, and gain to
die: For is there any thing more profitable then to die in this condition, to
covetousness, pride, concupiscence, wrath and hatred, that Christ by that
means may live in thee. For how much every one dies to the world, so much
Christ lives in him. Go to them, let Christ live in thee in time, that thou
in like manner may live with him in From whence be the perturbations of the
mind.
eternity. But seeing that the mind distracted with diverse worldly
concupiscences, is not capable of true tranquillity and peace, it follows,
that those that do die before they begin to live in Christ, that which our
Sarah the type of the new birth.
great God has taught us in diverse figures in the old Testament: for Sarah
when by reason of her age she was unfit to bring children, and dead to marriage
bed, did conceive in her womb, and brought forth Isaac, which word signifies
Laughter. So then, unless thou root out of thy mind, worldly love, thou shall
not be able to feel and receive the joy of the Spirit: The promise was not made
unto Abraham of Christ, Abraham is a type of the abnegation of the world.
and the covenant of circumcision annexed, before he left his proper
habitation, and his own inheritance: it is no otherwise with man, so long as he
has his mind fixed to the world, it is impossible for him to taste and receive
Christ into his heart. Herod being dead, Christ returned into Judea, Matthew. 2.
The document is plain, so long as the mind does play the Fox with the World,
Christ cannot enter into it, and therefore thou must die to the Fox First die
unto Adam that Christ may live in thee.
Herod, that the child Christ may live in thee. All which returns to this,
that you must die unto Adam, or the old man, before Christ can live in thee.
Paul to the Galat. 2. says, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And to
the Coloss. 2. You are dead, yet he writes to the living, and your life is hid
in Christ: for then every one is truly dead, when he cease to be that he was
before. Those which are of the spirit, do understand the things of the spirit,
says St. Paul, Romans 8. and to the Galat. 5. If we live in the spirit, we walk
also in the spirit. Neither is it sufficient to boast of the faith and the
spirit in words, but words are to be approved by the fruits and works: for it
is spoken to all men by the Apostle, If you live after the flesh, you shall
die; but if you mortify the works of the flesh by the spirit, you shall live:
wherein very many are like unto Saul, who did not slay Agag, the King of the
Amalekites, Concupiscences are to be mor^ified, not hidden.
as God commanded him, but put him into prison: so these men do nourish and
hide closely their concupiscence, when they should be eradicated utterly, and
not any part of the root left behind: let us do this, unless (with Saul) we
lose our Kingdom; The scope of the whole Scripture requires the new man.
that is, lest we be deprived of our eternal life. In brief, the whole
Scriptures with the consent of all Histories, Types and Figures, do point out
Christ, whose life we ought to imitate, and do set out the scope thereof;
neither do I speak here of the great world, and of his exceeding testimonies
of God, and divine love. There is a sort of men that not unfitly may be
compared to Winter trees: for as they receive easily their leaves which were
cast off, the year changing and becoming favorable; so many in adversity do
retain their pleasures within, and hide them, which yet do forthwith in
prosperity, having, as it were, gathered a troop, break out on a sudden. A
true Christian is most unlike to those hypocrites, who in prosperity and
adversity lives according to piety, equally just and faithful to his Christ,
and takes all things indifferently his lot does cast upon him. When our great
God did grant to Achab victory over the King of Syria, upon that condition that
being taken, he should hold him in prison, that he should remain an example to
show that God was stronger then all his enemies, and did require just
punishment against those that did blaspheme his Name, he despising the Name of
God, and his Commandments, having taken his enemy in battle, saluted him as
his brother, and let him go; for which disobedience, and giving life to a man
deserving to die, the Prophet pronounces the pain of death to Achab by Gods
appointment. To whom these are most like, who nourish and feed their own
concupiscences, when they should pull them up by the roots, and therefore
willingly without mortification of the flesh, there is no good in man.
do draw eternal death upon themselves. And therefore it is most true, that
without mortification of the flesh, no prayer nor piety. Lastly, without
mortification, no work of spiritual devotion can abound in the soul, which
was the cause God Almighty, Exodus 19. appointed all those beasts to die, that
should approach unto the mount Sinai: and by how much more ought we to kill our
beastly concupiscences, if we ascend to the holy mount of God and offer our
prayers to God, and if we meditate on the word of God, lest if we do otherwise,
we die the death. Genesis 32. we Jacob thou must be before thou be Israel.
read that a new name was given unto Jacob, to wit, Israel, which signifies a
Champion, or a Prince of God; because in wrestling with the Angel of God, he
beheld his face. But before this, Jacob, which signifies a Supplanter, or
Underminer: for so he was, not only in name, but in deed; after whose example,
unless thou first through the holy Ghost, do tread down thy concupiscences,
to become Israel, or the Prince or Captain of God, thou shall never attain Man
must displease himself to please God.
the place of a Captain, or see the face of God. The same Jacob, that he might
enjoy the beautiful maid Rach^l, he was constrained to take Lea with bleared
eyes; do thou such a thing, and if thou art in love with Rachel, that is, if
thou dare marry with Christ the true Jacob, first do not despise Lea, that
is, despise thy self as a beastlike and sinful man, displease thy self and
force it to death. But there be very many who like unto Jacob, are deceived of
their own life, thinking verily he had met with Rachel, that is, that he had
led a Christian life, pleasing to God, inwardly declared in truth; afterward
then see that they live with Lea, that is, they have not yet learned Christ,
and therefore not in the favor, but in the hatred of God, and that most
deservedly. Therefore let us do this, Before all, let us displease our selves,
and as Lea in the house of her father, be counted unworthy: so let us contemn
our selves, taking to us humility, lowliness, and patience, that at the last
we may obtain fair Rachel, for whom, as Jacob served constantly the whole
seven years, her love The service of mystical Jacob.
mitigating the hardness of his labor, and wearing out the time without
tediousness: so the most faithful spouse of our souls, Christ Jesus, served
full thirty three years in this world, a most hard service or servitude, for
our cause, according to that of Matthew. 20. The Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to serve others, and give his life a redemption for many.
And according to that of Jacob, which he endured after a sharper manner for our
love: This twenty years (says he) I served thee in thy house, abiding both
heat and cold, and frost; and I watched both day and night. And shall we doubt
yet to love Christ again, and make war all our life, against his capital
enemy the world?

CHAP. XIII. For Christ and eternal salvation, to which we were created and
redeemed, every Christian ought willingly to die to themselves and the world.
2 Corinthians. 8. You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, because for you he
was made poor, being rich, that by his poverty ye might be made rich.
FOr thy Christ thou must die to thy self, thy sins, and the world, thou
must do good, and live a holy and innocent life; not that thou can merit
any; for Christ did that for all; but out of thy sincere love toward him, and
because he To love Christ is to live in him. the love of Christ overcomes the
world and death.
willingly died for thee: for neither in thy tongue or words, lest thou be
deceived, must thou love him, but in deed and work, and in virtue and truth,
and in keeping his commandments, as thou art taught by himself, John 14. If
any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father loves him, and we shall
go unto him, and have a mansion with him: For this is the love of God, That we
keep his commandments, and his commandments are not heavy. St. John 1 Epist.
Cap. 5. and our Savior himself, Matthew. 11. does affirm, My yoke is pleasant,
and my burden is light: And to those that love Christ fervently, it cannot but
be easy and pleasant to want the sweetness of worldly trifles, and to live in
Christ; mitigating all sense of difficulty through the vehemence of love: but
to those that do not embrace Christ's love with sincere affection, doing all
things ingratefully, and with an evil will, all things must needs be found
sharp and difficult in the study of an holy life: when contrariwise, to a true
friend of Christ, not death it self, if it be required for him, is in any wise
terrible: For unto us it is given (says St. Paul to Phil. 1.) for Christ, not
only that we might believe in him, but also that we might suffer and die for
him. Behold Moses with me, of whom honorable mention is made in most ample
words in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 11. By faith Moses denied to be
made great, and denied himself to be the son of the daughter of Pharaoh,
rather choosing to be afflicted with the sons of God, then to have the
pleasantness of a temporal office, esteeming the opprobry of Christ to be
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. The love of wisdom does cause the
contempt of pleasure.
Consider with me Daniel, Chap. 1. set apart by the King of Babylon, with a
certain number of his fellows in captivity, and reserved by the King, and
nourished with meat and drink from the Kings Table, until he should be fit to
execute the offices appointed by the King, and forth with he was brought up;
yet he and his fellows despised those dainties, and desired the Prince of the
Eunuchs, that they might rather be fed with Lentiles, and drink water: for so
much could the love of divine wisdom work in their young and tender minds;
with which to be divinely endued, they only desired: Therefore take thou heed,
and do not think thou may do otherwise: but if thou wish that Christ, who
is the eternal wisdom of the Father, should come into thy mind, persuade thy
self again and again, that thou must abstain from carnal pleasures, as from
the delicate dishes of the Babylonians Court. And as those children by
themselves were made more beautiful when they lived soberly and temperatly,
satisfying nature with Lentiles and water; so be thou assuredly persuaded in
thy mind, that it will be before God the best of all, and most excellent, and
so become partaker of his divine nature, as says Saint Peter, 2 Epist. chap.
1. if thou detest worldly pleasures and sin. The words of S. Paul are to Gal.
6. The world is crucified to me, and I to the world; that is, I am dead to the
world, and the world to me. In example of this, all true Christians are in the
world truly, but not of the world; and although they live in it, no part of the
love of it cleaves unto them, accounting it for shadows, and as nothing;
worldly pomps, dignities, concupiscence of the eyes and the flesh, with the
pride of life, how the world is dead to them and is crucified, and they
Christians account al worldly things but shadows
to the world, likewise are dead and crucied, because they esteem little of
honors, wealth and pleasures, and account them as dung to obtain Christ, or in
respect of Christ. But happy, and thrice and four times happy is that heart
who is so divinely endued, and in whose heart such graces are infused, that it
is withdrawn with no desire of worldly honors, wealth and pleasure; which to
obtain, it is needful, and very behoovefull for a true Christian to pray daily
to God for the same. Solomon, the wisest of all Kings, by this means obtained
his desire of God, Prove. 30. Two things I desire of thee, deny them not unto
me: That thou neither give me Riches nor Poverty, but give me so much as is
necessary for my life. Let a true Christian in like manner so pray, Two things
are necessary for a Christian.
Two things I desire of thee, O Lord, two things, That I may die to my self
and the world: without these two things, it is unpossible to be a true
Christian: And if thou think otherwise, thou art deceived, and thou shall
hear this, I know you not. Although to flesh and blood it be a grievous cross
to die to himself and the world, that is, to set by no worldly thing in
respect of heaven; yet the spirit overcommeth, and breaks through all these
difficulties, so A spiritual life is a cross to the flesh
great is the force, so great is the love of Christ, that they pass through
all these things, as a sweet yoke, and easy bu^den. And although those which
are so, are hated of the world, yet they are beloved of God. For the enmity of
this world, is the friendship and love of God: And in like manner, the enmity
of God is the friendship of the world. Whosoever therefore would be a friend of
the world, is sure to be the enemy of God, witness James, chap. 4. and Christ
himself, John 15. plainly professes, If you were of this world, the world
would love that which were its own: but because you are not of the world; for I
have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world does hate you. For as the
Sea receives, and will bear quick men, and casts out dead men: so the world
is adversary to those that are dead to the world, and so esteems them, and is
otherwise to those that live in pomp and splendour, it commends them. Finally,
to speak briefly, he who so lives that in his heart pride, covetousness,
pleasure, wrath, revenge, and the desire thereof mortified, are to him indeed
the world What it is to die to the world.
is dead, and he to the world: this man lives in Christ, and Christ in him.
And those that are so, these Christ does acknowledge for his, to others it is
said, I know you not, who in like manner knew him not, and were ashamed of his
life: I say, his meekness, humility, and patience. In brief, he who refuses
to live with Christ here in time, how should he live with Christ in eternity?
For how should he live in thee after this life, who can not live with him in
this life? It remains therefore, whose life in this world is not in Christ,
he shall not have life in the other world. Here I pray thee now examine thy
life, and see whether it be more like to Christ's or the Union with Christ or
the Devil.
Devils: Certainly, with one of them thou shall be joined eternally after
death. But who is dead to himself, he is in love with no businesses, yea is
dead to the world; what other thing is it to die unto the world, then not to
love the world, and the things of this world, according to that of John, Epist.
1. chap. 2. He who loves the world is not of God? For what should he do in
the world, who inwardly and in his heart is dead to it? Whom also whosover
loves, he is no otherwise then Samson of Dalila, overcome of it, and condemned
to all the torments and vexations which the He is overcom of the world that
loves it.
worldly life contains or affords. Moreover, the love of the world
belongs to the old man, not to the regeneration, because the world has
nothing but honors, The old man delights in the world, the new man in Christ.
wealth, concupiscence of the eyes, and of the flesh, with the pride of life,
in which the old Adam is conversant, and delights it self. And contrariwise,
to the new man, he has all things in Christ, as joy, honor, wealth and
pleasure: for what can be more The Image of God the great est dignity of man.
honorable to a man, or is more to be desired then the Image of God renewed by
Christ? Or if we seek pleasures, what man in his wits can doubt that God does
give delight to his, above all creatures, and delight The man is made for
greater things then this world.
them more? as the words of Taulerus say. Furthermore, what think you of that
which the Scripture teaches, Man was not made for the worlds sake, but the
world for man's sake, nor to fill his belly with delicate meat, pamper his own
wit, heap up riches, spread his Empire abroad to get most ample possessions,
grounds, and fruits of the earth, to be gorgeously attired, to abound in gold
and silver, to be Lord of the earth, to put all his delight and joy therein, as
in his paradise to place it, and know and hope for nothing but what is before
his eyes: Or lastly, for any terrene cause whatsoever, or any thing that is
frail, although of it self it be good, pleasant, and precious. No truly, he
must go hence, he is but a tenant and a life-renter of this great world, into
which we enter many at one instant, as it were by heaps, yet death calls for us
also. As it is not profitable for any of us to carry with us a grain of all the
treasure we have heaped, whereby it evidently appears, that we were not
created for this temporal life, To what man was created.
neither this world to be the principal end of our creation, seeing that we
live therein as prilgrims and guests, therefore another cause brought us into
this world, and for whom we were born, which is God himself, and the image of
God which we bear in Christ, and unto whom we are renewed: In this we are
convinced evidently, to wit, that we are especially created for the kingdom of
God, and life eternal, which Christ has recovered for us, and to whom we are
regenerate by the holy Ghost. How preposterous then is it for one to fix his
heart to the world, and give his mind to earthly things, when we know the
other to be more noble then the whole word? I say, for a man to attend and
spend his time on earthly things, which is the most excellent of all creatures,
which carries about him the image of God in Christ, and is renewed to this
image: Wherefore as I said before, the man for the world was not created, but
the world was created for man, and therefore carrleth about with him the image
of God in Christ: of which the excellency and nobility is so great, that all
men with all his works and power, could not repair one soul, or renew the
Image of God. But for this cause it was necessary that Christ should die, that
because the image of God was defaced and destroyed in man, it should be renewed
by the holy Ghost, and he should become forthwith the habitation and house of
God. And this being known and called to mind, if he be right minded, he will
never compare the riches of the world, honors To prefer earthly things
before heuvenly, is great madness.
and pleasures, with the price of his soul, which Christ has redeemed at such
a price: for what is it to cast pearls in the mire and before swine, if this
should not be? That which our Savior says, Matthew. 16. pertains to this
place, What profits it a man to get the whole world, and lose his own soul?
For seeing the world is mortal, and the soul of man immortal, the world with
all his pomp cannot recover one soul.

CHAP. XIV. A true Christian ought after the example of Christ, to contemn the
world, and hate his life in this world.
John 12. He that loves his soul loses it; and he that hates his soul in
this world, does preserve it to eternal life.
HE that will hate himself, he must first, not love himself, so that he may
daily die to sin, and therefore he must continually Self-love the chiefest
enemy of the soul* and Idolatry
wrestle with himself and his flesh; for nothing is more hurtful to a man
that is desirous of his salvation, and more hinders him, then self-love; I
say that carnal Philautia, of which this following discourse in all this book,
is the subject. I do not say that care of preserving our selves, but loving
our selves is forbidden: For seeing that God alone is to be loved, it
follows, that he who loves himself, is an Idolater, and makes himself
God; what every one loves, in that his heart is fixed, neither can we be taken
but with the love and servitude of something, so as we become servants,
despoiling our selves of our proper liberties; and consequently, having so many
Lords, we are subject unto, as we have objects to love; but if thy love be
sincerely and simply toward God, then thou art subject to no object, but it is
manifest thou art at liberty; wherefore thou must be very circumspect, that
thou follow nothing that may hinder the divine love in thee: And if thou
desire to possess God alone as much as thou art able, so much in like The
law of God brings forth tranquillity, the world perturbation.
manner of thy all, must thou consecrate to him: But if thou love thy self,
and please thy self, much pensiveness, sorrow, fear, and sadness, will
befall thee. Contrariwise, if thou love God, and rejoycest in him only, and
do dedicate thy self only to him, then will he be thy comfort, never shall
thou be overcome with sorrow, fear, and sadness; he who seeks himself
every where, and in all things, and follows after his own profit only,
praise and honor, he never attaineth to tranquillity: for always something
meets him that brings perturbation. Therefore beware you believe not, that
the increase of wealth, fame, and honor, is good and profitable, but rather
set before thee the best things, contemn such things, and extirpate the root
of concupiscence, which hinders thee in pursuance of the love of God. Now
seeing the commodities of this True and constant rest in God.
life, praise, honor, and likewise the world it self, are frail and floating
away, but the love of God remains for ever: that delight cannot be durable
which thou take in the love of thy self and earthly things, because it may
vary by very light occasion, where contrariwise the mind firmly set upon divine
love, cannot but continually rejoice: vain, frail, and brickle is that which is
not grounded upon God; but do thou forsake all things, and thou shall find
all things by faith: For the lover of himself and the world, finds not God.
The love Who finds not God
of our selves is earthly, and not of God, and is chief enemy to heavenly
wisdom: Humility is the companion of heavenly wisdom.
for it cares nothing less then to be eminent in the world, and to be
accounted great; for which cause, and for their own profit and simplicity, it
comes to pass, as almost with one blot it is put out of the mind and memory
of Man. Therefore although many in Sermons do boast and make a noise thereof,
yet remains, and will remain, this precious Pearl unknown and hidden, as
long as in life and manners we are far from it, and know little: And the
only way to find it, is to unlearn and forget humane wisdom, proper applause,
self-love. And for humane and earthly wisdom, which the whole world boasts
to be such, but indeed is ridiculous and vile, you must change for
celestistiall and divine. It is impossible to love Wherein the love of God
consists.
God, unless you hate your self, that is, unless thou be displeased with thy
self for thy sins, crucify thine own flesh, and mortify thy proper will;
that is, by how much any man is attentive to the love of God, so much more does
he study to mortify and keep under the concupiscence of the flesh, and his
own proper appetites. Also, the further thou departest from thy self, and thy
proper love, by the power of divine love, by so much the nearer art thou hidden
in God and his love, through faith. For even as inward peace depends on
vacancy and leisure from outward things; so it must needs be, that when the
inwards are at leisure, and the heart free from all creatures, it cleaves to
God alone, giving back from other things; the soul must enter Self-love and
the love of God, are two contrary things.
into God by consequence. Moreover, he that goes about to deny himself,
therein it must needs follow, that he does not his own work, but Christ's: I am,
says John 14. the Way, the Truth, and the Life: without the way no man goes
on, without Christ the way, the truth, and the life,
the truth nothing is known, and without life no man lives: Therefore look
upon me who am the Way, which you ought to walk in; the Truth, which you ought
to believe; and lastly, the Life, which you ought to live and hope in: I am the
Way that endures for all ages, the infallible Truth, and the Life everlasting
and eternal. The Kings way to immortal life through my merit, the truth it
self in my word, and life through the power and efficacy of my death.
Therefore if you continue in this Way, the Truth does carry you to eternal
Life. If you will not err, follow me; if you will know the Truth, believe me;
and if you will possess Life eternal, put your trust in my death. And what is
that Kings Way, that infallible Truth, and that Life the best and most noble of
all others? Truly, other life cannot be then the most holy and precious merit
of Christ, nor other truth then the word of God; lastly, no other life then
sempiternall happiness. Now then if you desire to be exalted into heaven, it
behooveth thee to believe in Christ, and after his example to follow humility
in this world, which is the only Kings way. If thou will not be deceived of
the world, take hold of his word by faith, and follow the footsteps of his
life, because this is the chiefest and the infallible truth. If thou desire
to live with Christ, with him in time, and through him, thou must die to sin,
and become a new creature, because this is life. In brief, Christ is the Way,
the Truth, and the Life, no less by example then merit. Be you followers of
God, as most dear children, says S. Paul to the Ephesians: 5. Let us therefore
with all our Our life ought to be conformed after the life of Christ.
might and power endeavor this one thing, that our life may as near as
possible it may be, be most like unto Christ's life, so that if other things be
wanting to confound false Christians, even this only example of Christ might
be sufficient: for we may be ashamed to lead our lives in pleasures when Christ
Jesus led his life amongst sorrow and tribulation, even to his death. And if a
Soldier do forget his own proper recreation, when he sees his Captain by
fighting valiantly, receive his death, and thou gettest honor before thy
Captains eyes, used most contemptuously, shall I not say that thou do not
fight under his Banner? But alas, we will be accounted Christians, Many
Christians, but few followers of Christ
but how few be there that imitate the life of Christ? Truly, if it were the
part of Christians to be seekers after wealth, perishing fame, and honors,
Christ would never have commanded the loss of them for eternal good. Behold
with me his life and doctrine, and thou shall not deny, that nothing is more
unlike then the world and He: that manger, that stable, those swaddling
clothes, are not those a spectacle or looking-glass of the contempts of these
worldly things? Or let us perhaps say, that thou will by these examples draw
thy self from the true and right way? nay, rather it is means to bring thee
into the right way, when we shall compare his doctrine and way together with
his example: whereupon he says and proclaims that he is the Way and the
Truth. Therefore when they by contempt, misery, and reproaches, do attempt to
make the way to attain to heaven, it follows, that thou that seek after
jollity and wealth, and thirstest after promotion, art in a ready way to hell,
return thou, and come out of that broad highway, and come again into this way
that cannot stray, and embrace the truth that cannot deceive. And lastly, live
in him which is life it self: this Way is Truth, this Truth is the Way. O the
blindness! a worm of the earth will make himself great, when the Lord of glory
in the world did willingly give up his own life! Blush therefore faithful
soul, and do not thou when thy heavenly spouse, celestial Isaac, comes
Humility is the way to Christ.
on foot to meet thee, fit aloft on thy Cammel: but like to Rebecca, who
beholding her Husband, for bashfulnesse covered her face, and coming down from
her Camel, went on foot with him; so thou from the toylsome beast of thy proud
heart, descend lowly upon the ground, and meet thy Spouse, and he will infold
thee in his arms, and bring thee into his heart. Go from thine own land, and
from thine acquaintance, and from thy fathers house, and come into the Land I
will show unto thee: so said God unto Abraham, Genesis 12. Go thou likewise out
of the house of thy self-love, and proper will: for self-love corrupts true
judgment, blinds the understanding, The evil fruits of self. love.
disturbeth the reason, seduceth the will, corrupts the conscience, shuts
the gates of life, and knows neither God nor his neighbor, expels virtue,
hunteth after honors, lies in wait for riches, longs after pleasures; and
lastly, prefers earth before heaven: who so does so love his life, loses
it, John 12. but whosoever hates his own life, that is, does deny his
self-love, this man shall keep it to eternal life: self-love is the root of
impenitence and eternal damnation; with the which whosoever are bewitched, they
are without humility and acknowledgement of their sins: the remission whereof
can be obtained with no tears. For they were not tears for God offended, but
for their own proper loss. Mat. 13. the kingdom of heaven is compared to a
precious stone, or pearl of great value, which to obtain, the Jeweller went
and sold all that he had. This Pearl is God himself, or eternal life, which
to obtain, all other things are to be left: of which thing we have a most
absolute example, Jesus Christ, who descended from heaven, not for his own,
but for thy cause; not to serve or profit himself, but thee, and shall we then
doubt to seek him alone, who did forget himself, and for us gave himself unto
death? It is the part of a faithful Spouse to seek to please none but her
husband, and thou being spoused to Christ, desire still to please the world?
See then thou remember What soul is the virgin and spouse of Christ.
that thy soul is espoused to Christ, yet not without a sacrifice, with this
condition annexed, that thou may not love any but Christ; rather persuade thy
self thus, that thou ought to contemn and put all things out of thy mind,
that thy Spouse might deem thee worthy of his loving imbracements; for if thou
dare divide thy love, so that thou beholdest not Christ alone in all things,
now thou art no virgin, but an adulterer: for it behooves the charity of
Christians to be a chaste virgin and without spot: Therefore as in the Law of
Moses it was lawful for the Priests only to marry with virgins; so Christ our
true high Priest, does desire a virgin soul, and which is taken with nothing
besides his love, and so knows not her own self in respect of Christ: that
which he professes in express words, saying, If any come unto me, and hates
not his own s^ule, he cannot be my Disciple. What it is so to do, to hate
himself, Why a man must hate himself.
let us show in a word. We all do carry about with us the old man, and are so,
the old man himself, whose nature and property is, to do nothing but sin,
to love himself, to follow his profits and honors, to pamper his own will and
the flesh: for the flesh and blood is at all times like unto it self, studieth
it self, gives honor to it self, does applaud it self, does serve it
self, does respect it self, in all things, it is easily grieved, envious,
bitter, covetous of revenge: All which thou do and art; for seeing they arise
and flow from thy heart, this is thy life, thine I say, of the old man.
Wherefore thou must hate thy self if thou desire to be Christ's Disciple. And
he that loves himself, he that loves his proper pride, covetousness, wrath,
hatred, envy, lying, perfidiousnesse, unrighteousness, and wicked
concupiscence, which without doubt are not to beloved of any, they are not to
be excused and covered, but followed with professed and open hatred, mortified
and utterly denied by him that will be Christ's Disciple.

CHAP. XV. In a true Christian it behooves the old man should daily die, and
the new man be renewed. Also what it is to deny himself, and what is the true
Cross of Christ.
Luke 9. If any will follow me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me.
THese are the words of St. Paul, Ephesians. 4. of the old man, Lay aside according
to your former conversation, the old man which is corrupted according to the
desires of error: but be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put you on the
new man, which is created according to God in justice and holiness of truth.
And he expresses the cause, 1 Cor. 6. For ye are bought with a great price,
therefore glorify and bear about with you God in your hearts. What the old
man is, we said even now, as What the old man is.
pride, covetousness, lust, unrighteousness, wrath, enmity, hatred and envy,
all which must die in a true Christian, that the new man might spring up and be
daily renewed. The old man therefore dying, the new man quickneth in opposite to
it, that is, pride wasting, humility succeeds by the grace of the holy Ghost;
wrath dying, lowliness shines in the room; covetousness being extinguished,
trust in God is increased; the love of the world being taken away, the love of
God waxes warm. And What the new man is.
this then is the new man with his members, these are the fruits of the Spirit,
this is the living and powerful faith: this is Christ in us, and his most
noble life, this is new obedience, this is the new commandment, this is the
fruits of regeneration in us; in which whosoever live, these verily are the only
sons of God; and therefore it is said, that a man ought to deny himself, as
proper honor, self-will, and his own judgment, private profits, and his own
estimation; yea, to forgo his own right, and not only all other things, but
to think himself unworthy to live his own life. What it is to deny himself.
Wherefore a true Christian, and one that is endued with the humility of Christ,
does willingly acknowledge that the man cannot All things are to ^e used with
fear.
by his own right challenge or require any of those things which God bestows
on him, seeing that all things that are, are the free gifts of Gods divine
munificence; whereupon he uses the same as other men's goods with fear and
trembling, not to his private pleasure, or instruments of his private
Comparison between a carnal and a spiritual man,
profits, praise and estimation. Go to then, let us compare together a
Christian in deed, and selfe-lover, as also a genuine man, and one answering to
his name, and one desirous of this denial of which we speak. If you offer the
one a contumelious affront, presently you shall see him wax hot, to be grieved
with anger, to reprove him, to brawle and play the madman, in words and deeds
to be revenged, and to bind his allegation with an oath; all which are the old
man, to whom it is proper and easy to be angry, to practice hatred and
revenge. On the contrary, he that has denied himself, is courteous,
well-pleased, patient, thinking nothing of revenge, confessing himself to be
worthy of all these, and much more, because all these are contained under the
name of self-denial: of which patience, humility and lowliness, Christ denied
himself
we have an absolute example, Christ Jesus, who sooner would deny himself,
when he said, Matthew. 20. The Sonue of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister unto others. And Luke 22. I am in the midst of you as one that
ministers. And Cap. 9. The Son of man has not where to rest his head. And
Psalm 22. I am a worm and no man. In like manner blessed David, when Shimei
reviled him, denied himself, saying, The Lord has commanded him, for I am a
worm in the sight of the Lord, I am worthy far worse All the Saints have
denied themselves.
things. Briefly, all the Saints of God, and the Prophets, have denied
themselves, holding themselves unworthy of any good thing; hereupon they did
bear all things patiently, they cursed no man, giving thanks for their
injuries, they blessed their persecuters, and prayed for them that slew What it
is to deny our selves.
them, and so by many tribulations have entered the Kingdom of heaven. Thou
have now what it is to deny their selves. That is, to acknowledge themselves
unworthy of any good thing, and worthy of all evils that might befall. And this
is the Cross of Christ, which he commanded us to carry, Luke 9. He that will
be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up my Cross and follow me. For
this life of Christ is a cross to the old man, and to the flesh and blood a
punishment, The works of Christ.
yea, death it self, because he had rather lead an unbridled life after his own
will in this kind of pleasure, then in humility, lowlines, patience; and lastly,
to assume the life of Christ entirely. Which nevertheless is to be done
necessarily; whatsoever is The decay of the old man is the beginning of the new.
the old man, ought to die in a Christian: for thou shall never put on the
humility of Christ, unless thou put off the pride of the old man, nor his
poverty unless thou cut off avarice by the root; nor the contempt of glory,
and reproaches, unless thou pull up ambition by the root: Lastly, nor the
lowliness and patience of Christ, unless thou correct thy desire of revenge,
and thy wrath. All which things the Scripture calls the denial of himself,
the bearing of the Cross of Christ, and the following of Christ, and that for
no hope of profit, merit, reward, praise or glory, but only for the love of
Christ, because he has done this first, because this is his life: and lastly,
because he has left this in command. Furthermore, seeing this is the Image of
God in Christ and us, a greater honor then this none can happen to man: it were
a thing very unworthy to expect other reward The Image of God the greatest
dignity of man.
of our work and dai^ly labor; for those that define all things by the honor
of this world, and attend this only, by which only part they are made better
then others, when by their own judgment Fortune has bestowed all things upon
them. The beginning and end of all men is one, No man better then others.
neither is one better then another, nor one enters this life, or goes forth
with better conditions then others; and yet what madness is this of ours? we
vex our selves willingly, and to other crosses we add a wheel of ambition, to
the vice of self-love, Self-love forbidden.
from whence that mad and giddy hunting after honor, does spring or flow
forth. Which whosever loves, and applaudeth, and flattereth himself in, and
serves both pomps, honors, and praises, it is certain that he averteth his
mind from God and Christ, to the world and himself. And to such as this
appertains that of our Savior, If thou will keep thy self, thy soul and thy
life, thou must hate all these things; but if thou intend to love them, truly
thou art in the way of perishing. Which paradoxicall sentence old Adam, to whom
it is always pleasing to be accounted some body, out of his own image or
inward man, refuses and is adversary to it. Thereupon it is that there be few
which know this genius of Adam, or being known, dare meet and encounter it,
specially when we must needs extirpate both this and all other things that have
their beginning with us, and their continuance, and die with Christ; as is
pride, covetousness, ambition, pleasures and wrath, which we must kill and bury
in the humility of Christ, poverty, contumely, suffering and lowliness of
Christ: But whosoever is dead after this fashion to himself, he easily
thenceforth contemns the world, God makes glad the heart of him that is dead
to the world.
with all the pomps thereof, wealth, honors and pleasures, comprizing all
these in one Christ; a true stranger to this world, and new born, but a
continual guest and table-friend of Christ, who by and by will fill his heart
with joy exceeding, and in this life will, keep a daily jubilee with him, and in
the other and in the other an eternal jubilee with all the Saintss.

CHAP. XVI. In a true Christian the strife of the Flesh and Spirit never
cease.
Romans 7. I see another Law in my members resisting the Law of my mind.
IN a true Christian the man is twofold, Man is twofold in use.
Exterior and Interior; which two, although they be conjoined, yet they do
daily differ by turns, ruling and dying, according to that of S. Paul, 2 Cor.
4. If our outward man be corrupted, yet the inward is daily renewed. The same
Paul calls Romans 7. The law of the mind and of the flesh; to the Gal. 5. the
Flesh and the Spirit. The flesh, he says, coveteth against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh. Therefore when the spirit overcommeth, the man lives
in a new nativity, and a new creature, and in God and in Christ: But the flesh
reigning, the same man lives in the Devil, and in the old nativity, The
carnal and spiritual man.
without the kingdom of God, and is called carnal, and to be wise according
to the flesh, is death. Therefore according to the rule of either of them, the
man obtains his name in Scripture, according as the carnal man, or the
spiritual man speaks. But if the concupiscence with his strength be
overcome, it will be argument of the strength which the spirit has in the
inward man; and if it faint, it is a sign of the weakness of the faith and
spirit, because these two are one thing, according to that of 2 Cor. 4. having
the same spirit The spirit and faith are suitable
of faith for which we speak. Moreover, when one has himself and his proper
lusts tamed, and keeps them in their duties, he is stronger then he that
overcomes a most strong Tower, according to the holy Proverb. Chap. 14. The
patient man is better then a strong man, and he that rules over The greatest
victory to overcome himself.
his mind, then he that gains a City. If therefore thou have a desire, and
set thy heart upon the greatest victory, and to obtain it, then conquer thy
self, thy private wrath, pride, covetousness, and evil concupiscence, What it
is to overcom the kingdom of the Devlll.
and thou have overturned the kingdom of the Devil, which rules in the world
by such things and means: of which sort of victors and conquerers, there be
very few to be found, and there be many The victory of the soul keeps the
whole man.
conquerers of Cities. Here consult with me and advise, if thou pamper the
flesh overmuch, thou slayest thy soul; but it is better to overcome the soul,
that the body therewith may be preserved, then that this overcomming, it with
the soul does perish: for our Savior Christ once said, John 12. He that
loves his own life loses it, and he that hates his own life in this world,
keeps it to eternal life. But howsoever this strife may have in it sharp
things to be born, yet it brings forth in the end a famous victory, and most
beautiful Crown. Be thou faithful unto death, (says the Son of God, Apoc.
2.) and I will give thee a crown of life. And 1 John 5. This is the victory
which overcommeth the world, even our What it is to overcom the world.
faith: that is to say, the world within us, and in the inwards of our hearts;
which being overcome, we become more stronger then our selves. What if some
should say unto me, Shall I then be damned, if sin sometimes subject me
unwilling to it, therefore to be put out of the number of the sons of God,
according to that of 1 John 3. He that sins, is of the Devil? God defend.
For if thou find a conflict of the spirit, and a strife with the flesh, that
thou do those things that thou would not, which are the words of S. Paul,
it is a manifestation of a faithful heart; and that the faith or the spirit is
averse to the flesh: for St. Paul by his own example teaches, that this strife
is to be found in good and faithful The strife of faith.
souls, when he professes plainly, that he perceived another law in his
members resisting the law of his mind (which is the new creature, the new and
inward man) and taking him captive in the law of sin, causing him to do the
things he would not, and to will is present with him, but to finish that which
is good, he could not: for he could not do the good that he would, but to do
the evil he would not, that was present: Therefore most lamentably he
exclaimeth, Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! Like unto which is that which Christ pronounces, Matthew. 14. The spirit
truly is ready, but the flesh is Sin reigning not dwelling, does damn.
weak. Therefore sin does not rule in man, so long as this strife is perceived
in him, neither is it to be said, that sin exercises his dominion over him,
against which he daily fights; and that which does not rule, the spirit
resisting it, that consequently cannot damn a man. It is the equal condition
of all Saints to have sins, according to that of Paul, I know because it
dwells not in me, (that is, in my flesh) good dwells not. Also that of
blessed John, Epist. 1. Chap. 1. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves: which vulgarly we call, Sin dwelling in us, to distinguish it from
sin reigning, whose property it is only to condemn: for that sin we
contend with, and do not consent unto, that is not imputed unto us. Paul
speaking to the Romans 8. Now then there is no condemnation to those which are in
Christ Jesus, who live not after the flesh: that is, they do not suffer it to
bear rule: But as many as are not exercised in this daily strife, these are
not born again, having sin reigning; and therefore overcome, and servants of
Sin and Satan, and damned so long as they suffer sin to rule over them.
This strife is shadowed unto us in the type of the Canaanites, Josh. 13. 15.
whose remainder in the promised rest was suffered to dwell amongst the children
of Israel, but Mystical Canaanite.
not to rule over them: even so the holy men of God, every one of them feel
and suffer their imperfections remaining, who in the mean time suffer them not
to rule over them, as becomes the new man; I say, a true Israelite, and
Champion of God, as contrariwise, it is fitting the old Adam should be subdued
and brought under. Therefore the daily strife against the old man, shows the
new man, and argues it plainly; strength and victory shows a true Israelite,
and a new born man. Lastly, the warfare approves him to be a Christian: for
the Land of Canaan is conversant The spirit ought to look, lest the flesh do
rule long.
and occupied in warfare; but if it happen sometimes the flesh, or the
Canaanites do invade the territories, it is the part of Israel and the new
man, not to suffer a tyrant long; but having gathered his new strength and aid
by the grace of God in Christ, and by serious repentance and remission of
sins, to arise from his fall, and implore and entreat the true Joshua to give
him victory, even that true Prince of his people, to lend him aid to overcome
the Canaanites; which being done, first the sin is covered, blotted out of
mind, and pardoned, and the man is again renewed to life, and transplanted into
Christ. Wherefore they who feel many imperfections in their flesh, and cannot
do and perform all things according to their mind, let me persuade them again
and again, as true converts, and true repentants, to impute them upon the
merits of Jesus The imputation of the merits of Christ, is only belonging to
the penitent.
Christ effectually, and entreat him to hide their spots under his most perfect
obedience. This (I say) is the means, and this is the way and lawful
appointment of the imputation of the merits of Jesus Christ, when daily
repentance goes before, and always arises from his fall. Which when the
impenitent do not, cockering and pleasing the flesh in every thing, and
sitting at rest under sin reigning; therefore such as these cannot challenge
the merit of Christ to belong unto them; for the blood of Christ trodden under
foot, can be no medicine.

CHAP. XVII. The Inheritance and goods of Christians are not of this world,
therefore they must use them as strangers.
1 Timoth. 6. We brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any
thing out of it, having therefore meat and raiment let us be content therewith.
SEeing that God Almighty created temporal goods to that end, and did bestow
All things are to be used for necessity, only with fear.
them on man as certain helps, and necessary furtherances, it is meet that they
should not be otherwise converted, but to be used and taken from our most
loving God with thanksgiving, and fear and trembling; and whatsoever is more
then necessary, Riches are trials and proofs of men.
abound and are superfluous, as are gold and silver, meat and drink, and
raiments, these are left to man as a trial, by God for to try man, that by
these things it may be seen how his mind stands between these terrene things
and God himself, that is, whether he cleave only to him alone, rest in him
alone, and seek only after celestial and invisible goods: or contrariwise,
sucking in, and feeding on the inticement of earthly things, addict himself to
this temporal life, and prefer this earthly paradise before that of heaven.
Therefore God Almighty, by reason Man is unexcusable.
of temporal things, and in them only gave unto man his election and choice,
whom by riches, honors, graces, and goodly gifts, it might be manifested in
some sort, whether he did cleave unto God, respect him, live in him, or being
seduced with their splendour, and false shows, turn his mind from God, and live
without him, and contrary to him. After which manner, every one by his own
sentence and trial, is declared, and remains inexcuseable, according to that
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. Consider what I have propounded this day before thee, Life
and Goodness; and on the contrary, Death and Evil; Superfluous things are
proofs of the fear of God.
that thou might choose life, and thou might bless thy self. All things
therefore in this world are exposed to our eyes, not for the cause of
deliciousness and pleasure, but as proofs and trials, in which the fall is
easy when we fall from God; and this is that forbidden tree with the fruits
thereof, the eating whereof is so forbidden, lest our mind resting in them, do
take delight, and play the adulterer, after the manner of men now, who know no
other pleasure but what is taken and received from earthly things, abusing
thereby the creatures of God, meat, drink, and apparel, to the pleasures of
the flesh, and vain delights, wherewith most men at this day are drawn from
God. But it is the part of a true Christian to think that they be strangers or
Pilgrims, A Christian is not delighted in worldly things.
whose necessity these earthly things should serve, not for delicateness, and
that they should not set all their delight and pleasure in the world, but
should place it in God alone: but if they do otherwise, they entangle
themselves in sin, and being seduced with wicked concupiscence, being womanly
wanton and effeminate, no true Israelites, with Eva they eat of the forbidden
fruit. Therefore Christians do not desire curiously and deliciously dainty
meats, so that they may gormondize them, but they hunger after meat which
corrupts not, they follow not the pomp of apparel that is earthly; but
otherwise they aspire to the clothing of divine light and glorified bodies. In
brief, to true Christians all Worldly things are a cross to a Christian.
things whatsoever in this world do please others, are nothing but a cross,
temptation, allurements of sin, gall and venom, and rightly indeed: for
whatsoever a man, to obey his concupiscence, and pamper the flesh, usurpeth
without the fear of God, that cannot but be venom or poison to the soul,
howsoever to the body it may seem healthful.

But such is the indocibility of man, no man lays to heart to know the
forbidden tree, but every man most intemperatly A Chrstian does use the
creatures with fear.
is fed with the concupiscence of the flesh, the fruit, I say, of the forhidden
tree; but a Christian which uses all things with the fear of God, and as a
stranger, using diligence, and having great care that he offend not his
heavenly Father in meat, drink, clothing, houses, or any frail good thing by
his intemperance; or his table-friends, taking heed of all abuses most
diligently, and with the eyes of faith he beholds future good things in like
manner: for what profits it the body, by and by to be eaten with worms, if in
this world it swell in all kind of pleasure? Naked (says Job) came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return again* that is to say, naked, infirm
and brickle body we bring into the world, as an unprofitable burden we bring it
into the world, which as the spoil of death, when we go out of the world, we
carry it out again, and in truth poorer then when we entered: for being born, we
have body and life, and things not yet ripe are at hand, cloth, clothing, The
bread of Christistians is the bread of grief.
meat and drink; all which being dead, we leave behind, and so now whatsoever
we had even from our birth to the hour of death; in this world the solace of
miserable necessity; yea the bread of mercy and grief they were, whose use and
possession in a moment death has interdicted and taken away: therefore nothing
is more wretched then a dead man, and especially he who is not rich in God. Go
to then, O ye mortals, because we are strangers and Pilgrims in this world;
and because we must leave all these things when we die, will we nill we, let us
leave at least to be grievous to our souls in such things, In death all are
alike, riches, covetousnes, is a kind of madness.
and let us acknowledge it to be a kind of madness to gather wealth with great
labor for a brickle and frail body, which it cannot carry out of the world,
especially seeing there is another world, and another body, and another life.
Call these things, I say, O ye mortals, to mind, to you I speak, who in truth
are strangers and Pilgrims before the eyes of God, as it is in the Psalms,
although very few of you do testify that you think so by your deeds; and if
we be straugers in this world, it follows that our country is elsewhere, that
which is manifest to man of it self, if we confer or compare time with
eternity, the visible world with the invisible, the earthly habitation with the
heavenly, mortal with immortal things, frail with eternal things. The
meditation of eternal and temporal things, does introduce wisdom.
In which comparison or meditation of contrary things, our soul is enlightened,
and by faith we behold many things, to the knowledge whereof they are not
admitted; those which to this contemplation are not at leisure; and therefore
like a Sow in the mire, so they wallow in earthly matters, drowned in
covetousness, fixed to the cares and study of earthly things, given to usury,
and as concerning the soul blind, howsoever otherwise they have a quick sight,
and have Lynxes eyes. Because such as these thereby have addicted themselves to
this frail and worldly life, and think this alone most pleasant, the best and
most To Christians the world is a cross and exile.
noble, when true Christians esteeming all things with a sound judgment, and
right estimation, accounts it an exile, a valley of tears, a den of misery,
a prison of grief and sorrow. Therefore those which love the world, do not
exceed brute beasts in prudence, and die like a beast as says the Psalmist,
they think not on heavenly things, they rejoice not in God, they are pleased
only in earthly things: in these things they take sweet delight and rest, and
having obtained these things, do think they are exceeding well. Men in deed
and truth wretched all manner of ways, blind and mere animals, sitting here
in the darkness of ignorance, and hence removing to that of death and eternal
damnation. Christians are strangers in the world.
But we must firmly imprint this in our minds, that we are strangers and
Pilgrims in this world, after the example of Christ, whose doctrine and life
we we ought alike to love, and to him as an Image and pattern for all true
Christians to follow and set before them, to conform our manners, thoughts, and
the whole course of our lives and conversations. Who when he was the most noble
of all men, he chose voluntarily that life in which nothing is notable as for
himself, besides extreme poverty and contempt of honor, wealth, and pleasure:
which three the world has for their three Gods. Therefore thereupon Matthew. 8.
he confesses, that the Son of man has not whereon to rest his head. David
before he was called to the Kingdom, was poor, vile and contemned, and being
made King, esteemed all Kingly splendour as nothing, in comparison of life
eternal, whereupon the Psalmist sings, Psalm. 84. How delightful are thy
Tabernacles, O God of power? my soul fainted and failed me in the Courts of the
Lord, my heart and my flesh were exalted in the living God: Better is one day
in thy house, then a thousand elsewhere. I have indeed a Kingdom, I have
subjects and people subdued unto me, I have Kingly Palaces, and the Tower of
Sion: but these are nothing in respect of thy Tabernacle, O Lord. Neither was
blessed Job of another mind, when he rejoiced in his Redeemer; nor Peter, nor
Paul, nor the other The Saints live in Christ.
Apostles, which intended not the riches of this world, but sought after the
riches of another world, took upon them the life of Christ, walking in his
charity, lowliness, and patience, they contemned the world, they prayed for
them that cursed them, they thanked them that reproached them, in persecutions
they praised The Saints were dead to themselves and the world.
God; by many tribulations it behooves us to enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
And last of all, when they were slain, they (with Christ) prayed, Father
forgive them. And what is it to die to wrath, revenge, bitterness of mind,
ambition, pride, the love of the world, and himself? also, what is it to live
in Christ, and in his charity, lowliness, humility and patience? Lastly, what
is it to be made alive in Christ by faith, if this be not it? Which most noble
way of living, to the lover of this world is altogether unknown. Therefore
because they live not in Christ, being ignorant that the true life is in him,
Ephesians. 4. it comes to pass, that they are dead in their sins, wrath, hatred,
envy, covetousness, usury, pride, and covetousness of revenge; in which so
many as are drowned therein, those for that cause are without true repentance,
neither live in Christ by faith, whatsoever they persuade and boast of
themselves. Contrariwise, true Christians do understand that it is their duty
to follow the steps of Christ, to conform their lives to the life of Christ,
and to take from him as from a book and an authentic author, the Rule of life
and doctrine. And these are found to be such, that none but this is the only
true life which is in Christ Jesus, according to that saying, The life of
Christ can teach us all things; these say with the Apostles, 2 Corinthians. 4. We
do not contemplate those things which are seen, but those things which are not
seen: For those things which are seen are temporal; but those things that are
not seen are eternal. And Hebrews 6. 13. We have no abiding City here, but
seek after one to come. Which if it be true, that we be strangers, and have
not any abiding place in this world, it follows that we were not created for
the cause of this world; and it follows then, that there remains for us
another world, another country, other dwellings, for which we shall think it
gain to lay down hundred worlds, yea, our life it self; which a true Christian
well knowing, he rejoices in his inwards, that he was ordained to eternal
life: and attending this one thing, that he may grow rich in God, he laugheth
at the madness of those that are made blind with the love of the world, who
fears not miserably to afflict their souls for these brickle and frail
things, and so unhappily to lose them.

CHAP. XVIII. That God is grievously angry with those that prefer frail things
before eternal: also why and how far we ought not to set our heart on
creatures.
Behold burning among them in wrath, the fire of the Lord has devoured the
extreme part of the Tents. Numb. 11.
THe people of Israel that murmured against Moses, saying, Who shall give us
flesh to eat? We do remember the Fishes The type of the true and false
Christian.
and Cucumbers which we did eat in Egypt, is a type of men of this time, who
under the pretext of the Gospel, and title thereof, seek after nothing but
earthly and carnal things, as honors, wealth, and pleasures; they use more
diligence to be sumptuous, then to become blessed and happy; they study to
please men more then God: And lastly, attribute more to the concupiscence of
the flesh, then to the poverty of the spirit. Contrariwise, the Character of a
true Christian is to have more care of eternal honor and glory, then this
momentary, to thirst after heavenly, and let earthly go, to seek after
invisible and neglect present things: and lastly, to crucify the flesh, that
the spirit may live in him. Truly in this is both the foredeck and the poop of
Christianity, to imitate our Savior: or as Augustine says, The chiefest
Christ is the rule of our life.
of religion is to imitate him whom thou love; from which opinion differs
not much that saying of Plato, drawn from the law of Nature, The perfection of
men consists in the imitation of God; whereupon nothing else is left unto us,
then that Christ ought to be the example and square of our life, and that all
our counsels, studies, and cogitations, should respect that one thing, how we
should come to him, by him be saved, and live with him eternally, All things
are to be done in faith.
expecting with joy the dissolution of our prison. And that we shall attain, if
we direct all our labors, actions, business and vocations by faith, and go
on with desire and hope of eternal life: or to speak more significantly, if we
never lay aside the memory The love of the world is extinguished by faith.
of eternal happiness in all our actions; because through this fear of God,
is begotten in man, a certain holy desire of eternal things, and withal the
desire and coveting of earthly things, insatiable in its own nature, is
restrained, according to that saying of St Paul to the Coloss. 3. Whatsoever
you do in word or deed, do all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
giving thanks to God the Father through him. And the name of God is nothing
but the honor, praise and glory of God, According to thy Name let it be O God,
and thy praise to the ends of the world, says David, Psalm. 48. Which Wh^^ the
name of God i^.
scope if all our works and life do chiefly respect, then we think of
eternity, and our works are done in God, and consequently our selves are in
God. Briefly, God our chief good, and the eternal life of all our thoughts,
works, and words, should be the first mover, if we will not fail of eternal
salvation. That which Paul most elegantly expresses to 1 Timothy chap. 6 But
thou, O man Who i^ the man of God: or the man of the world.
of God, fly these things, to wit, covetousnes. He calls a Christian a man
of God, because borne of God, and living in God, he is the son and heir of
God. Even as contrariwise a man of the world is he who lives after a worldly
life, whose inheritance is the world, and whose belly is filled with the goods
of the earth, as it is in Psalm 17. Which way the Christian is far from,
seeking after faith and love, and unsatiably covetous of eternal life, to
which he was created alone; which if it come not to pass, then the man linketh
himself to enormous sins, which our just God does punish with eternal fire,
prefigured by the burning of the Tents, sent from heaven, and from an angry God
to punish and revenge the excesses of the Israelites. The wrath of God from
whence.
Wherefore so often as such like plagues are sent upon the wicked, as
inundation, fire, war, hunger, pestilence, let us always call to mind and
remember, that these are the most just punishments of a moved and angry God,
because the people of Israel unmindfull of heavenly things, did follow after
transitory things, did prefer present things before future, and had more care
of the body then of the soul; which things let us not err in. It is an
extreme point of ingratitude and contempt A great contempt and ingratitude to
God.
of God, both here and hereafter to be punished, to wit, to contemn God, for
whom we bear about both body and soul, and from whom we received them, and
instead thereof to worship Idols of the creatures, the work of men's hands, and
to esteem eternal things after transitory. For these creatures Why creatures
are given to us.
are given to us for necessity, and not to set our hearts and minds after them,
that which God alone deservedly challenges to himself, and that they might be
as prints and testimonies of God, whereby we come nearer to the knowledge and
love of God, the author of them all; which divine institution, when the love of
the world dare abrogate it, then the same, by the most just vengeance of God,
together with the proper Idolaters, are turned into the fire The love of the
world Is converted into the fire of Sodom.
and infernal flood, of which Sodom and Gomorrah is a type, and this burning
of the Tents of which we speak. Truly all creatures are of themselves good, but
when men set their hearts upon them, and that not after a lawful manner, but
does worship them as Idols, then they become abomination How the creature
becomes abomination.
before God Almighty, no otherwise then the detestable and execrable Images of
gold and silver, and therefore matters of eternal fire, although gold and
silver of themselves are good creatures. In brief, the love of Christians, joy,
wealth and honor, are circumscribed in eternity, whereupon there follows
even life eternal: for where thy treasure is, there is thy heart, Luke 1^. On
the contrary, from the concupiscence The fruit of worldly love.
and love of the world, nothing can follow but eternal damnation; for the
world passes away, with all the pomp thereof, but he that does the will of
God, continues for ever; whereupon B. John 1. Epist. chap. 2. beseeches the
faithful, saying, Little sons, do not love the world, nor those things that
be in the world; which being so manifestly showed thee, that God would not have
us love any creature, first, Why the creatures are not loved.
because love is the heart of man, and the most noble of all affections; which
therefore is due to God alone as to the chiefest and only good. Secondly,
because it is a great folly to love that which cannot love us again; whereupon
in vain are frail and transitory things beloved; by good right is God alone to
beloved above all creatures, who out of his exceeding love created us to
eternal life, redeemed and sanctified us. Thirdly, because naturally, like
things are Why man was created after Gods Image.
loved; therefore God made thee after his own image and likeness, that thou
might love him and thy neighbor. Fourthly, although our soul be like to
wax, ready The soul is the lookingglasse of God.
to take any impression put upon it, rather like a glass representing all
objects set before it, whether of heaven or earth, yet it is born only to set
God before it. Fifthly, as the Patriarch Jacob when he lived in Mesopotamia
amongst strangers, and after twenty years service, demanded his two What our
mind ought always to respect.
wives and his wages; and being provoked with the sweet memory of his country,
did think and desire to return to the same: so our soul among worldly
occupations, and businesses of our callings, as the Loadstone it ought never to
decline from the Pole of eternity and our country. Sixthly, because men are
good or evil by reason of that which they love; therefore he that loves The
fruit of love.
God participateth of every kind of virtue and good thing: on the other side,
he that loves the world is defiled with all the sins and evils thereof.
Seventhly, like as King Nebuchadnezzar when he loved the The love of the world
makes man a beast.
world more then was meet, he lost the essential form of man, he degenerated
into a beast: for when the Scripture speaks expressly, that he in the end
recovered his former shape, it follows that he was in humane shape and kind.
So all men blotting out of their hearts the image of God, become according to
the interior man, Wolves, Dogs, Lions and Bears; even so are all those that
addict themselves wholly to the love of the world. Last of all, what every one
here savoureth in his The manifestation of hearts from the world.
heart, it will be manifested in him, and he will follow it, God or the World,
to which of the two he turns himself into, it may be hell fire prefigured in
this type.

CHAP. XIX. That he who in his own judgment is most miserable, to God is most
dear, and so by Christian knowledge of his own proper misery, obtains grace
with God.
Isaia 66. To whom should I show respect but to the little and poor, and a
contrite heart, or spirit, trembling at my words?
THis sentence our most gentle God does The contempt of our selves.
set forth to erect and lift up our minds oppressed and dejected with sorrow;
which propitiatory whosoever desires to have, it behooves him to declare
himself in his own judgment wretched and unworthy of divine or humane favor.
But whosoever yet seems something to himself, is not yet wretched nor humbled in
his own opinion, nor capable of divine favor; whereupon Saint Paul says, Gal.
6. If any man esteem himself something when he is nothing, he deceives
himself. For God alone is all things, which he that only knows, and does not
inwardly in his heart approve it, and show it in his example, argues the
knowledge of God in him to be superficial and slight. Therefore if thou will
give God the glory, and teach it in thy deed, that God is all things, it must
needs be so, that thou use a most sharp judgment against thy self, and believe
most assuredly, that thou art nothing, after the example of David, who dancing
before the Ark of the Lord, when Michol contemned him as an abject person, he
answered, I will yet be more vile then I have been. He that will be something,
he is the The matter of which God makes fools.
matter of which God makes nothing; yea, a fool. And he that on the contrary,
loves to be reputed as nothing, and in his own judgment is so, this is the
matter of which the great workman makes something, yea, half Gods; he who
professes himself before God to be more miserable and worse then all men, he
in his judgment is made the greatest and chiefest of all others: and he that
in his own judgment is the greatest sinner, him does God account among the
Saints. This is in truth that humility which God exalts, the misery which he
respects. Lastly, this nothing is that of which God no otherwise then the old
world, is wont to produce the men of God, and create them so; of which things
we have David for example, whose baseness our most gentle God beholding,
transformed him into a most noble instrument; then Jacob whose saying this is,
I am less then all thy mercies. And Christ dejected below the common sort of
men, who also for God makes all things of nothing.
us was accursed and made a worm, into how great majesty did his heavenly
Father exalt him? For as a workman showing his skill upon some special piece
of work, to labor it more exactly, takes a new matter, polluted with no man's
hands: so that man that God will make something, he must be nothing: And he
that will make himself great, and believes himself to be something, this
cannot be the matter for divine works, because that which is nothing, and
void, is it of which he after a A man judges himself worthy of nothing.
wonderful manner shapeth all things: which the virgin Mary knew full well,
saying, Luke 1. He beholds the lowliness of his Handmaid, behold from
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. But he is indeed inwardly and
in heart wretched, which thinks himself worthy of no divine benefit, neither
corporal nor spiritual: for he that arrogateth any thing to himself, this
man indeed esteems himself something when in truth he is nothing, and
therefore is furthest from divine graces, and most impatient of all arrogances,
who if he judge himself What is proper to man.
worthy any thing, he takes not all things gratis of God: for grace is not
merit, what soever we wish to obtain for our selves from heaven. Moreover,
nothing is proper to man, except sin, misery, and infirmity, all other things
are Gods. Behold the shadow of a tree with me, which is no more something then
a man, and therefore as it follows the motion of a tree, from Man is a shadow.
whom it has its being: so this man carries his life and all he has
received of God, according to that of Paul, Acts 17. In him we live, move, and
have our being. And although apples appear in the shadow of the tree, they do
not therefore belong to the shadow, but to the tree. Now think thou the like
with me, the good fruits that appears in thee, and are apparent, but are not
thine own. But as the apple grows not out of the tree, as the unskilful
vulgar think, although it hang thereon, no otherwise Man is a very tree.
then a child on the mothers paps: So all men are fruitless trees and
withered, the Lord only is their force and vegetable power, according to Psalm
17. The Lord is the horn of my salvation. And that of Luke 23. If they do
these things to a green tree, what will they do to a dry tree? I, says the
Lord, Hos. 14. will hear and direct him that he shall flourish, of me shall thy
fruit proceed. And our Savior, John 15. If you remain in me, you shall bear
much fruit.

But when a man is truly and in his understanding wretched, and moved at all
times, and trusts only in the heavenly grace of Christ, then does God
respect him: which respect is not done, or comes to pass after a humane
manner, and without force and efficacy; but is full of virtue, life, and
consolation. And as some contrite hearts are capable of this divine aspect
only; so how much more clear, amiable, and frequent it is, so much the less
do they think themselves worthy thereof.

How much humility have we shadowed in The truly humbled think themselves
worthy of nothing.
Jacob, Genesis 32. who pronounces himself unworthy of all divine favor, and
temporal blessings? Therefore to his example and pattern a heart truly humbled
and contrite, acknowledging himself unworthy of the least heavenly visitation
and consolation, be it never so little, cries, O Lord, my soul, thine
handmaid, is unworthy of thy great love and mercy which thou have showed it in
Christ Jesus; behold since thou gave me thy Son, I come with two troops,
with the blessings (I say) of grace and glory. And indeed if a man would weep a
sea of tears, it were not sufficient price for the least heavenly favor or
consolation. Therefore the grace of God is merely pure and free gift; and the
merit of man is nothing else but punishments and eternal damnation, which
every one knows What misera. men God respects.
through faith, and acknowledges freely; man consequently is guilty of his own
misery, and is pardoned of God, that which cannot befall man without this
zealous acknowledgement, and so to obtain the favor of God. Whereupon S. Paul,
2 Cor. 12. says, I would boast of the infirmities in me, that the power of
Christ might awell in me. For such is the mercifulnes of God, he will not see
his works suffer corruption, but so much the weaker it is in it self, so much
more fortitude is divinely infused into it, according to that the Lord said
unto Paul. My grace is sufficient for thee; for my power is made perfect in
infirmity. Wherefore by how much a true Christian in his own judgment is more
wretched, by so much does God pardon more freely, to the manifestation of the
riches of his glory in a vessel of mercy, Romans 9. not looking to any merit of
his by heavenly consolations, more sincere then all human joys. Furthermore we
call not him a miserable man, not he that is poor Why a man is wretched.
and destitute of human succor and comfort, but he that from the bottom of
his heart acknowledges, and is grieved for his sins: for if sin were not,
there would be no misery in the world, and so much could not befall man, but
that he is worthy of much more. Far be it from us to grieve, because many
heavenly benefits are not bestowed, Man is worthy of no divine grace.
seeing we are not worthy of the least, no not the life we carry about with us.
Which saying, although our flesh think it a very unworthy and hard saying; yet
if we will obtain the grace of God, the truth is to be spoken, and every true
repentant sinner most be a most bitter Judge and upbraider of himself for his
sins. Wherein then, and wherefore should a man open his mouth? Truly thus I
think, what ever man thou be, it is better for thee to say thou can say
nothing, in these two words; Lord, I have sinned; Have mercy upon me a sinner:
certainly God himself requires nothing else of a man, but that he should
deplore his sins, and crave pardon: which two whosoever The best work of man.
neglects, may be said, that he has omitted the best part. Take heed
therefore, O man, to power forth tears for thy body because it is naked,
because it is afflicted with hunger and cold, and because it suffers
persecutions, because it is restrained in bands, or because it is weak and
sick; but bewail and send forth tears for thy soul, which is constrained to
dwell in flesh and blood, obnoxious to sin and death. Unhappy man that I am,
(cries blessed Paul, Romans 7.) who shall deliver me from this body of sin?
And this Christian acknowledgement and conscience of his proper and inward
misery, this grace-thirsting repentance, Faith is the door of grace
this faith fastened on Christ alone, opening the door of grace in Christ, by
which God comes into the soul; therefore repent and amend, says John, chap.
3. Behold I stand at the door, and I beat or knock, if any shall hear my
voice, and shall open it to me, I will enter therein, and I will sup with him,
and he with me. Which supper is nothing verily but the remission of sins,
consolation, life and happiness: at this door of faith, our most loving God
at his own time does meet the wretched soul; here the truth arises from the
earth, and justice looks from heaven: here Mercy and Truth meet one another,
Justice and Peace do kiss each other, Psalm 85. Here the offender Magdalene,
I say, the soul of Mystical Magdalen.
man, all confused and pouring forth tears, anointeth the feet of our Lord,
washes them with tears, and wipeth them with the hairs of her head, of most
profound humility. Here the spiritual and mystical Bishop in the holy
ornaments of faith, offers the true sacrifice, the contrite heart and lowly,
and the frankincense of true repentance and contrition; I say, the tears for
sins committed, that true cleansing water, The mystical Bishop and sacrifice
of a Christian.
wherewith the mystical Israel are washed and made clean by faith and efficacy
of the blood of Christ. And thus much, Christians, it appears how by the
acknowledgement of your proper misery, and faith in Christ, you may attain the
grace of God; so that by how much every one in their own judgment is more
wretched, so much the more dearly beloved of God, and by him is adorned with
great favors.

CHAP. XX. By Christian contrition our life is daily amended, and made more and
more fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, and life eternal.
2 Corinthians. 7. Godly sorrow works repentance to eternal salvation, but
worldly sorrow works death.
TRue Christianity consists in pure Faith, true Charity, and holy life, which
have their beginning out of serious Holiness from whence.
contrition, repentance, and a strict and severe knowledge of himself,
perceiving daily more and more his defects, and amending them daily, and
participating the righteousness and holiness of Christ by faith, 1 Cor. 1.
and cannot be obtained The fear of God.
by any other means; in which, if we walk in the continual fear of God, after
the example of good children and subjects, we do not nourish any thing
belonging to the flesh. All things are lawful for me, (says Paul, 1 Cor. 6.)
but are not all expedient in me, making me better. For even as a son in his
fathers house does not all things, which many times the lust of the flesh
prompteth him unto, but warily observes his father, and as it were by the eye
does counsel with him before he comes to say or do any thing: So a true
Christian, and the Child of God will chastise his senses with Christian
modesty, neither will do or speak any thing without the fear of God. But for
The joy of the world does extinguish the fear of God.
the most part all men are without the fear of God, and do addict themselves
to worldly pleasures, not knowing it is better continually to fear God, then
to wallow in the pleasures of the world: for the fear of God is the foundation
and beginning of wisdom and devotion; all which the concupiscence and delight
of the world does extinguish. For even as by daily contrition or sorrow for
sin, and mortification The renewing of the man with his soul.
of the flesh, the man is daily renewed, according to that of the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4. Although our outward man be daily broken, yet our inward man is daily
renewed in bearing heavenly fruits and celestial, of unexplicable sweetness;
So contrariwise the pleasure of the world brings heaviness, vexation, and
wound of conscience; yea so great The loss of the soul by worldly pleasure
is the calamity of the mind, and so heavy is the loss of heavenly gifts,
which flow from the pleasure of the flesh, and worldly delights, as he that
calls them to mind, or would call them to mind, he cannot overcome or detest
any of the worldly joys. Two things there be which whosoever disputes, and
seriously pondereth The fruit of the meditation of eternal joy and misery.
with himself, he must be neither affected with worldly pleasures, nor moved
with calamities. The one is the pain of the damned, which whosoever shall be
willing to consider of deeply, truly the more for that cause, because it is
eternal, he is never heartily merry or joyous. The other is life eternal, which
he cannot for that cause neither take out of his mind, nor The impediment of
spiritual joy and sorrow.
mitigate, do what he can: neither whereof because we sometimes do revolve
them in our mind, seriously can we revolve hereupon; it is no wonder that we
are both without wholesome contrition and sorrow, as also ignorant altogether,
and unexperienced of celestial joys: and it is the property The true cause of
joy and sorrow.
of a true Christian to be equally minded, who rejoices very sparingly in
earthly things, being full of divine pleasures and life eternal; neither is he
carried away immoderatly with calamities, or dejected in adversity; but against
the loss of the soul only, he bears it so, as for that cause all his life
time he does not refuse to account it a thing worthy of lamentation: for a
Christian loses nothing that is never so little, of these fragill things,
which perish, but he shall receive a thousand fold in another world: but if the
soul once perish, it cannot be repaired or recovered. Blessed then is the man
that finds this divine sorrow, and besides that, celestial and spiritual
pleasure. But often times we perversely and crookedly do laugh, when we ought
rather to weep; seeing there is no true liberty or delight but in the fear of
God, and a right conscience, which without faith and holy life can neither be
had nor kept: For faith accompanied with divine sorrow, by the holy Ghost, does
correct The hindera^ces of the king dome of God.
the defects of man daily; which daily means every man neglects, and he
loses the best cause and part of living, thereby he is adversary to the new
life, hinders the kingdom of God in himself, neither can Who is truly wise.
he be set free of the blindness of his heart. Whereupon it follows, that he
only deserves the name of a prudent and wise man, who declines with all study
what he understands shall be an obstacle to amendment of life, and
proficience of heavenly gifts; neither does he determine to fly those things
only whereby any calamities might arise to the body and the faculties thereof,
but much more those things which he understands to be grievous to the mind, or
any ways burdensome. Be of good cheer then, and learn to war like an enemy,
and so continue: a valiant man can best resist a wicked custom, according to
that of Saint Paul, Romans 12. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome the evil
with goodness: For there is no cause why thou should think thy self sick of
incurable evils; if thou reflect thy thoughts upon thine own mind and
cogitations; and first view thine own proper defects, and do not curiously
first cast a rash censure of judging thy neighbor in admonishing him before
thou have controlled thy self first. Wherefore if this daily sorrow, and
spiritual contrition beget reproach and reports, and for that cause the good
will of men grow cold toward thee, take heed therefore that you grieve not at
it, but rather complain of thy self, as becomes a Christian, and live
Christian-like, as thy mind desires; and that thou might in good works
equal the dignity of the name of a Christian. For it is meet for thee to be
afflicted by the world, and grieved at it, that therefore in like manner God
might delight in thee, according to that of Isai. 57. I do The joy of the
world and of heaven are quite contrary
dwell on high in the holy place, and with a contrite and humble spirit, that I
might quicken the humble spirit and contrite heart. It is impossible that
divine and worldly joy at one time reside in the heart of man, so contrary they
are, and so different in their offspring; when the pleasure of the world
begets one in prosperity, the other of heaven is begotten in adversity: I
acknowledge it indeed to be beside, yea against nature, to rejoice in
adversity, according to that of Paul, 2. Cor. 6. As heavy, yet rejoicing; as
poor, yet being rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. But the
grace of God does mend, and purify, and change nature: whereupon the Apostles
rejoiced because they were accounted worthy to suffer some things for Jesus
Christ, Act. 4. Neither do all true Christians otherwise, who are made the new
creature, and become other men, for they rejoice and are glad in adversity; and
indeed those things that disturb the old man, cannot disturb the new man, who
with S. Paul, Romans 8. glories in tribulation. The joy that is from above, is
more noble then earthly pleasures, which he perceives very well by the
contumely and contempt of Christ who belongs to him, of whom if we be
ignorant, let us persuade our selves again and again, that this happens by
reason of the love of the True humility
world. A man truly humbled thinks himself worthy of afflictions and
tribulation, and unworthy of divine consolations. But by how much he thinks
himself unworthy, so much more largely is he visited of God: And by the more
and the oftener he deploreth his sin, so much the less is he affected to the
world; yea it becomes more grievous and bitter to him thereby. He who
considers himself as is meet, finds More causes of mourning then joy.
more things wherein to mourn, then wherein to rejoice: And he who examineth
another man's life, shall gather more things worthy pity and compassion, then
arguments of envy thereby. When Christ wept over Jerusalem, which persecuted
him, and followed him to death, even because he deplored the sins and
blindness of it, let us think the same is to be done to us, and no other
matter more heavy and more worthy of tears, then the sins and impenitencie
of men. If it came to mind so often unto a man that he should die, and that he
was to plead his cause before God, as often as he in a pensive manner Cause of
mourning.
discusses the matter with himself of the helps of this life, surely he would
be more sad, and more diligent in the amendment of his life, and of repentance.
And if the same man should call to mind the eternal torments, he could not but
despise the world, and in comparison of them, think all the afflictions of this
world pleasant. From which opinion, and fervency of devotion, we are the more
distant, because we are so much inveagled with the inticements of the flesh. In
brief, it behooves The life of the flesh is the death of the spirit.
a Christian most firmly to persuade himself, that if it go well with his
body, and that he flow in pleasures of this world, that his spirit is dead, but
that he lives if he crucify his flesh with his desires and concupiscences,
for the one is the death of the other: if the spirit live, it must needs be the
body shall spiritually die, and be offered a living sacrifice, Romans 12. Which
way of life all the Saints from the beginning of the world did observe, eating
and drinking with thanksgiving the bread and cup of The bread of tears.
tears, according to that of David, Psalm 80. Thou shall feed us with the bread
of tears, and thou shall give us drink of tears by measure. And Psalm 41. My
tears were unto me my bread both day and night. And this bread of tears faith
by a wonderful sweetness does mix and temper; and the drink of tears is
pressed from the tender grapes of devout hearts, by true repentance and sorrow,
which works to steadfast salvation. As The fruit of worldly sorrow.
contrariwise the sorrow of this world brings forth death, witness St. Paul:
the loss of honor, temporal and frail goods; and it is often so sharp and
bitter, and impatient, that men catch themselves in a net, or bring themselves
to their own death by diverse ways, of which there be many examples in the
histories of the Ethnicks, for which it were better to be more moderate, and
show themselves better Christians, who know it to be far unworthy their
profession, for the loss of frail goods to lose their souls, which the whole
world will not recompense. Far be it from us that for temporal goods we should
not mourn or thirst after eternal, seeing the use of them is most short, and
ends with death. When a man departs (says the Psalm 49.) he takes not all,
neither does his glory descend with him; which law is equally spoken to all, no
less to the King then to the meanest Beggar; the dead body putrifieth, and so
a living Dog is better then a dead Lion, as says Solomon, Eccles. 9. yet the
Lord will set the death at all times, and the face of them that are in bonds
among all people, and he wipeth the the tears from every face, as it is
written, Isa. 25. Therefore remember to carry moderatly the loss of earthly
things, and that the whole world is not worth one soul for The love of the
world brings sorrow.
which Christ vouchsafed to die; But if thou prosecutest not these frail things
with so unruly a love, thou shall be less troubled with the loss of them;
seeing this, that it is the condition of things beloved, that things lost are
more desired, and so the labor of fools afflicts them, which are the From
whence the pertur bations of the mind.
words of Eccles. 10. The sons of this age do gather goods with great labor,
with no less fear do they possess them, and with greatest grief forgo
them, which is the sorrow of the world begetting death. Apoc. 10. we read of
those that followed and adored the Beast, had no rest: to whom all these are
like, that adore the goodly Beast of earthly wealth, and avaritious desires
thereof, a kind of men most wretched, unquiet, and full of sorrows; whom
perhaps we shall shall not evilly compare to Camels, or Mules: for as they by
rocks, and steep hills, carrying Silken Garments, Pearls, Aromatic Spices, and
generous Wines on their backs, do draw many servants with them for security
sake, and so at evening coming to their stables, their precious ornaments, and
painted clothes and garments, are taken from them, and now being weary and
stripped, nothing but the prints of stripes and foul marks of blows are to be
seen: So those which in this world did shine in Gold and Silks, the day of
their death being come, have nothing but the prints and skars of sins through
the abuse of riches committed unto them. Learn then, O learn to leave the world
The world in the world i^ to be left.
before it leave thee with most bitter pains; which he who does, and first
separateth his soul from the world; to this man it is easy to be separate in
body from it, neither does he grieve for the loss of it. For as the Israelites
even now being about to leave Egypt, were daily pressed with greater burdens by
Pharaoh, going about utterly to overthrow their whole progeny, or stock; so We
carry nothing out of the world.
the infernal Pharaoh envying our eternal salvation, when we are near to
death, so much greater care and rapacious desire of earthly things, is he wont
to infest our souls withal; which blindness is the more remarkable, because
we cannot carry the least dust with us of all those heaps of money which we have
gotten, into the Kingdom of heaven; because that way is so strait, as all
earthly things and of the body, do exceedingly hinder the passage of the
soul: The way is strait which leads to heaven, and few there be that find
it, Matthew. 7. As the Husbandman on the Barn-floore separateth the Wheat from
the Chafe, so death sets free the seed of the faithful souls from the
chafe of the world, neither are they any other thing else indeed but chafe
carried hither and thither with the wind, Psalm 1. Therefore do that with all
thy might, and let not that depart out of thy mind which we brought before out
of St. Paul, The sorrow which is according to God, works repentance to a firm
salvation, but the sorrow of the world brings death.

CHAP. XXI. What is true divine Worship.
Levit. 10. The sons of Aaron did offer to the Lord strange fire, and there
went fire from the Lord and devoured them.
THis fire is said to be strange fire, because it was other then that which
burned perpetually on the Altar, and which by the commaandement of God did burn
the Offering, and it is a type of the false divine The false worship of God.
worship. The sons of Aaron did deserve to be burned with the fire of
revenge, because they broke the commandment of the Lord: which zeal of the
most just God, those likewise provoke against themselves, which out of their
own invention and singular devotion and presumption of religious sanctity, do
invent a new and uncommanded kind of worship, not of God commanded. Into which
indignation of the divine Godhead, lest perhaps we The punishment of it.
should fall into it also, it remains to see wherein the true worship of God
consists: for the punishment of the temporary fire, which in the old
Testament is remembered against feigned worship, stands as an argument that
God will do the like in the new Testament for false religions both with
eternal fire, and wars, and devastations of the laws, then which I know not
whether any fire can be more terrible; if he so avenge, it is most sharp. And
the nature The true worship of God.
of the true divine worship, and the reason will easily appear to us by the
comparison of both the covenants together; that which God required in the old
Testament, it was external and typical, full of figures and shadows of the
Messiah, and full of ceremonies, which that nation was bound to observe
strictly, and according to the letter. In which rites and images the faithful
of the Jews did as it were behold the Messiah, and by faith in him are saved
through the compact and promise divine, which God in the new Testament did
fulfill. This consists not in external Figures, Ceremonies, Rites, Statutes
and Laws, but is altogether inward, and drawn into Spirit and Truth,
consisting of faith in Christ, because by him the Temple, the Altar,
Sacrifices, the Ark and Priesthood, with all the Moral and Ceremonial Law,
are fulfilled, whereby consequently we are graffed into Christian liberty, free
from the maledicti-of the Law, Gal. 3. and Jewish ceremonies, Gal. 5. So that
with a free heart and holy spirit dwelling in us, we might serve God, Jer. 31.
Romans 8. And our faith and consciences are bound to no traditions of men. The
true^ worship of God consists in 3 things
Moreover, three chief things are requisite to a true spiritual, internal;
and Christian worship, that is to say, The true knowledge of God; Then of Sin
and Repentance; Thirdly, of Grace and remission of sins. And these three are
one no otherwise then God himself is one in Trinity: for in the knowledge
eternal of God is contained both repentance and remission of sins, and that
consists in faith, which takes hold of Christ, and in him and through him,
acknowledges God his omnipotence, love, mercy, righteousness, verity, wisdom
of God; all which is God himself, and Christ, and the holy Ghost. And that not
absolutely alone, and by his What i^ God.
own nature, but respectively also, and beholding of me by his gracious will in
Christ, by which means he is God omnipotent to me, merciful to me, eternal
righteousness to me by grace and remission of sins, and to me eternal truth
and wisdom. Nor there is no other way with Christ, who is become unto me,
eternal omnipotency, omnipotent Head and Prince of life, my most merciful
Savior, perpetual love, justice and righteousness immovable, according The
true knowledge of God.
to that, 1 Cor. 1. Christ is become our wisdom from God, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption. All which, and every one of them also are
spoken in like manner of the holy Ghost. And this is the true knowledge of God,
which consists in faith, and it is not a mere knowledge, but a joyful,
living, and powerful trust, by which I sweetly feel in me, the beams and
infusion of the divine omnipotency of God, so as I am held and carried by it,
to live in it, and perceive my self to be moved and to be so. In a word, that
I may feel and apprehend the riches of his goodness and mercy in me: for can
can there be greater charity thought upon, then that which God the Father,
Son and holy Ghost have showed unto us all most abundantly? What
righteousness more perfect and ample, then that whereby he draws us from
sin, death, hell, and the Devil? Or what can be added to that Faith is the
virtue and power of God.
heavenly and infallible truth and wisdom of his? This then is the true and
solid faith, consisting in lively and effectual trust, and not only in words,
or the noise of words, or external sounds. In which knowledge of God, or faith,
it behooves us all, the sons of God, daily more and more to profit and be
perfected. Whereupon blessed Paul has sufficient for us to wish for, Ephesians. 3.
That we may know the love of Christ exceeding all knowledge; as who should say,
all the study of our whole life if it were employed to know the love of Christ,
it would not be sufficient to learn the exceeding largeness thereof. Neither
does only knowing define this knowledge, be not deceived, but thus much more
he will, that we The lively knowledge of God.
participate, taste, and have trial of the sweetness, well-pleasingnesse,
virtue, and lively infusion in our hearts, inword, and in faith, of his divine
love so great and immense without expression. For shall we say he knew the love
of Christ which never tasted it, never proved it? according to that of the
Hebrews, chap. 6. Who have tasted the heavenly gifts, and the good word of
God, and the power of the world to come; which in faith is obtained through the
word: Neither is any other, the effusion of the love of God into our hearts by
the holy Ghost, Romans 4. wherein consists the fruit and efficacy of the
divine word. And to shut up all, this is the true knowledge of God arising from
taste and experience, and consisting in living and solid faith, which therefore
the Epistle to the Hebrews calls Hypostasin, and most certain eviction.
Furthermore; this knowledge of God, which consists in living faith, is a part
of the eternal and spiritual divine worship, What faith is.
as in like manner faith it self is a spiritual gift, living and heavenly, as
also the light The true knowledge of God does change the heart, and brings
forth virtue.
and virtue of God. Therefore when this knowledge goes before, by which God
does as it were drink to our souls, to taste and relish it, according to Psalm.
34. Taste and see how sweet the Lord is, it cannot be but serious repentance
will follow, that is, the renewing of the mind, and amendment of life. For from
the perceiving and solid knowledge of the omnipotency of God, there follows
withal humility, seeing that it is not possible under the powerful hand of
God not to be made crooked, nor to make himself straight. From the taste of the
divine mercy, proceeds love toward his neighbor: for no man is or can be
childish, or can deny his neighbor any thing, who is experienced of the divine
love, and shall remember that God out of his mere mercy has given him
Himself. From divine patience and long-suffering, arises a wonderful
patience toward his neighbor, and that so great, that if it were possible for
a Christian to die seven times, yet he would forgive his enemy that cruelty,
being mindful of the great mercies of God, first showed unto him. From divine
righteousness flows the acknowledgement of his sins, whereupon he prays
with the Prophet, To thee, O Lord belongs justice, but to us confusion of our
faces, Dan. 9. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, because no flesh is
justified in thy sight, Psalm. 130. Lord, if thou regardest our iniquities, who
can stand before thee? Psalm. 143. Out of the knowledgement of the divine truth
does flow faith and integrity toward our neighbor, whereby frauds do cease,
falsehood and lying, and a true Christian with such thoughts fortifieth his
heart, does not circumvent his neighbor; for by this means thou shall offend
the verity of God, which is God himself, who when he deals so faithfully and
truly with me, it were very unworthy for me to carry my self otherwise toward
my neighbor. Out of the knowledge of the eternal wisdom of God, flows
forth the fear of God, whom it is manifest to be the searcher of the hearts,
to see into the inward of man, whereby deservedly we reverence the eyes of the
divine Majesty. He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he which made
the eye, shall he not see? Psalm 94. Woe unto you that are of a deep heart,
that you might hide your counsel from the Lord, whose works are in the dark,
and say, Who sees us, and who does know us? Perverse is this your thought, as
if the clay should rise against the Potter, and the work should say to the
maker, Thou did not make me; and the workmanship should say to his maker,
Thou understandest not? And thus far of the true knowledge of God, wherein
consists repentance, and repentance in the renovation of the mind, and these
things concerning the amendment of life; that which concerns the other part
of divine worship, and is that holy fire appointed by God for offering the
sacrifice, lest he wax hot in his wrath, and send revenge. A type of this
repentance was the forbidding-drinking The type of repentance.
of wine by divine commandment to the Priest when he entered the Tabernacle of
the Testimony, which spiritually belongs to all Christians: for if we will
enter into the Tabernacle of eternal life, it is necessary that we abstain
from concupiscence of the world and of the flesh, also from all things by which
the flesh may subjugate the spirit: for the love of the Pleasure is like unto
wine.
world, pride, and other vices, as sweet and strong wine, do cloud the soul
and the spirit, whereby they are brought under the power and servitude of the
flesh. For even as Noah and Lot being overtaken with wine, left themselves
uncloathed; so honor, pleasures, and riches, after the manner of strong wine,
do invade, try, and disturb the soul and the spirit, whereby a man may be
prohibited entrance into the Tabernacle of the Lord, that is, from his
knowledge, and driven from his sanctification, losing the difference of holy
things and profane, clean and unclean, so that he understands nothing in
divine things, and therefore neither can instruct the people left in his charge
with wholesome doctrine, which is a just judgment of all those that mad
themselves with the wine of concupiscence, so that their own thoughts and
intellect are not conversant in the true light; and at the last do rush into
everlasting darkness. Moreover, this repentance, or sorrow and grief for
sins, and also effectual faith in Christ Jesus, before remission of sins,
which as it does consist only in the sole merit of Christ, so no man can
challenge to himself this merit of Christ without repentance; whereupon
remember the Thief upon the Cross, who repented before his forgiveness, and
Christ admitted him to Paradise: and that was not a slight or superficial
repentance, but a hearty and true, as appeared by the chiding of his fellow
Thief, And do not thou fear God? For us, we receive punishment due for our
deeds, but this man has done none evil. And moreover, he prayed unto Christ,
Lord have me in remembrance when thou come into thy Kingdom; which certainly
were most sure arguments of a faithful and contrite heart. And that free
pardon of his sins, which a repentant heart in true faith apprehends and
requesteth, is Christ supplieth all things for us.
of such force as God excuses all things, which was impossible for us to
expiate, and that for the death and blood of Christ, wherewith he purges all
things, blotting out all our offenses, as if they never had been done, and his
abundance of satisfaction, not now equalling, but exceeding the heaviness of
our offenses and sins: Whereupon blessed David cries out, Psalm 51. I shall
be made clean from my offenses, and I shall be whiter then the snow. Now seeing
the condition of our pardon is such, and our payment so good, as the Creditor
can make no more demands, nor the debtor has not any thing to pay; Hereupon it
is said, that God forgets them, and never Why God forgets sins.
more will call our sins to mind; so that the sinner turns to him; as
witnesses Esa. 18. and chap. 1. This conversion, or condition not without
which, he commending specially to the people under the person of God, says,
Wash you, be you clean, ^ease to do perversely, and after that come and argue
with me: If your sins were as red as Sk^rlet, they shall be made as white as
snow. As if he should say, You which require your sins to be pardoned by
compact and promise, go to, if you will, and call me to account; Truly I deny
not that I promised you to pardon your sins, but it was no otherwise but you
must first repent: which if you prove together with a true and lively faith,
you overcome, and then there shall be no delay in me, but your sins how many
and how great soever, they shall be put out of my memory with one blot.
Repentance therefore, repentance I say, is true confession, that contrition I
say, of the spirit in faith, which whosoever finds in his heart, this man our
Bishop Christ Jesus, by his death and blood, does absolve from all his sins;
I say, with that blood True absolution.
which cries to God in heaven for us. Deuteronomy. 4. we read that Moses set apart
Cities, Bezer, Ramoth, and Golon, to which one might fly if he had killed his
neighbor Spiritual homicide.
by chance; by which most beautiful type we are taught so often as we kill our
neighbor by our tongue, thoughts, hatred, envy, anger, revenge, and
unmercifulness, we are to run by flight of faith and repentance to the throne
of Grace and Mercy, which is the Merit and Cross of Christ, which being taken
hold on, we are in safe keeping; nor with what measure we measure to our
neighbor, with the same measure shall it be meted unto us. For those three
Cities should effectually represent Christ who is the sole merit, as Bezer
sounds, that by interpretation is a Tower of Defense, according to the
Proverb. 18. The Name of the Lord is a most strong Tower, (Jesus Christ) to
that runs the just, and shall be exalted: the same is true Ramoth, which
Christ our refuge.
voice signifies Exalted, to whose Name every knee shall bow, in heaven, in
earth, or in hell, Phil. 2. Neither is there for us another Golan besides him,
which according to the etymology of the name, is nothing but a heap of
thankesgiving, or graces and gifts celestial, as a certain overflowing
vessel: Whereupon (Psalm. 29.) we read, With the Lord there is mercy, and with
him is abundance of redemption. And Romans 10. The Lord is rich to all those that
call upon him. And thus much of the third part of the internal, spiritual,
and true divine worship, flowing from the knowledge of God, which is likewise
the fountain of repentance, as this is of remission of sins; which three
indeed are one, and set forth and declare the solid knowledge of God: And God
did shadow unto us this third part by the Priest, which was to eat of the
oblation of God (which what other thing did it imply, then the application of
the merits of Christ by faith?) in the holy place, wherein is signified
repentance: For the faith by the virtue and merit of Christ and his blood, does
make the man before the just God, as if he had never been defiled with any
sin, according to that of Ezekiel 18. If the wicked shall repent him of all
his iniquities that he has committed, I will not remember them. And after this
manner the Law of Moses is changed into the spirit Moses Laws and holy things
are changed into spirit.
or life internal, holy and another life; and his sacrifices into repentance,
by which we offer our bodies and souls a living sacrifice, and give thanks unto
him, because he has manifested unto us what is the true conversion acceptable
unto him, which is the justification and remission of sins, that God alone be
all things, his grace, as it is meet, should be acknowledged, and with
grateful minds and tongues be praised for ever and ever. This then, as we have
often said heretofore, is the true divine worship, of which Mich. chap. 6.
speaks, I will show thee, O man, what the Lord requires of thee, that thou
execute judgment, and love mercy, and walk carefully before the Lord thy God.
Because therefore, O mortals, do we repent to get remission of sins, seeing
but by this alone we cannot come to remission of sins; for neither can those
sins be remitted, whose sense and grief the mind never yet found by grace
divine, and consequently never to grieve for them; nor he which never had it
in his mind to change The true worship of God consists in the heart, and is
not external
his life, and mend his manners. Which true and safe-making conversion, that
God for his Christ's sake would bestow it upon us, I humbly pray: whose favor
also it is, that now it appears, that his true worship consists in the
soul and mind, in the knowledge of God, and in true repentance, by which the
flesh is mortified, and the man renewed after the image of God, whereby he is
made the Temple of God, wherein by the holy Ghost, the true and divine worship
of the holy Trinity is exercised; I say, Faith, Love, and Hope, Humility,
Patience, Prayer, giving of thanks and praises to God. And although this
worship respects God himself; and is performed to him alone, let us not
think or believe, Why called the worship of God.
that God for his own cause, and because it joyneth with his profit, that he
inviteth us unto him; but rather let us be so assured, that he is willing
through his boundless mercy, to bestow and communicate all himself to us,
with all his benefits, and to live, work and dwell in us, if so be we be ready
through his true Knowledge, Faith and Repentance, to receive him. For no work
is gracious and acceptable to God, of which he was not the author of in us;
What kind of works are pleasing to God.
therefore he commands us to repent, to believe, to pray, to fast, not as to
him, but that the fruit thereof might be ours. No man can give or take any
thing from God, nor hurt nor profit him: for we sow and we mow to our selves,
if we be good; but we create evil to our selves if we be evil. And what
damage has God if thou will not do well? therefore he commands thee to
serve him, not for his own cause, but for thine: who seeing he is Charity it
self, therefore amongst things acceptable and dear, and so fit, accounts
it, that there be many be who participate of his charity, yea of himself; that
is to wit, as a mother loves her Infant, cannot but rejoice that it sucketh
her milk from her; so God is to be thought of, out of his most loving
communicating of himself after his manner to receive singular delight.

CHAP. XXII. As we know a tree by the fruit, so a true Christian by no other
token is known then by love and amendment of life daily.
Psalm 92. The just man flourishes as a Palm Tree, as a Cedar of Lebanon he
shall multiply being planted in the House of the Lord: They shall flourish in
the entrance of the House of God, they shall flourish. Moreover, they shall be
multiplied in a fruitful old age; and they shall be very patient that they may
show it forth, because just is our Lord God, and there is no iniquity in him.
IT is not the name, but the life of a Christian that makes a true Christian;
whose daily and only study ought to be, that in him Christ might be
manifested, and be made conspicuous by love, humility, and humanity. In whom
therefore Christ lives not, it follows that this man cannot be a Christian.
Furthermore, it behooves this life to be from the bottom of the heart and
spirit, even as the Apple is derived and comes from the natural branch of
the Tree, faculties and vegetable power; yea, it is necessary that our life be
informed by the Spirit of Christ, and fashioned after his life, according to
that of Paul, Romans 8. Those which are carried by the Spirit of God, those are
the sons of God. But if any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
or belongs not to him; to wit, every life comes of the Spirit, which even as
the All life is from the Spirit.
inward man moves, drives, and is carried; so in like manner the outward man
fares, or is carried: whereby it is manifested how much it avails to a
Christian life, to have the grace of the Holy Ghost, which therefore Christ did
command us to seek, not with prayers only, but promised also the spirit of new
birth; I say, by whom we live, and are quickened in Christ to a new spiritual
and heavenly way of living; and out of whose eternal and quickening power all
Christian virtues do flourish, and the just man does increase as a Palm Tree,
and a Cedar of Lebanon which the Lords right hand has planted. Whereupon it
follows, that a man must first be inwardly renewed in the spirit of his mind,
after the Image of God, so as his desires and affections be conformed to
Christ, and his outward life proceed from the inward A Christian ought to be
within as he is without, or seems to be.
feeling of the heart, and be most like to them. And seeing that God searches
the heart, and reins, as it is, Psalm 7. it is most right and equal that a man
should have more in the inwards, and in the bottom, then outwardly, and in the
porch. And because it cannot come to pass that our inwards can obtain the
purity and cleanness The cleanness and righteousness of Christians.
of Angels, yet it is convenient to aspire to it, seeing God accepts of the
votes of our spirits, and sighs, and approves of them, the holy Spirit
helping our infirmity, and entreating for us with mourning unexpressible, Romans
8. yea Christ's blood purging us by faith, so that we are without spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. Neither now shall our purity be Angelical, and our
holiness and righteousness so, but of Ghrist, yea Christ himself, 1 Cor. 1.
Jer. 33. Which free holiness and righteousness is to be preferred before the
purity and innocence of Angels, it behooves us to renew our souls and spirits,
and to lead a working holy life in us, that as the Palm tree flourishes
continually, grows and increases, so we through Christian Discipline in our
selves, may become more and more perfect in Christ; and so much every one in
Christ does flourish and profit as he grows in faith, holy virtues, and
Christian life, and so much as he amendeth daily in himself; and lastly, so
much as Christ himself lives in him. And this is to flourish like the
Palmtree, and as that continually Christian like a palm tree.
grows upward, daily to be renewed, always repeating his purpose to his holy
Name, to be pleased no otherwise then as if it were the first day of thy
entrance into Christianity, or did receive the Sacraments, nor to have any
other thing in thy desire, then that thy life and works should br answerable
to thy profession and discipline. And as those that are chosen to some office,
are wont to prefer nothing before the study, be it never so difficult, that The
calling of Christians.
belongs to his vocation; so must we do that are called to Christ, we are
called to a holy calling, to whom we shall never be like, unless we hold this
purpose and this opinion, and it be a most firm Antidote or prevention to us:
for this holy purpose not stablished nor confirmed, we be not careful of
amendment; neither do we increase and profit in Christ; nay rather we be
altogether without Christ. Because this purpose of living well is the work of
the holy Ghost, and that preventing grace, which The wisdom of God calls us.
allureth all men, inviteth them, and drives them. on Then happy is he who
has ears and a mind at leisure, and entertaineth the Wisdom of God crying in
the streets, understanding all things we behold to be the monuments and
remembrances by which he inviteth and in it self goes about to allure us;
which touch and motion so soon as we perceive, forthwith we must put our hands
to the work, and assent and take hold of this point of time without
impediment: which being negligently lost, perhaps many days shall succeed in
which we cannot hear, speak, do, or think a good thought, which the
Procrastin^tio^ i^ to be es^^ewed,
eternal wisdom knowing it, calls us in all places, lest we neglect time
and occasion: and be like to the tree in the open air, and without cover,
which expects the benign aspect of an immovable Sun, and propitious
heaven. And we are daily nourished The grace of God is every where present.
by the grace of God and heavenly influence, and there remains no more but
that all impediments of the world being shaken off, we admit of them, and draw
them unto us with all our heart. O mortal men, let us call to mind the
brevity of time, how many opportunities of Christian The brevitie of our life.
virtues we have neglected, that we have spent much of our lives in sleep, and
cares of the body, and that we are to die by and by, and that we have scarcely
begun to lead a better life. As every one wishes to die the death of the
righteous, so it is needful so to live. And if thou abhorrest to die an evil
death, live godly; if thou desire to go out of the world like a Christian,
How it behooves a Christian to live.
here in thy actions and life labor to be a Christian; and he lives like a
Christian, who lives so as if he should every day die, well knowing it is the
part of a good servant to be ready at every call of his master, and God calls
us by Death, as his Apparitor or Sumner. Happy is that servant whom his master
shall find watchful; verily he will make him Steward over all his goods. But
who does watch? Only he who suffers not himself to be seduced of the world,
and the lovers thereof. Therefore let us fly it, and such lovers of the world,
such water-bearers are unprofitable, with which the good tree growing wild, it
is hindered to flourish, and becomes fruitless.

CHAP. XXIII. He that will grow in Christ, and profit in him, must fly worldly
friendship.
Psalm 84. How delightful are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my soul
faints and fails in the Court of the Lord, my heart and my flesh were
exalted in the living Lord.
FRequent familiarity with worldly men is to be eschewed by thee; because as we
are no where so well fitted, or well pleased as when we are at home: so it is
never better with the soul then when it is in its own house, that is, resting
in God, whose offspring since it is, it must needs return to him again, if it
desires to be quiet. For this is the condition of all creatures, that the same
place is to them both of beginning and rest; for Fishes, the sea; to Birds, the
air; to plants, the earth; and to the soul, God, according to the Psalm 84.
The Sparrow has found a house, and the Turtle a nest, wherein to put her
young. For even as he begets evil to himself, that suffers his sons
and daughters to wander abroad: so he begets evil to himself that
suffers his tongue and thoughts to be conversant amongst many men: he shall
decline many scandals, if he keep them within the circle and circumference of
his heart. In the tents of the Lord our God, the plants of the Lord do
flourish, as the Cedar in Labanon. These tents are the meeting place, or inward
and spiritual Sabbath of our heart; and the flourishing Lebanon is in the
desert and solitariness of the spirit; which solitariness thou ought to
follow diligently, that thou might search thy self, and contemplate the
benefits and wonders of God. Neither are those to be followed or imitated, who
are delighted in the reading of Whatsoever does not make us better, is to be
avoided
subtle and quaint things, whereby the heart is more provoked then amended:
whatsoever does not further, or disturb the quietness of the heart, or is not
a furthering to amendment of life, let it be far from thine ears, thy mouth,
eyes and thought: for the trees of the Lord do attend nothing, but to grow and
profit in Christ; such as was Paul, who desired to know nothing but Christ
crucified: so did all the Saints of God; who strived with all diligence to live
in silence, and by inward devotion after a divine manner to emulate the
heavenly and holy Intelligences, and to hide themselves in God alone, which is
the only rest of our souls; of which number I have heard one say, so often as
he conversed with men, he was made less in some part or other: For seeing
humanity consists in the similitude of God, and therefore The definition of
man.
God defined man to be an Image like to him; it follows by how much the liker
he is to God, he has put off so much the more of his humanity; and the nearer
he is joined to God, by so much he shall become liker unto him. But no man can
be joined to God, who first does not forsake the world. The same reason is of
all seeds, that The seed of God brings divine fruit.
they bring forth fruit like themselves: therefore if the seed of God be in
thee, as the holy Spirit and Word divine, it follows that thou become a tree
of righteousness, and plant of the Lord, to glorify him, Esaias 61. Nothing is
more frequent Scandalous words offend the soul
then that a word may fall from thee or another, whereby the heart afterward
is pricked, and the soul abhors it; wherefore no man is more secure, safer,
and more at tranquillity, then he that keeps himself at home, and so
contains his thoughts, words, and his senses within the threshold of his
heart.

When Diogenes the Philosopher was met by a certain man, who being
impertinently acute, accosted him after this manner; Man or no man.
What I am, thou art not: But I am a man, therefore thou art none: He merrily
taxing his foolish acuteness, answered; It will be truer, if thou begin with
me.

He who will speak laudably, let him first learn to hold his peace: for to
speak many things is no eloquence, it is garrulity or prattling. He that will
rule his heart Virtue arises from contraries.
well, let him learn first to keep it well, seeing it is an impossible thing
rightly to excel others, unless he learn to serve and obey God. He that
loves peace and tranquillity of the mind, let him keep his tongue, and study
to preserve a good conscience: True rest.
for that which is evil, foameth as the sea, unless it return to its rest,
which is Christ, by contrition and repentance. The Dove which Noah sent out of
the Ark, when it found no rest, returned to the Ark. This Ark is Christ, and
the Church, having only one Door, or Window, that is, repentance, by which we
must go to Christ for aid. As the Dove having made her flight, returned to the
Ark of God; so do thou remember so often as thou fliest into the sea of the
worldly businesses, that thou return by and by to Christ, and thy rest; yea,
whilst thou art conversant amongst men, and attendest worldly affairs, The fear
of God.
let it be done with fear and humility, yet let it be without secure and
precipitate rashness: but be thou like the Shrub bound to the perch of
distrust, and the fear of God, lest perhaps the wind of perturbation do break
thee, then which nothing is more frequent amongst men, little conversant with
the inward man, and using the world more freely. Wherefore persuade thy self
there is no more trust to be given to the world then to the sea; and that the
external calm of the world does easily turn it self into a whirlwind, and an
evil conscience does obey the delight thereof. True peace and rest
But if men would seek no pleasure in ftail things, if they were not entangled
with the world, lastly, if they would trust less to their worldly goods, then
they would by experience find more peace and tranquillity in their consciences,
and divine consolations and visitations would be oftener manifest, but seeing
that they will not believe these things, it comes to pass that they lose that
conversion, amendment, and devotion amongst men, which they might find in
themselves. For what things within, and in the heart, are found by resting,
they are by seeking here and there unwarily and hastily lost, and this
follows upon course. As a tree no where profits better then in his natural
soil: so the inward man in no place grows in goodness sooner then in the
profound inwards of the heart where Christ is. Joy and heaviness is in the
hand of the conscience, which if thou usest and employ it in inward and The
nature of the conscience.
divine things, it will return thee again sweet and delightful pleasures: but
if in outward and worldly things thou do rest, it will return thee vexation
and torment. As often as a faithful soul grieveth and is sorrowful for his
sins, so often Whol^some sorrow.
he mourns secretly, and in the fountain of tears many nights washes
himself therein, and cleanses himself in the Spirit and Faith in Christ, that
he may become holy, and worthy to enter into the Temple and most holy place,
where the Lord may have most secret speech with him. And because God is an
unknown God, it behooves the soul to be most familiar with him, if he will have
him to communicate his divine mind unto it, Psalm 85. I will bear what Divine
communication
the Lord will speak in me, Psalm. 34. I sought the Lord and he heard me, and
took me out of my trouble; he being poor, he cried, and the Lord heard him,
and he delivered him out of all his troubles, Psalm 5. But I will pray unto
thee, and thou will hear my voice right early: I will meet thee early, and I
shall see thee. By how much more our soul departs from the world, so much
more familiar it becomes with God; so did the Patriarch Jacob when he
estranged himself from his country and kindred, he had conference with Angels,
and with God. Neither can it be sufficiently expressed by any words, with how
much love God and the blessed Spirits embrace an holy soul.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Charity or Love toward God and our Neighbor.
1 Timoth. 1. The end of the Commandment is love from a pure heart and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned.
THis being delivered, blessed Paul describing the most noble virtue, that is
to say, Charity, does insist chiefly on four things concerning it: First of
all, that it is the end of the Law, or a brief and short collection of all the
commandments, because by this, or in this, the law is fulfilled. The reason
is, because in it all the commandments are fulfilled: and lastly, because
without it all the gifts of virtues are unprofitable, idle, and fruitless. And
whereas he says in the second place, that Charity ought to proceed out of a
pure heart, that The sincerity of divine love.
pertains to charity toward God, whereto it is requisite, that the heart be
void of all worldly love, according to that of 1 Ioh. 2. Little children, do
not love the world, nor the What a clean heart is
things that be in the world, because every thing that is in the world, is the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the eyes, and the pride of
life. The world passes away, and the concupiscence thereof, but he that does
the will of God abides for ever. Therefore whosoever has his heart free and
at liberty from all love of the creatures, so as he rest not in any frail
creature, neither put his trust in them, but only from the bottom of his
heart longs and seeks after God alone, after the example of David, who in
the Psalms says, My flesh fails me, and my heart it faints, O God of my
heart and my portion for ever, O God. For what is there in heaven that I
regard, or in earth that I prefer before thee? This man's charity proceeded
out of a pure heart. Also, if any take singular delight, pleasure and joy in
the love of God, such a purity of heart as the holy Ghost shows in the Psalm
18. I will love thee, O God my strength, the God of my health and my refuge, my
rock, my protection, the horn of my salvation, and my Redeemer. The Charity
out of a good conscience.
third thing requisite to charity, was a good conscience, which respects our
neighbor, who is to be loved of us for no profit sake: (for this is the
property of false love, and that which proceeds from an evil conscience,)
neither in word nor deed proudly to offend him, and diligently to beware
neither openly nor closely to detract from him, or hate him, nor with envy,
wrath or disdain, to malign him, lest our heart do check us in our prayer, 1 John 3. The fourth thing requisite in Charity, Love from frail consciscience.
is faith unfeigned, lest we determine any thing against the rule of Faith and
Christian profession, and lest we deny God openly or secretly, in prosperity or
adversity. Go to now, let us consider apart the singular heads. Paul says,
Charity is the end of the Law. For Charity, or Love, which proceeds out of
true faith, is the most noble of all fruits and works of God, then which a man
can do nothing better, or more acceptable to God: for God requires God
requires not of us costly gifts and works.
not of man any heavy things, nor lofty nor great works to his service and
worship; but rather he has contracted the most rigid religion of the old
Testament, and a multitude of Commandments, and the variety of them, in Faith
and Charity, and has added thereunto, the gift of the holy Ghost, according to
that of Saint Paul, Romans 5. The love of God is infused into your hearts by the
holy Ghost, which is given unto us. By which words he insinuates unto us the
original of Charity. Moreover, Charity is not a heavy work, but a pleasant
and easy work to a good and faithful man, according to that of St. John, 1
Epist. chap. 5. His commandments The easines of charity.
are not heavy, that is to say, to illuminate Christians, to whom the holy
Ghost has given a cheerful heart, and a free will, moved and stirred up.
Furthermore, God God requires not much learning
requires not of us much learning or teaching, but only charity, which if it
be sincere, burning, vehement, is far dearer then arts, and wisdom of the whole
world, so that all other things, Arts, Sciences, works and gifts, without it
are unprofitable, and thought of as dead works, 1 Cor. 13. For without Charity
every work is of no moment.
learning is indifferent and common equally as well to Christians as to
Ethnicks, and the works of the faithful and the Infidels in that are alike.
But charity only is the sure Badge and Character of a Christian, discerning
the false from the truth. For where charity is wanting, there is no goodness,
whatsoever external show of greatness and excellency it commends it self
by. For God is Charity, and he that abides in Charity, abides in God, and God
in him, 1 John 4. Whereupon it follows, where Charity is not, God is not
there. Charity makes all things easy, and is heavy to no man.
Charity is pleasant and acceptable with God, and also the man that exercises
it. For where other Arts and Sciences, and Wisdoms, are gotten with great
labor care, and grief, and with the loss of their strength, charity only
cheereth the body and mind, does add vegetation, and mendeth the soul:
neither is it loss to any, but rather of it self brings ample fruits. For
love is the reward of the lover, and virtue is a reward unto it self, like as
vice in like manner does punish and torment it self. And when other faculties
of the body What is done out of charity, has God the Author, and pleases him.
and mind are weakened, and tired, and wearied, only charity is never weary,
nor ever cease, howsoever Prophecy may pass away, Tongues may cease, and
Sciences may be destroyed, yea and faith it self shall fail, 1 Cor. 13. What
God will accept, must necessarily proceed from God: He that loves God prays
well and freely.
for he approves of nothing which he does not first work in us. And seeing
that God is love, therefore that ought to proceed from faith, which is pleasing
to God; and out of love, without hope of any profit, that it shall profit our
neighbor. And so should our prayers arise from love. Oh then you mortals!
imagine what prayers those can pour out to God, whose hearts are full of wrath
and rancor, which if such should recite the whole Psalterie, they can
nevertheless be nothing else but abomination before God; when true adoration
consists in Spirit, in Faith, and chiefly in Charity, not in words. Let
Christ be in our memory, who out of his abundant mercy prayed, Father forgive
them. In a word, he that loves not God, that man prays not; in whom the love
of God is, that man prefers nothing before God, nor esteems any thing so
sweet. He that loves God, serves him from his heart; he that loves not God,
he serves not him, although he heap mountains upon mountains. So then nothing
can befall a man better, or more profitable, then that the love of God should
wax warm in his heart. Whatsoever faith works in man, (and all things ought
to be done in faith) Faith in charity should do all things in man.
ought to be done in charity, no otherwise then the soul through the body,
seeeth, hears, tastes, smells, speaks, and does all things; I say, after
that manner should charity do all things in thee, that All things ought to be
done in charity toward our neighbor.
whether thou eat or drink, hear or speak, praise or dispraise, all things
should be done in charity, after the example of Christ, in whom most pure love
wrought all things. Wherefore if thou do look upon thy neighbor, let sincere
charity fix thine eyes upon him: if thou hear him, let charity erect thine
ears; if thou speak unto him, let most loving commiseration govern thy
tongue. Lastly, have a care and study this one thing, that charity through
faith may be the root and beginning, and cleave unto thee always, which can
beget in thee nothing but what is good, and wherewith thou beginnest the law of
God, whose love also is the fulfilling of the law, or the true abridgement
thereof. Which majesty of the divine love, all the old Saints of God with
admiration exclaim, O Charity The praise of Charity.
of God in the holy Ghost, the sweetness of the soul, and the divine life of
man; he who has not thee, is dead, though alive; he that has thee, never
dies before God; where thou art not, there the life of men is continual
death; where thou art, there the life of man is a fore-tast of the eternal
life. And thus much of Charity, so far as it is the end of the Law. Let us
God is man's sovereign good.
come now to the other attribute, the purity of the heart, which consists in
this, That the mind being void of worldly love, does rest upon God as his
chiefest good, according to Psalm 16. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou art he that do restore my inheritance to me.
Psalm. 37. The Lord knows the days of the unspotted, and their inheritance
shall be for ever. And therefore the mind of man ought to take his chiefest
delight and pleasure in God alone, because he is the chiefest good, and
consequently good it self, and virtue it self; verily mere favor, grace,
love, lowliness, patience, faith, truth, consolation, peace, joy, life, and
happiness: all which he bestowed upon Christ also; so that he Why virtue is to
be loved.
which has him, has all things. Wherefore he that loves God, ought to love
also his truth, mercies, goodness, and all virtues: For the true lover of God,
loves all things that are acceptable to God: and contrariwise abhors and
hates all things that be against God. Therefore justice is to be beloved,
truth, mercy, because God is all these, meekness, humility, by reason of the
example of our most humble and meek Savior. Contrariwise, a true lover of God
hates every vice, as the adversary and enemy of God, and the work of Why vice
is to be hated.
the Devil; therefore he hates a lie, because the Devil is a lier, and
consequently other sins, because they are part of the Devil. And whosoever
loves sin, as a lie, and injustice, this is a son of the Devil, as it is
in John 8. Even as he that loves Christ our Redeemer and Savior, he also
loves the example of his most innocent life; I say, his meekness, humility
and patience, he is the son of God. But thou must remember that thou pray to
God for this purity of love, who certainly, willingly, and freely, through the
love of Christ, does kindle it in thee: if so thou incessantly with daily
prayers cease not to importune him, and offer up thy heart unto him every hour
and moment. But if thy charity be could and weak, so that sometimes thou fail
and fall; go to, rise again, and go to work, and renew thy Charity, be sure
the eternal light of the divine love is not extinguished, God our most gentle
Savior will enlighten thee again; which albeit it be so, yet thou should
The charity of God and our neighbor cannot be severed.
pray unto God daily lest at any time hereafter he suffer the most bright fire
of divine love to be extinguished. And thus much of the Charity from the heart
purged from the love of the world, and the creatures. Let us see now the
charity of our neighbor, out of a pure conscience. The charity of God and our
neigbour is one, and they cannot be severed; neither is the love of God more
manifest in any thing, then by and in the love of our neighbor. If any man say
that he loves God, and hates his neighbor, he is a lier: For he that loves
not his brother whom he sees, how can he love God whom he sees not? And this
is the commandment we have received from God, That he that loves God, should
love his brother also, 1 John 4. For the love of God cannot dwell in the heart
of a man-hater, or hostile revengefull man. Whereupon if thou have no pity on
thy brother, and know that he has need of thy help, how can thou love
God, that has no need of thy help? As by faith we are united to God, so by
charity we are to our neighbor joined. 1 John 4. He that abides in charity,
abides in God, and God in him. As a man consists of body and soul, so faith
and charity of God and our neighbor, does make a true Christian. And seeing
that God is well affected toward all men, who is so indeed, it follows, that
he is of one mind with God, and so consents It is the property of Charity to
bewail a sinner.
to him; he that does contrary, is adversary to God; because he is an enemy to
mankind. Furthermore, it is the property of this charity to bewail humane
errors, because they represent as in a glass, our own proper defects, and
bring to our memory the most infirm condition of our humanity; whereupon it
follows, that we are to bear the infirmity of our neighbor with patience,
humility, and meekness. Truly, such as sin through want of strength We are to
bear with the weak.
more then of purpose, and whereof they soon recollect themselves, do rebuke
and punish themselves, and do of themselves acknowledge their sin: these
truly are to be pitied and condoled, and do deserve pardon. He that denies
this, surely has not the spirit of Christ. For to punish the fallings and
infirmities of our neighbor, rashly, and with severe judgment without mercy
or commiseration, only is proper to him that is without the most merciful law
of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and without God himself.
Contrariwise, a true Christian, and he which is anointed with the spirit of
Christ, does bear with all men in condoling, commiserating, and loving him,
after the example of Christ. And this is the Touchstone whereby every one is
to be tried, whether Where charity is not, there God is not.
he be of God or not. But if he find he has no love of his neighbor in him,
let him assuredly persuade himself he has not the charity of God in him,
rather let him fear God himself has forsaken him, wherewith he ought to be
afraid, and be sorry from his heart, and seek to return into his neighbors
favor. Which being done, God through his love will marry himself unto him;
and whatsoever thereafter he shall do in faith and charity, is, and will be
accounted for good, holy, and divine. Moreover, by reason of the inherent love
of God, of his free will, he embraces all with his mercy and love; neither is
any thing more acceptable then to do good; or as Jeremy speaks, He rejoices
in them, he will do good unto them. Without charity in man all things are
altogether evil and Devilish; neither is there Why all things that the devil
does, are evil
other cause why the Devil can do no good, but because he is destitute of the
love of God and his neighbor, and thereupon what he does is altogether evil;
neither does his works and counsels whatsoever, tend to other end, then the
reproach of God, and damage of mankind, and that he may satisfy his malicious
mind and rancor against God and man. For which cause he uses such cruel and
vengeable minds to execute and bring to pass the counsels and contrivement of
his wrath and envy. And this is the mark of the sons of Satan, whereby they
are discerned from the sons of God. Charity proceeds from faith not fained,
which cleaves and adhereth to God equally in prosperity and adversity.
Whosoever loves a man heartily, he cannot be ungrateful, because what God He
that loves God, all his works he loves, and all his punishments.
has appointed against him, he does after the example of Christ, who with a
cheerful mind took up his Cross which he knew to be put upon him by his
Fathers will; whereupon Luke says, chap. 12. I have a baptism to be baptized
with, and how grieved am I until it be finished! which all the Martyrs of the
Church did imitate, bearing his Cross with joy. And for a truth, whosoever
loves God heartily, he cannot but bear his Cross easily; which, he knows
to be the yoke of Christ. And if a Lodestone can lift up a weight of Iron, and
draw it unto it self, what cannot that celestial Lodestone of love divine
do? Shall not it take up the worst weight of our Cross, and mitigate the
feeling of it? Also, why does Sugar rather correct the bitterness of the herb
and medicine, then the sweetness of, love take away the ungrateful and
inhumane savor of our cross? whose force is such, as the holy Martyrs had no
other where that strength of their incredible and cheerful constancy, but they
did draw it out of this fountain of Love, wherewith being most sweetly
intoxicated, they did not feel the pains of their torments.

CHAP. XXV. Of love to our Neighbor in special.
2 Peter 2. Of whom any man is overcome, he is that man's servant.
AMongst all kinds of servitude, none is The servitude of the affections is
most heavy.
more hard and sharp, then to be under the subjection of affections; neither of
these is any more cruel then hostility or inhumanity, because that wearieth
and binds all the powers and strength of the body and soul, and so leaves to
a man not the least thought free, but he that exercises or remains in
charity, he is free in his mind, neither is he the servant or captive to
wrath, envy, covetousness, usury, pride, lying and slander; from all which,
being free by charity, he suffers not himself to be brought into slavery by
his evil concupiscences, but remains a freeman of Christ through the spirit
of liberty, 2 Cor. 3. For where the spirit is, there is liberty. whosoever
therefore walks in the charity of Christ, he cease to be the slave of
sin; and servant to affections and carnal lusts: For by the spirit of divine
charity, we are purged and set free. And The universality of divine Charity.
charity divine is equally reached and extended to all men, so that not only
out of the word of God, but by nature universal also, it is made known: for we
are all equally and alike covered with the heavens, and we have the use of the
Sun, Air, Earth, Water, both high and low degree alike. Moreover, with what
mind God Almighty is toward all mankind, so ought our mind to be affected
toward our neighbor, seeing what things even now we showed, thou do not say
it happened for that cause God would have it so, but that by his example he
might teach us, and make it manifest that he loves all with like equal
affection, and that it is without re^pect of persons, and prerogative of
dignity or merit in Christ to love every one alike; so that as he shows
himself toward us, such ught we to be, and to carry our selves toowards our
neighbor; whom after the same manner as we shall deal with, God will deal
with us. Which Law God writ in our hearts, that evidently he might convince and
teach us, with what mind he was affected to us, lest we should be mistaken and
overtaken unawares, we ought to carry the same mind toward our neighbor every
one of us. Wherefore he that would know what respect he is in with God, it is
sufficient to ask his conscience: for that thing will tell him presently, as
his mind is toward his neighbor, whereby he The trial of divine love.
may gather how God is affected toward him. For like as we have done to our
neighbor; so it is meet God should do to us. And in this sense the great God
is good to the good, and averse to the averse; neither does he deserve to have
God his friend, that is an enemy to his neighbor. Now seeing that God has no
need of our works, as our neighbor has, it appears by this counsel, that
the charity toward our neighbor gives us in charge, that it should be as a
Lodestone, a most certain argument of our charity toward God. For if these
things were otherwise, he would not have directed these things to our neighbor
so exactly as to a certain soap, nor bound us to this as a law, but that we
might know his affection to us thereby, and we should approve the same mind
every hour and moment to our neighbor. Wherefore though Christ Jesus by his
death once sufficiently made satisfaction for the sins of the whole world,
and all men therein, for which all men are to give thanks, no man can warrant
him, who is Christ does as it were call back his merit from them that do not
pardon their neighbor.
not first reconciled to his neighbor. For all mankind, under the person of
the wicked servant, Matthew. 18. is described, who when he had not wherewith to
pay, the King remitted him all his debts; but when he afterward behaved
himself so cruelly toward his fellow servant, the King revoked his pardon,
condemning the wicked servant by reason of his hard usage of his neighbor.
Which Parable Christ concludes with this farewell: So will my heavenly Father
do unto you. Like unto that is the saying of Matthew. 7. What measure you mete
unto others, the same shall he meted unto you. Christ's mandate.
Whereby it appears, that man was not only created for himself alone, but
for his neighbors cause also. And immediately he passes over the precepts of
loving our neighbor, to withdraw the love of God, and to proceed with his
justice, by whose most rigid decree he is immediately condemned; but if we
should call such things to mind as this Parable, we should never be angry long
with our Neighbor, neither should the Sun go down in our wrath: for it A heart
irreconcilcable is not capable of Christ's merits.
is in truth a horrible thing to be thought, that the merit of Christ, whereby
he satisfied for the whole world fully, and after the example of that little
King, of mere grace has remitted all our sins; I say, that this merit should
be cut off, and become of no effect, if we do not pardon our brother, and hate
him. But although this law seem hard, yet so it is written, and it so binds
us, that God without the love of our neighbor, will not be loved of us; and if
we become irreconcilable, we lose the love and favor of God. Neither may we
think The cause of charity.
it was for other cause that man was not created one better then another, but
that one should not insult over another, but as twins of one mother and one
father, we should live lovingly and peaceably together, our consciences never
accusing us. Therefore whosoever hates his brother and despises him, let him
know that God does hate him, and despise him, because he has most severely
forbidden it, and consequently that he is hateful and abominable to him, as
also guilty of eternal condemnation, and altogether excluded from the merit of
Christ. Neither can it by any means come to pass, that a heart in enmity,
without mercy, and inhumane, should participate of the blood of Christ, which
was shed out of mere love: seeing out of the Parable, Matthew. 18. it is
manifest, that God was less moved, or offended, for the debt of ten thousand
Talents, then at the unmercifulness and cruelty of the fellow servants.
Wherefore let us never forget, but daily remember that saying of Christ: So
will my Heavenly Father do unto you.

CHAP. XXVI. Wherefore a man's Neighbor is to be loved.
Romans 13. Owe nothing to any man, but that you love one another: for he that
loves his Neighbor fulfilleth the Law.
THese are the words of Micah, chap. 6. What good things shall I offer unto the
Lord? Shall I offer unto him Meat Offerings, and Calves of a year old? Can the
Lord be pleased in thousands of Ra^^nes, or in many thousands of fat be-goats?
Shall I give my firstborn for my wickedness, and the fruits of my womb for the
sins of my soul? I will show thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee: Even to do judgment, and to love mercy, and to walk
carefully before thy God. By which judgment he teaches us Wherein consists
the true worship of God.
wherein the true worship of God consists, not in Ceremonies and Sacrifices,
which confer nothing on God, because all is his own; nor in humane offerings,
which he requires not; nay rather he abhors, because they contain the
reproach of Jesus Christ the Propitiatory offering which God appointed to take
away the sins of the world; but in pure faith, which the Prophet describes
in this form, To do judgment, I say in the exercise of faith, in charity, in
mercy, better pleasing then all sacrifices, and in humility, according to the
Psalm 51. The sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, a contrite heart and
humble, O God, thou will not despise. To which divine worship, consisting in
the inwards of the heart, and in faith, charity, and humility, Saint Paul
exhorts us, Romans 13. whose admonition we have prefixed to this chapter, which
contains the praise of Charity, and the perpetual debt to our neighbor. For
certainly there is no other way of serving God but this, to whom we can approve
of nothing but what we our selves allow, and he himself works in our
hearts; so that to worship God, is nothing but to observe our neighbor, and to
do him good. To this love of our neighbor the Apostle inciting us, uses an
argument something plausible to those which Charity praised
are desirous to lead a Christian life, calling it a breviary of all virtues,
and a fulfilling of the Law: not that we are able possibly by our charity to
fulfill the divine Law, or that consequently it follows, to gain eternal
life thereby; but it insinuates unto us the noble bounty and majesty of this
most excellent virtue, and inflameth us to love it with all our desire. For our
justice and happiness is founded on the merit of Jesus Christ, which we apply
to our selves by faith; out of which also the love to our neighbor does flow,
and all other virtues, which therefore are called the fruits of justice to the
praise and glory of God. Seeing then the dignity of this virtue is so great, it
were worthy the labor to seek more arguments to draw us unto the love of it,
but the strongest in my opinion, is that which Saint John uses, Epist. 1.
Chap. 4. The imp^lsive cause of charity.
God is Love, and he that remains in Love remains in God, and God in him:
for who would not wish to be in God, and remain in him, and that God in like
manner shall be and remain in him? And who on the contrary would not abhor to
be in Satan, and Satan in him, which is so often as charity is repulsed,
barbarism and inhumane hostility does dwell in our hearts. For as it is the
delight of God to be with the sons of men: so contrariwise the Devil is a
devourer of men. To which belongs that place of John, who says, He that
Charity is a token of the sons of God.
loves is born of God, and knows God. In this is made manifest whether they
be the sons of God or the Devil: and can there be any thing more desirable then
to be the sons of God, to be begotten of God, and to know God truly? and
whosoever has his heart void of charity, nor by experience has known the
force of it, life, gifts, goodness, gentleness, long-suffering and patience,
this man it is manifest does not know God, who is nothing but Charity or Love.
For the knowledge of God and Christ is known by experience, and feeling and
seeing that Christ is mere love and meekness, it follows that he that is
without charity, is without Christ, according to that of By charity God is
known.
Saint Peter, Epist. 2. chap. 1. If you had charity, this would not leave you
empty, nor without fruit in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Christ
himself, John 13. In this all men may know if you be my Disciples, What a
disciple of Christ should do.
if you love one another. But to be the Disciple of Christ, is not sufficient
to be a Christian in name and outward profession, but it behooves us to be
more, to believe in Christ, to love him, and follow him, to live in him, to
counsel with him, to listen to him, to be inwardly loved of him; and lastly,
to participate with him in all his goodness. Which love of Christ who so has
not, this man is not of Christ: for how should Christ know him which is
destitute of Christ? For even as an Apple by his savor, and a Flower by his
smell, is known: so a Christian is known by his love. Bouldly, and without
doubt, blessed Paul affirms it, 1 Corinthians. 13. All gifts without Charity is
nothing. And in truth, the knowledge of diverse Tongues, nor Miracles, nor
knowledge of Mysteries, or any such like good things, do show a good
Christian, but faith which God requires no hard thing.
works by charity. Moreover, God commands not hard things unto us, as to
work miracles, but to exercise charity, and humility: neither in the day of
judgment shall it be demanded of thee, how thou have been verst in the Arts,
Tongues, Sciences, but whether thou have loved charity through faith; I have
been hungry (says our Savior, Matthew. 25.) and thou gave me to eat. And
blessed Paul to the Galatians, chap. 5. witnesses, In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith which works by
Charity. Furthermore, the words of Saint John, Epist. 1. Chap. 4. If any man
say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a lier: For he that does not
love his brother whom he sees, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
And this commandment have we of God, He that loves God, should also love his
brother. And this one thing they teach, That the charity and love toward God,
cannot consist without the He must love his neighbor that will love God.
love and charity toward our neighbor. For he that hates him, cannot but
hate God that is the chief lover of man.

Charity is the Law of Nature, from which do flow all good things to mankind,
and without it mankind would perish Al good is out of charity.
of necessity. When any good thing happens to man, it proceeds from Love;
whereupon Saint Paul calls charity the Bond of perfection to the Colossians,
chap. 3. and Romans 12. does declare in excellent words and magnificent oration,
the fruits thereof. And our Savior himself, The whole law depends on charity.
Matthew 7. does teach, All things that you would that men should do unto you,
do you the same unto them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

I pass by that of the Ethnickes, whose famous Adage or Sentence is out of the
Law of Nature, and taken from their School, That which you would not should be
done to you, do not the same unto another. Which most excellent admonition the
Emperor Severus, a Prince most praiseworthy, daily had in his mouth, and
inserted it in his written laws. Charity is a Charity is the hope of eternal
life.
certain figure of eternal life, and a foretast or sweet drink of it, wherein
the elect do mutually love each other sincerely, do receive singular delight
one from another, and do converse together in a wonderful and ineffable
concord, sweetness, affection, cheerfulness, and mildness, and courtesy one
with another.

Who so therefore does desire as it were a certain fore supper of the eternal
beatitude, let him study Love, wherewith he may Affinity with God by charity.
be delighted with singular pleasure and affection in the inward of his soul.
For how much purer, more fervent and fruitful your charity is, so much the
nearer it approaches to the divine nature; when in God, in Christ, and the holy
Ghost, the charity is most pure, most rare, most fervent and noble. Therefore
that love will be pure when we love not for private profit, but only for the
cause of God alone, whom we may know in like manner he loved us, and took in us
delight most purely, and for no good of his own. Which he that does not so, but
loves his neighbor for his own profit, his love is not pure and divine:
wherein The difference betwixt Ethnic and Christian charity.
also consists the difference between Ethnic and Christian charity: for
they do all their virtues in seeking after their own private gain and honor,
do as it were cast ink upon Ivory; but the Christian he loves his neighbor in
God and Christ gratis. And the love is true and unfeigned when the^e is no
hypocrisy nor dissimulation, and love is born in the heart, not in the lips
and tongue, wherewith many are deceived. Lastly, charity is ardent when it is
accompanied with mercy and compassion; and when the affairs of our neighbor
go as near to our heart as our own, so that we should be ready to lay down our
life, if need It is the Christians property to love their enemies
were, for him, John 3. after the example of Moses and Paul, who wished to be
accursed for their brethren. Whereupon that also follows, that we ought even
to love our enemies, Matthew. 5. Love your enemies, do good unto those that hate
you, and pray for them that persecute you, and revile you, that you may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven: for if you love them which love
you, what reward have you, or shall you have? Do not the publicans the same?
In this therefore con^isteth the excellency, prerogative, nobility, and dignity
of Christians, to subject nature unto it self, to tame his flesh and blood,
and to overcome the world with the evil that is therein, with goodness; to
the Roman^, chap. 12. It is the commandment of God in Exodus 23. If thou
meetest with thine enemies Ox or Ass going astray, bring him home. If thou
see the Ass of him that hates thee falling under his burden, thou shall not
pass by him, but thou shall succor him. What care has God about dumb
creatures, blessed Paul, 1 Cor. 9. admiring, writes, Has God care of Oxen?
And does he not speak this concerning us much more? And Romans 12. he elegantly
gives in charge, If thine enemy hunger, give him meat. Wherefore lest we
think it not sufficient, not to hurt our neighbor, but moreover we might do
good unto him; which to perform, if any contemn and refuse, this man cannot be
the son of God, because he loves not his neighbor. He that exercises not
Christian Charity does show a man how to be a living member of Christ.
charity, that man separateth himself from the spiritual body of Christ,
which is the Church, and forfeiteth or loses thereby all the merits of Christ,
according to that of the Ephesians, chap. 4. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
For even as the members pulled from the body, do not participate of the life
and bountiful influence of the head, but dies every member: even so as many
as live not in charity, these because they separate themselves from their head
Christ, do not participate nor receive his life, lively motions, and fullness,
Prayer without charity, is unprofitable.
according to that of Saint John, Epist. 1. chap. 3. He that loves not his
brother, abides in death. Last of all, because by prayer all good gifts are to
be obtained of God, and without it, all helps, consolation, and freedom, we
may look for but in vain, being without blessing and safety; And God Almighty
gives hearing to no prayers but to those that are grounded on Faith and
Charity, according to that saying of Matthew, chap. 18. If two of you upon the
earth consent together, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be granted unto
them by my Father which is in Heaven. Go to therefore, O mortal men, let us
live in charity, wherein is peace Peace in charity.
and union: and where peace is, there is the God of peace; where he is, in that
place the Lord has commanded his blessing and life for evermore.

CHAP. XXVII. Wherefore our enemies are to be loved.
Matthew. 5. Love your enemies, do good to those that hate you, and pray for
them that persecute you and revile you, that you may be the children of your
Father which is in heaven.
THe first cause for which our enemies ought to be beloved of us, is the
commandment of God, to which he gives no other reason, but that you may be
the sons of your father, of him (that is to wit) that loved us when we were
his enemies, Romans 5. As if he should say, Unless you love your enemies, you
cannot be the children of the heavenly Father. And he that is not his son,
what father shall he have? To which commandment when exceeding few of us do
obey, it is manifest how far we are from the fruits of the children of God,
wherein we ought to use charity toward our enemies. He that loves not his
brother (says blessed John, Epist. 1. chap. 3.) abides in death; for he has
not in him the true life, which is of Christ, which is spiritual and heavenly,
which consists in faith toward God, and charity toward our neighbor,
according to that of blessed John, We know that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren. Whereupon it is manifest, that the fruit
and testimony of our quickening in Christ, is brotherly charity: and
contrariwise the hatred of him is death; so that whosoever dies in hatred, he
shall die an everlasting death. And all his good works that hates his
neighbor, his divine worship, and observation of the commandments of God, are
in vain, according to that of Paul to the Without charity all works are dead.
Corinthians, Epist 1. chap. 13. If I give and distribute all that I have to
feed the poor, and give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profits me nothing. Moreover, it is the property of a noble, great, and
divine mind to pardon injuries. For let us behold God both how long suffering
he is, and consider how suddenly he is reconciled. Behold Christ, how amongst
his most heavy torments, and most inhumane pains on the Cross, like unto a
Lamb, did not so much as open his mouth, Isa. 53. Let us contemplate the holy
Ghost, who for no other cause rather appeared in the form of a Dove, then to
teach unto us the meekness and lenity, and simplicity of manners. Behold
Moses, with what patience he did bear the reproaches of the people, whereby
Numb. 12. he deserved this praise, Moses was a most meek man, above all men
which remained on the earth. David also, with what Ienity of mind he did hear
Shimei cursing of him, 2 Samuel 16. And one says, True charity knows none to
be angry with, but himself; and true peace consists not in a great fortune,
but in humble bearing of adversity and his adversaries. Publius said excellent
well, The free estate of an honest man receives no reproach. And Seneca, If
thou be magnanimous, thou will never judge thy self any reproach to be done to
thee. Even as the Sun, if any mad man should reproach it, and call it mere
darkness, for that cause it would not, nor does it change the nature of it: so
neither a valiant mind, or generous, whose great generosity is also to pardon
The Ethniks exam^le of long-suffering.
revenge. And many Ethnicks in their examples did express th^se golden sayings
and admonitions: As Pericles, that was the most pleasant Orator of Greece, who
having heard a man upbraiding and reproaching him the sp^ce of a whole day with
his own ears, ^^ght coming on, did command him to be brought into his house,
lest he should take any harm; this speech b^ing added, It is an easier thing to
speak evil of virtue, then to possess it. Phocion the Prince of the
Athenians, when he had deserved exceeding well of his Country, through the
envy of some was adjudged to death; which being about to undergo, when he was
asked by one, if he would command him any thing to his son, Nothing else,
said he, but that he never take in hand or go about to revenge this injury
which I suffer of my country. Titus the Emperor, when it was told him, that
two brethren did affect the Empire of Rome, and that they had conspired his
death, made no scruple to bid them to supper, and about three days after set
himself betwixt them, to behold a Stage Play; with which admirable clemency he
overcame their improbity. When it was told to Julius Caesar that Cato had laid
violent hands on himself; He has bereaved me, says he, of the greatest
victory that ever I had: for I had decreed with my self freely to pardon him
all the injuries he had done unto me. But most of all, whom would not the
extreme patience and meekness of the Son of God himself move to love his
enemies? The great long-suffering of God.
neither this, nor any of those of the Ethnicks which I mentioned, nor any of
the Saints in their examples, did equal him. For what greater injustice and
dishonesty can be thought on, then that the Son of God should be so
miserably handled of men, to be made a laughing stock, to be scourged with
stripes, to be crowned with thorns, to be spit upon; and lastly, to be nailed
on the Cross? What extreme impiety out of his great and mere favor, did he
pardon his enemies, crying, Father, pardon them? Truly to this end our Redeemer
set his example before our eyes, that it might The example of Christ, our
Panacea.
be an ever-living mark set before us in our whole life; by which whatsoever
was proud or lofty in us, might be depressed and abated; what was weak, should
be comforted; what was unprofitable, should be made good; lastly, whatsoever
was wicked, or depraved, should be corrected. Or at the last, what pride of man
is so cruel and intolerable, that cannot be made whole with the extreme
humility of the Son of God? Or what covetousness is so great, that cannot be
sanctified with the poverty of Christ? What wrath so vehement, that his
meekness cannot mollify? What desire of revenge so barbarous, that his
patience cannot assuage and reconcile? What inhumanity so great, which Christ
with his charity and benefits so great and so many, do not expel? Lastly,
what heart so hard, that is not mollified with the tears of Christ? Or who
would not wish from the bottom of his heart, to be like God the Father, and
his Son, and the holy Ghost, and to carry the excellent image of the holy The
Image of God.
Trinity, which chiefly consists in charity, and pardoning injuries? For it
is the principal of all divine properties to have mercy, to spare, to pardon,
and to be propitious; The highest degree of virtue.
whereupon it can no way be doubted, but that that is the most noble of all
virtues by which we become most like unto God and all virtuous men, most
eminent in praise. Last of all, the highest degree of a virtuous man is to
overcome himself, and consequently, to forget, pardon, and exercise clemency.
He is stronger that overcommeth himself, then he that overcommeth strong
Walls, and Virtue can go no higher: whose double Kinsman is that in the
Proverbs, Chap. 16. A patient man is better then a strong man, and he that
rules over his own mind, then one that overcommeth Cities. And this as I
said, is the top and stem, beyond which no man can go, because then he is in
God, rests, is sanctified, and made perfect.

CHAP. XXVIII. How and wherefore the love of the creator of all creatures,
should be preferred in love. Also wherefore our Neighbor is to be loved in
God.
1 John 2. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him:
IN the heart of man such is his nature, and that property endued of God, that
it cannot cease to love: and therefore one man loves God, and another the
world, another himself. Whereby appears the necessity of love, this most
noble of all affections, Charity is the most noble of all the affections
therefore only due to God.
implanted by God, and kindled by the holy Ghost, is to be bestowed in the
study of the chiefest good, and given unto God by seeking daily of him that he
would vouchsafe to kindle the divine love more and more. For he loved us first,
which if it meet with love again, the same does more and more ardently embrace
us, according to that of Saint John, 14. He that loves me is loved of my
Father. Now in whomsoever the love of God is, he ought to love and wish well
unto all men, which is the property of the love in God, and consequently
circumvent no man, nor to Nothing bette then the love of God.
hurt any man in word or deed: but for the most part all men are so fascinated
with the love of the world, that they never admit the love of God into their
heart, that which they do openly in their hypocritical love toward their
neighbor, covetous of their own gain or advantage, not of him nor his. But it
were more meet so to love the world, and whatsoever is in the world, that no
injury be done to the divine love, nor the way or means thereof impeached,
especially seeing there is so great vanity and vileness of the world, and The
creatures unworthy of our love.
of God so great eminency and majesty as no comparison can be betwixt them: for
even as God does infinitely excel all his creatures, so does the love of him
in holiness, nobility, and dignity, go before all the love we have to any
creature, and leaves it behind, by a most exceeding distance, not to be
computed by humane reason: therefore no creature is worthy to be compared to
divine love. The words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 9. Who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Let us make something like to this, and say,
Who is more worthy of our love, then he that put it in our hearts, and to whose
love we owe our life? And we all live by the love of God in Christ, whose way
of love is showed unto us throughout all our life, what condition soever we be
of. Even as Mariners, when a storm comes, do cast anchor: so we, so often as
this great sea of the world does toss and shake the little ship of our heart
hither and thither with the Floods and waves of sin, as wrath, pride,
impatience, covetousness and lust of the flesh; we should remember to
strengthen our selves by the Anchor of Divine love, and love of Christ, being
ready rather to suffer the loss of all things then our selves The love of God
cannot be taken away from us.
to be pulled from him; of which mind we ought to be so often as we fall into
spiritual temptation, and be tossed by sin, death, Devil, hell, and miseries,
no otherwise then when we are tossed by cruel and raging floods and waves. For
the love of God is that hill which was showed to Lot, that he might fly unto
it, and eschew the fire of Sodom. For what other thing is this world then
spiritual Sodom? Also, what is the burning of it, but the burnings and flames
of worldly concupiscences, which must needs burn those that do not endeavor
to keep in memory the divine love, or willingly to depart with it? I say, of
that love, or divine fear which preserves a man from the world, as Joseph was
preserved from the wife of Potiphar. For no man can love the world, but he that
never tasted the divine Love: no man can hate his neigbour, but he that does
not love God from his heart. For the sweetness and delight of divine love is
so great, that it mitigateth the sense of all miseries, and death it self.
Such is the nature and instinct of Love, as all cogitations omitted, it is
fixed upon that only thing which it loves, and forgets and contemns all
other things by reason of the incredible desire by which The nature of divine
love.
it is carried toward that which it loves. Therefore can you show any cause,
O mortals, which say you love God, that for all things for which others are
wont to contend, you blot all out of your minds with one stroke, I say, for
honor, pleasure, and wealth, which you do not strive for this one thing, that
you may enjoy God alone? That which in old time was done by the holy men of
God, whom the divine love, with the admirable sweetness thereof, had so tied
and fixed them thereunto, that they became forgetful of the world, and of What
man is most wise, and who most foolish.
themselves also. Whom therefore as fools, and worthy to be derided, some did so
account them, when themselves indeed were the most foolish of all others;
because they prefer frail things like unto childrens lakings, before the
greatest good. A true lover of God loves him no otherwise then as if there
were nothing under the heavens but God alone; and therefore follows him
only: And by this reason he finds ^ll things in God, which he followed
before in the world. For God is all things essentially, true honor and joy,
peace and pleasure, riches and magnificence, all which ^re found in a more
excellent manner in God then in the world. Whosoever therefore loves any
creature for beauties sake, take my counsel, neglect those things, transfer
thy love unto God which is the fountain of all beauty. And he that would follow
any thing because it is good, follow God rather, which is the only and eternal
good essentially, and without whom nothing is good; so that all creatures for
that From whence all creatures do receive their goodness.
cause only are good, because even a spark, and a little drop of water, be it
never so little a thing, stained with many imperfections, because they
participate of that Ocean of goodness; why then do we not rather love God the
fountain and perfection of that which is good, and who is the good essentially,
and the out-flowing of every good thing in singular manner? By how much less
earth or earthly gravity every thing has, so much lighter it is, and is easier
carried upwards: so our souls and minds, the more they are addicted to
earthly things, and by them are as it were, made heavy, do by consequence
endeavor celestial things the less, and joy less in God: weigh well always
the damage of The gravity of earthly minds.
earthly love, with the divine love in balance, and that which is necessarily
annexed unto it, that of our neighbor. Whereupon it follows, that he which
loves God cannot but love his neighbor: and he that dare offend God, will
not forbear to offend his neighbor.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Reconciliation of our Neighbor, without which God takes
away his grace from us.
Numb. 5. If any man shall offend against a man, he shall be judged by the
Lord.
MEmorable is this Sentence, because Offending man offends God.
he conjoyneth both God and Man, as also the love and offense of both, that
every one, by Moses Law, in express words, that did offend his neighbor,
might be judged to offend God, or injure God: Whereby that follows
consequently, He that will be reconciled to God, he must do the same to his
neighbor, seeing that God takes the injury offered to man to be his own,
then he that offends God and man he cannot return into favor with him,
before he be reconciled to his neighbor. As Christ manifestly bears
witness, Matthew. 5. Wherefore it is needful and a work worthy regard, that I
should forthwith show that the love of God and The love of God and our
neighbor cleaves together
our neighbor cannot be separated, which is the true and most clear shining
fountain of brotherly love. The words 1 Ioh. 4. If any man say that he loves
God and hates his brother, he is a liar: For he that loves not his brother
whom he sees, how can he love God whom he sees not? And this commandment we
have of God, that he that loves God, should love his neighbor also. Which
Sentence teaches the same that we exhorted even now, That the love of God
cannot consist without the love of our neighbor. Whence also flows or
follows this saying, He that sincerely without hypocrisy, loves God, loves
his neighbor with the same love: But contrariwise, he that loves, or can
love either of both with false and fained affection, loves neither of them
truly. Whereby it comes to pass, that the love of our neighbor is a sort of
divine love, and that which is no other then a Loadstone pointing out the
sincerity or hypocrisy of it. Wherefore we shall not err if we shall speak
of a double The double scope of man.
scope or end prefixed to man, whereunto all the actions of his life are to
tend, as to certain tools, which we ought to imitate and use: I say, charity
of God and our neighbor, whereunto all our studies ought to obey and be
bestowed, and we ought to profit and make progress therein more and more
daily, seeing that we are to this end created, redeemed, and sanctified,
although The charity of God is manifest in the incarnation of Christ.
perhaps it is more fit to say, Christ is our scope, to whom we are so much the
nearer joined in neighborhood, as we are nearer him in charity. For by this
counsel God is made man that he might set before our eyes a living and
breathing image of his love, and that he should show his love to be in the
inscrutable, incomprehensible essence, infintie and divine, that men should be
transformed through Charity into this image of God, which is Christ.
Furthermore, The bond of charity.
as in Christ God and man are bound together by an undissolveable knot: ^o the
Charity of God contains in it the Charity of our neighbor; which are and be
no more easily dis-joynted and pulled asunder, then the divine and humane
nature in Christ: so that he which has injured the humane nature of Christ,
the same man is held guilty of the divinity: and he which offends man, is
declared guilty God is offended in our neighbor.
to offend God; nor any man, the bond of charity being broken, can be angry
with his neighbor, separate himself from him, but by that divorce he
declineth from God, and sins against him. Let us show that which we teach by
a similitude: Even as he that by the middle circle draws lines every way
from the circle about, or out circle, begins at the same or from the said
circle, but uniteth and gathers together all the near joining points in the
center, from whence it must needs depart, if we will take any away from
another: so God is a center, as it were, or a certain center from which he
departs, that separateth himself from the charity of his neighbor, but he
that will continue near unto him, he must relieve him, and participate by a
sympathy with him in his Compassion out of charity.
afflictions and miseries: for if he do otherwise, it is manifest, in God he is
not, who is as it were in a center wherein all lines are coupled together. And
to this place belongs the history of Job, which does insinuate what we spoke
erewhile in a most gallant, divine, or mystical way. Therefore when it was told
Job by a messenger, that he was overthrown and spoiled of all his goods and
livelihood, he said, The Lord gave it, the Lord has taken away; Let the Lords
name be blessed; bearing such and so great a loss moderately. But when it was
told him that he had lost all his children, even then he was much more moved,
and began to rent his garments. Let a true Christian do so or the like, when
he hears of the calamity of his neighbor, whom the children of Job do
represent, let him know that must be more grievous unto him, then if that
affliction had touched his fields. For the property of true love is to be more
moved with other men's miseries, then his own. Therefore O happy The happy life
in or of love.
mankind, if we could all live in love, frauds would cease, injuries would not
be known, neither would there a man be found to vex another, or complain of
damage. Truly, that we might think of this, therefore God Almighty in the
beginning of the world, when he had brought forth many beasts and plants, on
the other side created but one man, from him by and by producing Eva, that
humane kind derived from one stock or root, and mindful of his own original
and kindred, should conspire in love, and mutual affection one toward
another. The excellency of charity commanded by God to us, is only wanting,
that causes us to faint both in strength of body and mind, a thing most
convenient to our nature, and that which brings with it a most quiet life.
And if the same God Almighty had commanded thee to hate thy neighbor, then he
had set thee a far ha^der burden, and heavier yoke upon thee: for the hatred
and revengefulnesse of a mind of an enemy, does torment and cruciate it self.
On the other To love is more easy then to hate.
side, love only recreateth the whole man. Also, to those that love God, it is
a pleasant thing to love their neighbor; only it is hard and difficult to
those who do not love God. But if thy depraved nature hold it a hard matter to
settle it on the love of thy neighbor, bethink thy self, thou shall take in
hand a far harder task if thou incur the pangs of hell; which if thou had
rather to do, then be reconciled to thy neighbor, certainly then thou art
Reconciliation brings rest.
the most unhappy of all men alive; seeing it is no great labor, nor can be,
in reconciliation, which a man of small experience may understand. Even as
faith begets peace with God, Romans 5. so charity and reconciliation with a man,
makes our minds more quiet and easy. Contrariwise, hatred and revenge does
vex and torment them: For this is the property of all virtues, that he that
has them, of their own accord they increase in worthy esteem and honor: and
of vices, that they punish their favorers with the punishment which they
deserve. But how friendships are to be renewed, we are taught by Scripture,
which Virtue is a ^ word to it self.
commands the faulter to be reconciled to his neighbor, and ask pardon of
him; then to restore the thing taken from them, that is the thing it self, the
head or lot, and the fifth part over and above to him whom they have offended;
and if there be none Restitution is a part of repentance.
to receive it, to give it to the Lord. Which restitution of things taken away,
is commanded in express words, Numb. 5. and is part of true repentance.
Whereupon B. Augustine says, The sin is not remitted, unless the thing
taken be restored; and by and by, as a declaration of what he had spoken, he
adds, When the thing (says he) that is taken away, may be restored, and is
not restored, there is no repentance that is true, but fained. Because it is
the property of true repentance which converteth man unto God, to contemn all
earthly things, and esteem all things as dung, in respect of the grace of God
(that which Zacheus by his example teaches us to do, very few such are now to
be found) to cleanse their heart, to purge their consciences by faith and
restitution of the thing wrongfully detained. For which in the heart and in the
conscience he remains a thief before God, who keeps back He that restores
not, before God is a thief
and does not restore the thing taken away by theft; howsoever he cease to
steal any more thereafter. Wherefore that repentance may be true, and the
conscience may be pure, restitution is to be made as much as possibly may be;
or otherwise, he must pray to God with all his heart, that he would in his room
or place restore the things taken God is not reconciled unless there be first
restitution to our neighbor.
away to his neighbor. For seeing that a sinner is bound in two things, to God
and his neighbor, that his repentance may be full, both are to be satisfied,
God not acknowledging repentance unless a man be reconciled to his neighbor.
Therefore it suffices not, no, if thou shall say unto God, Most loving God, I
do acknowledge and confess that I have offended and done injury to my
neighbor, I have damaged him by wicked gain and fraud; and lastly, have dealt
so with him as I would not another should deal with me; which iniquity I
humbly entreat thee to pardon me for thy Sons sake. And even this prayer is
most unjust, which God repelleth nevertheless, and says, Restore that which
with fraud and usury thou have taken, and thy pardon shall be ready. Not indeed
as if a man after this manner should deserve remission; No, not so, but because
not this only is due to his neighbor, but many things more by him are owing
to his neighbor, and that because it is the divine decree, Matthew. 7.
Whatsoever Repentance without restitution is nothing
things you would that men should do unto you, do you the same unto them.
Also, Luke 6. The same measure that you measure to others, shall be measured to
you again. Matthew. 5. Go first, and reconcile thy self unto thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. Isa. chap. 1. Wash ye, and be clean, take away
the evil of your thoughts from mine eye, cease to do perversely, learn to do
good, seek after judgment, aid the oppressed, judge the Orphan, defend the
widow. And come argue with me, says the Lord. If your sins were as scarlet,
they shall be made white as snow; and if they shall be as red as blood, they
shall be as white as wool. And chap. 58. And is not this that which I have
chosen rather then fasting? Unbind the bonds of impiety, loose the bonds of
oppression, let them go free that are bound, and unlade every burden that is
burdensome or heavy, break thy bread to the hungry, and bring the wayfaring
man and the needy into thy house; when thou see one naked, cover him, or
cloth him, and do not despise thine own flesh. Then shall thy light break
forth as the morning, and thy salvation shall arise betimes, and thy justice
shall go before thy face, and the glory of the Lord shall gather thee
together. All which with one voice do cry, That God will not accept the
repentance of any man, or his prayer, unless he first be reconciled to his
neighbor.

CHAP. XXX. Of the fruits of Love.
1 Cor. 13. Charity is patient, courteous, charity striveth not, it does no
wrong, it is not puffed up, it is not disdainful, it seeks not his own, it
is not easily provoked, it thinks no evil, it rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth: it suffers all things, it believes all things, it
hops all things, it sustaineth all things.
EVen as in the midst of Paradise the Tree of Life was planted, the fruits
whereof whosoever should eat, he should lead an immortal life, according to
that of Genesis 3. Now therefore lest he hap to put his hand thereto, and take of
the Tree of life, and The life of the faithful is Christ
eat, and live for ever, the Lord God sent him out of the Paradise of pleasure,
that he might labor the earth from whence he was taken. So Almighty God, in
the midst of the Paradise of the Christian Church, set Christ Jesus, that all
the faithfulll from him might draw life and spirit, and be comforted. For all
Christian discipline consists in Faith and Charity; and the sum of
Christian life in general, by reason of faith in Christ, is pleasant and
acceptable to God: So in like manner we cannot approve or allow of the reasons
of our neighbor, but through charity. And so true it is, that all virtues
without charity, are nothing, and dead, that faith it self is not excepted; which
although it only justifies when it only apprehends the merit of Christ,
neither in the business of justification any reason of works going before,
present; or to come, or to follow, but Christ only is accounted of, yet it is
most sure, where charity does not follow, there is not true faith, but
hypocritical, although it work by miracles. For even as a body destitute of a
soul, is dead; so the spiritual or inward man, whose members are virtues, if
charity be wanting, with all his members ought to be accounted for dead.
Whereupon B. Paul has set it as a Loadstone of faith, and such faith does
require as works by charity. Truly I know well, in the work of justification,
that faith without works does consist, Romans 4. but that it should want works, I
profess it cannot be, when it shall have to do amongst men in the market of
charity. Wherefore to the Galatians, chap. 5. it is called Faith which works
by charity. And 1. Cor. 13. the fruits of this most beautiful Tree are
remarked to be fourteen. And the first of these is Patience and
Long-suffering, whose nature and constitution no man better expresses, then
Christ himself the true tree of life, whose goodly fruits we ought to eat, and
turn them into the juice and blood of Christ. Therefore even as he by his
wonderful long-suffering, did bear the malice and sin of the world, that he
might allure and draw sinners to repentance, Romans 2. So then also order thy
life and manners that the most gentle Christ may live in thee, and thou in him,
as a member united to his head, and breathe together. The second fruit is
Benignity, or well-doing, which was chief and principal in Christ, according
to Psalm 45. All grace did drop from thy lips. And Luke 4. They wondered at the
words of grace which proceeded out of his lips. Which do thou hear, that thou
may follow, and to cause thee love thy neighbor, Christ will speak by thy
mouth, and thou shall remain united to him in perpetual charity. The third
fruit is, not to be emulous, or revengefull, but to remit and pardon, then
which nothing is more proper to God, Psalm. 103. David says, He will not be
angry for ever, threaten thee eternally. He has not done to us according to
our offenses, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. To which like is
that of Ezekiel, chap. 18. If the wicked shall repent him of all his sins and
iniquities that he has wrought, he shall live by his life, and shall not die;
I will not remember all his iniquities which he has wrought. And in Jeremy 31.
In perpetual love have I loved thee, therefore have I drawn thee to me in
mercy: I will have pity on them, I will be reconciled as concerning their
iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more. And in Esaias, chap. 43. I
am, I am he that blotteth out thy iniquities for my own sake, and I will not
remember thy sins. Therefore do thou the same, remit, I say, pardon, and
forget thy neighbor, and in like manner Christ will pardon thine offenses, and
thou shall have his Spirit, and shall remain in him. The fourth fruit is, not
to mis-judge thy neighbor, nor causelessly, or crookedly, or perversely to
deride thy neighbor before others, or by sycophantizing or collusion, to
damnifie him: but contrariwise, let thy heart be seen in thy brow, and do all
things ingenuously and clearly, without hypocrisy. Example whereof Christ
gives unto us, who carried himself equally to his friends and foes; and from
the bottom of his heart would that all should be most rightly guided, both in
deeds and counsel: in which footsteps whosoever does insist, in him does
remain the candor and ingenuity of Christ. Therefore let all of us from the
heart study the good of others, by which means we shall remain united as true
members to Christ our head. The fifth fruit is, Not to be puffed up, to insult
or wax proud, but behold Christ Jesus the tree of life, to whom the woman, Luke
11. with a loud voice in a great assembly and concourse, was bound to say,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck: He turned
this praise most worthily due, from himself to them that feared and loved God;
yea rather subjecting himself, saying, Happy are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it. And this is the character of true love, to transfer all his
praises due to himself, upon his neighbor: which if thou, after the example of
Christ, do resolve to do, then truly humble Christ lives in thee, and thou
in him. In the sixth place, true charity is not cruel, not disdainful, not
rough, not discourteous in manners, but tempered, and composed to all humanity:
which Charity Christ used, according to the prophecy of Esaias, chap. 42. who
was not rigid nor turbulent, but with admirable gentleness and sweetness of
tongue, he accommodated The worship of God profits not God, but our selves.
himself to his neighbor, and commanded the same to others. Whosoever
studieth to imitate him, he is transformed into his Image, and is united by an
everlasting conspiration. The seventh fruit of love is, Not to seek that which
is his own, nor to have nothing more acceptable or pleasing, then gratis, or
without expectation to serve others, and as much as he can to be helpful to
others: that which only God most abundantly performs, giving all things to
us freely, and commanding his worship and fear unto us, not for his own sake,
but that we might receive the fruit of his divine love, and carry away the
blessing thereby. So Christ had no recompense but only the cause of our
salvation: neither did he come to be ministered unto, but to minister unto us;
and like unto the tree which without envy or respect of persons does give his
fruits such as he has received of God, first to all men indifferently, does
wholly spend himself unpon us: yea, God himself in Christ has reached himself
with all his gifts to humane kind, and delivered it by a right of property to
have and possess them in this thing, openly making himself to be the chief
good, which needs must be most specially in communicating himself; he who
studieth to make himself like unto him, he shall be a plantation of the Lord
to his glory, Esaias 61. and Christ shall bud and flourish in him a living vine,
and a Palm always flourishing, or waxing green. The eighth fruit of love is,
not to be provoked to anger, not to be inflamed with anger, nor that which
makes man no man, to utter wrath conceived by cursing and railing speeches,
but to imitate Christ Jesus, which did not cry out or open his mouth, witness
Esaias, cha. 42. nor any kind of bitterness, but spoke mere benediction and
life. And although he did denounce threats against Chorazin, Capernaum, and
Bethsaida, and against the Pharirisees themselves, uttering many woes against
them, yet it came not from a cruel or vengeative mind, it was a serious and
severe exhortation to repentance. Therefore let us be wary lest any root of
bitterness springing again, do hinder our charity, and many be offended
thereby, Heb. 12. The ninth fruit of charity is, Not to think any evil, which
is the property of Almighty God, as he testifies, Jeremy 39. I know the
thoughts which I think of you, or concerning you, the thoughts of peace and not
of affliction, that I may give an end, and have patience. Seek me and you shall
find me, when you shall seek me with your whole hearts. Whereupon it
follows, He that has the thoughts of peace toward his neighbor, has the
heart of God, and the understanding of Christ, and as a living member knit unto
his head, is inspired of him. Tenthly, It rejoices not in iniquity, nor in the
injury or oppression of injustice, as wicked Shimei did when David fled from
Absalom, but it imitates Christ Jesus, who with most tender compassion
beholding Peter's perjury, did with his most benign aspect rectify him
according to the Psalm. 146. God does raise them that ^^e fallen: who deplored
the evil that was to befall the men of Judea, and the destruction of the
Jews: lastly, who with all his heart desired to bring his wandering and lost
sheep into their way, and that which was in him, with a sweet and most gentle
voice did allure them home. Let us imitate this so great a Master of love, and
if any be fallen from his love, let us deplore him after this manner, Let us
instruct him in the spirit of love and lenity, and help to bear his burden,
that we may fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. His law, I say, that first did
bear the burden of our sins, and let him be in us as in true members of our
head, life, sense and spirit. The eleventh fruit, Does rejoyee together with
the truth, and where all things are done rightly and decently; after the
example of Christ, who at the return of his seventie disciples at their well
doing rejoiced very heartily, and confessed himself to his heavenly Father;
and also the Angels in heaven do rejoice, as Christ teaches, at the return of
a sinner: which if we do the like, then truly we have the understanding of God
and Angels. The twelfth fruit of charity is to suffer all things, as may
appear by this bond of peace, after the example of blessed Paul, I am made
weak with the weak, that I might profit the weak: I am made all things with all
men, that I may save all men. The same believes all things, suspecting no
evil of his neighbor; hops all things, praying that nothing may fall amiss
to his neighbor: lastly, It sustaineth all things, that it may go so much the
better with his neighbor, and more profitable. All which our Savior by a
lively example of his life did teach us, by bearing most heavy injuries and
reproaches for our sins, as also most inhumane scourgings, and extreme poverty
and hunger, that we in him and by him, might obtain joy and honor. The
thirteenth fruit of love is, Not Gods love is eternal.
to be weary, nor to cease. Like unto God, whose mercy from eternity to
eternity is upon those that fear him, Psalm 103. who respects not that he
may have mercy on us, and rose up to spare us, Esaias 30. whose love is strong as
death, Cant. 4. which many waters cannot extinguish, Cant. 8. Lastly, from
which nothing can separate us, Romans 8. who has mercy on us with everlasting
mercies. Isa. 54. And although, Jer. 15. he denies that henceforth he can have
mercy, to those only it pertains who repel obstinately the divine mercies,
contemn his grace, and abuse them with high contempt, but not to those that
fear him, according to that of Esa. 54. The mountains shall be moved, and the
little hills shall tremble, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and the
covenant of my peace shall not be moved: Thy merciful Lord has spoken it. To
which example also we must comply our love, that it be never weary, no not
toward our enemy, but even as Christ prays in us.
Christ did live and prayed, let Christ in us say, Father forgive them.

Last of all, love is the Head and Queen of all virtues, because God himself
is love, and because it is the end of the commandments, and sum or collection
of the Law; and because it is eternal; neither will it vanish with faith,
hope, tongues, and so forth, our happiness appearing, which is the end of
faith; because it works all things, and all virtues without it are as
nothing; and last of all, because it will give us testimony through faith in
Christ, that we shall have eternal happiness: Whereupon it follows, that
Christian charity must needs excel all Gifts and Arts whatsoever, according to
that of the Ephesians, chap. 3. To know the supereminent love of the knowledge
of Christ, that you may be filled in all fullness of Christ.

CHAP. XXXI. Self-love and Arrogancy, is as Ink upon white Ivory, spotting and
defiling the greatest and most excellent gifts.
1 Corinthians. 13. If I should speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have
not love, I shall be as a tinckling Cymball, or sounding brass.
LEst any man should marvel that Saint Luther of the Church. part. 2. fol. 13.
Paul does adorn Charity with so many praises, you must know that God himself
is love; and consequently, like praise to belong to both: neither greater or
more ample virtue to be found in man or in God himself. Now that which
respects our neighbor is twofold, one true, living, sincere and clear; the
other, hypocritical and dissembled, or cloaked. The first St. True love and
false.
Paul describes by a most ample catalogue, and an account of the fruits and
properties thereof added thereunto: the latter with all his words, gifts and
works, abused as a Bawd, to and for private gain and honor: And howsoever in
outward show it seems to affect divine and humane good and profit, yet
inwardly and in his heart he respects nothing but his private profit, and
honor, and wealth; and whatsoever flows from this fountain, comes not from
God, but from the Devil, and it What arises not of charity, arises not of
God.
is poison, infecting all good works, and the most excellent gifts. For as a
flower in sight, taste, and smell, most beautiful and sweet, if it retain any
venom, is not approved by the beauty of the color, nor pleasantness of
smell, nor sweetness, because it is deadly or hurtful to man, if it be not
foreseen: So man, if he be adorned with the gifts of Angels, and if he be full
of avarice, pride, self-love, and arrogance, then those gifts do not only
fail in their fruits, but become pernicious: for that which is good indeed,
ought to have God in the beginning and ending: who as he is the only author of
every good thing, What is good.
so whatsoever he works in thee, is truly that only good. But it is
otherwise, if arrogance, self-love, the desire of honor, or private profit,
shall have any design in it: for when it comes not from God, his impulsion
and provocation, it can never be good. Therefore God alone is good, also love
it self, by which all good is conveyed to our neighbor through love, no
otherwise then from God to our selves, this necessarily comes to pass. It is
said, that a certain Saint of old should wish, that he should be of no other
use unto God, then his own right hand was unto him; which seeing it was nothing
but an instrument, aptly to give and receive what was fit, and consequently
arrogateth neither honor nor glory to it self. And indeed it is meet we all
should be such; and because all things come from God to us freely, in like
manner we should render all things to our neighbor in single simplicity, and
without the desire of vainglory, and praise, out of pure love: for unto God
alone, as to the author, is honor and glory due; but unto us nothing at all:
we are only instruments created and made fit to receive and deliver; which if
any be without this sincere charity, he with all his gifts is nothing: So I
say, Although he speak with the tongues of Angels, can prophecy, know all
mysteries, and all knowledge, and had never so much faith, even that it would
remove mountains, and give all that he has to the poor; lastly, give
himself to be burned, Self love and arrogance was the fall of the Devil.
1 Cor. 13. For all self-love, that is, the desire of honor, and praise, and
private profit, is of the Devil, and was his Apostasy by which he fell from
heaven, and for which he was worthily driven from thence. For when God had
created Lucifer the most beautiful Angel, and adorned him with most excellent
gifts of wisdom, light, glory, and riches, he began to admire himself in his
gifts, as a Peacock does admire himself, to love, honor, and praise himself,
which was the first step to his ruin, even to give honor to himself, not to
God, and to turn his love from God to himself: whereupon he was worthily cast
out of heaven, with all his companions, which his pride by contagion had
infected: neither was he contented with his principality amongst Angels,
according to that of Saint Jude, The Angels which kept not their principality.
And that of Saint Paul to the Colossians, chap. 2. Spoiling Principalities and
Powers, traduced them confidently, And of man.
and openly triumphing over them in himself. Now by what sin Lucifer
procured his own ruin, he was the cause and perswader by the same sin, of
the loss of mankind, turning him from the love of the honor of God, to
himself; whereby followed self-love and arrogance, such and so great, even to
affect the similitude of God, whereby consequently he was no otherwise cast
out of Paradise, then Lucifer out of Heaven, leaving to us all the heritage of
arrogance and self-love. And this is the fall and Apostasy of Adam, which all
men in like manner do iterate, and with flesh and blood give and deliver every
one to other the same: the means of amendment, and cure whereof, can and ought
no other ways be sought and obtained, but by the merit of Christ apprehended
by faith, whereby thenceforth we are renewed in Christ, and our flesh is
crucified, neither now do we love our selves any more, but Denying our selves
necessary.
hate our selves, Luke 9. that is, all our own works do begin to displease us,
we do not honor our selves, or bear out our selves, but deny our selves, Luke
14. that is, we set naught by our selves; lastly, we do not now seek our
singular praise and glory, but by denying all things that we have, place our
pleasure and trust in no earthly thing; and likewise do fight and strive with
flesh and blood our inward enemies, which whosoever has not, nor does not, as
abovesaid, he neither is nor can be the Disciple of Christ, seeing by this
means in serious and true repentance, the conversion of humane nature must be
changed. Moreover, seeing that means is greater then the strength of man, which
of it self, and by its nature, can do nothing but love it self, favor it
self, and boast, and cannot forbear By the incarnation of Christ our nature
is renewed.
to seek his own ends, or to speak in a word, to sin: therefore it behooves
God to be the beginning, middle, and end and prop, the Son of God to take the
form of a man upon him, and consequently to renew our nature, that thereby
every one of us being regenerate, by him, in him, and from him, we become a new
creature: for even as in Adam we were dead bodily and spiritually, so it
behooves us in Christ to rise and be spiritually renewed. Even as by carnal
nativity we entered upon the sin of Adam, as a certain heritage: so in Christ by
a spiritual birth and faith we must be justified. Finally, as radically we
draw from Adam sin, self-love, arrogance, and ambition; New Birth is found
in Christ
so from Christ by faith, and the holy Ghost, our nature is to be renewed and
sanctified; all self-love, arrogance and ambitition to die in it: and it
behooves us to get a new heart and spirit from Christ, as we have from Adam
flesh subject to sin. And of this new birth Christ is called Father eternal,
or of the future Age, Isa. chap. 9. The works of Christians ought to proceed
from the new birth.
Whereupon it follows consequently, that all the works of Christians, and
gifts which shall be acceptable to God, ought to proceed from the new creature,
that is, from faith in Christ, and the holy Ghost; which if it be not so done,
whatsoever things, although they be most excellent gifts, and even miracles
themselves, before God they are void, and to no purpose. And toward our
neighbor all things ought to be done in charity, 1 Cor. 14. and without hope
of proper gain, or honor. For example of which, and a most excellent pattern,
God Almighty offered, and gave us his Son, in whom there was no self-love,
no arrogance: lastly, no desire of private profit, or praise, or glory, and
nothing but sincere and mere love and humility; neither also as other Saints
was he proposed to us to imitate, because their example was from without, and
so to behold, or renew; but that he might by faith live and breath in us:
which when it comes to pass, even then all our works, words, and so our
knowledge do proceed from Christ as from a living foundation and original; if
otherwise, then all our works and gifts, if they be Angelical, or of what kind
soever, they are nevertheless nothing worth. For where self-love is, there
the hatred of God is; where arrogance, there the contempt of God, where by no
reason it can come to pass, that works springing from thence, should be
acceptable to God. Let us therefore do this, let us beseech Almighty God from
the bottomes of our hearts, to give us faith and sincere love, contaminated
with no desire of honor, profit, or glory, but proceeding from a pure heart;
which being obtained, not only illustrious gifts and works, but the least
also, even a cup of cold water, will be most dear and acceptable to God: For a
small work that proceeds Charity makes the least work great.
from sincere charity, and humility, is most excellent, and better then all
great ones, that have their original from the desire of pride and glory.

CHAP. XXXII. Not great gifts, but faith that works by charity, does show a
man a Christian, and acceptable to God.
1 Cor. 4. The Kingdom of God is not in talk, but in virtue.
BLessed Paul going about to describe a Christian man, in brief finishing the
thing, says, 1 Timothy 1. The end of the law is charity God does not require
great knowledge.
from a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned: as if he should
say, That any man may be made a Christian, and ^cceptable to GOD, are not
required hard and lofty matters, no worldly wisdom, no humane learning, no
gifts, no eloquence, no knowledge of tongues; lastly, no miracles; but that he
have faith in charity to do all things, resigned to God, devout and well
addicted, and not careless of the motions and rule of the holy Ghost.
Wherefore let us not much regard, that What it is to mortify the flesh.
any one is expert in the tongues, and how eloquent he is, but how he shows
forth his faith by love, and mortifying of the flesh: For they that be Christ's,
do mortify the flesh with the concupiscence thereof, that is to say,
arrogance, self-love, covetousness of glory, proper gain, hunting after
praise, whereupon blessed Paul denies the Kingdom of God to consist in words,
or gifts and Arts, but in virtue, or living exercise of virtue in faith, as
charity, lowliness, and humility. Therefore Before God nothing avails but a
new creature
no man, I say, no man is in greater grace with God, or blessed, because he is
endued with great gifts, but because he is found in Christ by faith, and
lives in him as a new creature. And if any man have Great gifts od not make a
man happy.
attained unto so great and such gifts, as no man else, neglecting daily
repentance, he is not renewed in Christ; and if he deny not the world, although
he have never so many gifts, if he despise not himself, nor hate himself;
last of all, do depend upon the pure and sole grace of God, no otherwise then
an infant depends of the pap, he with all his Arts and Gifts shall be damned,
it is a thing most manifest. For neither are those given us of God, that by
them before God we should be great or blessed, but for the edification of the
To what end gifts are given of God.
Church. Therefore when (Luke 10.) the seventy Disciples returned with joy,
saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us in thy name; Christ
answers, Do not rejoice in this, for neither miracles nor gifts shall save
us; but rejoice that your names are written in the book of life; that is,
because you believe and acknowledge me. By faith Moses was saved, not by hi^
miracles: and Miriam the sister of Moses, being endued with ^he gift of
prophecy, and by whom the Spirit of the Lord did speak, was punished with
Leprosy. Finally, the Apostles, not because of their miracles, or tongues
sake, but for their faith, were made Citizens of Heaven. Let us remain, I say,
let the least and the greatest remain in faith, humility, ^epentance, in
crucifying and mortifying of the flesh, and in the new creature (which as in
Christ in faith and charity it lives, so in like manner Christ lives in it)
So let us be found, that Christ may acknowledge us for his. Let Christian
Charity remain to be that new life of the new man; yea the life of Christ in
the faithful, and that efficacious and working power of the holy Ghost, by
which Saint Paul, Ephesians. 3. wishes us to be filled in all fullness of God.
Like unto that of Saint John, God is Love, and he that remains in love,
remains in God. Whereupon it follows, that he that feels love in his
heart, feels God himself: Where, as a certain forerunner, or
leading-starre, it is present; therefore Saint Paul, as a tree from the root
whereof, with all the fruits thereof, describes it in 1 Corinthians. chap. 13.
Charity (says he) is patient, etc. All which are the properties of
Christians, and consequently the life of the new man. And to speak in a word,
God the Father is Love, God the Son is Love, God the holy Ghost is Love; the
whole mystical body, who is Christ, or the Christian Church, is bound together
in the bond of Love: So there is but one God, one Christ, one Spirit, one
Baptism, one Faith; and lastly, the happy and sempiternall life shall be
nothing but mere love. Wherefore he that lives not in Charity, this man is a
dead member of Christ manifestly, if he be in the body of Christ. For even as
a dead member is not warmed with natural heat, nor nourished; and for that
cause is altogether without life: So he that lives not in charity, has not
the spiritual life of Christ, but is dead to God and Christ, because he is
without faith, and is a dry tree without juice from the Vine, which is Christ,
and to be cut off: lastly, He that has no charity, is dead.
without God, Christ, and the holy Ghost, the Christian Church, and life
eternal, where God face to face shall be seen, which is love it self.

CHAP. XXXIII. God gives no respect to the works of the persons, he judges
and esteems the work according to the heart.
Prove. 21. Every way of a man seems right to himself, but God tries the
heart.
WHen the Prophet Samuel, by the commandment of God, went to anoint David
King, he entered his Fathers house, and would have anointed his firstborn, the
Lord said, Do not thou respect his countenance, nor the height of his stature,
being I have rejected him, neither do I judge according to the countenance of
a man: for a God judges all things by the heart.
man sees those things that are open and evident, but the Lord beholds the
heart. By which example God teaches us, that he has no regard to any person,
although never so great and illustrious, when his heart is void of goodness,
love, faith, and humility, but to esteem of the works by the inward spirit and
intention of the mind, and to allow them according as it is in the 21. of the
Prove. Moreover, all gifts, how great soever, illustrious, praiseworthy, and
excellent they are in the judgment of the world, unless they proceed from a
pure heart, unless they respect the sole honor of God, and the profit of our
neighbor; lastly, unless they be free, and altogether separated from pride,
arrogance, self-love, desire of private praise and glory, they cannot please
God. Therefore whosoever thou art, O man, be assured and certainly Arrogancy
corrupts all gifts.
persuaded, that if God should bestow on thee alone all the gifts he has
bestowed on all men, yet if thou should not use them to the profit of thy
neighbor, and honor of God, to which end God bestowed them upon men, but
should use them as certain instruments of praise, glory, honor, and lucre,
God would abhor them no otherwise then the greatest sins. This you may
learn from the example of Lu^ifer, a fairer and more beautiful Angel heaven
had not, who when he vilified the gifts of God with his own honor and
self-love, and did not purely respect the love and glory of God, by his own
act he became a Devil, and was cast from heaven. Therefore those things which
God will accept and account well of, ought to proceed out of faith alone, and
most pure love of God and men, and ought to be void of all self-love,
arrogance, and private gain, so much as may be by the grace of God in this
infirmity: whereof Saint Paul writes; If I speak with the tongues of Men and
Angels, and have not charity, I am as a sounding brass and a tinckling
Cymball; that is, I am in vain, and altogether unprofitable. In truth God
regards no faculty but in humble hearts, not arts, not much learning, but
whether our spirit does seek the honor of God, and Miraculous faith and saving
faith differ.
edification of our neighbor: not a miraculous faith to remove mountains for
glory sake, but the pure and contrite in spirit, trembling at his word, as it
is read in Isa. 66. not lastly, if any covetous of fame and renown, do
distribute all he has to feed the poor, and give his body to be burned alive;
but the heart and the cause of them all. That which is manifest by many
examples to be brought. Cain and Abel both of them brought Sacrifices Differing
sacrifices.
to God, one of them acceptable, the other was execrable, by reason of the
disparity of minds. The same reason was of David and Saul, both which attended
Gods service, but with unlike event for the foresaid cause. David, Manasses,
Nebuch adnezzar, and Peter, by repentance obtained grace; contrariwise, Saul,
Pharaoh, Unequal repentance.
and Judas, did miss the same by reason of the same variety of mind: Pharaoh,
and Saul, and Manasses used the same prayer, Lord, I have sinned, they received
unlike rewards. Judith and Hester, and the daughters of Israel, Esaias 3. they
adorned themselves, and combed themselves, with praise and renown the one, the
other dispraise and reprehension. In like manner the prayer of Hezekia, Josua,
and Gideon, by which they required a sign from heaven, as approved is praised:
Contrariwise, the Pharisees, Mat. 12. doing the same are reproved of the Lord.
The Publican and the Pharisee, both of them pray in the Temple, not approved.
The Ninivites and the Jews, and Pharisees, do fast alike, but the one God
heard, the other he heard not: wherefore (Isai. 58.) they cry; Wherefore have
we fasted, and thou regardest us not? The Widow which brought into the
Treasury, two small Mites, is praised of Christ; he that gave more, was not.
Herod and Zacheus in the sight of Christ do rejoice, but had most differing
rewards. The holy Martyrs for Christ suffered death; Achab and Manasses offer
unto the Lord their own children, and God accepted the sacrifice of the one,
and the other was rejected. Which variety proceeds from no other cause, then
from the heart, which God only respects: whereupon he only accepts those
works which come from a heart unfeigned and sincere charity, and free humility:
Contrariwise, whatsoever gifts they be, if arrogance, self-love, and the
contagion of lucre do infect them; he rejects them.

CHAP. XXXIV. That a man does nothing at all to his salvation, but God does all
things to us, only we admit of his grace, as a sick man does his Medicines; to
those without repentance the merit of Christ is not imputed.
1 Corinthians. 1. Christ is made unto us the Wisdom of God, and justice, and
sanctification, and Redemption.
BY this Sentence Saint Paul teaches us what things are necessray for our
salvation, by Christ all things are done for us. For when we were ignorant of
the way of life, he was made wisdom unto us; when we were sinners, our
justice; when we were abominable, our sanctification; lastly, when A man cannot
help himself.
we were damned, our redemption. Whereupon it remains, that the man does not
confer one jot to the beginning, middle and end of his salvation with all his
merits of works, strength and free will: But sin he could of himself, but he
could not justify himself again; lose, but not recover; kill, but not raise
again to life; be subdued to the Devil, but not set free from him again. For
even as a dead carcass cannot quicken it self again; so neither can a man, as
the Apostle says to the Ephesians, chap. 2. which was dead in sin, help
himself. Also, even as we did not bring so much as a hair to our creation, so
neither to our redemption, or regeneration and sanctification, which are much
greater, and more noble then our creation it self: Wherefore The cause of the
incarnation of the Son of God.
it was necessary, that the Son of God should take humane nature upon him, to
recover that which was lost in Adam, to revive that which was dead in him;
which that it may be brought to effect accordingly, we must imitate the
Traveller, which is cruelly handled, and wounded, and laid upon the ground, and
could not help himself; him therefore the merciful Samaritan takes up, and
binds up his soars, and then lays him upon a horse, leads him into the
Stable, and after that omitteth nothing which an industrious and faithful
Physician can administer to a sick person. And as the Traveller also shows
himself observant to his Physician, and Christ i^ our Physician, not we our
selves.
observes his beck and command: so let us remember to do the like, if we
desire to be healed: Let us do our full diligence and power to our Physician
Christ; let us resign our selves wholly unto him, let us trust in his faith,
that he will bind up and cure our wounds; also, let him power in Wine and Oil
into them: neither will he be wanting, or fail to restore us to our former
health: that is, so soon as a sinner repe^teth, converteth himself by heavenly
grace to God, is grieved from his heart for his sins, and resists not that
his wounds should be washed in the sharp wine of contrition; and lastly, to be
anointed with the Oil of Consolation: then presently Christ by his grace does
work and bring forth faith in him, and the fruits of faith, as life, peace,
joy, consolation and happiness, renewing him after his own image, and working
in him to will and finish according to his good will, Phil. 2. For seeing that
the abundance of sins are greater then humane nature can bear, as witnesses
the Scripture, which John 8. pronounces the natural man the servant of sin,
and Romans 7. sold under sin, and can do nothing but sin, according to that
of Jeremy 13. If the Ethiopian can change his hue, or the The natural man
neither can nor will do do any good.
Leopard his spots, and you can do well, and forget to do evil: therefore
the singular grace of God appeared to all men by his Gospel, teaching us (by
the words of Paul to Tit. 2.) that denying all impiety and worldly desires, we
may live a just and sober life in this present world. As if he should say, by
the The grace of God does all things in us.
word of God grace is offered unto us, and does instruct, inlighten, allure,
and teach us heartily to move and provoke us to desist from sin, which
teaching of the divine grace, or joint warning by the Word, consents with the
inward testimony of the conscience, whereby the man both from without and
within is convicted that he does evil, and of leading a life against the way
of God, and his conscience, he ought to change it to better, let him know this
if he would be saved. Furthermore, if he will bend his ears and mind, and
being full of good hope, denounce war against vice, then the grace of God Man
is mere darkness Christ is mere light.
works all things in man, as faith, charity, and all the fruits of faith. For
as darkness cannot lighten it self, and the Sun not shining we do in vain
open our eyes: so neither can man inlighten himself, according to that in
Psalm 13. O Lord thou give light unto my Lanthorn and my darkness. But the
divine Grace, or Christ himself, is the clear light which is risen to all men
sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death, How the true light light^^s
all men.
which inlightneth all men (or every man) that comes into this world; that is,
by manifesting himself, and offering his grace; He, I say, is the light of the
world, showing to all men the way of life; and like a good Shepherd, guiding
his Flock into the right way, he sought us as his lost sheep, and daily even
now seeks us and allureth us; nay more follows us and embraces us after
the manner of a bride, or spouse that he loves, whose grace I would to god
most men did Christ as a Bridegroom imbraceth our souls.
not refuse, and give repulse to his love, and prefer the darkness of vice
before his light. And even as a Physician says to his sick Patient, Beware of
this if you will not dye: for you hinder the efficacy and force of the
medicine, that you cannot be made whole: so Jesus Christ, the true Physician
of our souls, says, My son, I pray thee incline thy mind to repentance, and
leave thy sins, Impeninitence hinders the efficacy of Christ's merits.
that pride, covetousness, concupiscence of the flesh, wrath, revenge, and
forsake them, or most certainly the honor of my merit shall profit thee
nothing, when thou art a hinderance that my grace cannot be sown in thee, that
it cannot increase in strength and bring forth fruit. Truly, for this very
cause I give my Apostles in charge, before all things, to preach repentance;
and I called Why repentance is to be preached before all things.
sinners to repentance, because an impenitent heart cannot participate of my
merits. Which speech, when a sick man hears the Physician of our souls, as
to abstain from sin, or else he must utterly perish; the word of God coming
expressly to his mind, let him know this, that it is most certain, that God has
promised remission of sins to all men gratis, but under this law and
condition, if they will convert themselves to God, according to that of Ezekiel
33. If the wicked shall repent him of his sins, he shall live the life and
not die: all the offenses which he has done, shall not be True faith.
imputed unto him: Wherein truly the repentance of sins is joined to
remission; neither does Christ the son of God in any other sense promise life
eternal to those that believe in him: For faith does always oppose it self
to the Old Man, tameth the flesh, and subjecteth it to the spirit, that is,
converteth the man, rooteth up and amendeth sins, and clears and purges
the heart, it being the fountain of all evil. Truly, this is true faith, that
I say, that turns it self from the world, from sins, and from the Devil
to Christ, and seeks solace and rest for his soul against the grieving debt
of his sins, in the only blood, death, and merit of Christ, without the
works of any man whatsoever. What man is so foolish to believe that his sins
are pardoned of God, although he do not desist from his sins, this man has
a false faith, neither ever shall he obtain everlasting life, unless he first
repent. The example of this doctrine is set forth by Zacheus the Publican, Luke
9. who understood the doctrine of faith and conversion in a sound sense,
acknowledging that only to be true faith, by which a man should be turned
from his sins to God, and which expected and hoped for the remission of sius
from Christ, and desired to participate of his merit, it behooves him to give
over sinning, and in firm trust of the divine grace, to cleave to the bounty of
Christ: and so he construed or understood the Sermon of Christ, Mark 1. Repent
and believe the Gospel, that is, desist from sinning, be ye filled with the
good hope of my merit, and expect the remission of sins from me only.
Wherefore Zacheus says to Christ, Behold, Lord, I give half of my goods unto
the poor: and if I have defrauded any man of any thing, I do restore it
fourefold. By which words he does not commend his works, no, but extolleth
grace, by which he was given to understand the way of true repentance;
therefore this sense has his prayer, O Lord, I am so grieved that I have
circumvented my neighbor, that I Acknowledgement of sin in faith does the
Son favor.
will restore unto him fourfold, and I will bestow half my goods upon the
poor. Wherefore seeing that I confess my sins, and likewise do fully
purpose in my mind, to leave my sins, and do firmly believe in thee, I do
pr^y and beseech thee to pardon me, and vouchsafe to circumvent me with thy
grace. Which lawful form of conversion, the heavenly Physician allowing and
receiving, he answers, This day is salvation come unto tby house. For the
Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost. And this is the true
repentance and conversion by faith which God works, therefore is the
beginning, middle, and ending; so that no other thing is required of us, then a
will not to resist the will of God, or voluntarily not resist the holy Ghost,
after the manner of the contumacious Jews, of which mention is made, Acts 17.
and 13. we read of those whom Saint Paul reproacheth in this manner, It
behooves us first to speak unto you the Word of God: but because you reject it,
and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life; behold, we turn us unto the
Gentiles. It is our part therefore after the manner of sick folks, to take the
counsel of the Physicians, and to obey their Precepts; and as he in the
beginning The process of spiritual cure.
of the disease does signify the pains to the Patient, so God la^eth open our
sins, as he does to the sick, and gently admonishes us what things are to be
avoided, that his medicines may exercise their full strength: so God does show
us what is to be declined, or avoided, lest the medicine of his most precious
blood be made void, and work nothing at all. Moreover, so soon as a man by the
grace of the holy Ghost, does forbear to sin, here upon A man of himself can
neither think nor do any good.
truly the grace divine does begin in him to work new gifts, which before and
without this would make no beginning, nor was sufficient by himself to think
any good thought, much less to do any good but from thence forth the good
that is in us, is not ours, but comes of divine grace, (according to that of
Saint Paul, Romans 12. I speak by the grace that is given me. And 1 Corinthians. 15.
By the grace of God I am that I am) and to us grace is freely imputed, with the
whole merit and the obedience of Imputation to whom it belongs
Christ, no otherwise then if it were our own, so we be penitent. Neither does
imputation, lest we err, belong to the wicked, and the contemners of the word
of God; neither does Christ work but in the penitent. And even as a
Schoolmaster leading the hand of a child that he learnes to write, and then
praises his writing; so God which in us does work crowns and commends those
things. Without me, says Christ, you can do nothing that is good; and we are
apt by nature without him to do the things that are evil; and this only is
proper to us: But that which is good is mere grace, neither has flesh any
thing whereon to boast. Therefore happy are you, O mortals, if you give your
minds to forbear sinning, and to consent unto God, no otherwise then a young
Virgin that gives her promise and faith to her Spouse that embraces her. And
Christ truly the Spouse of our souls, goes about or endeavors to manifest
in us that he is willing, Christ works the will in us.
or does consent by calling us so courteously to him in his Word and our
Conscience, I say, by seeking us, alluring us, and embracing us thinking no
such thing, as to desist from sin, lest his precious blood be spilt in vain
for us.

CHAP. XXXV. Without a holy and Christian life all Wisdom, all Arts and
Sciences, yea the knowledge of the whole Scripture and Theology is in vain.
Matthew 7. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.
BEcause in charity consist, or are contained all the duties of a Christian
man, and so all the life of Christ was nothing but a sincere and most pure
love; hereupon blessed Paul, 1 Cor. 13. under the name of Charity comprehends
the whole life of a Christian man. And it is the property of true charity to
respect God alone in all things, not to have the least respect to The property
of sincere charity.
his own honor or profit, but in all things gratis, and for that cause only,
because God is the chiefest good, and to do it for his honor and the good of
his neighbor. Which charity whosoever has not, he is a Who is an hypocrite.
true hypocrite: and when in all his works he respects only his own works,
and not God alone, it appears to be false love which he boasts of.
Therefore let us allow that this man understand the holy Bible without book, and
speak with the tongues of Angels, yet all these things shall profit him
nothing, but he shall be as a sounding Without charity all things profit
nothing
brass, or as a tinckling Cymball. For as no food can nourish the body,
unless it be turned into juice and blood: so the word of God and the
Sacraments are to no purpose, if they be not expressed in our life and The true
fruit of faith and the Sacraments.
works, neither is the new man any other then a man converted, holy and full of
charity. Therefore Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. If I could prophecy and know
all mysteries, and all knowledge, and all faith, so that I might remove
mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing. That is, if I should shadow mine
own honor under them, and expect any thing besides the honor of God, and the
good of my neighbor: therefore all are abomination and accursed before
Almighty God, according to that of Matthew. 7. Many Why God respects not the
gifts.
shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name,
and cast out Devils in thy Name, and have done many miracles in thy Name? And
then I shall say unto them, Because I know you not, depart from me The alms of
the ambitious is damnable.
you workers of iniquity, and you have not respected me sincerely, but your
selves. Of the like mind is Saint Paul, If I should give all that I have unto
the poor, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Even that love,
which exercises or shows liberality for Gods cause alone, and not for his
own praise or profits sake. Such as was the righteousness of the Pharisees,
who offered many sacrifices, and drew on others that they might adorn their
Temples with their gifts, and offer costly offerings, the slaverie of which
ambition drew them to forget the offerings of the poor, whose gifts ought
rather to be preferred out of pity alone. Which preposterous charity in them
Christ upbraideth, Matthew. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites,
because under long prayers you devour widows houses. In which perverse
religion there be now followers, which bequeath large legacies to Temples and
Monasteries, that their Clerks and Monks may make long prayers for them: which
truly is false love, seeking themselves; and, if you scan it well, not
respecting divine honor, but themselves. But we who know to live justly by
faith, let us rather be penitent, and offer our selves to God by mortifying and
crucifying our flesh, then all our works of charity, not out of self-love, nor
for the cause of praise or profit whatsoever; but let us do it for the love
and sincere love of God, being sure, if we do it otherwise, they will not
profit us a hair. Therefore, although thou give thy body to be burned, and
want love, which is due to God alone, and his praises and honor, thou do
nothing, says Saint Paul. Neither do they profit any more, which whip and
burn their bodies by humbling and afflicting their souls, as speaks Isai. 58.
because indeed they are conceited in their singular sanctity, and affect their
own proper praises, and their presumptuous religion, in their private
judgment, do not respect God, but applause, popular praise, and estimation,
whereby many of them are so blinded, God suffering them the work of error, 2 Thessalonians. 2. that they make no doubt to suffer themselves to be burned for the
defense of their False Martyrs
conceived heresy, and if God be pleased, to become Martyrs of Christ; when
yet they do not serve Christ but themselves, neither does the punishment but
the cause make a Martyr. Such Martyrs as these the Devil even amongst the
Ethnickes has, many were so blinded in their understanding, they were
contented to die for their Altars and Idols. And the same is done this day
amongst Christians, under the show of the Christian faith, seeing the Ethnicks
themselves to gain an immortal name, to persuade themselves they do well in
so doing. To whom for self-love and glory, or praise, there were like unto them
certain Monks, devout persons in our age, which are called Catholics, which
for the cause of propagating Religion, will persuade Princes and Monarchs, that
they are to do the like unto them, even die for the Catholics cause. Whose
madness is so much the more manifest, being they believe that they suffer for
Christ's cause, and they become his Martrys, when contrariwise they become the
Martyrs of Roman Bishops, and of their private renown and praise. And thus much
of coated or cloak charity, powerfully seduced and carried on by a false light.
It remains therefore, without the sincere love of God and our neighbor, and
a holy and Christian life, all Arts, Sciences, Faculties, profit nothing;
wisdom, how great soever, and if it be as great or greater then that which was
in Solomon, is nothing, the knowledge of the whole Scripture, and universal
Theology, is nothing; lastly, all works whatsoever, and Martyrdom it self, if
you will so call it: yea, to know the will of God, and his word, and to live
after the prescript rule thereof, that only augmenteth the guilt of eternal
damnation, according to that of Saint John, 15. If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had had no sin, but now they have no excuse for their sin.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of those that live not in Christ, but have their heart fixed to
the world, although they possess the outward letter of the Word, and do not
taste the inward force of it, and the hidden Manna.
Apocalypse 1. To him that overcomes I will give the hidden Manna, I will give
him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written; which no man knows
but he that receives it.
BY this Sentence it appears, we are taught, that no man does taste the
inward sweetness of the heavenly joy and solace hidden in the word of God,
which does not overcome his own flesh, and the Who be apt to taste heavenly
sweetness.
world, with all the pomps and concupiscences thereof, and lastly, the Devil
himself; that is to say, they who crucify their own flesh daily by their
serious contrition and repentance, with all the desires and concupiscence
thereof, who die to themselves and the world daily; lastly, to whom this life
is a mere cross: I say, these are divinely fed with heavenly Manna, and drink
the Nectar of Paradise. Contrariwise, those that follow none but worldly
pleasure, it is unprofitable for those to taste the hidden Contraries joy not
together.
Manna. For like things are delighted in their like; and seeing that the word
of God is spiritual, it is no marvel if worldly minds be not delighted
therewith. For even as the soul receives no strength of the food which the
stomach has not concocted: so the soul, of the divine Word, or Manna,
receives no strength, unless it be converted into it self, that is, into
life. Yea, as a man sick of a Fever distasteth all things, and are bitter unto
him: so those that are sick of the worldly Ague, that is, of the love of the
world, covetousness, pride, and lust; these, I say, do loath the word of God,
and distaste it as bitter. Contrariwise, With whom the word of God has no
savor.
those that have the Spirit of God, these do find in it the hidden Manna,
never to be tasted by them that are carried away with the world: which is the
cause that many by the daily hearing of the Gospel, do feel little desire and
spiritual joy, because they are not carried by the Spirit of God, nor have any
heavenly (but earthly) minds. But he that will fully and soundly understand the
word of God, and eat Manna, it behooves him to study to conform all his life
to it and Christ. Which being done, he feeds the humble with grace,
comfort the meek, and makes his yoke pleasant, and his burden light unto
them. For the sweetness of the heavenly Manna cannot be tasted but under the
yoke of Christ; according to that, He will fill the hungry with good things,
and send the rich empty away. The words that I have spoken, are spirit and
life, says Christ, John 6. Whereupon it follows, a voluptuous heart and
carnal, that is, a man that has no spiritual understanding, cannot possibly
understand those things. For in spirit, in rest, in silence, with great
humility, and holy and vehement desire, is the word of God to be received;
which if it be not converted into life, then truly it is no better then the
external letter, and a sound of words. Even as he that hears the noise of a
Harp only, or a Song, and understands it not, receives no pleasure by it:
so no man is partaker of the virtue that is in the Word, unless he endeavor
to express it in his life. And this is that which was said before out of John:
I will give thee a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no
man knows, but he that has He which clears to the Lord.
it. This is that, I say, even a testimony of the hidden spirit which he
gives to the word of God, Romans 8. And in like manner, the Spirit of the Word
gives testimony to our spirit, whereby both do conspire and consent together,
and so become one spirit, which is that New Name unknown but to A new name.
the receiver. For as no man knows the sweetness of honey, but he that
tastes it; so the name of the testimony divine in the hearts of men, no man
knows but he that proves it. This man only knows the consolations and
divine visitations, because he perceives them: whose name is also called New,
because they are the works and fruits of the new birth. Blessed is the man to
whom God has given himself to be so tasted in his heart! Blessed are the
Prophets whom from the beginning of the world he has fed with his bread so
heavenly, and by the conference of his eternal word: which because it was so
done unto them, therefore out of sense, feeling, and experience, they have
spoken of it, and composed holy Scripture. And in truth even all this day he
speaks unto all men, and feeds them inwardly with his word in the soul:
but almost all men have shut their ears against his voice, and had rather The
living word is meat of the soul
hear the world then God, and be driven by their own concupiscences, then by
the Spirit of God. Whereupon it comes to pass, that they cannot taste the
hidden Manna, swallowing up in the mean time both apples of the tree of death,
and carnal concupiscences, contemning the tree of life. Which men are not a
little mad, whilst they can understand that God can give greater pleasures to
his lovers then the world: so that he that has once tasted the goodness of
God, to him the whole world, with all the pleasures, they will seem The tree of
death.
to him as mere gall and bitterness. Now seeing we know our first progenitors
were beguiled with the world, and by eating of the forbidden tree have acquired
death, yet we are so blind and mad, as fed with eternal death of carnal
pleasures so dearly bought we may remember. If any shall eat of me, says
Christ the true tree of life, and true bread of life, he shall live for ever,
John 6. And what is it to eat of it, but to believe in him, in him to joy and
take delight; lastly, to rest and take pleasure in him alone? Great therefore,
O mortals, is the carnal blindness, to serve the world for trifles, vain and
frail things with such affection and desires, and not to do the same to God,
who rewards his worship and service with eternal things, and far more
noble goods. For who performs to God so much and so great faith, obedience,
and diligence, as the vulgar we see do perform to Mammon and the World? We see
them many times for small matters, or a little money, make journies: and for
heavens cause it grieveth us to move a foot. Hereupon the holy Prophets
reproach Tire and Sidon with emphaticall upbraids for taking in hand most vast
and sea journies for the advance of their earthly causes, when in the mean time
they would not deigne for the sovereign good to change their place. And in our
time men of all sorts and conditions do prefer the world before God, it is a
thing most manifest. The sons of the world.
Thereupon we see many Doctors do study day and night to attain to honor in
the world, who hardly or not at all will take so much leisure as suffices to
say the Lords prayer, if they might attain eternal honors and dignities
celestial with so little labor. Therefore you see the same men to avoid no
labor in warfare to attain to fame and honor, and yet will not enter combat
with their own vices, although they may attain heavenly nobility thereby.
Therefore you shall likewise see that the Lords and Victors of many Nations and
vast Kingdoms, do not care for overcoming themselves: lastly, that infinite
many do not regard the loss of their soul and eternal happiness, to
attain to frail and momentany goods. And all these have not The true victory.
tasted the Hidden Manna of the divine Word, and therefore do not overcome the
world, but are overcome of the world. Which whosoever dare contemn in respect
of God, he truly finds the most sweet visits of the holy Ghost, and is filled
with the heavenly pleasure which no man The divine sweetness is tasted when the
world is despised
knows but he that receives it. This therefore is to be done, the tree of
life is first to be planted in us, that we may eat the fruit thereof: and our
heart that wishes to be recreated with the celestial consolations, ought
first to be converted from the world to God; but we being made drunk with
worldly pleasures, and bewitched, do not incline our hearts and minds to think
that heavenly joys, and those of God are rather to be wished, then those which
the world offers or affords. Although truly that is more true that God
offers and does, and are more noble then that which the creatures do bring
to pass. Wherefore the learning which comes from above by the inspiration of
the holy Ghost, True consolation and wisdom is of God.
is much more excellent then that other which humane understanding with great
labor does obtain. For even as an Apple or a Lilly produced by nature, is far
more noble and much better then that which a workman makes of gold, be the
gold never so fine: so one drop of consolation divine, The venity of worldly
joy.
is more noble, and by many, yea infinite parts better then a whole Ocean of
wordly pleasures. Which truly are to be slighted by him that desires divine
consolations. Which if any that will hear me will lend me his ears, if any will
understand me, let him attend what I say; finally, if any will see me, it
behooves him to fix How God should be perceived and tasted.
his eyes upon me: Who doubts that all our hearts and senses ought to be
converted to God, if we desire to see, hear, understand, taste and prove him
how good he is? according to that of Jeremy, chap. 29. When you shall seek me
with your whole heart, I will be found of you. Many men at this day they term
admirable; O! a learned man, a rich, magnifical, wiseman; but no man regards
how courteous, humble, patient, and how devout any man is. Of which perverse
False praise.
judgment there is no other cause then that now men do attend and admire
outward things, and in the mean time with blind eyes pass by inward things,
which are only worthy to be esteemed. Therefore he that praises one because
he has beautified many Cities, and far situated regions; let him see if it
were not far better to have seen God. He therefore that suspecteth another
because he has not served one Monarch, I would have him think whether it were
not more excellent to have served God lawfully with all his heart. Those that
are fatuated with the mere love of the world, do prefer this our Age, as the
only learned and wise before all antiquity: these, I say, do not know the Art
of Arts, that is, the divine love more noble then all knowledge to be extinct
wholly together with the faith, Ephesians. 3. Luke 18. and few to remain divinely
learned, Isai. 5. and that have learned of Christ a humble and lowly life,
Matthew 11. yea to speak the truth, the most learned for the most part, are
void of divine love, and therefore do not know at all that the true life is in
Christ, Ephesians. 4. These therefore do circumscribe knowledge in the circle of
words, when it is more true, that solid learning is a thing and not words, and
to consist in eternal and true wisdom: of which we have spoken more at large
in the Treatise of ancient Philosophy. But if any shall say that this our Age
is wicked, he truly shall say that which is agreeable to the truth, and to the
word of God. Likewise those are ridiculous which praise any because he lives
gorgeously and deliciously, being unmindfull that the true dainties is the word
of God, and the Hidden Manna thereof, and that it contains in it the
incorruptible bread of heaven; and that lastly, he does live delicately in
whose presence the Lord The solid and only joy is of God.
has prepared his Table, Psalm 23. to wit, who savoureth the Lord God and his
Word, his palate nothing can displease; but he that does loath it, and is
displeased with it, he cannot soundly and truly rejoice: for he is the joy
exceeding all created joys, and the eternal light surpassing all temporal
light: who I would to God now at the last would fill our hearts with his hidden
pleasure, and purge our spirits, illuminate, inlighten, clarify and quicken
them; Would to God, I say, that the time would now come, wherein Almighty God
by his presence would fill us with all those things which he is essentially.
Of which desires, although we be not competent, or fit, nor do joy true joy,
having in the mean time sufficient if we may but enjoy the crumbs that fall
from thy table, O Lord, till we be translated to the joys of eternal life.
They are the words of our Savior, Apocalypse, chap. 3. Behold, I stand at the
door, and I knock, if any man hear my voice, and Christ is our banquet
open to me, I will enter unto him, and I will sup with him, and he with me.
What preposterousnesse is it, O mortals, to neglect this and so great a
banqueter, which has prepared us a supper, who after the manner of a Prince
coming to his poor friends house, brings all his dainty dishes, and the whole
supper with him; I say, the heavenly Bread, and hidden Manna; is not this a
great oversight to let him stand waiting at the door, and not to open readily
unto him? I say, what incivility is this, not to receive a friend, but not to
entertain God himself with all diligence and alacrity? Shall I tell you the
reason why we do not open the door? because as in a house full of noise and
clamor, music although never worldly things ought to be expelled, that divine
things may enter.
so excellent, cannot be heard: so neither can the voice of the banquetter
enter the ears of a worldly heart, and consequently, the Celestial Manna
cannot be tasted by him. I think so indeed. If therefore the worldly tumults
and noise in man do not tease and rest, who will not doubt that the Lord
beating and crying shall go away away unheard, that they with Samuel may Why
quietness is required to Gods speech.
answer, Speak Lord, thy servant hears. Moreover, this internal voice
speaks in a spiritual and heavenly Supper, Heb. chap. 6. Those which have
been once lightened, and tasted the heavenly gifts, and have been made The true
spirit of illumination.
partakers of the holy Ghost, and also have tasted the good word of God, and
the virtues of the world to come. By which we are taught in what man the holy
Ghost is, neither is his mind hindered from daily feeding of that Manna, hidden
in the sweet and mellifluent divine Word which proceeds out of the mouth of
God, and by which we live. That which the Kingly Prophet David by the holy
Ghost found in his heart and mind, saying, Psalm 16. Thou will fill me with joy
of thy countenance, and delight of thy right hand even unto the end. And Psalm
34. Taste and see, because the Lord is sweet, blessed is the man that puts
his trust in him. Psalm 23. The goodness of God is Nectar and Ambrosia.
Thou have prepared a table for me in my view, against those that trouble me;
thou have anointed my head with oil, and my cup being brimfull, how beautiful
is it? Psa. 63. Thy mercy is excellent, far exceeding above our lives, my
lips shall praise thee, Psa. 36. Even as thou have multiplied thy mercies, O
God, the sons of men shall trust in the shadow of thy wings, they shall be made
drunk with the plenty of thy house, and thou shall make them intoxicated with
the torrent of thy pleasures, because with thee is the fountain of life, and in
thy light we shall see light. Psa. 70. They shall rejoice and be glad all
which seek thee, and they shall say always, Let the Lord be magnified, which
love thy salvation. But I am needy and poor, help me, O God, thou art my
helper and redeemer, Lord, make no delay. By which, beside other places, may
be known who those are who are inwardly fed with Gods word, to wit, those that
are poor in spirit, and in God alone who place their trust and delight. Those I
say, are worthy to taste heavenly gifts, of whom David Whom God feeds with his
eternal word.
speaks, Psalm 84. How delightful, O Lord, are the Tabernacles of thy
dwellings! my soul sainted and was moved in my inwardnesse in the entries of
the Lord. My heart and my flesh were exalted in the living God. Whereby one may
understand that the least pleasures of eternal life do far exceed all the
joys of this present world, and that one day there is more excellent then here
to live in worldly pleasure one whole year: which whosoever has once made
trial of, and found to be so, the world brings unto him a loathing and
tediousness, and as one accustomed to better things can relish it no more.
Hereto appertains that which the eternal Wisdom speaks in Ecclus. 24.
saying, God alone fills the soul.
My spirit is sweet above the honey, and my inheritance is above the honey and
the honey comb. Who eat me do yet hunger; and who drink me do yet thirst.
And his hunger and thirst no creature but God alone can fill with his love
wherewith the Saints are made drunk, according to the Canticle of Canticles,
Eat, O friends, drink and he drunk* O my dearest friend^. Therefore Almighty
God for that purpose does make such delicacies for his dear The type of
eternal life.
friends, as being inamored with this bait of delight, they may forget all
wordly delight. Now if in this life it be better for us to leave all the
pleasures thereof for a few crumbs of hidden Manna, and a few drops of Nectar,
and of the heavenly Vine, how much more plentiful and abundant shall that be
which we shall attain to in the other life? That our Savior might stir up
this thirst in us, it was expedient he should thirst upon the Cross. For even
as he alone can stanch our hunger and thirst; so we in like manner can restrain
his most flagrant desire of loving. He thirsts after us more vehemently then
we thirst after him, according to that of John, cap. 4. My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, that I may finish his work. And what is the will of
God, but that we may attain eternal life? And if we equally thirst after him as
he thirsts after us, then of a truth should we drink and be intoxicated with
his Spirit most liberally and sweetly, so that out of our bodies should flow
rivers of living water; that is, there should be nothing in us that would not
be spiritual, amiable, comely; nay, no The greatness of the humane soul, and the
humility.
otherwise then if we were filled as from a torrent of goodness and
consolation divine, in our whole mind and conversation we should rejoice in
God. For nothing is of more account with God then the humane soul, or greater,
when it conceives God, and heaven and earth, by way of enjoyment freely: and
nothing less then it when it humbles it self before God, and ^asteth it self
below all creatures.

CHAP. XXXVII. Those that do not follow Christ in their life, cannot be freed
from the blindness of their heart, but do remain in perpetual darkness. Moreover,
he cannot truly know Christ, or participate of him, or earnestly repent.
2 John 1. God is light, and there is no darkness in him, if we shall say we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we do lie, and are not in the
truth: But if we walk in the truth, even as he is in the truth, we have joint
fellowship with him.
THat we may understand the nature of Light and Darkness, it is necessary to
seek into the definition of Light; which no man can give a better then that
which blessed John himself delivers. God (says he) is light. And what is
God? A spiritual being, eternal, infinite, almighty, merciful, gentle, just,
holy, true, all-knowing; lastly, of love and faith ineffable; God the Fathet,
the Son, and holy Ghost, one in essence, three in persons, the chief and all
good essentially. And this is the true and eternal light, whence every one
from True light and true darkness.
God and his love, mercy, justice, and virtue, turns himself when it is
evident he passes from light to darkness, seeing without God there is nothing
but darkness. For if he be light, it follows contrariwise that the Devil is
darkness it self: if he be charity, the Devil is nothing but wrath, envy,
hatred, sin and torment, it must needs be so. To which whosoever joyneth
himself, he is changed to darkness and the Devil, from which he is not
delivered before he shall convert himself from darkness to light, from sin
to righteousness; and lastly, from the Devil to God. That which is the work of
faith alone, by which our hearts are purified, Acts 15. For whosoever believes
in Christ, he repents daily, and converteth himself from sin, that is, from
the Devil to Christ. For as Adam by sin converted himself from God to the
Devil; so it behooves every one of us to fly by true repentance and remission
of sins, from the Devil to God. Whereupon it follows, that man without
returning and conversion to God, cannot be enlightened. For what fellowship has
justice with unrighteousness, or what place of society is there for light and
darkness? 2 Cor. 6. This darkness is unrighteousness, but the light is the
true knowledge of Christ, which can no ways enter into fellowship: so that it
is impossible that those should be enlightened by the Spirit and light of
eternal truth who live in the darkness of unrighteousnes. To which
appertains the saying of Paul concerning the Jews, When they shall be
converted to the Lord, the vail shall 2 Cor. 3.
be taken away; that is, darkness, blindness, and ignorance shall cease,
Christ shall inlighten them. For what greater blindness, or thicker mist can
cover the minds of men, then infidelity, with the fruit thereof, as pride,
covetousness, wrath, lust; therefore where they be, it cannot come to pass
that a man should acknowledge Christ the most true light, until he believe in
him, confide in him, and be saved by him. For how shall he understand the
humility of Christ, whose mind knows not himself through pride? How should he
know his meeknes, that is altogether full of wrath and envy? How his exceeding
wonderful patience, which rejoices in revenge, and imitateth The true
knowledge of Christ.
the brute beast in cruelty? For whosoever understands not the lowliness,
humility, and patience of Christ, he never knows Christ in his faith. And
that you may truly and rightly know him, it behooves thee by faith to have the
heart and understanding of Christ, and to perceive his lowliness, patience,
and humility within thee in thy heart. For as a plant is known by the taste and
smell: so Christ which is the tree of life, by tasting and by trial, is
understood: I say, by tasting in faith his lowliness, and humility, and
patience, and by eating of his fruit, whereby consequently his soul might find
rest and tranquillity, and be made capable of divine grace and consolation.
Which two into a heart void of faith, and unfenced with the humility and
lowliness of Christ, cannot enter to fructify, seeing that God gives grace
only to the humble. Seeing then it is thus, what does Christ profit a man who
has no society with him? Such are all those who living in the darkness of
sin, cannot be companions of light, according to that of Saint John, If we
say we have society with him, and walk in darkness, we are liers, and want the
truth. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have joint
fellowship with him. Which in the second chapter he adds, The darknessc is
passed over, and the true light now shines: h^e which says he is in the
light and hates his brother, is in darkness until now. He that loves his
brother abides in the light, and there is no offense in him. But he that
hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes. And how long a man
remains in that terrible cloud of sins, he cannot be lightened of Christ,
which is the true Light, and come to the knowledge of God. For the true
knowledge of God and Christ consists in that he understands God to be mere
The true knowledge of Christ.
Grace and Charity: which who has not and exercises, this man knows it with
the most ignorant. So all knowledge consists, and arises out of the
understanding, experience, and works of truth: and so certain it is, that he
which does not exercise charity; howsoever he make many words of it, yet he
perceives not the perfect nature of it. In like manner, Christ is mere love,
humility, meekness, patience, and virtue: the which who has not, is ignorant
of Christ, although he can prattle many things of him, and usurp his name.

After the same manner, the word of God is nothing but Spirit: whereupon they
which live not in the Spirit, these consequently do not know what the word of
God is, although they fable and dispute of it every where. Therefore it
belongs not to him to judge of love, who never exercises it. For all
knowledge, as we said even now, begins with feeling and experience.
Knowledge arises out of experience.
Nor is it his part to speak of the light that never moved a foot out of his
own darkness to see the light: and what is light in man but faith and charity,
according to the saying of Christ, Matthew. 5. Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. Now seeing that the most holy life of Christ is nothing but mere love,
if we endeavor to drink and draw from him true faith, humility, lowliness,
and patience, as it is given in commandment to us by the severe Law of
Learning, then truly we are transformed into his image, and we are beautified
and adorned with his love no otherwise then if we were covered with Christ
himself, which is the eternal and true Light, according to that of the
Ephesians, chap. 5. Arise thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ will inlighten thee. Whereupon it follows again, that as many as do
not awake from the sleep of the world, that is, concupiseence of the eyes, of
the flesh, and pride of life, their soul cannot truly be illuminated by
Christ. Contrariwise, they which assume the life of Christ, and follow him in
faith, these truly are illuminated, according to that of Saint John, chap. 8. I
am the light of the world, he which follows me, in faith, charity, hope,
patience, lowliness, humility, fear of Only the martyrs of Christ
illuminated.
God, and prayer, walks not in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
As if he should say: Only those that imitate me, have the light of life, and
the true illumination and knowledge of me. By reason of the same Faith and
Life of Christ, or Christian life; blessed Paul, Ephesians. 5. calls the faithful
the Light, You were (says he) sometimes darkness, but now light in the Lord.
And 1 Thessalonians. 5. You are all the sons of light, and the sons of God; we are
not of the night; nor darkness, having put on the breast plate of faith, and
love, and the helmet of salvation. To this belongs that of the Book of
Wisdom, which faith, That the holy Ghost does fly wicked persons, but comes
into holy souls, and of them makes Prophets, and friends of God. Which if it
fly the wicked, it is plain that they cannot be enlightened of it. To which
that is like, that Christ denies the world, that is, carnal minds not
repenting them at all, can they receive the holy Ghost. But that there might be
a perfect and absolute example amongst men, and an Idea of virtue, therefore
the Son of God became Man, and by his most holy life, became the public Light
of the world; that all men might follow him, believe in him, and be illuminated
from him. Now seeing the false Christians themselves know not Christ to be the
most perfect and absolute righteousness, or virtue, therefore they did not
care for following him, it is manifest that the Ethnicks, the most rigid
observers and lovers of virtue, did go far beyond them. Of whom the wisest, as
Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and Seneca determined: If the virtue of the body may
be seen, or could be seen, it would appear more clear then Lucifer, or the
day star. But those that shall behold Christ with the eye of faith, he being
the true Lucifer, or Day Star, does far excel them, and Faith in Christ
illuminateth the heart.
those shall so see and contract the word of life, 1 John 1. But if the
Ethnicks did so esteem virtue, and desired to see it, how much more ought
Christians to esteem it above all things, seeing Christ is mere virtue, mere
The love of Christ is to imitate Christ.
lowliness, yea God himself? Whereupon not without cause, Saint Paul
prefers the love of Christ before all Sciences, or knowledge: for that he
which loves him, it necessarily follows, that he do embrace his lowliness
and humility out of his mere and most sincere love toward him: whereby he is
further illuminated, and daily Light and grace is given by humility.
transformed into the image of Christ, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. For God
gives grace to the humble, says Saint Peter, 1 Epist. chap. 5. And Saint
Bernard, The floods of grace do flow downwards, not upwards. By all which it
comes to pass, that the grace of the light and of knowledge divine, is not
communicated to a man that lives not in Christ, but walks in the way of the
Devil, when true faith, and the works thereof do not leave us empty, or void
of knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. Now seeing that a man having
the Light and Life of Christ, dwells in him (for all these things he is
himself) therefore according to the saying of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 11. upon
such and no otherwise then upon Christ himself, do rest the gifts of the holy
Ghost, that is to say, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and fortitude, the Spirit of knowledge, piety, and the fear of the
Lord. Wherefore Saint Peter in the second of the Acts, speaks thus to the
Jews, Repent, and you shall receive the gifts of the holy Ghost: as if he
should say, The Spirit of God, of which you have had experience, and which is
the Illuminator of the heart, sends not it self into other minds then those
that are faithful and repent. Go to then, O mortals, which desire to be freed
from the blindness of heart, and everlasting darkness; and lastly from the
Devil himself, imitate Christ in faith and true conversation, and amendment,
being sure that the nearer you are to Christ, the nearer you are to Eternal
Light: and by how much more unfaithful you are, so much nearer you a^^ to
Darkness and the Devil. For as Faith, Christ, and all virtues are knit
together: so in like manner, incredulity, the Devil, and all vices do cleave
together. Behold with me the Apostles imitating Christ in faith, contemning the
world, denying themselves, renouncing their possessions, and living in
eternity: by which things they attained to this, that they might be heavenly
illuminated, and might be endued with the holy Ghost. To whom was most unlike
the young man that was so rich, whilst he studied himself, and thought
himself something, Luke 18. Therefore he remained in the darkness of the
world, neither was he enlightened to eternal life. For he that loves the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. And blessed John professes
plainly, That he which loves not, remains in darkness, and knows not
whither he goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes. To whom agrees
Taulerus, who in all his Sermons every where shows and admonishes, without
serious exercise of faith, without mortification and selfe-denial, without
inward turning himself to his heart, and lastly, without the inward Sabbath of
the soul, no man can receive the divine Light, or perceive it in himself. In
brief, as much as in the condition after conversion the works of darkness by the
spirit of God in man are destroyed, so much is he illuminated: and by how much
more and more powerfully on the other side our corrupt nature, as the flesh and
the world, in man do bear rule; so much less Grace, Light, Spirit of God and
Christ is in him. Therefore it remains, without daily and continual
repentance, no man can be illuminated, when as he has not resisted one ^ice,
nor The further from the life of Christ, the further from the true light.
rooted out one, and exercises innumerable others, brings forth out of
himself continually with more increase then people are wont to do. And as
darkness is thicker in it self, and more cloudy, by how much the Sun goes
back from us, by so much we are unlike to the life of Christ, so much more
plentiful are we in sin, and darkness grows the thicker in us, till they
become eternal night. On the contrary, he which by the grace of God enters
the Chariot of virtue with a good courage and firm hope, this man cannot but
profit in them daily, one following another, as rings be linked one to another
in a golden chain. Which connection blessed Peter expresses, The knowledge of
Christ in love, faith, and the fruits thereof, is to grow in Christ, and profit
in him.
writing in the second Epistle, cha. 1. And you ought to have care, and to use
diligence, ministering in your faith virtue, and in your virtue knowledge, in
knowledge abstinence, in abstinence patience, in patience piety, in piety
brotherly love, in brotherly love charity. And if ye do these things and
abound therein, you shall not be found empty, nor without fruit in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he should say, he that shall not
addict himself wholly to the study and exercise of these virtues, he knows
not Christ: but he that by faith profits in them, he grows in Christ: all
other, as proud ones, wrathful ones, covetous ones, impatient ones, profit not
in Christ, but in the Devil. And it is left us Christians in precept, that as a
child by little and little, and in time is made a man: so we may grow in faith,
and in the study of virtue, to perfect The fruit of the death of Christ in us.
men to the measure of full age in Christ, Ephesians. 4. Coloss. 1. But to whom
these things are not ready, or at hand, (says Saint Peter, 2. Epist. 1.) he is
blind and hand-bound, forgetful of the purging of his old sins. As if he
should say, It is for certain, that Christ by his death and blood, took and did
bear all our sins; but in the mean time we must beware that we addict not
our selves to sin hereafter, but rather the death of Christ fructifying in us,
we die to the world, and live in Christ; which whosoever does not care to do,
to this man it is plain, that the purging of his old sins profits nothing.
Whereupon it follows, if we desire to have the sins of our former life
remitted and pardoned, we must forbear ^^ sin, we must repent and believe in
Christ: which if we do not, then we retain all those sins of our former
life, and they are to be lamented by us to all eternity, without all hope of
expiation, or forgiveness; so that it is possible that even for wrath alone, a
man may be damned, which if he had by Christian lowliness corrected, then in
truth he had obtained pardon for all his other sins, which because he neglected
to do, therefore according to the words of Saint Peter, He is blind, being
forgetful of the purging of his old sins. Whereby it is given to understand,
The necessity of repentance.
how necessary a thing repentance is, and the changing to a betternesse: For
although Christ died for our sins, blotting them out and abolishing them with
the incomparable price of his blood, yet we do not participate of that merit,
unless we repent, it profits nothing. And howsoever every man is promised
pardon for his sins for the merit of Christ; yet that promise pertains
nothing to thee, to the unbeleever, nor the impenitent, but to those alone
which do amend their lives; when it is most meet that those sins be remitted
which we go not about to remember, but those only which we were heartily
grieved for. And to this pertains that which is spoken, Matthew. 11. The poor
receive the Gospel, that is, obtain the remission of sins.

Now let us suppose some Usurer for many years has been a servant to
covetousness, without amendment sins are not forgiven.
after the example of Zacheus; or to lust, as Mary Magdalen; or lastly, to
wrath and revenge, as Esau: and this man so soon as he heard these offenses
were to be left, or else the death and blood of Christ would profit him
nothing, he becomes a suppliant to God, and to him, as old men did speak, to
give satisfaction in words, and then to desist from his sins to crave pardon
and grace of God, and to believe in Christ, then it is most certain, that all
his first offenses are remitted him out of mere grace, and no merit, but for
the death and blood of Christ shed for them. But these that have not determined
as yet to detest covetousness, wrath, usury, pride and lust; they, because
they want faith purging their hearts, may hope in vain for the remission of
their sins, but lament for them in eternal torments never to be satisfied.
Whereupon blessed Paul does earnestly admonish, Galat. 5. Because they do such
things, they shall not inherit or possess the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore
either eternal damnation follows, or amendment of their lives to a better;
which where it is done by faith and true conversion unto God, there is pardon
and divine grace ready at hand, yea Christ himself, without whom there is no
grace: For Christ does accompany his most precious All things necessary to
salvation do accompany faith, taking hold of Christ's merits.
merit, and consequently satisfaction for our sins: which being present,
there is righteousness, with righteousness peace and a good conscience, as
Psalm 85. Righteousness and peace do kiss each other; with a cheerful
conscience the holy Ghost; which because it is the spirit of joy, thereupon
also joy follows, and thereupon life eternal, which is nothing but joy
sempiternal. And this is that light of eternal life with which they are crowned
so many as live in Christ and daily repentance, whose beginning and foundation
is the death of Christ. On the contrary, where there is no repentance, there is
grace wanting, and grace wanting, neither is Christ there present, who being
absent, his merit is not participated, and that which depends upon
Impenitency hinders the whole kingdom of God and eternal salvation
it, the remission of sins. Where that is not to be had, or to be found,
there is no righteousness, and consequently no peace or good conscience, no
consolation, no holy Ghost, no joy of heart and conscience; lastly, no life
eternal, but death, but hell, but condemnation and everlasting darkness.
Whereby that is manifest we affirmed in the beginning, That those who by true
repentance in Christ, do not intend to follow him in his life, cannot be
freed from the blindness of their hearts, nor themselves freed from the eternal
darkness.

CHAP. XXXVIII. That the Antichristian life is the cause of false doctrine,
hardness of heart and blindness; where certain things are ingraffed in
predestination.
John 12. Yet there is a little light in you: walk while you have the light,
lest darkness comprehend you.
Seeing it is certain that Christ, together with faith and a Christian life, is
denied, renounced, and wholly extirpated, to what end serves his doctrine to
us? which together with the Sacraments to that end is The end of the Word and
Sacraments.
given us only that it may be turned into juice, blood, and our life. And as
from noble seed does arise or grow noble fruit: so from the Word and
Sacraments, should arise a new man, holy and spiritual, and to speak in a word,
a Christian, out of the Spirit, Word, and Sacrament, no otherwise then a man
regenerate out of Christ, so believing in him, and living in him. For as an
infant is born of his mother, so a Christian is born of God and Christ by
faith. But when we have not determined to change our life, nay rather have so
framed our manners, as they are against him, it is plain we are not begotten of
God, and therefore his doctrine and light does profit us nothing when we are
sure we walk in darkness. Whereupon also the light being fled and taken
away, it must needs be that darkness and false doctrine of errors and
seducing, do incroach upon us. Which to beware of, our Savior did admonish us
saying, Little children, whilst ye have light, walk in it, lest darkness do
comprehend you; I say, the darkness of errors, deceivers, deluding, of
blindness and hardness of heart: such darkness as deceived Pharaoh, the
Jews, and Julian, who in the end convicted by his own conscience in his own
evil, exclaimed openly and confessed, that Christ did yet live, and the true
God, saying, Thou have overcome, O Galilean, thou have overcome; when it had
been better for him to have said, Have mercy upon me; but he could not so say
because of his blindness, From whence hardness of heart.
and because he refused and denied the mercy of Christ. And this hardness of
heart is that terrible darkness which in the end overtaketh those that will
not walk in the light, and is the punishment of those that blaspheme the truth,
as Pharaoh did, Exodus 5. Who is the Lord that I should hear Blindness is a
punishment.
his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the the Lord. Therefore it was
convenient that God should manifest himself to him by his power, making him an
example before the whole world, that it might be manifest that man can do
nothing against God. In like manner when the Jews would not hearken unto God,
they were stricken with blindness and hardness of heart: that which Moses had
foretold them would come to pass, Deuteronomy. 28. and 32. The Lord shall strike
thee with madness and blindness, and the fury of the mind; and it came to
pass, witness Esaias, chap. 6. Whereby it is manifest, that such ^lindnesse is
the most just punishment of incredulity and contempt of God and heavenly truth,
according to that of Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Because they received not the love of
the truth that they might be saved, therefore God shall send unto them, or
give them over to be deceived by the spirit of error, to believe lies, that
all may be judged that believed not the truth, but consented to iniquity. By
which it is given us to understand, why God is wont to permit such blindness
and hardness of heart. Moreover to whom he denies, and lastly takes away his
offered From whom God withdraws his favor.
grace, this man is wretched of himself, neither can return into the way at
any time, after the example of Pharaoh and Julian; and from whom the Lord
takes away his light, he lives all his days in darkness. But Almighty God
takes it only from those that will not walk in it; neither takes he his
favor away, but from those that have refused it. In which sense blessed Paul,
Romans 9. recounteth that oracle of God out of Moses; I will have have mercy on
whom I will have mercy; and I will show The cause of blindness.
pity on whom I will have pity. Therefore on whom he will, he has pity; and
whom he will, he hardens. But he has pity of all who acknowledge his
mercies; and contrariwise hardens those that do repudiate and blaspheme his
offered grace: that which blessed Paul plainly reproacheth the Jews, Acts 13.
It was meet that first the word of God should be preached to you: but because
you expel it, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we
turn unto the Gentiles. And the Gentiles hearing, rejoiced, and glorified the
word of the Lord, and believed as many as were ordained to eternal life: that
is, as many as did not repudiate the word of grace, or means of faith. Of
which contempt because the Jews were guilty, therefore they could not believe:
for Almighty God has preordained none to eternal life which repel his Word
disdainfully. Therefore predestination, or preordination to life eternal, is
finished or brought to pass The order of predestination.
in Christ: so that Almighty God offers his grace to all by his Gospel, which
who receives, those truly are preordained to eternal life: and those that do
cast it behind their backs, and refuse it, those do judge themselves unworthy
of eternal life, as Paul says, that is, by their own fault are unworthy of
that blessing, exempting themselves from universal grace, and putting out their
own names out of the book of life, which is Christ, by his contumacy resisting
the word of God; thereupon consequently cannot be made faithful. Let us not
err, Who those be that drive away from them the word and grace of Christ.
O Mortals, they do not only repudiate the word of God, and drive it away,
which will not admit of the doctrine of Christ; such as are Turks and Jews; but
those also which will not continue in the footsteps of Christ, take his life
upon them, and walk in the light: for which cause consequently God himself
takes away even the light of the Word, and sound doctrine. I (says Christ
John 8.) am the light of the world, he that follows me, walks not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. As if he should say, whosoever
shall contemn to imitate my life, the darkness of errors, of seducements,
blindness, and hardness of heart. Behold with me the most proud, the most
excellent, the chief, the most learned, and the most powerful of this world,
whose errors in truth, seducements and blindness, come From whence the most
prudent of this world are most guilty of seducement.
from no other cause but because they live not in Christ, neither imitate his
life; and therefore cannot have the light of life. From hence it must needs be
which Paul calls the works of errors, and Satanicall lies, which rush upon
us more powerfully, because the universal world refuses to imitate the life
of Christ. For what society is From whence error.
there between light and darkness, and what agreement is there between Christ
and Belial? 2 Corinthians. chap. 6. As if he should say, the purity of doctrine
and divine knowledge cannot remain with those, or amongst those that live in
the Devil, in darkness, in pride, in covetousness and pleasure. For how
should pure doctrine and divine mix themselves together, or suffer themselves
to live together with an unpure and an unchristian life? Or what is more
disagreeing and unreconcileable then an impure life, and pure doctrine?
Wherefore if we will retain doctrine, the way we hold, is wholly to be
changed, is utterly to be changed by public suffrage of custom and
applause, and it must be altered for a better then Antichristian, we must
imitate Christ, and shake off the sleep of sin, and He that keeps not the
footsteps of Christ, strayeth from the way
Christ will beautify us with the light of true faith. For whosoever insisteth not
in the footsteps of Christ, that is, his love, humility, lowliness, patience,
and fear of God, he must needs be deceived when he walks not the way which
leads to truth. But on the contrary, if we did all live in Christ, if we did
walk in love and humility, if all our studies and Theology did respect this one
thing, that the flesh and Adam might be mortified, Christ would live in us,
that we might overcome our selves; that lastly, we might triumph over the
flesh, the world and the Devil; then truly there would be less brawling and
strife about doctrine, and heresies of themselves would fall to the ground. We
have an example of that in Achab, who by his wicked and tyrannical life
obtained this, that through his own evil, and the lies of four hundred false
Prophets, he believing them, by their provocation did undertake the Blindness
and seducing ^s a just punishment.
war, and contemn the Prophet Micaiah foretelling his death in that war, and
contrariwise he was constrained to give credit to the false prophets,
prophesying all things to go well; and lastly, by right and due desert the dogs
did lick his blood. And is not this the same that B. Paul says, 2 Cor. 4. God
blinded the minds of the unfaithful of this age, that the light of the Gospel
should not shine upon them: and also which God by Esaias, chapter 29. threatens to
all hypocrites boasting of Christ and his doctrine, and denying him in life,
that they shall be seduced by the illusion of false prophets, as Achab was: For
because this people draws near me with their mouths, and honor me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me; therefore the wisdom of the wise
shall fail, and the understanding of the wise shall be hid: the Lord shall shut
their eyes, he shall darken the eyes of the Prophets, and the principal of them
that see visions, and the word of God shall be as a sealed book, and as
letters to an ignorant man. To which those are like which blessed Paul, 2 Cor.
3. mentions of the The blindness of the Jews through unbelief.
Jews, to wit, that there was a veil set before them, and over their hearts,
that reading in their Prophets of the Messiah, they should not understand;
which veil Almighty God would take from them if they were converted to him.

CHAP. XXXIX. The purity of doctrine, and the divine Word not only by disputing
and writing many books, but by true repentance also, and a holy life is to be
obtained and kept.
2 Timoth. 1. Take the form of wholesome words, which thou have heard of me in
faith, and in love in Christ Jesus. The good which is deposed hold fast by the
holy Ghost which dwells in us.
THe purity of Doctrine, and the verity of Christian faith come to be defended
against Sects and Heresies: after the example of the Prophets which preached
against The necessity of disputation.
false and idolatrous Prophets in the old Testament: after the example of the
Son of God, who disputed vehemently against the Pharisees and Scribes; after
the example of John the Evangelist, who wrote his Gospel against Ebion and
Cerinth, and the Apocalypse against the false Church of the Nicolaitans and
others: after the example of Saint Paul, who defended most strongly the
doctrine of justification by faith, of good works, of the resurrection of the
dead, of Christian liberty and such like against false Apostles: after the
example of the holy Bishops and Fathers of the Primitive Church, which wrote
most strongly against the Pagan superstitions, and Heretics, and in the
Ecumenical Councels gathered by the Christian Emperors, did condemn the
chief Heretics and Patriarchs, Arrians, Macedonians, Nestorians, and
Eutychians: lastly, by the example of the incomparable Hero Martin Luther, by
whose excellent and grave writings the Papality and other Heretics were much
weakened, it is as clear as the noonday. Therefore it remains as a thing
most fit and requisite, to preach, write and dispute, that the purity of the
doctrine, and the verity of religion might be manifest, according to the
Apostle, who in the first chapter to Titus will have a Bishop to be powerful
to exhort in doctrine that is sound, and to argue with those that contradict
it. The The abuse of Thenlogicall disputation.
which although it be a lawful and a laudable way, it is so fallen out by the
abuse of it, that amongst all their bitter Disputations and Sermons of
controversies, and the infinite heaps of writing, and counterwriting, the
memory of Christian life, of true repentance, devotion and charity, is almost
abolished with their names, no otherwise then if the sum of Christian
Religion consisted in disputation, and writing books of controversies, and not
in the practice of the Gospel, and Christian learning. For if we behold the
examples of the holy Prophets and Apostles, as also of the Son of God, it is
manifest that they did sharply dispute not only against false Prophets and
Apostles, but also against the superstitions of the Gentiles; but with no less
fervency did exhort to repentance and Christian life; and moreover did show in
most grave Sermons, that by their impenitency and wicked life, the divine
Worship and Religion did go backwards, and decay, the Church was wasted, that
Kingdom and people were afflicted with hunger, war, and plague; all which
came to pass as true as they said it. Of this kind is that Sermon of Esaias,
Impiery destroys the worship of God, and true religion.
chap. 5. where he denounces to the people of the Jews, because the vineyard
of the Lord did not bring forth clusters of grapes, but wild grapes, therefore
Almighty God had decreed to lay it wast. Whereby it plainly appears, that
impiety is the cause why God uses to take his word from us. To the same sense
is that which Christ said, John 12. Walk in the light whilst you have it, lest
darkness overtake you. For what other thing is it to walk in the light, then
to imitate Christ? Or what other thing is it to be overtaken with darkness,
then to lose the purity of the Gospel? Whereby it appears without true
repentance none is enlightened.
that none can without true repentance and a holy life, enjoy the light: the
holy Ghost, which is the true enlightner of our hearts, flying the ungodly, and
choosing holy souls only to make friends and Prophets of God, as it is written
Wisdom 7. whose beginning since the fear of God is, as it is in Psa. 111. who
likewise doubts impiety to be the beginning of folly, ignorance and
blindness? Moreover, the true knowledge of Christ, and pure doctrine, and the
profession thereof, does not consist in words only, but in deed and holy life,
according The knowledge of Christ consists not in words.
to that of Titus, chap. 1. They confess they know God, but deny him in their
deeds, when they are abominable and unbeleevers and reprobates to every good
work. And Titus 3. They have the show of godliness, but deny the virtue
thereof. Whereby it is given to understand, that Christ and his Word is denied
by a wicked life as well as words; neither has he the true knowledge of Christ
which never puts it into action. Wherefore he that never feels or tastes
the humility, lowliness, It is lame without a holy life.
patience, and the love of Christ inwardly in his heart, he knows not
Christ, and therefore where use and necessity requires, they cannot confess
him. For to profess and preach the doctrine of Christ only, is truly to
divide Christ, and to lame him, if you do not profess and preach It is not
words, but life that makes a Christian.
his life. And we have abundance of books of his doctrine; of his life almost
none; every where books of controversies concerning doctrine, but very little
time spent about true repentance and a Christian life. For what is doctrine
without life, but a tree without fruit? Or how should he follow the doctrine of
Christ who imitateth not his life? For the head or chief of the doctrine of
Christ is charity from a pure heart and a good conscience, and an unfeigned
faith. But we live in that age wherein there is a great number of those whom if
we hear them disputing so acutely and well of the doctrine of Christian
religion, you would think them to be men of great worth; but if you behold them
narrowly, and touch them nearly, you shall then know them to be inwardly and
in their hearts full of pride, envy, and covetousness, that no Basilisk can
be more venomous. Against whom therefore we must beware, observe what Paul
says, 1 Timothy 1. he does not rashly or suddenly join Love and Faith, that he
may show that these two do or would conspire and consent together. And although
we cannot arrogate so much to our strength and piety, that we make it the
price of our happiness, knowing also with Saint Peter, Epist. 1. chap. 1. that
we are kept in the virtue of God by faith to salvation: yet we profess this,
that by an Antichristian life the Spirit of God will avoid us with all The
wicked are not enlightened
his gifts, amongst which faith, knowledge, understanding and wisdom are not
the least. Whereby it follows again, without a holy life the purity of
doctrine cannot be preserved; and the wicked which will not imitate Christ, are
not enlightened with the true light. On the contrary, those that walk in the
light, that is, which do insist and persevere in the footsteps of Christ, are
drenched and bathed in the true light, which is Christ, and divinely preserved
from all errors. Therefore it is true which that ancient Writer Taulerus says,
So soon as a man dedicateth himself to God, and suffers him, and denies his
own will and flesh, then truly the Spirit of God does begin to make beginning
of illumination, and endowing with true and solid knowledge, because indeed
this man does celebrate the true Sabbath of the heart, and keeps holy day,
and rests from his wicked concupiscences, will and works. Which is to be
taken of the state after conversion, and of daily illumination, and of the
increase of gifts and spiritual grace. Now neither is it unfitly said which
Christ, John 14. speaks, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; calling
himself the Way, who shows the same unto us, not How Christ is the way.
only in doctrine, but in his most holy life. Which life is no other thing
then a living faith, and working by love, hope, patience, meekness, humility,
prayer, the fear of the Lord, and to speak in a word, true repentance and
turning to God, whereby we are drawn to the Truth and the Life, wherein the
whole Christianity does consist, which is the breviary or epitome of all books
and precepts. Which is also the true and Kingly way to life and truth, and is
Christ himself, the book of life, in the involving and learning whereof we
ought Christ is our book.
to spend all our life. This (I say) is that strait way and narrow gate, Matthew.
7. which few do find; this is the book of life which almost none do read,
although in it all things are contained which a Christian ought to know: so
that we shall need no other book to our eternal salvation. Which is the
reason why also the holy Scripture is contained in very few books, to wit,
that it might appear that Christianity did not consist in the multitude of The
brevity of Scripture whereupon.
Commentaries and great Volumes, but in living faith, and imitation of Christ,
according to that of Eccles. c. 12. There is no end of making many books, and
much meditation of the flesh is affliction. In like manner let us all hear the
end of speaking, Fear God and keep his commandments. Moreover, Matthew. 7. it is
said, That the Devil when men are asleep sows Tares in the Wheat: that
teaches us, when men neglect repentance, and sleep soundly in their sins,
and are overtaken with the love of this world, we having more care of frail
things then immortal goods, then by little and little does the Devil sprinkle
his Pride is the field of heresies.
seed of false doctrine in the field of pride; whereupon do arise Sects and
Heresies: for by pride both Men and Angels lost the true light; and all errors
came into the world, which yet we might have wanted if Satan and Adam had lived
in the humble life of Christ. Whereupon Saint Paul deservedly, Ephesians. 6. says,
Arise thou that sleep, and Christ shall inlighten thee, being willing to
show that no man can be divinely enlightened, who has not before shaken off
from his eyes the sleep of sin, and driven from him security and impiety,
according to that of the Acts, chap. 2. Repent and receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. And that of John, chap. 17. The world cannot receive the holy Ghost:
understanding by the world, a wicked and worldly life. Likewise when Christ
says, You know them by their fruits, All things are known by the fruits.
what other thing signifies it, then not O Lord, Lord, but the fruits of life
is the sign and mark of true and false Christians? For what belongs the pure
doctrine to those false Christians use, who under pretext of sheeps clothing
do make show, when inwardly they are nothing less the^ true Christians. And
although the life be corrupt, yet it should not, or may not be drawn into the
argument of false and wicked doctrine, as the Papists do at this day, esteeming
and condemning our doctrine by the wickedness of our lives (which way of arguing
if it were worth any thing, now the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had not
been sound, because even then many false Christians were found) but it is yet
and will be a show and mark of the men themselves whereby The life is the mark
of a man.
we may know whether they be true or false Christians; he that teaches
otherwise teaches otherwise then he lives, and when he believes aright, he
does blot his faith with an Antichristian life, as if Ivory were spotted with
Ink. In which sense so many as are so, Christ calls them false Christians,
unfruitful trees, fit for nothing but to be burned; lastly, that only is true
and Christian faith, which works by love, by which a man is made or becomes
a new creature, by which he is regenerated, by which he is united with God, by
which Christ lives in us, dwells and works in us, by which the kingdom of
God is built in us; and lastly, by which the holy Ghost purges and enlightneth
our hearts. To which do belong many golden Oracles of holy Scripture, such as
that 1 Cor. 6. He that cleaves to the Lord is spirit. And what is it to have
the Spirit of Christ, and to breath with it, then to have the same
understanding and mind, and the same heart? which joint breathing and consent,
is nothing else but a new, holy, noble, heavenly, spiritual, and heroical
life of Christ in us. Also 2 Cor. 6. In Christ is a new creature, terming to
be in Christ, not only to believe in him, but to live in him. Also Hosea 2. I
will espouse thee to me for The espousing of Christ and its fruit.
ever, in faith I will spouse thee to me. Which indeed signify nothing else
then that a man wholly and spiritually is to be united to Christ; so that
where faith is, there is Christ; where Christ is, there his life is in man;
where the life of Christ is, there is love; where love is; there is God
himself (for God is love) and the holy Ghost remains. For all things are
connexed and chained together; they cleave together no otherwise then the head
with the members, and the cause with the effect. Which connection of faith and
life, blessed The chain of virtue.
Peter, Epist. 2. chap. 1. representing to us, writes thus: But of all have
especial care, add virtue to your faith, and in virtue knowledge, and in
knowledge abstinence, and in abstinence patience, and in patience piety, and in
piety brotherly love, and in brotherly love charity. For if you have these
things and abound therein, you shall not be empty, nor be without fruit in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But for those that have not these
things, those are blind and hand-bound, being forgetful of the purging of
their old sins. In which place the Apostle eloquently declares in whom this
conjoyning of faith and life is not, when to be ignorant of Christ, to fall
from faith, and to walk in darkness. For it is the property of true True faith.
faith to change a man wholly, to renew him and to quicken him in Christ, so
that he may live and remain in Christ, and Christ likewise in him.

CHAP. XL. Certain Rules very profitable to lead our lives Christian-like, and
devoutly.
1 Timothy 4. Exercise thy self in piety: for piety is profitable for all
things, having promise both of this life, and the life to come.
IN this admonition is contained a brief description of a Christian life, by
which we are taught, that a Christian ought to spend all his time in the study
of piety, (which is the compendium of all Christian virtues;) first, because it
is profitable for all things, in all our words and deeds, blessing them if so
be we use it in them: Secondly, because God does reward it both in this life
and the life to come, where we shall receive the everlasting harvest of our
labors.

Rule I. First, although thou can not live so perfectly as the word of God
commands, and as thy spirit would, yet thou God allows the good will for
the deed
must never but wish ardently the same. For after this manner the holy desires
of the Saints were acceptable unto God, who also allows them; because he is
the beholder of the hearts, not the works. In the mean time having a special
care of one thing, to crucify thy flesh, and not to suffer it to rule.

II. In all things that thou think or The concupiscence of the flesh is the
door of the Devil.
do, study to preserve thy heart, lest thou be defiled with proud thoughts,
words, and works; or lastly, by wrath, and such like Devilish actions: For by
this means thy heart is open to the Devil, and shut up from God.

III. Strive for it, lest it happen that thou lose the liberty of thy mind
through evil concupiscences of earthly things, making thy self a servant and
slave of the creatures. For seeing thy soul is more noble then all the world,
it were a very unworthy thing to put it under, and sell it to the world, and
addict thy heart to frail and frivolous things of the world.

IV. Avoid studiously the sorrow of this world, that brings and works
death, and by covetousness, envy, and too Divine and worldly sorrow.
much care of a family, and also by incredulity and impatience is begotten. But
on the contrary, embrace divine heaviness, which proceeds from the
meditation of his sins, and infernal punishment, and* thereby works a
stable salvation, and also peace and joy in God, 2 Corinthians. 7. Indeed man ought
to bear the loss of no worldly goods so heavily as his own sins.

V. If thou can not bear thy cross with such joy as is meet, yet at least
take it with The cross how to be bo^n.
patience and humility, resting upon the divine will and pleasure of God. For
this is always good, neither does it respect or intend other things then our
profit and salvation. Therefore whatsoever God shall appoint or determine for
thee in making thee merry or sad, poor or rich in spirit, exalted high or low
and humble; and lastly, vile or excellent: think always this, It seemed good to
him, and expedient for thee; therefore that which pleases him, let it not
displease thee, but rather rejoice if he carry all things according to his will
and thy salvation. All the works of God are good, says Sirac. chap. 39. And
Psalm 144. The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works.
Wherefore it is more excellent The will of God always good, never evil.
that God in thee do his will, that never swarveth from good or his own end,
which thou ought to suffer willingly, who art by nature always inclineable
to evil.

VI. Consolations and heavenly visits are to be received with humble thanks.
Contrariwise, if they do not move thee, then know that the mortification of
the flesh is more profit for thee then the joys of the Spirit. For unto us
that be subject to sin, and dwelling in flesh and blood, grief is far
better then joy and delight. For many by reason of plenty of spiritual Sorrow
and dryness of the spirit how it is to be born.
consolation, fall into spiritual pride: But the Lord knows who are fit to
be led by a pleasant and lightsome way to eternal life, and who are fit to be
led by a crooked, sharp, sorrowful, fearful, and stony way. Always think it fit
for thee, that thou may come to life by that way the divine wisdom has
chosen, although it differ from thy opinion and desire. Better is sorrow then
laughter, says Solomon, Eccles. 7. Because by sorrow the mind of the offender
is corrected. The heart of a wise man is where sorrow is, and the heart of a
fool where joyfulnesse and mirth is.

VII. If thou can not bring great offerings of devotion, prayer, and
thanksgiving to God, offer to him that thou have, and can, commending and
adorning thy small sacrifices with good will and holy desires, that thy religion
and devotion may become acceptable before God: because to have even that pious
desire, or be willing to have, is no small grace, and most acceptable sacrifice
to God; because so much as we wish to perform before him of devotion, prayer,
praises, and desire of heavenly things, even so much it is before God. For he
requires nothing of thee but that his grace and favor may work in thee,
neither can thou return him any more then he has first bestowed on thee. In
the mean time desire this of Jesus Christ with humble prayer, Our perfection is
in Christ.
that he would supply thy sacrifices with his most perfect sacrifice, because
he is our perfection, ours on the contrary all of them are lame and unperfect.
Wherefore say, my God and Father, let my devotion be acceptable unto thee, my
faith, my prayers, my thanksgivings, in thy most beloved Son, and those not
for their own worth, but esteem them for the merit of Christ, and it cannot be
but that his most perfect works be and shall be pleasing unto thee. For he, he
shall copiously supply what is wanting in me. And by this means our piety,
prayer and thanksgiving; how unperfect soever, obscure and small it be, the
greatest weight of glory and dignity is given in exchange In faith and Christ
all our things are perfect.
for the merit of Christ. As an infant if it be naked and defiled, is not
seemly, nor amiable; but if it be honestly clothed and adorned, is pleasing to
all: so all thy works are of themselves, and their own nature, nothing; which
yet if they be adorned with the perfection of Christ, they are most acceptable
to God the Father. Even as Apples otherwise of no great value or price, if they
be placed in golden Scutcheons, or Sockets, are more excellent and beautiful
then themselves: so our prayers, our piety, and thanksgiving in Christ, is more
worthy, more precious and more noble made: according to that of the Ephesians,
chap. 1. He has gratified us in his beloved Son.

VIII. When sins and manifold imperfections do make thee sad, let them not A
Christian may sorrow, but not despair.
make thee to despair. Although they be many, think this: There is mercy with
the Lord, and plenteous redemption with him, Psa. 130. If thy imperfections be
great again and again, remember Christ's merits are far greater, and say with
David, Psalm 11. Have A repentanr soul is at peace with God.
mercy upon me according to thy great mercies. And when by the grace of God
thou art penitent for thy sins, and do behold Christ in faith, then in like
manner God is grieved at thy punishment, and pardon and remission follows
this thy divine and wholesome contrition by and by: and so often as thou becomest
an offender, and returnest again to him by sorrowful sighs. For even as the
Leper was healed in a moment when he said to Christ; Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me whole: and he answered, I will, be thou clean: So Almighty God
inwardly and in the Spirit, makes thee clean, saying, Be confident my son,
thy sins are forgiven thee. Which great mercy of God in cleansing and pardoning
our sins, prefigured in that Lepers example, ought not to give us occasion to
sin again, but more and more to glorify God: whereupon thou may say; My
soul praise the Lord.

IX. Outward injuries, reproaches, and How injuries are to be born
upbraids, beware they do not provoke thee to wrath, indignation, or revenge;
but rather think them to be certain trials of thy heart, by which God would
prove thee, what is in thee, and in thy heart does lie hid; I say, whether
meekness and humility, or pride and wrath. For whatsoever lies hid in a man,
or concealed, provocated contumelies do make trial of him. Therefore if thy
heart be endued with humility and lowliness, thou will easily bear all
contempts; nay, whatsoever shall happen to thee of that kind, thou will accept
it as a punishment of God for thy just desert and sin, after the example of
David, who being reproached to his face by Shimei, said (2 Samuel 16.) God
commanded him to revile David. Moreover, thou should think the contempt of us
to be a great part of the contumely of Christ, which a living and a true member
of him ought to participate, according to that saying, Heb. 13. Let us go to
him, bearing our infirmities. Not being unmindfull with what heart, with what
lowliness he did bear his reproach; then conclude, for him in like manner
thou art to bear thy reproaches and private injuries with an equal mind. Do not
thou say, Shall I suffer these things at his hands? For by reason of the
lowliness, and most patient heart of Christ, all things should be moderately
born by thee. I conceal the benignity of Christ to be so great, that for one
contumely that an innocent does suffer, he is ready to reward it with many
honors and gifts. That David knew when he received the reproach of Shimei, as
a pledge and token of honor to come, saying, Suffer him to revile as the Lord
has commanded him. If the Lord shall respect my affliction, and the Lord shall
return me good for his cursing this very day. Wherefore let not the fables of
men perturb thee, but rather rejoice, because the glory of Gods Spirit rests
in vile things, 1 Pet. 4. Victory consists in patience.


X. Study to overcome and pacify thy enemies and detractors with benefits and
goodness; not in wrath, nor in revenge, nor in returning answer: for no man
will be reconciled to thee by this means, seeing that victory consists in
virtue, not in vice. For as Devils do not drive one another out, or away: so
revenges and maledictions do not pacify but provoke thy calumniators. For as
no man goes about to heal a frantic man, or a wretched person, or a wounded
man afflicted with soars, with beating, or club-law: so a man evil affected to
you, is to be handled with lenity, and not with cruelty; and by sweet and
gentle means pacified. That which God himself, to overcome us, does think he
must observe, pacifying our malice with his goodness, and our wrath with his
love, and inviting us with this such and so great benignity to repentance. And
Paul has commended the same Art unto us, Romans 12. Be not overcome of evil,
but overcome evil with goodness. For this is our victory.

XI. If in thy neighbor thou observest We ought not to envy good in others.
a gift which God has adorned him with before thee and others, take heed thou
do not envy this in him, rather rejoice and give God thanks: for seeing all
the chosen and faithful are one body, it follows that the beauty of every
member do ennoble the whole body. On the contrary, if thou perceive The sin of
our neighbor is to be condoled.
any misery in thy neighbor, lament it as thine own, thinking the condition of
all men to be equal, and the weakness of the flesh to be alike; and he that
cannot take compassion nor condole, he is no member of Christ. For he thought
ours his own, by compassion he delivered us from all our miseries. To which
belongs that of Saint Paul to the Galatians, chap. 6. Bear one another
burdens, and so you shall fulfill the law of Christ.

XII. The vices and sins of our neighbor are to be hated even as the works of
Hate the vice, not the m^n.
the Devil; and if he should be no otherwise, lest thou become more wicked then
the man himself; but rather bewail his lot, because he is subdued with such
sins, and commend his cause to God, as Christ prayed for his enemies upon the
Cross, Father forgive them. And contrariwise, whosoever hates man, cannot
please God, seeing it is his property to desire to rectify all men, according
to that of Luke 9. The Son of Man came not to destroy, but to save men's souls.

XIII. Think all men frail, but thy self A Christian thinks himself the
greatest sinner.
most frail: for before God all men are of equal condition, and alike
condemnable, because we have all sinned, neither have we any thing whereon we
may boast before God. Then how great a sinner soever thy neighbor be, take
heed thou believe not therefore thou art the better before God. Let him that
stands take heed that he fall not. Yea he that makes himself the lowest of
all men, this man keeps the grace and favor of God. It is sure that thou no
less stand need of the grace and mercy of God, then the greatest sinner;
which is the greater to thee, the more humble thou art. Wherefore blessed Paul
accounted himself the greatest sinner, 1 Timothy 1. And therefore says, That he
obtained mercy Christ showing his patience in him. To which alike is that which
he says, 2 Cor. 12. As concerning my self, I will boast of nothing but my
infirmities.

XIV. That true illumination does follow The contempt of the world is from
illumination.
contempt of worldly things. For even as the sons of this world have their
inheritance upon earth, as temporal honors, frail wealth, vain splendour and
beauty, which they love and keep as treasures: so the treasures of the sons of
God are, poverty, contempt, persecution, contumely, and reproach, the cross,
death, martyrdom and punishment; whereupon Moses preferred the contumely of
Christ before the treasure of Egypt: which is true illumination.

XV. The true name of Christians written The name of Christians.
in heaven, is the true knowledge of Christ in faith, by which we are
transplanted into Christ, and written in him as in the book of life, from whom
do flow living virtues, which God in that day will beautify with an honorable
testimony. Mat. 25. bringing forth all those treasures which we have laid up
in heaven: 1 Timothy 6. and bringing to light every work which is wrought in God,
Joh. 3. None of the Saints has made himself famous by any virtue, which will
be forgotten, Psalm. 112. And this virtue of his, as faith, charity, mercy,
patience, and the like, are that name written in heaven, and the note and
character of the Saints, and the eternal names of heaven. Of which more in the
second Book.

CHAP. XLI. In which is repeated the sum of the whole Book.
That the whole Christian Religion does consist in the restoration of the
divine Image in Man, and extirpation of the Image of Satan.
2 Corinthians. 3. We all beholding with a revealed face the glory of the Lord, are
transformed into the same Image from glory to glory, as it were by the Spirit
of the Lord.
IN the true knowledge of Christ, and of his person, offices, benefits, and
heavenly gifts, does consist the blessed life; which the H. Ghost does
enlighten in us as a certain new light, which in it self becomes more and
more clear, as a certain metalline body, Wherein consists eternal life.
or a glass by making it clean, becomes more neat and clearer, or as an
infant daily augmented in stature and growth. For even as righteousness is
given to a man by faith in Christ, and then he begins his conversion or
regeneration, or to be begotten in his conversion, and daily to be renewed
after the Image of God; neither is he by and by a man, but is an infant, whom
afterward the holy Ghost does nourish, and from day to day does more and more
conform him to Jesus Christ. For the whole life of a Christian man upon this
earth, What Christianity is.
ought to be nothing else then a reformation of the image of God, so that he
might live continually in the new birth, and on the contrary mortify the old
man daily. Which manner of life is only begun in this world, and perfected in
the world to come. Therefore he that before the day of the last judgment, and
so of his death, has not made his beginning, in this man the Image of God shall
never be erected to all eternity. Wherefore I hold it very needful forthwith
to inculcate and inform what is the Image of God, and also what the Image of
Satan is, seeing that in the knowledge of these, the whole Christian religion
consists, and from this one head many other doctrines of original sin, of
freewill, and so of repentance, of faith, of justification, of prayer, of
regeneration, renovation, sanctification, and of the new life, and obedience
come to be explained. Therefore the soul of man is an immortal spirit, endued
by God with excellent powers and faculties, as understanding, will, memory, and
other motions and affections of the mind. And this ought to be turned to God,
and in him to be made the image of God; so The soul of man is the glass of God.
that as the object in a glass, so in it God may be manifested and made
conspicuous. In which sense Saint Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 3. That the glory of
God in the image of God renewed does shine as in a glass. Moreover, as God is
good and holy himself, so the substance and essence of the soul in the
beginning, The conformity of our soul with God in the state of in^ocency.
was originally good and holy: And as in God there was no evil, so the soul of
man was without all evil from the beginning: as in God nothing is but good,
Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 92. so in the soul there was nothing that was not good: as God
is all-knowing and wise, the humane soul was full of divine knowledge and
spiritualls celestial, and eternal wisdom: as the divine wisdom disposed all
things in number, weight and measure, and knew the strength of all creatures,
as well celestial as terrestrial; so the mind of man was enlightened by the same
light. Neither was the will inferior to the understanding, as equally holy and
conformable to the divine will in all things. Therefore as God was, so the soul
of man was, just, benign, merciful, long suffering, patient, meek, courteous,
true, and chaste. Which conformity of the humane will with the divine, all the
affections, appetites, desires and motions of the heart, did participate,
emulating or following most perfectly the motions and affections of the divine
will; even as God is charity, so the affections of the man did breathe nothing
but mere charity: and as God Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are joined together
and conspire in ineffable and eternal love; so all the affections, motions, and
desires of the humane soul, by a mere, most pure, most perfect, and most
ardent love from the bottom of the heart, did grow warm and The body of man is
the temple of God.
prosper together, so that the man loved God and his honor more dearly then
himself. Moreover, even as in the soul, so also in the body, the image of God
did shine most gloriously, which therefore in all the faculties thereof was
holy, chaste, subject to no filthy concupiscences, or motions, beautiful,
comely, of perfect health, immortal, and was without molestation, tediousness,
passion, grief, vexation and old age. In brief, the whole man both in mind and
body, was perfect, holy, just, and acceptable to God every way. For as the man
was the image of God, it follows necessarily that the body it self be holy,
and conformable to God, according to blessed Paul, who commanded to sanctify
the body, soul, and spirit together. For seeing that the man consists of
soul and body, and therefore bodily and spiritual functions going together, it
is necessary that a soul holy and just, accomplishing its works through the
body, and in the body, should have an observant instrument and equally holy as
it self. Therefore as the soul did burn; or was zealous in the most pure love
of God, so all the faculties of the body did imitate the same gesture in the
love of God and his neighbor. As the soul was all merciful, so the body with
all the powers thereof, did incline to clemency. As in the divine soul chastity
did shine, so all the body, with all internal and external senses and powers,
did use perfect purity and chastity. In brief, the perfections of virtues were
conspicuous no less in the body then in the mind or soul. Wherefore it was
easy What heart signifies in Scripture.
for a man in the state of innocence to love God with all his heart, with all
his soul, and all his strength, and his neighbor as himself. Hereupon it is,
that when Almighty God requires the heart of man, the whole man as concerning
body, soul, and all his strength, is to be understood. In which sense the name
of heart in Scripture is understood every where; so that with it do come all
the strength of the soul, and ^^ it were the nerves, the understanding, memory,
affections and desires. Neither is it for other reasons when God requires the
soul, understanding by that denomination the whole man, so much as in him is:
which indeed is to be conformed to Justice, righteousness and joy, cleave
together.
him, to be renewed in Christ, and that he ought to walk in spirit, or in a
new and spiritual life. But the perfection of most sincere joy does accompany
the perfection of holiness, righteousness, and love in the man wherewith he
was most sincerely affected; God so disposing it, that where divine holiness
is, there also should be divine joy: which two, as they cannot be separated, so
they make the Image of God. But we who in this life do attain to only an
unperfect and begun righteousness of God and his holiness, for these
beginnings of the righteousness of Christ living in all the faithful, if we
be devout, if we be exercised in the Kingdom of God, we shall and do
participate thereof in this world, and have the fruits thereof, even the first
fruits of that heavenly joy. Therefore how much every Christian profits in
love, so much divine pleasure and joy he does find in himself. Which holy and
divine love, because in that day it shall receive the last hand and its
perfection, therefore also our joy shall be then perfect, Christ bearing
witness, John 16. For charity or love is life and joy; as contrariwise, where
love is not, there is neither life nor joy, but death it The greatest joy for
the love of God.
self; wherein the Devil and wicked impenitent men shall remain to all
eternity. This love makes the father of the son, the bridegroom of the bride
draw an incredible delight: yet it is a far greater love that is perceived from
the love of the Creator, which most lovingly kisseth us with the kisses of his
mouth, that is, in Christ, and in him by the charity or love of the holy Ghost
comes upon us, and takes up his dwelling with us. And of this image of God
and the Image of God differ.
God which consists in similitude with God, when we make mention of it, we
do not mean that a man should be every way like God in justice,
righteousness, and holiness, and become like God himself, (for God is
incomprehensible, and he is immense as concerning his essence, virtue and
properties) but only to carry about the image of God, as is declared in diverse
places of this book. Where, what we have commented of the Image of God, those
are no conjectures, but things indeed: neither can it be denied of the most
perverse, that Almighty God created man that he might be his most clear
looking-glass, so that if one were desirous to know the nature of God, he
might look back to himself, and counsel with himself, contemplate God in
himself, as in a glass might see his Image within and in his heart, as his
life and happiness. But the Devil beholding this Image The acts of the Devil
to abolish the Image of God.
of God in man with wicked envious eyes, laid in wait with many deceits and
machinations, until at last through disobedience and an hostile mind conceived
against God, he overthrew that Image and destroyed it: which he has attained
unto with such craft, as never any thing was attained unto, or shall be.
Neither was it an obscure thing unto him, if the man had remained in that
state, he had been his Pride the original of all sin.
Lord: but so soon as he fell from him, he became a tyrant to him. Therefore
when all his forces, of malice and craft displayed, he found nothing more fit
to perfect his cogitations, then that sin by which he was bewitched and
pulled from God; he began to insinuate into our mother the affectation of the
divine Majesty by sweet and flattering speeches, with the help of the Serpent,
that old and deceitful Parasite, and the atchiever of so great The fall of Adam
a wickedness: which proud thought once entied into the heart and admitted,
there followed Apostasy, disobedience and transgression of the precept
concerning the Tree of knowledge not to be touched. Hereby came the image of
God to be overthrown, the holy Ghost to fly away, and the image of the Devil to
be set up in the place of the divine Majesty, and both of them to become the
bondslaves of the Devil, and he their Lord, to handle their souls most cruelly,
and as a Giant handles a child, to blind the understanding, to turn the will
from God, to accompany all the powers of the whole heart against God, and
intoxicate them with Satanicall malice, to overthrow all the image of God in
man, to plant his own in the room, to infect them with the contagion of his
own nature, to beget after his own image children not now of God but his own,
to fulfill all kind of sin and enmity against God; and lastly, to slay them
with eternal death. For even as in the image of God, life eternal, and the
happiness of man was contained: so death and condemnation did follow its
loss. This death those do best understand which fall and are cast into most
grievous spiritual temptations, being exposed to the tyranny of the Devil, by
infesting the miserable soul of them most cruelly with the custom of sinning;
Spiritual death and eternal by the fall of Adam.
under which cross being depressed and trodden down only, unless the holy
Ghost do under-prop him, and comfort him, then the Devil does fasten his death
upon them, and tormenteth their souls with pains and grief infernal: whereupon
it must needs be, that all the powers of the body do fail, the heart waxes
dry, and the marrow to be consumed, Psalm. 6. and the Spiritual temptation.
38. and the word of God, if any go about to be without life, with juice, and
with all devotion, and spiritual life. Into which Spiritual death
state when the business is to be brought, then the man is converted in the
agony of a true spiritual death, esteeming nothing of the holiness of all
men, righteousness, dignity, strength, power, glory, honor, arts and wisdom
of all men, without doubt this man shall perish, unless the grace of God do
prevent him. Therefore learn of me, O man, that Original sin is the most
terrible of terrible sins, that is, the loss of the hereditary
righteousness of God, and contrariwise the hereditary unrighteousness What
our original sin is.
of the Devil and man planted in the place, for which the sinner is cast from
God, and judged to eternal death, incurring the same without doubt, unless he
obtain remission of sins by faith in Christ. Which natural corruption of
soul, mind, and body, that thou, O man, may understand more exactly, it
shall not grieve me to express it more plainly, or more at large, exhorting
and praying thee for Gods sake and thine own happiness, that thon would
diligently read, and daily meditate this Article, whereby thou may know thy
natural misery, and thy in-born wickedness, no otherwise then in a glass, and
that which follows it, and continually lament and deplore the same. For the
sum of Christianity is no other thing What Christianity is.
then a continual spiritual wrestling with original sin, and continual
purging of it by the holy Ghost, and a serious (no superficial) repentance. For
how much every one mortifieth this natural iniquity, so much from day to day
he is renewed toward the Image of God. On the contrary, so many as inwardly
and from the heart do not mortify it by the holy Ghost, these are hypocrites,
whatsoever show of holiness Hypocrites.
they outwardly show unto the world. And whatsoever is not dead in it self,
and The necessity of regeneration
is not renewed by the holy Ghost to the image of God, all that is unfit for
the kingdom of heaven. Whereby there is to be noted, the necessity of the new
birth, and renovation, if we will put out the Image of the Devil, opposite to
the divine law. For as the Devil does hate God with all his heart; so has he
taught the humane soul, against God in hostile manner to behave it self, not
to love him, not to honor him, not to call upon him, to be against, and to
fly from him. As the Devil lives thus day by day in blindness, little
caring what is the Divine will; so all things bewitched by him, spend the time
unmindfull of God and his commandments; which mist and night of humane mind,
is a horrible and terrible destruction of the light, and of the image of God,
and also abominable sin, whereby the man is so far slided back, that he does
say, There is no God, Psalm 14. And for this blindness all humane kind is
abomination and accursed before Almighty God. And although there be and remain
in man a certain spark of natural light, by the force thereof he understands
some God to be, and that he is just, as the Ethnic Philosophers do teach; yet
the spiritual life, according to God and his righteousness, is A spark of
natural light remaining in m^n.
altogether extinguished in him. For the conscience, which is the Law of God
written in the heart of man in the creation, teaches what is good, whereby
there is no man so brutish in his pleasures, but by that conscience he thinks
there is a God, and that he is moved with no motion, but is chaste, and
therefore it cannot but that he abhors all filthiness, neither should he
do otherwise. But this good and right thought and spark, our light is put out
by the filthy pleasures of the body, and the concupiscences thereof, no other
ways then if water were cast upon it. After the same manner a slanderer or an
homicide sometime reasons with himself; Certainly there is a God that will
not that men should be killed, but would have them preserved: but this spark
lasts not long, but The spirituell life in man is altogether dead.
by and by Devilish wrath, and the sweetness of revenge extinguisheth it.
From which it is understood that a spiritual life consisting in love and
truth, in a carnal man is altogether dead, neither does he think otherwise,
howsoever sometimes by the light of nature they understand that there is a God,
and that he does govern humane affairs, yet by and by being blinded with the
darkness of heart, they call in The mortal blindness of man.
question his providence, as their books do witness. And from this natural
blindness and in-born mists, arises incredulility, unstedfastnesse, and
wavering-mindednesse, which all men naturally are incident unto; and for which
before Almighty God they are abomination, because they live not in faith, and
they do not trust from their heart. For seeing that a natural man of the
spiritual life and works of the same, is altogether ignorant and profane,
hereon it is, that he calls not on God, but trusts in his wisdom, power
and strength, then which nothing can be thought more foolish. Of the same
blindness the fruit is contempt of God, and spiritual security. For as the
Devil secure of God, cares not to humble himself before him, but persevereth
in his pride; so he The seed of the Devil in man.
does infect the soul of man by the contempt of God, with security, and
insolency, so that he does not humble himself before God; but secure of the
divine fear, does all things after his own will and mind, proudly, insolently.
As the Devil carried along with his own strength and wisdom, governs
himself: so the soul of man infected with the contagion of the Devil, is
wise unto it self, does counsel and govern it self. As the Devil seeks his
own honor only: so the man has no care of the divine honor, but only his
own. As the Devil has contended with God; so has he armed the soul of man
against God by impenitence. As the Devil does blaspheme the name of God, and
is extremely ungrateful toward his Creator, as he is unmerciful, wrathful,
and bloody; so he has infected man with these vices, as with a pestilent
poison. As the Devil rejoices to exercise tyranny against man, and stirs up
one against another; so man by his discipline depraved, insolently carries
himself over his neighbor, and despises him as a man of no account, derideth
him as a fool, and abhors him as a man covered with greatest sins and
outrages. As the Devil is an homicide; so he stirs up the soul to the same
cruelty and thirst of humane blood. Lastly, persuade thy self assuredly, that
God does not accuse the outward members, but the God accuses the soul always.
heart and soul always: for the heart and soul is an homicide, and a lier,
no^ his hand, not his mouth. Therefore when God commanded man to call upon him
in necessity, he gave that charge to the soul, not to the mouth. He that
understands not this, he truly remains as a Mole-warp in the Scripture,
neither understands the nature of original sin, of repentance, of the new
birth; lastly, not any Article of Religion. We see daily before our eyes, the
extreme malice of men, their horrible pride, cruelty, hatred, and beastly
envy: so that they are accustomed to lie in wait for another man's life with
the hazard of their own, and desire to have their neighbor utterly overthrown.
Which inhumane and detestable envy, wrath, and rancor of minds, what other
thing is it then that seed The holy matrimony in the state of innocence.
and image of the Devil, of which we speak? God had planted in man in the
state of innocence, a pure, chaste, and honest conjugall affection, that he
might beget children after the image of God according to the spirit; neither
could there be imagined a more holy pleasure or love, then to propagate the
image of God, and to multiply humane kind to the glory of God, and good of men.
So, I say, if men in the state of innocence could beget infinite children, and
could propagate the honor of God and his image in infinite generations, for
the great love both of God and man as the image of God, nothing more
acceptable, nothing more pleasant, and nothing would be more to be desired. For
even as God in the creation of man, did receive an ineffable pleasure, and had
in him (or took in him) delight as his image; so the man was to receive and
have most pure pleasure in the procreation of his life, and sending forth of
the divine Image, which at this day is the reason of marriages; and how Satan
has spotted and defiled that The abuse of matrimony.
most pure and chaste matrimonial love with his filthiness, it is as evident
as the noonday. Therefore they mix together no otherwise then brute beasts,
and in a blind and furious heat do beget like unto themselves. Moreover, as
the Devil is a Thief and a Robber, so he infuseth the same guile and art in
the soul of man. As the Devil is a calumniator, a Sophister, a Sycophant, and
a Scoffer of God and man, depraving both deeds and words, and wresting the
sense, and repugning it with false interpretation, (of which craft he showed
us a fair example, when he suduced our first parents) so the minds of men
corrupted with his pestilent contagion, did contract a perverse nature, lying,
and cunning intrapping, and calumniating. Which Diabolical and Satanicall
corruption of the soul, inexpressible both in the craft and variety of it
self, the Psalmist describes under the person of a double tongued lying man,
Psalm 14. Romans 3. and blessed James, chap. 7. For God (as we said even now)
does not accuse the mouth only, the tongue, hands and feet, but the whole Man
in his own law, yea, his heart and mind, as the cause and fountain of all
evil, as appears by the two last precepts of the Decalogue concerning
concupiscence to be avoided. Which is well to be observed The Image of the
Devil.
with special regard. And this is that image of the Devil set by his Father
against the divine image, as lust and pleasure in sinning, slandering and
reproaching, so far forth as many that desire to be accounted good
Christians, take occasion of traducing their neighbor; which happily being
done, they say, applauding themselves; I did this lately, now I have enough, I
am freed of a great burden; I seem to my self to return, as it were, to life
again, when at length I have satisfied my mind. What blindness is this of
yours, and unhappiness, O mortals, even not to know by whose instinct you do
these things? whose sons you are? whose image you bear about? or do you
doubt that these works are of the Devil, the work-master, these fruits to be
of the seed of the Devil, these properties to be from the nature of the Devil,
which he has planted in our nature, that he might riot by a plentiful
increase in vices of all kinds, as pride, covetousness, lust and slanders, of
which we spoke erewhile? And this corruption of the Satanicall image, or
original sin, is so filthy, horrible, and profound, as no man can in thought,
much less in speech express the abomination of your hearts. Which
notwithstanding no creature, no Angel, I say, nor men, can either amend, or
purge, or root out. For seeing our strength and powers are utterly worn No
creature can extirpate sin.
out, consumed, and spiritually dead, it is a vain thing to expect any thing
from them. Therefore this remains, that we be miserable and unhappy to all
eternity, or use the counsel or help of some most powerful avenger and
extirper of sins, Lord of evil and death, and which can by himself change,
renew, and purge humane nature. Whereby it appears in the first place, that
justification can be obtained by no humane good work, as also the necessity of
regeneration is to be found out. The natural power of man.
And to speak this again, the soul can by its own power or strength do nothing
but live in its in-born pravity, malice, and all kind of fins both against the
precepts of God, and most especially against the first Table, in transgressing
whereof consists the true enmity with God; in our understanding and will we
are so blind, corrupt and dead, that it is against nature to fear God, love,
call The true explication of free will.
on him, honor, praise, worship, trust in him, and to convert our souls to
him. As concerning the second Table, truly I confess that there is in the
soul a spark of freewill remaining, yet very weak and without sinews, which
therewithal it is hardly able to retain and bridle the evil concupiscences,
that they break not forth into outward works (to which things the example of
the virtuous Ethnicks are extant in their virtue;) but to change the heart, to
turn it to God, to purge it from wicked concupiscences, is a greater work,
only a work of divine strength. For the inward roots and fangs of evil are
most deeply fastened, so as all the endeavors of freewill cannot perform to
forbear to break out openly into flames to destroy all, but lives in smoke
and ashes. Therefore without God, this humane kind could not subsist, the will
of man is so depraved; and howsoever the Devil can do nothing more to exercise
the greatest cruelty in the mind of man, yet he cannot extirpate all natural
strength and affections, whereby we know the law of nature, and inbred
affection of married couples parents and children, which are foundations and
bands of humane society. For he that will do all things to which he is
carried by the force of corrupt nature, it must needs be that Why natural
love is left in man.
he shall disturb humane society, and find out a revenging sword of revenging
power. Moreover, it must be thought a deed done by the singular counsel of
God, that this natural affection was not utterly extinct, that we might
understand the love of God was the sovereign good, and the Image of God which
we lost by our fall and vice. But that which pertains to spiritual good,
concerning blessedness, and the Kingdom of God, is as true as truth it self;
blessed Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. The natural man understands not the things
that are of the spirit of God, for it is foolishness to him, and be cannot
understand it: that is, he has not the least spark of the spiritual light,
tasting nothing of those things which belong to an heavenly, divine, and
spiritual life, to which man only was created, that being enlightened with
spiritual light by the inward eyes of the soul; he might contemplate the
presence of God, and his most sincere love toward him, might live with Man was
born to a spiritual life
him, and depend on his beck and call throughout all his life. And of this
spiritual light in the Kingdom of heaven, the natural man has not the least
spark, and he must needs abide in this hereditary and inbred blindness,
unless he be divinely Natural blindness.
enlightened. To which I would to God that natural blindness did not adjoyn it
self, nor that the perversity of man were Man is nothing without Christ.
so great, as to put out that small light of nature, whereby moral virtues,
and external honesty of life is governed. There is great infirmity in the sons
of God.
Which when it comes to pass, then truly all the soul is blind, and cannot be
set free from such great blindness, unless it be enlightened by Christ,
regenerated by his spirit, renewed after the Image of God, and be made a new
creature; or to speak more truly, in this frail life it only begin to be.
For if every one of us that are in the new creature by the holy Ghost, do
consider, it will appear in truth, that the Image of God is lightly engraven
in us, or rather shadowed only, faith, hope, charity, and the fear of God,
these are only in the beginning; little humility, but on the contrary,
diffidency, pride and impatience, much greater; prayer weak and faint, and
cold, and love to our neighbor as weak. Moreover, very small sparks of
spirirituall chastity, on the contrary, flames of carnal pleasures, as also
self-love, the desire of private profit and honor, and the heat of
concupiscence will be found in our hearts. Whereupon it follows, that to
Inward strife.
the last gasp of our life, we are to fight and wrestle with old Adam, and the
image of the Devil by the spirit of God, neither ought we to have a greater
care, and to lay it to heart, then to pray, mourn, sigh, to ask, to seek, and
knock, that the holy Ghost may be given us, who as our Captain may daily
abolish in us the image of the Devil, and also renew us after the Image of God.
Whereby we are to understand, that we are not to trust to our selves, but to
the divine grace, and that is it which does all things in us, all things are to
be sought, desired, and entreated for of Christ by faith: Divine knowledge and
wisdom against our blindness, the righteousness of Christ against all our
sins; Christ his sanctification against our impurity, Christ his redemption,
virtue, victory and fortitude against The use of this chapter.
Death, Hell, and the Devil; pardon of all sins against the kingdom of sin and
Satan; eternal blessedness against all spiritual and corporal miseries; and
last of all, in Christ alone to obtain life eternal. Of which I shall say more
in the second Book.

CHAP. XLII. Wherein the reason of the order of the first Book is set down, and
therewith is taught that spiritual pride is to be eschewed; and herewithal that
no true and celestial gifts can be obtained without prayer.
1 Corinthians. 4. What have thou that thou have not received? And if thou have
received it, why do thou boast, as if thou had not received it?
BEfore I put an end to this Book, I thought good to understand and foresee
that the Reader be admonished of two things, rather two Chapters. The first is,
that through all this book, is by penitence, with all his fruits, as by
renovation in Christ, by mortification of the flesh, denial of our selves,
contempt of the world, and exercise of charity, so copiously and dive^sly
described, that was not without cause, nor rashly done by me. For, first of
all, repentance is the beginning and foundation Repentance is the beginning of
Christianity.
of Christianity, of a holy life, and our blessedness through faith: secondly,
true and solid consolation in the mind of man, cannot be felt to effect by him,
that does not not exactly understand the nature of original sin, (never to
be sufficiently deplored) fruits, and what kind of horrible, pestilent,
deadly, and diabolical poison and seed it is; when we have studied what we
can, which unless it be done, and a man before all things do well know his
own miseries, and so the terrible corruption of our original sin, in vain and
of no account are all the books of spiritual and Evangelicall consolation;
whereby it is given to understand, how preposterous and choice our nature is,
and how it rejoices in flatteries, because most men about this foundation, and
the forecited things of our sins, of our inbred corruption, and inborn
wickedness, we only please our selves. Which way of reasoning the holy
Scripture is just contrary, whose saying is, that a medicine is to be prepared
for the sick, and not for the sound and healthy; seeing that Christ is the true
Physician altogether unseasonable consolation.
of our souls, yet the crown of his merit with all vulgar consolations, is of
no worth nor use, where the knowledgement of the disease went not before; so
the whole Christian life is nothing else but a continual A Christian life
and daily crucifying and mortifying of the flesh. Neither can any man (this to
be said again and again) belong to Christ, who composeth himself and his life
otherwise: but those that are so, those are never Orphans, and without sincere
joy; nor lastly, without celestial comfort and consolation. Seeing this which
we speak of, our proper misery, the knowledge of our corruption and infirmity
by the holy Ghost, and meditation of the holy Scripture and Gospel, does bring
forth most true consolation of it self and the own nature brings us to
Christ; which seeing it is so, to be advised by me, Let no man of corrupt
judgment deceive thee and persuade thee that these books are of little
regard: Persuade thy self these are a blind Foolish judgment of this book.
kind of men, and that with the most ignorant of men they take knowledge of the
misery of their nature, both what Adam and Christ is, and how Adam is to die in
us, and how Christ ought to live in us; let not this be held for a dream,
understand it not so. And whosoever disdaineth this notice, it is certain that
he has his mind stuffed with the darkness of ignorance; neither does he
understand what repentance, what faith, what new birth, what regeneration is,
and in what chapters the whole course of living Christianty is contained. And
this is the first I desire thee my Reader. And the second, that thou be
mindful of spiritual pride: After that Almighty God Three sorts of spiritual
pride.
shall begin by his grace to work in thee spiritual gifts, new virtues, and new
knowledge in thee, ascribe none of these to thine own strength, but wholly to
divine grace; even the beginning of a holy life is righteousness before God,
and so to be interpreted; and it is as sure, that all that thou do, is
unperfect, lame, and defective. Moreover, that thou beware of the Devils
Cobwebs, and his devices, whose properties and custom is to sow Popple amongst
the Wheat, to whom therefore thou art not to give place; but how much more is
in the new gifts, the more do thou beware thou abuse it not to thine honor,
but in humble fear of God, ascribe whatsoever it be, to the great and eternal
author of them; Remedies against spiritual pride.
and to thy self on the contrary, thou shall deny all things, lest perhaps
thou may say sometimes in thine heart, O great faith of mine, great
knowledge, great gifts: for lest thou deceive thy self, none of these are
thine, but Gods, without whose illumination thou remainest a dead, filthy, and
vile sheafe. Therefore these gifts are none of thine, no more then the
glistering of a gem or precious stone wherein as a Jeweller he puts his
treasure: so God places in thee his goods, but without them thou art empty and
void. And it were great dotage and foolery, to take occasion to boast thy self
of another man's goods, as I shall speak more in the second book. For even as a
Jeweller when as so often as he pleases, has power to put his treasure or
Jewels into another box to carry where he pleases, or keep about him: so God
every moment may take his gifts from thee, whom therefore thou oughtst to
fear, and with all diligence eschew spiritual arrogance. Moreover, thou must
think that Almighty God will require an exact account of those things of thee.
And how great soever those things be which our heavenly Father has lent thee
through Christ, they are only beginnings and first fruits of solid graces.
Furthermore, it is thy part to know, that there is no perfect gifts obtained
but by prayer from God; without which whatsoever they be that thou have, those
truly are but shadows and unprofitable dead seeds, bearing no ripe fruits, as
thou may understand by my little book of prayers, No profitable gifts are
obtained without prayer.
whereby examples we teach, that without prayer no heavenly gifts do descend
into the heart of man. Of which little book, that thou may have some taste, I
invite thee to read those things which I have written in the second book of
prayers. There be two things in special which all our prayers ought to
respect, one is the destruction of the Devils image, which comes in power of
incredulity, pride, covetousness, lust, wrath, and such like. The other is,
the restoration of the divine Image, in which is contained faith, hope,
charity, humility, patience, lowliness, the fear of the Lord: which two things
are by The sum of the Lords prayer.
divine workmanship briefly contracted in the Lords prayer, as I may so say,
that it makes part for us, and part against us. For if the power of God be to
be sanctified, then it behooves thee to kill thine own power, with all the
pride of old Adam. If the kingdom of God be to be built in thee, the Devils
must be overthrown: if the will of God be to be fulfilled in thee, thine must
needs be contemned and denied. And these two heads in the book of prayer are
required, if thou will have it profitable unto thee, are shadowed, as I said
even now, in the Lords Prayer, which is a certain breviary of heavenly and
temporal gifts; which because the Son of God commanded us to pray, therefore
those things his heavenly Father will give us much more willingly, it is more
sure then needs be called in question, or any doubt made thereof. Of which in
another place.

Finis.
Glory to God alone.
The Contents of the Chapters of this Book.
CHap. 1. Of the Image of God. page 1 2 Of the Fall and Apostasy of Adam. 9 3
How Man is renewed in Christ to life eternal. 18 4 What true repentance is,
and what the Cross. 28 5 What true faith is. 36 6 How the word of God ought to
live in man. 44 7 How the Law of God is written in the heart. 52 8 Without true
repentance man cannot challenge Christ's merit. 60 9 The Antichristian life of
men deny Christ and true faith. 71 10 Worldly men by their lives deny
Christianity. 75 11 Those that imitate not Christ, are none of his. 78 12 A
Christian must die to himself, live to Christ. 91 13 A Christian must die to
the world and himself. 100 14 A Christian ought to despise his own life. 110 15
The old m^n should die, the new man revive. 122 16 The combat of the Flesh and
Spirit. 129 17 A Christians inheritance is not of this world. 136 18 Eternal
things to be preferred before temporal. 146 19 Most miserable to himself, most
dear to God. 154 20 By contrition our life is to be amended. 163 21 What true
divine worship is. 176 22 Amendment of life a mark of a Christian. 193 23 The
friendship of the world is to be avoided. 199 24 Of love toward God and our
Neighbor. 206 25 Of love to our Neighbor in special. 221 26 Wherefore our
Neighbor is to be loved. 227 27 Wherefore our enemies are to be loved. 238 28
The Creator to be loved before the Creatures. 245 29 Of the reconciliation of
our Neighbor. 251 30 Of the fruits of love. 261 31 Self-love and arrogance
defile the best gifts. 273 32 Good works without charity not acceptable. 281 33
God accepts works according to the heart. 286 34 God alone the author of our
salvation. 291 35 Without a holy life all things are unprofitable. 302 36 Who
taste the virtue of the hidden Manna. 308 37 Their loss who follow not Christ in
their lives. 324 38 The fruit of an Antichristian life. 341 39 How the purity
of doctrine is to be obtained. 350 40 Certain Rules conducing to a devout life.
362 41 Christian Religion wherein it ^onsisteth. 375 42 Spiritual pride is to
be eschewed. 400
FINIS.

