THE ARMY FOR A TREATY, AND ACCOMMODATION: OR, Collections out of several
Papers formerly published by the Army, containing their desires (grounded on
solid reasons) of Peace by Accommodation with His Majesty and His Party, on
terms very suitable to those now proposed by the Parliament.

Whereunto is annexed, A Letter to His EXCELLENCY, and the Officers of the Army
in Council Assembled. And short Observations on the Collections.

JAMES 1. 8. A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Printed in the
Year, 1648.

In the representation of the Army, June 14. 1647. This is set down as the 8.
proposal for PEACE.
8. THat (public justice being first satisfied by some few examples to
posterity out of the worst excepted persons, and other Delinquents, having made
their Compositions) some course may be taken (by a general Act of Oblivion, or
other ways,) whereby the seeds of future War, or fewds either to the present
Age, or Posterity, may the better be taken away, by easing that sense of
present, and satisfying those fears of future ruins, or undoing to person^,
or Families, which may drive men into desperate ways, for self-preservation,
or remedy; and by taking away the private remembrance and distinction of
Parties, as far as may stand with safety to the Rights and Liberties we have
hitherto fought for Page 45.

In the humble Remonstrance from His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the Army
under His Command, presented to the Commissioners at S. Albans, June 23. 1647.
is this passage.
ANd whereas there has been scandalous informations presented to the Houses,
and industriously published in Print, importing, as if His Majesty were kept as
Prisoner amongst us, and barbarously, and uncivilly used. We cannot but
declare, that the same, and all other suggestions of that sort, are most false,
scandalous, and absolutely contrary, not only to our declared desires, but
also to our Principles, which are most clearly, for a general Right, and just
Freedom to all. And therefore, upon this occasion we cannot but declare
particularly, that we desire the same for the King, and others of His Party,
(so far as can consist with common Right and Freedom, and with the security of
the same for future;) And we do further clearly profess, we do not see how
there can be any peace to the Kingdom firm or lasting, without a due
consideration of, and provision for the Rights, quiet, and immunity of His
Majesty's Royal Family, and His late partakers: and herein we think that
tender and equitable dealing, (as supposing their cause had been ours) and a
spirit of common love, and justice, diffusing it self to the good and
preservation of all, will make up the most glorious Conquest over their hearts
(if God in mercy see it good) to make them, and the whole people of the Land
lasting Friends. Page 64.

In a Letter from Sir Tho: Fairfax to both Houses of Parliament, giving an
account of transactions between His Majesty, and the Army, there is this
passage.
IN general, we humbly conceive, that to avoid all harshnesse, and afford all
kind usage to His Majesty's Person, in things consisting with the peace and
safety of the Kingdom, is the most Christian, honorable, and prudent way: And
in all things (as the representation and Remonstrance of the Army, does
express) we think that tender, equitable, and moderate dealing both toward
His Majesty, His Royal Family, and late Party (so far as may stand with the
safety of the Kingdom, and security to our common Rights and Liberties) is the
most hopeful course to take away the seeds of War, or future fewds amongst us
for Posterity, and to procure a lasting Peace, and a Government in this
distracted Nation. Page 75.

Reading, July 6. 1647.
In the Proposals of the Army, 1 Aug. 1647.
14. That (things here before proposed, being provided for settling and securing
the Rights, Liberties, and safety of the Kingdom) His Majesty's Person, Queen,
and Royal Issue, may be restored to a condition of Safety, Honor, and
Freedom in this Nation, without diminution of their Personal Rights, or
further limitation to the exercise of the Regal Power, then according to the
particulars aforegoing. 15. For the matter of Compositions. 1. That a lesser
number out of the persons excepted in the two first qualifications (not
exceeding five for the English) being nominated particularly by the Parliament,
who (together with the persons in the Irish Rebellion included in the third
qualificaon) may be reserved to the further judgment of the Parliament as they
shall see cause: All other excepted persons may be remitted from the exception,
and admitted to Compositions. 2. That the rates for all future Compositions may
be lessened, and limited not to exceed the several proportions hereafter
expressed respectively; that is to say, 1. For all persons formerly excepted, not
above a third part. 2. For the late Members of Parliament under the first
branch of the fourth qualification, a fourth Part. 3. For other Members of
Parliament in the second, and third branch of the said qualification, a sixth
Part. 4. For the persons nominated in the said four qualifications, and those
included in the tenth qualification, an eighth Part. 5. For all others included
in the sixth qualification, a tenth Part. And that real Debts, either upon
record, or proved by witness, be considered, and abated in the valuation of
their Estates in all the cases aforesaid.
3. That those, who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant
put upon them, as a condition without which they may not Compound.
16. That there may be a general Act of Oblivion to extend to all (except the
persons to be continued (in exception as before) to absolve from all
trespasses, misdeameaners, etc. done in prosecution of the War) and from all
trouble or prejudice, for, or concerning the same. Page 116. 117.


For his Excellency, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, and the Officers of the Army under
his Command, in Council Assembled.
Right Honorable,
UNderstanding by common fame that on Tuesday November. 16. there is to be a
general Council of all the Officers of the Army, the result whereof may have
a great influence on the affairs of this distracted Kingdom. Out of a fervent
desire of my Countries good; I have taken the holdnesse to represent to your
Excellency, and the rest of that Honorable Council, an abstract of some
particulars out of your formerly Printed papers, containing your worthy
expressions to promote, with the freedom, the Peace of this Nation, by tender
respect to all Estates therein. How popular those expressions rendered your
Excellency, and the Army under your Command, I need not now tell your
Excellency, nor them: Nor need I express what contrary effects any recession
from those expressions, and proposals may work, if in so hopeful a
circumstance of affairs for Peace, there should be any interposition from you,
to frustrate the present expectation of the closure of our breach upon any
pretenses contrariant to those expressions enclosed, so deliberately penned,
and generally communicated to the eyes of all the Nation. Mutability in men of
your places, is in it self a thing too unsuitable: but in a case of this nature,
It cannot but be looked upon as the fruit of the turn of private interest (the
public being still the same;) And for men that have done so much for the
Public, to move on the hinge of private interest, in a business of this
concernment, how greatly it may obscure your present resplendent glory, I hope
you will rather foresee in reason, then adventure to read it in the black
letters of sad experience. Verbum sapienti. I will conclude with hope, and
prayer, that God will so direct you, that you will promte the happy hoped for
cloosure of our distractions, and crown all your former Victories over others,
with this victory over all private interest in your selves, to promote the
Public, which is most manifestly involved in a good Peace.

Observations on the foregoing passages.
REader, Thou may Observe that the whole Army in their Remonstrance Declare:
1. That it is not only against their desires, but Principles, to imprison the
King, or use Him uncivilly. And I hope their Principles are the same still.

2. They declare their belief; that there cannot be any Peace to the Kingdom
firm, or lasting, without a due consideration of, and provision for the
rights, quiet, and immunities of His Majesty's Royal Family, and His late
partakers.

3. That they come lower in moderating rigor to the Kings Party then the
Houses, bringing the parties exempted to five (the Parliament holds up to
seven:) And the five not condemned to death, but reserved to the further
judgment of the Parliament, as they shall see cause.

4. After all they move for a general Act of Oblivion in as full terms as
may be, and very rationally, to prevent future disturbance of the State. Whence
from their own pens it must inevitably follow, that if they (under pretense of
Justice) shall disturb this present Treaty, or use (to say no worse) any
uncivility to the King; They shall recede from their own Principles, render us
incapable of a peace firm and lasting; which the late experience since the
Vote of No addresses may more clear unto us. And if such an attempt be not
destructive to this poor Kingdom; the world may, God will rightly judge.

THE END.

