THE REFORMATION. A COMEDY. ACTED At the Dukes Theater.

Sunt, quibus in Satyra videor nimis acer -- Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 1. LONDON,
Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head, in the Lower walk of the New
Exchange in the Strand, MDCLXXIII.

PROLOGUE.
I Smile to think how every One that is here,
Expects Tartuffe or Scrupple should appear;
Who with Religions Twang and Mouth a-splay
Should Conventicle now instead of play:
But 't is the other house, you have lost your way.
Here Is nothing like a holy Reformation,
Nor Drum, nor Trumpet, though so much in Fashion
In all admired Plays of the new Translation.
Nay can you Guess what our dull Rogue should mean?
He has not left us Room for Gaudy Scene;
Which uses to amuse you for a time,
Whilst Nonsense safely glides away in Rhyme.
I Will swear I had advised him for the best,
To Lard it with fat Song or bawdy jest
Or write in Verse and huffe the Gods at least.
But he was humoursome and bid me say,
He was for plodding in the Ancient way:
Yet he would if this did not please our Friends,
In Rhyme and Nonsense strive to make amends.
If we procured Noise, Clothes, Scenes, Songs and Dance,
His Siege, or Conquest he can have from France.
Dramatis Personae.
Camillo an old severe Father. Mr. Samford Pacheco his Son a fop and a
reformer. Mr. Ant. Leigh Tutor to Pacheco an Englishman. Mr. Underhil Antonio
Reformer. Mr. Harris. Pedro Reformer. Mr. Cademan Leandro in love with Ismena.
Mr. Cosby Lysander Husband to Juliana. Mr. Medbourne Pisauro Gallant to Juliana
a Reformer. Mr. Smith Boy to Antonio. Mariana daughter to Camillo. Mrs. Caft.
Ismena daughter to Camillo. Mrs. Johnson. Juliana wife to Lysander. Mrs.
Batterton Lelia Cozen to Juliana. Mrs. Osborn Aemilia Mistress to Lysander.
Mrs. Lee Nurse. Mrs. Norris Lucia Servant to Aemilia.
Scene Venice.

THE REFORMATION
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Antonio. Pedro. Ant. BUT that I know thee honest, I could not guess thou
had a less design, than the betraying of this Town of Venice to the Grand
Seignior.


Ped. Or, since thou have such an opinion of my honesty, what do thou think
of the retaking Candy?


Ant. In earnest Pedro, thou have been as musing this two hours, as a
Politician would be thought to be, when he thinks of just nothing; sometimes
you stand cross armed, or biting of your nails; by and by nod, as if it was
concluded: then on the sudden scratch your head, as if some prodigious accident
had ruined the conquest of the Indies.


Ped. I am pleased it affords you mirth Antonio.


Ant. What a Devil ayl'st man? if it be want of Wench or Money, (as I Am sure
thou can have no other cause of Melancholy) thou have lived long enough, one
would think, to purchase confidence to tell thy Friend.


Ped. You Are sure to guess right, without being thought a Conjurer, nay you
might have left one of them out too, for Heaven send me money, and i will never
throw a way a thought, on any thing that is Woman; whilst I know how to purchase
them from a Ducat upwards.


Ant. But it may be you are grown particular; I have known as brawny a Donn as
your Worship, that has shrunk to the thinness of a Bul-rush, in less than two
months time, for this thing called Woman, that you talk of.


Ped. Certainly thou have a better opinion of my understanding; particularly as
the world goes now? Why Antonio, I tell thee, I will sooner turn Pimp to a
Suburb Bawdy House, where there is nothing to be got, but blows, dead Wine, and
the Pox: or Hermit, and forswear the sight of them, another extreme, and as
great a punishment, as --


Ant. Not so fierce, good Pedro, it must be money then.


Ped. Yes faith, I was thinking, since my Father will not be so civil as to
dye, what I shall do to live.


Ant. He begins to grow a little rude now, that is the truth on it, I had one,
thank my Fortune, that came to his Estate betimes, kept it till his Lease of
one and twenty Years was run out, and never thought good to renew.


Ped. That was kind, but mine is fourscore, yet thinks as little of Death, as he
did at fifteen: and of my conscience is as far from it; nay that that vexes me
I cannot rest for his rules of temperance, and I know not what, and how he lived
when he was a young man.


Ant. Pox of their Morals, when they are once past pleasures themselves, they
envy us. They never consider should we all live, as they do now, the World
would be undone, I tell thee Pedro, if it were not for this debauchery, that
kicks up our heels in convenient time, it would not hold half of us.


Ped. It would be pleasant, but to hear what cunning contrivances I had to live
in my Melancholy fit.


Ant. Will you give me leave to guess? I Will lay my life gaming was the first
proposal.


Ped. Right, and concluded on, till I considered there was never a Scriveners
Clerk, or Tailors Prentice about the Town, but understood the trade; nay more,
the very Women get it, and cheat with as much confidence as a Hec. that has
but one stake left, so that design was ruined: my next was a Soldiers Life.


Ant. The certain retreat of a broken Gamster.


Ped. But methoughts it was a little undecent for a man of my Quality, to walk
the Street with one Leg, it may be never an Arm, and half a Nose.


Ant. Thou never think how people would be concerned for thee; one that so
proper a Gentleman should not be able to carry his Drink to his Head, the Women
that your dancing was spoiled; besides the Honor Man.


Ped. Pox on it, That signifies just as much as Peoples Pity, when one's
certain of hanging: I Will have none on it: next I was for Poetry.


Ant. Why what could put that into thy Head? that is the high way to Beggary.


Ped. Not as the World goes now: Besides, believe me, it is an easy Trade to
one that understands a modern language or two, and will translate.


Ant. Nay he must rhyme too, or the Ladies will nere be pleased.


Ped. Phu! That Is but a weeks practice at Crambo, and once obtained saves us
pains: for it is impossible to write nonsense in it, some few long words, and
half a score sentences out of Seneca's Tragedies, make an Heroic Poet.


Ant. Come, thou have more wit than to think on it, never trouble thy self, thou
shall want nothing whilst thy Father lives; and when he dies, I know it all
secure.


Ped. You are still my Friend. That that vexed me was to see that Rogue Pisauro,
thrive by Air, wear his Jewels, variety of Cloths, keep his Lacquais, Horses,
play as deep as any man, and all this out of nothing.


Ant. It must be some Woman, the little Rogues are grown so loving since these
Wars, and want of men, that they begin to take it ill to be courted, and
provide for themselves.


Ped. I could nere discover't, he is as private as a Confessor.


Ant And upon the same account, for he gets money to conceal her vices: nay
your Confessor is like him too in this, that he seldom hides the Women's
faults, but in the same time he saves his own credit. But if it be a Woman,
much good may it do him, I shall never envy him.


Ped. Nor I, He had better thrash, or be chained to the Gallyes.


Ant. No more, here he is.


Enter Pisauro. Pis. Save ye Gallants, I interrupt you.


Ped. No Pisauro, we were just now guessing how thou did to live.


Pis. Faith Gentlemen ye are both my Friends, but we Chemists always conceal
our great secret by which we thrive.


Ped. Heaven send the Furnace where you make your gold, don't prove too hot for
you.


Ant. But why in this Garb? thou usest to outshine the Sun.


Pis. I am sorry Gentlemen you have hit upon two Questions, I must be so
uncivil as not to answer; but hereafter when things grow ripe..


Ant. There needs no excuse Pisauro.


Pis. Your design goes forward with Pacheco?


Ant. Yes, yes I intend to carry Pedro thither,


Pis. And it is odds but I Will bring a Friend.


Ant. Do think the Women will come in?


Pis Nere fear't they will not stand out at any thing that makes for pleasure.


Ped. These are mysteries Gentlemen.


Ant. I Will unriddle all as we go.


Pis. We Will all meet anon, for the present I must leave you, and to a patient,
though I think he is past cure.


Ant. What Is his Disease prithee, that thou art turned Quack?


Ped. The Gentile one i will warrant you, he cures that by his own experience.


Pis. No Faith worse, he is taken of the sudden with a love frenzy, and runs mad
for a Wench.


Ant. Pox on him, get him one then.


Pis. That will not do, I have offered him as fair as any one, but he is come
to his Sonnets, and Serenades, sighs and walks with his Hat over his Eyes in
deep meditation of doggrell love verses, calls her by fine Romantic names,
sometimes she is Celia fair, then Phyllis, Amarillis, Clelia, and the Devil and
all, but her right name, and that I am now going to learn.


Ped. Prithee give him a little Ratsbain, or some cold Poison to cool his
pluck; in love; I thought the World had learned more wit above this 12 month.


Ant. May we know the man?


Pis. I Will try but one Medicine more, and if that cure not, deliver him over to
be baited: In the mean time if you chance to guess, pray conceal it till the
game grows hot. Gallants adieu.


Ant. Adieu ^isauro. Come Pedro you will not fail.


Exeunt. Scena Secunda.
Enter Juliana. Jul. I wish she were returned, for I Am impatient till I hear
some news, Heaven send she meet him, and me rid of this fond Husband. I am as
weary of him, as a Woman can be of a Man, she has married for money; I think I
hear her.

Enter Lelia. Oh Lelia did you find him? and will he come?


Lel. Yes Madam,


Jul. But art sure he said so? for thou art so apt to forget.


Lel. As sure Madam as that you long for his coming.


Jul. Did remember the hour too?


Lel. Lord Madam what makes you so mistrustful? I did, if you will have me swear
--


Jul. No I believe thee, prithee Cozen pardon me, and think what a sorment it is
to want the thing we love: Alas, now it is a whole long Week since I saw him:
and besides, all the while to be troubled with a doting Husband, would make
any body impatient.


Lel. Is kindness troublesome? I thought no Woman had complained on that side.


Jul. O more then any thing, from one I cannot love.


Lel. Pray Madam why did you marry then?


Jul. Poor innocent, do think that love's the only cause? there are a
thousand stronger Lelia, that is the very last, in any VVomans thoughts, that is
wise.


Lel. Pray instruct me then, it may be my fortune one day.


Jul. I will and dare with confidence since I know thee private. Before I
married people flattered me, or else they thought me fair, and that little
beauty Lelia, was the greatest of my Fortune.


Lel. and trust me Madam, a very great one too.


Jul. As it was, it proved of strength to tempt Lysander, who was, and still
continues, one of the richest Merchants of the Town: my Parents thought the
Match so great, that it was in vain for me to seem unwilling: to be short, I
married him, but not for love Cozen, but to maintain my Dear Pisauro, who long
before had ransackt all my Virgin Treasure, and still enjoys my heart.


Lel. I shall endeavor to learn Madam.


Jul. Trust me Lelia, no vvay's so direct to Misery as to marry one you love.
Love added to a Husbands power, makes him perfect Tyrant; now let him do or
say his pleasure, all is indifferent.


Lel. But is it not as much trouble Madam, to dote on your Gallant?


Jul. No Lelia, He has dependence on me, and all my happiness is, I know his
fortune's low; Oh! that he were but here once dearest Pisauro.


Lel. Here Is your Husband Madam.


Enter Lysander. Jul. Then I have a new Trade.

she weeps.
Lys. Come Dearest, I must take leave; what weeping? Thou have too much love.


Jul. If I had thought I could have loved so well, I never should have married
sure, scarce a Week but I am left to misery and solitude, methinks I could
curse him that e're invented your profession.


Lel. Aside Brave Woman thou shall instruct all our Sex.


Lys. Cheer up dearest, it is but for a few days, and i will return, and love
still more, if possible.


Jul. A day's an age to be from one I love, nay my mind give's me, you will nere
come agan, stay but one day.


Lel. Aside Heaven send he does not take her at her word.


Lys. Fond Rogue, my word's engaged, I cannot for a World.


Jul. No you will nere do any thing I ask you, stay but one hour, come prithee
do, let this beg for me.


Lel. Aside Rarely acted, she might deceive an Angel.


Lys. Why if I should thou wilt be the same then, and trust me, my time is gone,
nothing in the World should tempt me from thee, but my credit, prithee Dear be
patient.


Jul. I have no other remedy, you are always t^us cruel, if you find me sick,
or dead, when you return, it will never trouble you.


Lys. Come prithee be not so unkind, thou know I love thee, thou make me
weep to hear thee talk thus.


Lel. Aside Loving Cuckold! you would have cause, if you knew all.


Jul. Well if we must part for ever.


Lys. I tell thee it is but a day or two.


Jul. Farewell, Heaven prosper you, I must have the last look.


Lys. No prithee go, or else you hinder me. Lelia wait on your Mistress.


Jul. One kiss more, I Am all obedience, and then --


Lys. Adieu dearest.


Jul. One look more. VVas't not rarely acted Lelia?


Lel. To the life Madam.

Aside
Exeunt Juliana and Lelia. Lys. She Is gone, and faith now I begin to think my
self a Wretch, to abu^e her thus. How easily their good nature is deceived?
^oor doting fool! I dare swear she loves me, then why should I dissemble thus
with her? but hanged let her go, she is but a Wife, and that is enough to fully
all her worth. I Will to Emilia and there forget her: if I can get loose, I may
return a day or two the sooner for this kindness.

But when a Mistress draws, a Wife must wait.
Your Fishes always choose the freshest bait.

Exit Lysander. Enter Juliana. Lelia. Lel He Is gone Madam, He had a grievous
conflict betwixt love, and business, talked a little to himself, gave a kind
look or two this way, and Exit.


Jul. Laughs A fair riddance, Poor Fool* now he is as secure of my love, as he
is of being Cuckold. Well men may talk of their wisdom, conduct of affairs,
etc. but this one VVomans virtue of dissembling, out-weighs them all Lelia.


Lel. True Madam, were we all as great proficients as your self.


Jul. It Is but getting a husband to Practice on, and thou wilt soon learn. How do
I look to day Cozen?


Lel. Tempting fair.


Iul. I would be dressed to all advantages, for every time I meet Pisauro,
methinks I make a new conquest. Prithee what did he say to thee?


Lel. He talked something of a Reformation was designed very much for our
advantage, I did not well understand him, but you will here all anon.


Iul. I wish* he were here once, is it not the hour yet Lelia^ I Will meet him, if
he comes not quickly, if we chance to miss, he has the key, and knows where to
expect me.


Lel. He Will be here Madam presently, pray be patient.


Iul. To me even time it self does slowly move,
There Is no such thing as patience in Love.

Exeunt Juliana, Lelia. Enter Camillo and Servant. Scena Tertia.
Came. Mariana, Ismena, hey days! go seek'em out.


Serve. They Are not within, Sir.


Came. Not within Sir? This it is! Women? I had rather have 40 Cats to look
after; and they all wild too, great, wild, He Cats. I Have seen Tigers, Lions,
Wolves coopt up, and tamed: But let any man prove to me of his own knowledge,
two Women that were so, and i will believe all Mandevile. OF my conscience I had
all bedlams put together in me, when I got these girls, they make nothing of
creeping through Key holes.


Ser. They Are only gone to Church Sr.


Came. To Church Sr? what have women to do at Church Sr? cannot they say their
Prayers at home, or let them quite alone, and mind their needles? I tell thee
there never comes any good of these holy pretenses; were I young I Would as soon
marry one out of the stews as one of these religious gadders: and the truth
on it is it comes much to one, for they meet with Priests at both places.
Where Is Pacheco?


Serve. Abroad Sr.


Came. There Is a youth too, hopeful enough till this cursed voyage: if any man
longs to spoil a son, let him send him into England with an Ambassador. They
are all mad there, and hated the very true Religion, because of Nunnerys and
Covents, that confined People to Sobriety and Chastity. I have a hopeful brood;
would any thing but the downright devil had'em.

Enter Mariana, Ismena. So, are you come gypsyes? not a word, I Have rayl'd my
self weary at present, get you in, I Will but take a turn in the gallery, to
recover a little, and you shall have it with a vengeance.


Exit Camillo. Mar. What shall we do sister, my Father's strangly angry?


Ism. Why e'ne go abroad again, and run for it, or let him talk out his talk,
he is old and quickly out of breath.


Mar. We women are most miserable creatures sister, brought up at first by some
severe Parent, or kinswoman; and when we grow most sensible of bondage,
delivered over to the tyranny of a cruel husband.


Ism. Or clap't into a nunnery to spend our lives in thinking, and
contemplation, though I persuade my self there is little of religion in it: but
from the small remembrance we have of men, scratch their pictures on the walls,
and wish: and the first opportunity we have of being sick make use of the
confessor.


Mar. You Are a wild wench, will nothing tame thee?


Ism. 'Twould make a dog wild to be tied up thus, I wonder we can never muster
courage up for to rebel. I have read of women that have been famous for it, and
I Am persuaded I my self have courage enough to be a general.


Mar. My Brother talks of some design he has, I wish he would complete it once.


Ism. Were I but a man I Would make my self renowned in the women's quarrel, work
them all deliverance; and then share the best of them.


Mar. It Is the men's interest to keep us thus enclosed Ismena.


Ism. None but but a few elder brothers that are husbands Mariana, I dare swear
were it once proposed the young rogues would dye in our defense, 'twould make
their addresses cheap and easy, when as now twenty fees can scarcely purchase
a good look, which falls hard upon the younger brothers. You Are Melancholy
Sister.


Mar. I dread my fathers anger, and the very thoughts of liberty torment me
worse, then this imprisonment. Would my Brother would come home once, that
we might hear the nevvs.


Ism. Dread! I Am ashamed to hear you name it, let us in and laug^, and weary
out this tyranny.


Mar. It Is thy mirth that keeps me still alive.


Ism. Come vvench,

Our bodies by a father are confined,
But there is no man can rule a vvomans mind.

Exeunt Omnes. Scena Quarta.
Emilia. Lucia. Emi. No news of Lysander?


Lu. No Madam.


Emi. pulls out her Glass. I have not lost my beauty yet, the same luster
sparkles in my E^es; and youth sits smiling on my cheeks: the same brisk heat
runs through my veins, and makes me warm, and active in my love. Then why
should he grow cold? Five days and not see me? it is very strange! He Is too wise
to have the dotage of a wife seize him. No, it is another love grown happy by my
ruin. I Will find out some new way to sound him, for it is fixed. My youth must not
be lost in this indifference. Lucia bid them bring me in a Chair and Table, and
do you fetch me the Prayer Book lies in my closet.


Luci. The Play-book Madam?


Emi. No the Prayer Book, are you Deaf?


Luci. You Would better have the other Madam, that will but make you melancholy.


Emi. Go I say, it may be I resolve to be so.


Luci. I shall have a sad trade on it if it comes to this once. I wonder who
invented these grave Books! or ever taught any of our profession to read them,
I Am sure they are very much out of our calling.


Chair and Table set out. Exit Lucia. Emi. It shall be so, and if this fail,
I Will find some other way to live; there are more kind men than one.


Enter Lucia, gives her the Book. Lucia. Here Madam, but I hope you are not in
earnest.


Emi. Peace Baggage, and if Lysander come, tell him I Am not to be disturbed.


Sits down and turns over the Book. Luci. Since you are so serious, you shall
have none of my Company: I Will e'ne go sing a brisk song or two in the next room,
and bless the first man that comes to put you out of this humor.

Enter Lysander. Oh here is Lysander, then I must run for it.


Emi. Aside He Is come, now all that is woman help me to dissemble. Yet I can
find no Prayer that is fit for me. Sure never any woman was so wicked.


She turns the book over. Lys. Come Emelia throw away thy book, and fly to my
embraces, thou need'st not study any new charms. Come let me see what it is that
tempts thee thus: some smutty Novells on my life. How Is this? A Prayer book! I
should sooner expect to see the French King turn Calvinist than to find thee in
this posture. What sad affliction has brought thee to this misery? Have spotted
thy new gown? lost thy little dog? or do want a new fashioned pair of
Pendants? Prithee tell me.


Emi. No, No, Sr. None of these. But I have spotted all my life, lost my
innocence which you have robbed me off; and want a new heart*


Lys. Hey day! turned Canter? this becomes thee worse than fine dress, and
youthful cloths an old woman: There Is scarce a Nun will talk thus through a
grate.


Emi. But I shall when I Am there (as I resolve I will) and if I can, teach you
repentance.


Lys. Aside Pox of this wheedle, I see through it, and will cure her by one as
extravagant.


Emi. It is but Just I help to wash away your guilt, who have been the unlucky
cause.


Lys. Aside Now for my trade. Oh Emilia from this minute I Am happy: give me
your hand, my bloud's obedient; and I can touch thee now with as chaste
thoughts, as Virgins pray.


Emi. Aside If this be real, I Am undone, but I must on.


Lys. Methinks I loath my former life. Oh could we but call it back Emilia.


Emi. Then we were blessed indeed. But since that cannot be, I Will double all my
Orisons, and that way make up my arrears: And never speak, or think of man, but
when I put up prayers for you, O Lysander.

Aside -- Hang me if I can hold for laughing: if I make a good end of this, if
I ever undertake to Preach again, may I turn Nun in earnest.


Lys. Aside She will outdo me; they have the advantage of a voice for whining,
but I Will try. I Will to a cloister too, for it is but just the residue of life be
spent in punishing this too much pampered flesh. There in our several cells
we'll fast, and watch, and wash away our guilt, and when we are fit to dye
remove to heaven. Oh Emilia!


Emi. Aside This is counterfeit too, but how to come off I cannot imagine. Well,
dear Lysander (for now I dare call thee so) since our designs agree, let us time
our Prayers, that Heaven may hear us both together.


Lys. We'll rise before the morn.


Emi. Out-watch the pale-faced moon.


Lys. Nor eat to satisfy our appetite, but lengthen out our lives for our
devotion.


Emi. We will not drink, but what our tears have seasoned.


Lys. Nor sleep.


Emi. Nor think.


Lys. Nor dream.


Emi. Nor live.


Lys. Nor any thing but --


Emi. They both burst out a laughing. I can hold no longer.


Lys. Nor I by heaven. You idle rogue, could you imagine I could think thee in
earnest?


Emi. I was once half afraid that you was, till I considered how ill it became
you.


Lys. Now what amends for all this? Will you never leave this jealousy?


Emi. You shall find that within. I did it only for to try you after your
absence.


Lys. No more of these tricks, there needs none, I am as fond as ever, come
let us in and enjoy our selves, and some twenty years hence, we may venture on
such a discourse in earnest.


Exeunt. ACT. II.
SCENA I.
Pisauro, Leandro. Pis. YEt you resolve to have this wench?


Lea. Why I Am sure thou would not have me dye, if it were only to save the
trouble of praying for me.


Pis. Faith it would put me a little out of my road, that is the truth on it; but
why must you needs dye? Thou have not seen her above twice, and that at Church
too: if you had been at your appointment you might have avoided such
temptations; for my part I Am resolved to keep out of harms way.


Lea. Away you're profane.


Pis. Prithee stay till thy Saint's Canonized, before thou say so; do you think
it religion to kneel squinting at your mistress, two or three hours with your
beads in your hands; and only cast up your eyes, because she is in the gallery
above you?


Lea. Heaven made such beauty for to be adored.

Pis. And she will make use of it for to be whor'd
Aside Why don't you go on? I thought you had a copy of verses on it. Heaven
made etc. I shall believe you are in love, when once you talk your sublime
nonsense. Heaven, Beauty, Fate, Adoration, Sun, Divinity and a few such words
will make thee Poet too, and then you are fit to court a Queen.


Lea. I was bewitch't to tell you, I knew you would but mock at my
misfortunes; I should hardly serve Pisauro so.


Pis. Misfortunes do you call it? will you make me believe women can run
through thee, like lightning, and set what brand upon a heart they please? Let
me be thy Doctor and prescribe thee two or three of my infallible cures against
this witchcraft of love. Feed high. Wench discreetly. And go to bed with a
jolly cup. Probatum est -- it is as infallible as the Jesuits po^der for a
Quartan.


Lea. I see I must find some other friend to help me in my affairs. Adieu.


Pis. I Will be serious. By my troth I had such a qualm came over me once, 'twas
troublesome, and lasted about a quarter of an hour, but since a she friend of
mine taught me to draw the humor downward, I Am free.


Lea. I have no patience to bear this fooling.


Pis. I have done, pray pardon me; but which way do thou intend for to
obtain her? The old man keeps her with more care, than he does his gold; He cut
of a dog's ears the other day, to search for lettters: And has a gun ready
charged to kill pigeons, for fear they should be Carryers: He swounds at the
sight of a post, or any thing that runs of errands.


Lea. This difficulty makes me need thy help. I know thee expert in all the
tricks of women; art read in their winks and nods, can tell how to answer
with a shrug or sigh, know how to wheedle Chamber Maids, and make love to old
nurses. Prithee be serious and advise me.


Pis. Now I see thou art in earnest, I can, and will Leandro.


Lea. But how dear Pisauro?


Pis. Why thus: old Camillo, Father to thy Ismena, has a son lately returned
from England, whither he went with our Ambassador.


Lea. This way I can fores^e no hopes.


Pis. Yes very much. You knew him humorsome, and conceited before his voyage;
but this has added to him all the fopperies of that Nation, which they borrow
from the French: so that he is the strangest piece of Fantastickness that can
make droll for a play: in short he is a mere singing switching Fopp.


Lea. Still you amaze me.


Pis. Suffer me. Amongst the rest of the English customs it is one, and faith
almost the only one that pleases me, to allow all possible freedom to their
women. This he resolves to bring up in Venice, and will in spite of his
father, begin with his own sisters. There is a Royal society of us, called the
Reformers. Do thou yet understand me?


Lea. Yes, this sounds like something.


Pis. We Will admit thee into the number, and then shift for thy self. I must
leave you, and to the business that concerns my life (as I was telling you) my
little Merchant adventures, Oh! it is the kindest thing, so like matrimony, and
yet no trouble. Now we talk of reforming, could you all thrive like me, and
leave off the damned trade of keeping wenches, and let them keep you, 'tvvould
be a happy world.


Lea. But I Am for neither, I Am for the honest way of marrying.


Pis. Heaven forbid, but that somebody should like that dull trade: for if
there were no wives, there would be no husbands to rob to maintain us
younger Brothers.


Lea. You still keep your old humor; but why no better dressed man?


Pis. I Will tell you; I serve her, as the wenches used to serve me; always
pretend to want something: thou shall see me as glorious as the day at our
next meeting.


Lea. Stay, who are these?


Enter Antonio and Pedro. Pis. Antonio and Pedro, two of the society: I Will
admit you presently.


Ped. You Are a rare rogue: How the Devil could thou find Rhetoric enough
to vvheadle him to this?


Ant. He did it himself Sir. And tells me in England, it is thought honorable to
bring their sisters acquainted, as they call it, I believe some fashionable
name for Pimping. It Is ordinary there to do it for a kins woman, and that may
save a portion. Heaven send them good faces, and they never need work for their
livings. Oh it is. --


Pis. Save you Gallants, how does the Society go forward?


Ant. With full sail, Pisauro.


Pis. Shall I beg admission for my friend here?


Ped. Leandro! The only man we wished; but he must be sworn according to form.


Lea. Your Servant Gentlemen, I shall willingly pass any ceremony.


Pis. They are easy, only an oath or two to swallow, and they are gilded.


Ant. Lay your hand upon the book. It Is Ovid de art amandi, and begin. You
shall swear, to the uttermost of your power to reform Venice according to the
Pattern of Enland in manners and discipline; and that you will, without respect
of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Tyranny, that is, the government of
Husbands and Fathers, by Sisters, Aunts, Nurses, and all other officers
depending upon that Usurpation. And that you will with the same sincerity root
out the spreading errors of Vizards, Masks, Veyles, Padlocks, both for the
restoring of lost pleasures to your self, and the freedom of the distressed
Ladys.

So help you Cupid.


Ant. So, now you are a sworn Brother, we need keep nothing secret.


Pis. Where Is our Grand-master Pacheco?


Ant. I left him with his Tutor, the English man, contriving which way to get
his Sisters out of Prison.


Lea. That Is the English man, I warrant, that pretends so much to Poetry and
breeding; and censures all the old Authors, with as much Authority as if he had
been their Schoolmaster.


Pis. The same; if he gets but the upper end of a Table at an Ordinary, you
shall have him run them over as fast, as a Dutchman tells money.


Ant. Sometimes he pretends to Plays too, and then he damns French, Spanish,
and Italian in a wind, yet steals out of the very worst of them. He would be
thought to have a little kindness for an Author or two of his own Nation, but
will be sure to ruin their reputation too, with some exception or other, before
he leaves them.


Lea. Does he ever write himself?


Ant. Yes, Yes; but as all your professed Critics do, damnably ill: To tell you
the truth (for I have made it my business to understand him) the fellow has
wit, but broke with driving a trade too big for his stock; and when Pacheco
took him in, all he had to subsist on, was confidence, and the favor of two or
three fopps.


Ped. Faith he is bravely fitted with a Master.


Ant. It Is very pleasant to hear him talk of the advantages of this
Reformation, his Lectures of Repartes, Converse, Regales, and an hundred more
unintelligible fopperies.


Ped. To end, he has ordered us to expect him at the old place, where we shall
hear the Result of all.


Pis. There you may expect me then an hour hence.


Ant. But how shall we find a Mistress for Pacheco?


Ped. -- Why faith I have a wench I grow something weary of, he shall have her.


Lea. No, that is too cruel.


Ant. What think you of my boy finely dressed? The rogue has a smooth face, and
sings well.


Pis. Nor that neither. I have a Cozen witty and handsome, whose Fathers
fortunes were ruined in our last wars at Candy: what if we set her up? she may
teach him wit.


Ped. As you can agree. But prithee, now you talk of singing, let Leandro hear
the song you made upon the Reformation.


Ant. Sing boy.


SONG.
Beauty no longer shall suffer Eclipse,
Nor jealousy dare to confine
The power of those eyes, or use of those lips
Which nothing but kindness design.
Our Ladies shall be
As frolic as we,
Nor shall husband or Father repine.
We'el banish the stratagems used by the State
To keep the poor women in aw,
Henceforth they themselves, shall rule their own fate
And desire shall be to them a law.
Thus they being free
From Padlock and Key
May with their Reformers withdraw.
Where in private we'el teach them the Mysteries of Love,
And practice that Lecture over,
Till we the fond Scruple of honor remove,
And the end of our passion discover.
No maid shall complain
Or wife sigh in vain
For each may be eased by her Lover.
Away with all things that sound like to Laws,
In this our new Reformation;
Let the Formalists prate, the good old cause
Is a general toleration.
From this time they are free
A veyl's Heresy
And a Vizard Excommunication.
Lea. It Is a brisk design, and must needs take among the Ladies: but are the so
free in England as you pretend?


Ped. Freer than you can think Sir. It Is mortal sin not to know what is what at
fifteen.


Ant. Fifteen! They have lost time at that age; a Maidenhead at thirteen is as
great a rarity in the country as a wolf; now and then in some village there may
be some ugly Monster, that holds out longer upon force, but --


Pis. In earnest Leandro, the soberest women there, have more freedom of
discourse and company, than we give to a stale Bawd, or an old Midwife at a
Christening: And yet the men so free from jealousy, that you man as soon
persuade one of us to leave whoring, as them to believe their own eyes.


Ped. Nay, they are so contrary to us, that a Vizard Masque is a certain sign
of a free booter, and nothing makes them cover their faces but impudence.


Lea. This must needs be the fortunate Island, people talk so much off.


Ant. Now after all this, make it a matter of conscience: consider the
necessity of this Reformation, and how damnably we have been wheadled b^ these
veiles of ours. After half a years attendance, and courting of some delicate
shape, that would tempt a Hermit in the midst of snow, to lose all our
expectation and compliment, and when we see the Devils face, be forced to fly,
and cross our selves for fear of blasting.


Pis. It Is intolerable. I tell you I resolve to spare no body, a Vizard sha'n't
pass though it be following her Mother to the grave: nor any face be hid by a
veil, though the woman be to do penance in a Church: The truth on it is,
Gentlemen, there must be no mean, rank rebellion or nothing.


Ant. At that I Am with you, and I know not but this may make us as famous, as
inventing a new Religion.


Ped. There Is no question. Thou art well read, it is but finding half a dozen
places in our modern Reformers, to back us, and the business is done.


Pis. This design has so tickled me, that I have forgot my assignation. Leandro
I leave you to be introduced by these Gentlemen.


Ant. We Will all go.


Pis. My way lies here, I Will be with you presently.


Ant. Sings. Let your politic nodles debate
So our women be free,
It Is nothing to him, to thee, or to me
Who governs the Church or the State.

Exeunt. Ant. Ped. Leandro. as Pisauro is going out at the other door. Enter
Juliana and Lelia Masqued. Pis. So my adventures begin already: though two to
one be odds, I must board them; Heaven send they don't prove Fireships


Jul. It Is he.

to Lelia
Pis. Nay faith Madam, no passing this way without a small Patley, and a kind
look or two.


Jul. Sure you are some stranger you are so rude, do you know you are in Venice,
Sir?


Pis. Yes Madam, but I perceive you don't know the most considerable news of
the place. How the Devil do you two come into these Vizards that have been out
of fashion these six hours?


Jul. What Sir? and the men are to wear them to cover bad faces, as the women
did to save good ones?


Pis. Well said Spitfire, come, unmasque for fear I call yours in question; for
were you fair, you would be proud too, and we must hire you to keep it on.


Jul. Like enough Sir, were the prize worth taking, but what shall I get by
conquering you? You look as if you had nothing about you, but a Surgeons bill,
and it may be a Taylours, which must be worn out with carrying in your pocket
too, if it came home with your clothes.


Pis. As I live she g^esses all my treasure within a Ducatoon: Oh for some
succor to relieve the forlorn hope. Aside. Nay if you once turn wit, I Will swear
you are ugly; and now I look again I see your wall e^es, and guess the length of
your nose by the shape of your Masque. Faith Madam, the men are beholden to
you, that you take such care not to fright them.


Jul. Without you repent you shall pine for this, though it be spoke at random.

Aside.
Lelia. This is the strangest beggar I ever heard Madam; but you use to be
charitable, give him something to put him into repair, the Gentlemen has been
in a Storm.


Pis. Do you begin to open too, you pispot-emptier, you must be such by the old
lace shoes, and respect you have to follow the fashion at a distance.


Lel. Marry come up! one had better be out of the fashion, than out at the
elbows.


Jul. Methinks one of your complexion might light upon some wife, or easy fool
that would buy her pleasures at the price of perriwigs, or a new suit, you have
had ill fortune Sir. Prithee Lelia help me to abuse him.


Pis. Aside Worse and worse she knows me too: yet refuse me, if (except this
minute to Leandro) I ever told it so much as to my Confessor, but most of your
women are witc^es.


Lel. Or what do you think of a Gentleman Usher? you have a good fashionable
face; and your Lady will see to bring your legs to a fit size.


Jul. No, No; I tell you he scorns any thing of Service. The Ladies dote on
him, it is ten to one, but that he is just now sent for, you see he is dressed for
the purpose.


Pis. Pox on you both, for I have nothing left to say but curses, and they
shall be home: may you be both Padlock'd, chayn'd together, and turned upon a
Common; or which is yet worse, may you always gape for meat, and it be death
for any man to feed you.


Jul. Nay if you be so good at that, I Will have one for you too; may you have
nothing to maintain you, but the favor of some woman, and she grow weary and
discard you.


Pis. Heaven forbid, that bites, I Would give all the world to see this Devil, and
will before I go.


Jul. Nay, never take the pains to strive.


She unmasques her self. Pis. How! Juliana! Could you curse with so much
cruelty, when you knew me too?


Jul. Don't you deserve it? how do you like my wall-eyes now?


Pis. Now you're cruel: Good faith I did not know thee, I was just coming.


Jul. I have waited above this two hours, but you men when you once get a hank
upon our affections, think you may do any thing.


Pis. By this you sha'n't be angry. I have the pleasan'st story to tell you;
come be pleased Lelia shall engage for me.


Lel. Yes I have cause, you did not abuse me?


Pis. Peace, I Will stop thy mouth with a husband Girl.


Lel. Say you so? I have done.


Jul. Well I Will try you once again, but if ever -- I Will only go round and meet
you, you have the key of the back door.


Exeunt Juliana, Lelia. Pis. What fool will trust himself to wind and waves?
When thus he reaps the fruit and trouble saves?
A Husband's factor for his wifes Gallant,
And till he break, the other nere can want.

Exit Pisauro. Scena Secunda.
Pacheco, Tutor. Pac. Throws back his wig. That was something nigh it, but
methinks I have not the right fling yet. I Will try again.


Tut. I here you nickt it. Now for your Virtuoso's Looking glass.


Pac. Pulls out a piece of polisht metal.)
Tut. Right Sir, that expresses your design of promoting new experiments. You
must observe it in every thing not so much as a tooth-picker, but must have
something extraordinary.


Pac. Would not this show genteel and modish in a Playhouse?


Tut. This and the managing ^our comb will make you pass for a Critic in the
fashion. The next thing you may practice is some few books, and then you are a
wit too.


Pac. That Is the only thing I aim at; on good Tutor.


Tut. When you come to a new Play, and know the Author is no fighter, and you
may venture to abuse him; first sit grave and unconcerned, and be sure to cast
an eye upon some famed wit of the town, and take him for your pattern.


Pac. But how if there be none there Tutor.


Tut. Why then if any thing takes in general you may venture to smile a little:
if only amongst some few, and you imagine it not good, cast a scornful look
about you, as if you pitied their ignorance. Above all things commend nothing
without some exception. These few rules well observed, you will be a standard of
carriage unto others.


Pac. Nay, they almost take me for a wit already, I know all the Poets Christen
names; and call Tom and Jack with as much confidence, as if I had been their
Godfather.


Tut. That Is well: There Is very much in that. You may take occasion to give
them the familiar shrug, talk aloud, and swear, Tom the humor in thy last
Prologue was high and new. Pox on thee for a rogue, thou wilt grow famous. A
whisper now and then, with a great laugh after it does well.


Pac. Did not you talk something of a shrug? You promised to teach me the way
of accosting people, that is the word I think in England.


Tut. Yes, mark* First take notice of no body in bad clothes, or poor, though
it should be your own Father come out of the country for to see you: or if you
must needs speak to him, withdraw, and after half a score words return, and
tell the company that a Tenant wants dispatch, or a dependant on the family;
and you will be with them presently.


Pac. I sha'n't forget this, it is so natural to me ever since I have been in
England. I cannot tell what to say to any one that wants a white wig, and a new
suit.


Tut. When you're nigh a person of honor, and one you think it a credit to be
acquainted with, be sure to turn and smile, though it be a secret he is
whispering to another, and you don't hear a word. This makes you be thought
familiar, and a favorite at Court


Pac. That Is excellent, faith Tutor I Will remember I Will warrant you.


Tut. As for your Equals, your shrug, or shaking of the head, as if you had
been at a debauch the night before, is creditable and modish. As to practice:
Mounsieur Pacheco? shrugs. Come, how is it? shrugs What at some deep engagement
with the Ladies last night, or a tavern on my life. shrugs.


Pacheco imitates him. Tut. That Is right, and confirms him, that you drink and
wench, things of more credit, as the world goes, than a Knighthood, or the
command of a Regiment.


Pac. Incomparable Tutor! but no more, for fear I forget: besides I fear they
stay for us; and I would not hinder the Reformation, to be great Duke.


Exit Pacheco. Tut. In England, where each Writer shares the stakes,
The gains are small, and one the other breaks.
But here alone without control I rule,
His trade cannot fail that is Tutor to a fool.

Exit Tutor. ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Lysander, Tutor. Tutor. I Tell you truth Sir.


Lys. Pisauro? the thing it self does not so much perplex me, as that I Am
over-reacht; and yet it cannot be; she is all fondness.


Tut. What greater ground can you propose for your suspicion? Consider Sir, had
you the same design what other way is left to hide it? But I have done the
office of a friend believed or not.


Lys. This argument has convinced me, and since thou art so much my Friend,
I Will tell you, I have the same design, and love a Mistress more than twenty
Wives, and by this very means conceal it from her. But People that pretend
themselves to cunning, seldom see through others. Do think he is there now?


Tut. I Am sure he was Sir within this half hour I see him enter.


Lys. Then I will surprise them. I know she cannot expect me yet a day or two.
I Will only dispatch an hours business Gives him gold. and be with them. Pray
accept of this acknowledgment, you're far from home and trust me it is a real
kindness. For had I found it out my self I know not what a sudden heat might
drive me to. A little time to pawse will make me unconcerned.


Tut. If this project chance to fail, within a day or two I Will find out one
that shall be certain.


Lys. Till my one eyes convince me I Will be still the same. Adieu.


Exit Lysander. Tut. Your Servant Sir. Thus far things go well, and here is a
good reward. But let me think. This Gallant keeps his Mistress too. That shall
to Juliana. And since they are so much for Reformation I Will show them one more
of our Country tricks. The taking fees on both sides.


Exit Tutor. ACT III. SCENE II.
Mariana, Ismena. as at work. Ma. THis England must be a blessed place my
Brother talks so much of it.


Is. Would I were there; that I might be acquainted with these men, I have such
a tickling runs through me when I see them.


Ma. And there it is commoner for them to go to a treat, than for us to go to
Church; never a day but this Lords or that Knights Coach waits on you and
hurrys you to a Play, thence into the Park, then there is such perpetual
Masquerades and Balls, that it is Carnival all the year.


Is. And here if we have a little liberty before Lent we are sure to pine
for it, so that the whole year scarce recruits us again.


Mar. They have no such thing there: they account it almost sin not to eat
flesh when it is forbidden by the Church.


Is. That Is a life worth something, I wonder why these old men live, sure there
they all die when they are young, or else the women never knew their Fathers, for
my part I wish I had never known mine: I Am sure he is grievous troublesome.


Ma. Fie Ismena consider he is your Father.


Is. Fie me no fies, Mariana, I vvonder who disturbs his telling of money, or
any thing he has a mind to: does he think because he had the pleasure to get
us, we are bound to be his Slaves? if he had not been my Father it is odds but
somebody else would, I Have heard them say my Mother was a handsome woman.


Mar. Peace for shame and be content a while, you know what my Brother
promised us to day.


Is. I vvish he would make his words good and bring them once. But I have a
strong fancy we shall quarrel, for I have had a mind to every man I have seen
yet.


Mar. I vvish it were come to that once, for I am grievous weary of working
these virtuous Stories of constant wives.


Is. Constant! thine I think's Penelope an old withered witch that was forced
to spin ten years to earn money to pay her drudges with; and when she had
wearied them all out, sent to seek her Husband; mine is Lucretia, it may be she
was virtuous but it would never grieve one to kill ones self, so one was well
ravished first.


Ma. Now thou art stark mad.


Is. Phu! we may say any thing amongst our selves, if we did not talk merrily
how should we be able to live?


Mar. Hark, I hear my Father, Heaven send him in a better humor than when he
last left us.


Is He Would best look to himself, for such another Scold would cut off two or
three years at least.


Enter Camillo and Nurse. Came. So, this I like, if I ever catch you abroad
again without my leave, do you hear I Will have your legs tied together.


Ism. We may sometimes go to Church Sir.


Came. No, I Would rather have thee stay at home and be damned; I wonder what it is
you do at Church? make mouths at some young fellow, who talks to you all the
while on his beads. Come come, I know all your tricks and will have you stay at
home; nor shall any come to see you, no not your Brother to tell you Stories of
his England voyage: curse on the Nation.


Ma. Not my Brother Sir? this is too severe.


Came. No not your Brother Minks; you're like to come to good when you will be
instructing of your Father. Here Nurse take the Keys, and give no more liberty
than the two next rooms afford without my order.


Nurse. I warrant you Sir, I Will keep them close.

Exit Camillo. Now Mrs. Ismena I shall be even with you for all your f^umps.


Ism. They shake her. Nay as long as you are with us we shall want no sport,
come Sister help me to shake her to pieces.


Nurs. Will you murder me? Oh!


Mar. The other shake does it, I heard her bones rattle.


Nurs. Oh I am dead.


Mar. You keep them close you old toadstool! thou art too ugly to be a Bawd.


Ism. She had been a Witch Sister, but that the Devil loathed to suck her.


Nurs. When you are once in your pound I Will make you fast for this, you sha'n't
so much as see a man this twelvemoneth, nay, I Will have your hands tied behind
you, that you may not scratch where it itches.


Ism. That would be hard indeed Sister.


Mar. Leave your threats, or you know your old punishment: or what do you think
of tossing her in a blanquet? she is so old and dry she must be light.


Ism. Excellent! if we had her in the Garden on a windy day 'twould be a sure
riddance; But now I think on it Sister we will get some packthread and fly her as
the boys do a paper kite with a Candle and Lanthorn at her tail. She Will make a
rare Comet.


Mar. It Is the best use of her, she is like the picture of one of the Sibylls
above in the Dining room, and this is the way to make her prophecy.


Nurs. Well Mrs. Percks this goes to your Father, with some improvement of my
own.


Mar. If you dare Keeks, we will in and study a revenge.


Ism. Shakes her. Farewell Rattle, and be sure to keep us close.


Exeunt Mariana, Ismena. The old woman locks them in. Nurs. So, if you will
prate, Magpies, it shall be in a Cage. These Gimcracks if they once come
toward fifteen are so gamesome, there is no riding them without a curb, nay
then it is ten to one but that they fling the first Adventurer out of the Saddle
too. The Divel's in them I think, I Am sure in my young days. But I Would as good
stop I shall be tempted to lie else. The truth is I hate all young women that
are fair and there is reason for it; if we old ones get a good look once a
twelvemonth, be sure the next young one that passes by robs us.


Enter Pacheco, Pedro, Antonio, Leandro, and Tutor. Pac. Come Gentlemen, the
old man's safe, enter, and think your selves in England: there we run about
till we find the Ladies Chambers, ransack every thing, and are never chid
except it be for not staying longer. What say you, Tutor?


Tutor. He tells you truth Gallants, we help to dress and undress faith almost
any thing; yet all the while as Virtuous as two Nuns. More, you will find there is
no other way but liberty to make us so.


Lean. I Am glad to hear the way to Virtue is so easy Sir.


Ant I always thought it, there is none but a company of ill-natured morose
people that would have it hard can think it otherwise.


Ped. Can any one believe that such a glorious thing as woman is, was made to
be concealed?


Ant. No, 'tmust be cursed Heresy, I had rather they should put out the Sun by
half.


Pache. That Is because you love their company in the dark. Was not that good,
Tutor?

Aside.
Tut. Excellent!


Ped. Sees the old Nurse. Hey day! who have we here? I have heard of Guardian
Angels, but never thought that Devils were so employed before.


Tutor. You know the fashion Sir of your own Country. This is the sweet-meat
keeper, the preserver of Maiden heads that shall for a Ducat corrupt youth, and
teach them more bawdy in a week than half a dozen years practice; yet is
trusted with as much beauty as is able to make the great Turks Empire run mad,
merely for being old and ill natured. In short Sir here our Reformation must
begin.


Ant. Come at her then.


Nurs. What do you mean Gentlemen? I Am only a poor old Servant to the house.


Pedro. Thy being old is enough to make us hate thee.


Pacheco. Come where are my Sisters? give me the keys.


Nurs. No such matter, my Master charged me but just now to the contrary, and I
will be true.


Pacheco. Give me them you Witch or --


Nurs. I Will cry out, will you force me?


Pedro. Have you got them?

He takes away the keys
Pacheco. Yes, Yes.


Pedro. But how shall we stop her mouth? an old woman's tongue is harder to lay
than ten Devils.


Anto. Let me alone with her, I go always prepared to stop these noises.


Ant. Gags and binds her and throws her out. Ant. There lie thee there, and
dare but so much as think mischief, and do you hear I Will pull out the two
stumps that are left.


Pacheco. Here Gallants take these keys. Now you may enter and catch who catch
can a la mode d' Angleterre, I disturb nobody not I.


Ant. A kind Brother this! Aside it shall go hard but I will have a Sister for
you Sir.


Exeunt Pedro, Antonio. Lea. Aside My jealousy makes it but too true I am in
love, and that with such respect that it is impossible to benefit by this
freedom.


Tut. Courage Sir, I perceive you are one of the cold contemplative lovers that
follow a Mistress at a distance, and think your self happy if you purchase one
gracious nod, with ten thousand cringes. In for shame.


Pacheco. If you will carry me to one of your Ladies, I Will soon teach you better
courtship. Or if you will stay here. You shall see me practice.


Lean. I shall be glad to learn Sir.


Pacheco. Come Tutor show me the way of address to a Lady.


Tutor. Did you never see the Gallants in the Antechamber, how they prepare
themselves before entrance?


Pacheco. Yes I warrant, what was I in England so long for else? but will that
do?


Tutor. The very same.


Sets his wig and shirt and tricks himself. Pacheco. Then thus.

How do you like this Sir?


Lea. Oh Sir much beyond any thing I ever saw. I must have patience with this
fool for his Sisters sake.

Aside.
Tutor* Then Sir we don't go your formal old way of making legs, as if we had
some Deity to worship. But knowing they are flesh and blood as well as we
approach briskly.


Pacheco. Begin with an oath or two. I think it is not much matter whether it
be to the purpose or not Tutor.


Tutor. Not at all Sir, they will excuse all that follows for the sake of that.


Lean. These are great secrets, you improve me Gentlemen.


Pac. Nay Sir, if we carry on our Reformation, the whole state will stand
engaged to us, but great designs seldom prosper at the first.


Lean. The more's our ignorance, but pray Sir in. If there be such a toy as a
Masque or Fan to play with, or you can find any thing new about her to commend
it is modish, and the most gentile subject for discourse.


Tut. If you name two or three Ladies of quality familiarly, it sounds well and
brings you in esteem. But most of all if you can learn who she hates (for women
have always little quarrels amongst themselves) and can pick up a story to
their disadvantage, you render your self beyond exception acceptable.


Pacheco. I do it always, but nothing pleases them so much as a little
sprinkling of bawdy Tutor. Only the Devils in it, the rogues perpetually outdo
me at it.


Tutor. No wonder Sir, they practice daily, and no three women that are
acquaintance but make a Bawdy language for their own use.


Pach. I wish you had a Sister Sir, or so, that you might see me practice over
these lectures,


Lean. It Is my misfortune Sir.


Pache. But suppose for once that you were my Mistress.


Lea. Content.


Pacheco. Thus I come up.

Sings a piece of a Tune. And how? damn me Madam all a mort?


Tutor. Incomparably well!


Lean. Must I swear too?


Pach. No Sir by no means, if the women once get that (as there is a faction
amongst them that endeavor it) they rob us of half our discourse. But say
what you will I have nevvs from the last Ball, or of some new Beauty kept by
such a one. Or a new Play to find fault with or commend according as I hear
who made it.


Tutor. And when you once get them into the discourse of Plays they will run on
themselves. Praise such an Actor for this part, a second for another, a third
for a comely man, a fourth for dancing well.


Pache. Nay Sir, if you meet with a woman that does not find you discourse on
this subject, conclude her some Jilt that never had the good luck to be picked
up there, or some poor whore that cannot purchase a seat.


Lean. But what do you do all the time?


Pache. Comb my Wig by her glass and twenty other gentile tricks. But you must
have time to learn, I my self am beholden to travel, and this good man my Tutor
here.


Lea. I despair of e're attaining such perfections.


Pache. Industry may do much, Sir.


Enter Pedro, Antonio, Mariana, Ismena. Tutor. So, here they come; does not
this look better than making legs to a belcony and blowing kisses up and down.


Pache. This is right. Blessed Reformation!


Lean. Aside I find this English custom will not down with me, I Am too much an
Italian not to be jealous of the thing I love.


Mari. You may think us rude for to be thus familiar; but a Fathers strictness,
and my Brothers good lessons have instructed us.


Pedro. It Is nothing Madam but what becomes all People that are Virtuous; it is
only such as drive a trade, and gain by seeming nice that should be otherwise.


Ism. Phy Sister, you sin against our Covenant to go about to excuse your self;
for my part I think we need none, I Am sure our souls are free as any man's: And
yet forsooth our bodies must be confined, and that by old men and women too,
people by their very natures made unfit for liberty.


Anto. Brave Virago! You shall be our Captain Madam in this holy war.


Pach. She Is my own Sister Sir, you see that.

(of Leandro.) This is a modest Gentleman of the Reformation, pray bid him
welcome. I and my Tutor have been reading to him and we have hopes of his
improvement.


Mar. Your friend must challenge welcome here, Brother.


Ism. The being a Reformer gives it him in's own right.


Lean. You heap your honors too fast on me Ladies, and the obligation is too
far above my merit.


Pach. There Is stuff indeed. Cannot you serve her as I told you I would one of
your Sisters? But the first fault shall be pardoned.


Lean. Still worse it gnaws here.

Aside.
Mar. Fie Brother, the Gentleman speaks well.


Pach. Yes if he would hold up his head a little, and not begin with such a
long word as obligation.


Lean. I have lost all patience.

Aside.
Pach. Mark Sir, you should cringe thus, speak two or three half sentences, as,
I vow Madam, take me but, and all that. And then come up boldly.


Lean. Aside It Is well you are her Brother. I find

I must contrive my ends some other way,
And when she is once a wife she shall obey.

Exit Leandro. Tut. You may end your Lecture, the Gentleman's gone Sir.


Pach. Gone! then let him live in ignorance.


Mari. If you're always thus exact brother, we shall never increase our Company.


Ant. You must pardon him, he was always humorsome.


Pach. It Is strange, when People have such opportunities and wont improve
themselves.

Enter Pisauro. Art thou come dear Rogue? let me kiss the. Here Sisters, share
him, this is my second that I told you of. If we meet with any opposition in
our great affair.


Pis. But that we meet on the design of freedom Ladies, I might easily have
been thought rude to have intruded thus.


Is. Nothing but your free humor can make you welcome here.


Pis. 'T would be happiness to purchase it at any rate, but this doubles the
favor Madam.


Mar. Fie Sir, this sounds too like a Compliment. We should be loath to lose the
good opinion we have of you.


Pach. Have done for shame or I shall read you one of your friend Leandros
Lectures.


Pis. Pray what have you done to make him leave your Company?


Ped. Trust me nothing but mirth, but Lovers are humorsome.


Pis. Sir, no more.


Pach. Come Gallants now we are met, what think you of a Dance?


Anto. We want Music and Ladies.


Pach. Not so fast good Sir, here is two to four of you, in England it is common
to go halfes, and the women never complain neither. No, no. The Music, is the
thing. Oh Tutor for the four and twenty English Violins now. You Would think your
selves in Heaven, Gentlemen, at a new Play. There we stand up with our
Mistresses in our hands, keep time and court them to the humor of the air,
have one particular sort of strain to gripe at, another for a languishing look.
We Italians find fault with your Tramontanes, but we are dull we are dull to
them.


Pisa. Pray let us defer that for our next meeting; if these Ladies will but
honor me to be my guests, I Will take care these wants shall be supplied.


Pach. I Will engage for them.


Mar. Now we have begun this way of freedom we should be uncivil to deny you
Sir.


Ism. But how shall we get loose?


Pisa. That shall be provided for before we part. It is but just the first time
be spent in the public service.


Tut. Some Chairs there.


Anto. Well proposed, and that the rules of Reformation be decreed by joint
consent.


Ped. At least that every one should undertake besides the General work, some
one particular for to advance the Reformation.


Pis. Let Us to the consultation then.


Ped. First I propose Pacheco be voted perpetual Chairman to the Society; as
one of whose faithfulness and zeal we have had sufficient proof.

All. Agreed.


Pach. W' accept the honor Gentlemen, and hope we may deserve it by our future
diligence.


Sits down Ant. Come Ladies will it please you sit.


Ism. Do you use to admit of women to your privy counsel?


Ped. Yes Madam they still have had the casting vote in every Reformation.


Mar. Nay then we will never lose our Privilege.


Pach. First I declare my Tutor secretary.


They sit down. Pis. You Have made a happy choice.


Pach. Next, as a thing that is very much conducing to the Reformation, I
undertake to regulate and be the pattern of all fashions in the town. To
further which my Secretary shall dispatch and keep a correspondence with our
beloved pattern England.


Pis. Why not with France? they borrow all from thence.


Tut. True Sir, and I have known some scores of Gallants that sail thither
twice or thrice a year on that design. And are expected by the rest with as
much earnestness as the East- India fleet by those that make the greatest
venture.


Pach. Yes Tutor, but they make some new additions of their own; as your
fringed glove, curle of the wig, or cut of the belt, which strikes me
strangely. Besides, they much improve the gate and ceremony. And outdo the
French in their own way cringe and wadle.


Ped. These are Arguments beyond objection. I undertake t'invent a Language for
the company, I mean some twenty words or more of constant use. Or sense or not,
all is one so long as fashionable.


Pach. Good, and the true Genteel English way of wit. You shall have a Gallant
pay his devoirs, testify his amors, and make his assignations some twenty
times a day.


Ped. To this I Will add as many stories too. To which we must refer all our
discourse. This serves instead of whispering.


Tut. Oh much better; but then the Ladies must engage to seem to understand and
laugh at all you say.


Mar. That Is easy, for we always do pretend to know more than we do.


Ism. It Is but as all that would be thought great wits do, Sister.


Pis. I have a project now on foot which will advance the Reformation, but beg
I may once more try the experiment before I do reveal't.


Pach. It Is granted. What say you Antonio?


Ant. Why I will undertake for to reform all the old men in Venice to the
English way. Expect within a week to see them in their Wigs and with their
chins new shaved, like boys of fifteen. Nay more, I do intend for to begin with
old Camillo too himself.


Pis. It Is a bold project, succeed or not.


Tut. For my part I Will stick to my old way and write you Plays and Songs. I
know they never fail. I Will undertake the last new Play or two I writ made
the young Ladies more free, and brought more kind couples together, than all
the old women or Pages in the Country.


Pach. Probatum est. I Have reaped the benefit of that my self. What say the
Ladies now?


Mar. We can only promise for to follovv your instructions, Gentlemen.


Ism. And that we do in every thing: with a little more experience we may
venture to undertake some project of our selves.


Ant. Bravely resolved Ladies. No cause can fail that is backed by two such
Champions.


Tut Will you give me leave to give you some advice.


Pach. Leave? you're Tutor to the Society.


Tut. Then first --


Mar. Hark what noise is that, for Heaven sake look out. Oh we are undone
Sister.


Ism. 'Twill be in good company then.


Tut. It Is Antonio's Boy.


Enter Boy. Ant. Is he coming?


Boy. Yes Sir.


Pach. Away with these things there quickly.


Boy. He is not very near yet.


Ant. Go out and give us more notice.


Exit Boy. Pis. Ladies, if you follow my advice you may have freedom without
fear.


Ism. We Will follow any thing to purchase that.


Pis. Here only take this Powder, and when your Father calls for wine mingle
it with this, within an hour it will make him sleep, and you free.


Mar. But is there no danger Sir?


Pis. A child may take it Madam.


Enter Boy. Boy. He Is just here.


Ant. Then we have no time for complement.


Pis. You remember your promise Ladies. Come Pacheco you shall go along with
me, it shall be hard but I will have a Mistress for you. This does but set thy
teeth on edge.


Pach. This way, this way, by the back door.


Exeunt, Omnes praeter Mar. Ism. Mariana and Ismena pull out their works. Mar.
Pray Sister let us be very dutiful for fear he should mistrust.


Ism. I warrant you; do you think I am to learn to counterfeit at fifteen?


Enter Camillo. Came. Now I Am pleased, be still thus dutiful, and you shall
find me an Indulgent Father. I am contriving something unto your advantage
Mariana, you shall hear it shortly.


Mar. I shall wait your commands Sir.


Came. That was well said, and for you too Ismena.


Ism. If it pleases you Sir I must needs be satisfied, I was always taught to
be dutiful.


Came. Thou have thy Mothers soul. I am o'rejoy'd to find thee thus. Where Is the
Nurse?


Ism. I forgot to tell you Sir, as soon as you went out, she was taken with a
most violent raving fit. And talked and rayled so loud she quite frighted us.


Mar. Then on the sudden was struck dumb. And has not spoke one word since.


Came. Poor woman. I Will go see her.


Ism. No, pray Sir she is now fast and you will disturb her.


Came. Nurse within makes a noise. Well thought on. it is only rest that must
compose her. But hark what noise is that! Again!


Ism. to Mar. It Is the Nurse, for Heaven sake Sister run and ungag her we are
undone else, and leave me to my Father.


Exit Mari. Came. What Is the house hanted at this time of day?


Ism. It Is only the poor Nurse Sir that wakes in her distracted fit.


Enter Nurse and Mariana. Mar. Good dear, dear Nurse.


Nurse. Not I, it shall out.


Mar. I Will give you my best Peticoat, good Nurse.


Nurs. Not all the world shall hire me. Oh Sir!


Ism. Pray Sister help me to hold her. Her fit increases, Lord how her eyes
roll! Aside Sweet Nurse I Will give thee any thing.


Nur. Oh Master! Such a noise, such singing, nay pray Heaven it were no worse,
for they were roaring Boys.


Came. She raves indeed, what do mean Nurse?


Nurse. I mean here Sir, with your daughter some five or six of them.


Mar. Poor old creature, how strong her fancy is? let us bind her Sir, they say
that that will hinder it.


Came. Here Is no body but I and you and my two daughters.


Nurs. But there was Sir. Heaven grant you have no grandchildren in store, for
I begin to doubt them.


Ism. Just thus she talked before she slept, a little Opium would do well to
settle her. (good Nurse.

Aside
Nurse. You think to carry it off, but now my Gag's out it shall be known. And
how you contrived.


Came. I found them here at work alone.


Nurse. I Am apt to think they are work was done before you came Sir.


Came. Pray Ismena, what does she mean by this?


Ism. Heaven knows, some sad distraction Sir, I doubt she has been wicked in
her youth.


Nurs. Come, Come I doubt you are. I see old Age and Service cannot be believed.


Ism. Mark Sister, now she is in her crying fit too. I Will call for help and put
her to bed.


Enter Servant. Ser. Here Is a Gentleman without that calls himself Leandro,
Sir, has business with you.


Came. I come, carry out the Nurse and let the Maids look after her.


Exit Camillo. Mar. I think they had best bind her. Pray Heaven she do no
mischief.


Ism. Her teeth are all out, she cannot bite.


Mar. Now what do you think on it Nurse?


Nur. I think you're all possessed, for to abuse me thus. All that vexes me, I
never deserved it at my Masters hands. But I will be revenged.


Exit Nurse. Ism. This is beyond expectation. Pray Heaven our next frolic
succeed as well.


Mar. I Am strangely afraid of this Leandro.


Ism. That Is the Melancholy man that was with us, is it not?


Mar. The same; if he betray us we are undone yet.


Ism. Never fear wench, this powder will be one shift more.

And whether Fortune smiles or knits her brow,
We cannot be worse than slaves, and so we are now.

Exeunt Ism. Mari. Enter Camillo, Leandro. Lean. I thought my self engaged
besides the particular love I bear your daughter, by my tie to honor to declare
this truth.


Came. It Is very strange.


Lean. The Nurse can justify it.


Came. Why, she is distracted Sir.


Lean. She might well seem so, abused as she has been.


Came. Come in with me and we will examine further, and if it does prove true, I
stand obliged.


Lean. If not, then take your own revenge.


Exeunt. Juliana, Lelia. Jul. 'Twas well we had this notice, we had been
surprised else. What unlucky business brings him back? Now must I be kissed and
hugged by one I hate. Phaugh. He said Lysander told it him himself, did he not?


Lel. Yes, Madam.


Jul. Very well, the more he doats on's Mis, the more time shall I have with my
Gallant, and if he does chance to find me out I have something to cry quit
with. In the mean time I Will seem as fond as ever, lest he should suspect me.


Lel. Hark Madam, I think I hear him coming.


Jul. Yes, it is he.

Enter Lysander Next I will have you work the dismal story of poor Ariadnes
love, and how the cruel Theseus left her, 'twas unkindly done Lelia: But men
are not so fond as we.


Lys. Pox of your counterfeit pipe, he has been here but fled.

Aside.
Jul. Ar't' come dearest? now you are kind indeed, a sudden joy o'rewhelming
me. I was just talking of the cruelties of men, and pitying our poor sex. But
I had never yet a cause to doubt of thee. Ten thousand welcomes. I have had
such fears.


Lys. Lest I should come home too soon Aside. Thou art so fond, I must believe
thee, I am o'rejoy'd to find thee in this health. Trust me I Have scarcely slept
since last we parted.


Jul. No, you had one that kept you waking Aside Poor Dear I pity thee; you
wanted me to sing and kiss thee to thy rest.


Lys. Truth is, no Opium causes sleep so much as such a bedfellovv. -- I hate
Aside.


Jul. Nay I my self have had the strangest dreams too.


Lys. I hope they were all pleasant ones.


Jul. They were all of you, you night and day dispose my thoughts. One time
methoughts you loved another woman more than me, that troubled me a little, as
it would any wife that loves so well as I do. But I believe there are but
fevv.


Lys. Heaven forbid there should. Aside That was thy too much fondness, thou
can not have those thoughts awake.


Jul. No dearest joy, 'tvvas only in a dream.


Lys. That Is nothing, for I had such a one of you, but when I waked I chid my
self.


Jul. Nay, then we are even, and must pardon one another.


Lel. There Is reason for it, for you are both sinners.

Aside.
Lys. I am so far from a mistrust, that I dare swear thou art as innocent, as I
my self.


Jul. I dare pawn my innocence for thee too.


Lel. And if you never redeem't it is no great loss.

Aside.
Jul. But why should we talk thus? it looks too like mistrust. Believe me it was
with me an Age till your return.


Lys. The very last hour before mine, seemed months to me too. I would fain
have taken you napping.

Aside.
Jul. Poor rogue, you're thin since last I saw you, you shall not go again.


Lelia. A Mistress and a Wife's enough to make any body look so.

Aside.
Lys. Nay dearest but I must, and leave thee for a week or two, an hour is the
longest of my stay.


Jul. And of my life. You will kill me.


Lys. It shall be with kindness then.


Jul. A week! I know you are not in earnest but vvilt deceive me thus again,
come prithee do, these surprises make thy coming ten times pleasanter.


Lel. That was well nickt, to make sure work.

Aside.
Lys. It Is too certain, Juliana, that is the least; nay, never cry for it. But
let us enjoy that little time we have, come prithee leave.

They say that married peoples Loves decay,
But mine still grovvs

Jul. And mine, -- another way.
Aside.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Pisauro, Antonio, Pedro. Pis. COme hanged, why all this mincing? can you
imagine I Am so dull as not to see through it? Ten to one I know the cause of
your Mumps; as much, I find the rise of your sullenness. In short Pedro you
have a months mind to measure lengths with Madam Mariana, and you Antonio have
as much to a day to try how things will fit with brisk Ismena. Come,
confess, confess; I see plainly by your solemn pace and grave contriving looks,
you have been running over all the stories in Romances to accomplish your
designs.


Ped. I must declare that I have no aversion to the freedom of her humor.


Ant. And I have seen some faces and conditions which I have liked much worse.
But --


Pis. Pox on you both! don't you think this sounds very prettily to one that
has been an Adventurer, in this trade of love? You must give me leave to know
that your no aversion is the height of desire, and your liking much worse is
the same with nothing half so well. But this silly love still thinks, because
he is blind himself, no body else must see.


Ped. Nay, Pray Pisauro, for charity invent some other name, though it should
prove the self same thing, for this is scandalous.


Ant. No, No, it is so, I plainly see all men have a certain time allowed to
play the fool, and love in, and this is mine.


Pis. This is honest and a friendly part. But why the Devil don't you tell them
so? you see we are more put to it to lay the jealousy of old Camillo, than we
should be to raise a Ghost, to gain an hours leisure.


Ant. I thought I ventured fair considering it was the first time.


Pis That Is very fine, the first time? is not the Gallant worthy more applause
that hits the mark the first shoot, than he that draws a dozen times and never
comes nigh the spot? I Am sure the Ladies will commend him for his aim.


Ped. But you know the Custom does require Ceremony.


Pis. As for customs, our Reformation is designed for to destroy them all. And
this first in short Gentlemen, there are but two ways you can design to be
possessours of your hopes: either to persuade them to their fashionable way of
love, or be content your selves to marry them.


Ant. But neither of these, I doubt, will do, Pisauro; it is certain they are
too wise and virtuous for the first; too brisk and jolly for the second.


Pis. Truth is, their briskness makes me fear they are honest.


Ped. Could I find them otherwise, I should soon make an end of all my love.


Ant. Faith, thought I formerly have had no great opinion of the other, yet I
resolve to try it now, and carry on the Reformation too. Venice shall learn
from me the freedom due to Wives. What say thou, Pedro?


Ped. Nay, I am too much thy friend to leave thee in the greatest hazard of thy
life.


Pis. Well agreed. I shall give you opportunity anon, if my design succeeds
with old Camillo: though I begin to doubt because the Tutor comes not. By this
Pacheco and his Mistress have changed a broadside or two; I left them nigh
engaging.


Ped. There is no danger in the combat I presume.


Pis. Faith, not on her side, she has little to lose besides the Vessel, let
him board her when he will.


Ant. Have you got the Tutors consent yet?


Pis. That I intend to buy with gold and good words, and the money will be well
put out to use too; the fool must needs be rich, and the wench I know has wit
enough to wheedle him.


Ped. But do you think he will bite home enough to marry?


Pis. Yes, I know she will stand upon her honor, the unknown value of a woman's
credit, and twenty such common places they all inherit from their Mothers, and
if he once grow hot he will do any thing.


Ant. Have you heard any news of Leandro?


Pis. Yes, but am loath to tell a story so imperfect; the Tutor will tell us all.


Ped. Does that Fellow continue his old humor still?


Pis. Without the least change, if not improved.


Ant. Prithee put him into 't a little.


Pis. You Will repent you, for it is intolerable.


Ped. No, No, for once we will venture it.


Ant. It Is much that this fellow that has wit, and is company in every thing
besides, should thus besot himself.


Ped. Let Us work a cure and beat him out of this humor.


Pis. If beating would have done he had been well long ere this.


Ant. Methinks change of air should work.


Pis. No, nothing, he picks out half a dozen young fools where e're he comes,
sticks to them till he has talked over all he has to say, and then changes. But
st.

Enter Tutor. Here he comes, let us dispatch our business first: Welcome Sir,
what news? you look as if you would had a Play hist, or met with some presumptuous
fool that would pretend to understand the rules of Poetry in your company.


Tut. No none of these, but something that concerns you nearer at the present:
in short, Leandro has betrayed all, renounced his covenant, and become
Reprobate.


Ant. Faith, I expected no better, I knew he must necessarily turn Heretic by
this way of living: alas, he drunk nothing but Penitential water and dangerous
Coffee, half a dozen such Sneaks would ruin the Republic.


Ped. Prithee, what new light or Revelation rules him now?


Tut. The old flame of Love, and he goes the old Italian way to work too: makes
his addresses to the Father without consulting the woman: Has told of your
being there, the Rules of your Reformation; and by this art so wheadled him
that he resolves to marry one of his daughters to him immediately; to which end
he is just now gone to fetch a Priest. Yonder has been such a Lecture, what
between the old man and the Nurse, that the Poor Ladies have been worried.


Ant. Which of the Sisters is it?


Pis. Ismena, that is it which vexes me, h'as picked the flower out of all our
conquest.


Ant. But he shall hang before he e're shall wear her.


Ped. No, it must not be; if we let the first rebellion prosper, we betray the
weakness of our Government.


Pis. I knew him false before, and therefore promised to assist you in your
loves, from hence I do renounce all friendship with him as a Traitor.


Ant. Thou art truly Loyal. Pray let me beg the freedom to contrive his
punishment; if I make him not as wretched and ridiculous as his worst of
enemies can wish, trust me with no more affairs of State.


Ped. But how shall we escape this danger?


Pis. Has be taken the powder yet?


Tut. Yes, that is all our hopes. He railed himself so dry that he was forced to
call for wine If that works before Leandro comes, we should be freed for the
present, the Nurse too has a dose to spoil her talking.


Ant. That Is well, could we but meet him.


Tut. He must come this way, for he went toward the Arsenal.


Ant. Then we are safe, let me alone to manage him.


Pis. In the mean time let us divert our selves.


Tut. I thought to have met Pacheco here, it is certain he must not come nigh
home till old Camillo is appeased; nor I neither.


Pis. He Is in a safer place practicing all his Lectures over to his Mistress. I
have a project now on foot which if you will promise to advance you shall want no
gold; but of that anon.


Tut. I shall endeavor to serve you Sir.


Pis. Come Sir you are a judge, what opinion have you of the last new Play?


Tut. Faith -- well for an essay. I guess the Gentleman's but a beginner. I my
self --


Pis. Now he is in.

Aside.
Tut. Writ with the same much success at first, 'twas industry and much
converse that made me ripe; I tell you Gentlemen, when I first attempted this
way I understood no more of Poetry than one of you.


Ped. This is strange impudence.

Aside.
Ant. It Is nothing yet.

Aside.
Tut. There are many pretenders but you see how few succeed; and bating two or
three of this nation as Tasso, Ariosto and Guarini, that write indifferently
well, the rest must not be named for Poesy: we have some three or four, as
Fletcher, Johnson, Shakespeare, Davenant, that have scribled themselves into the
bulk of follies and are admired to, but never knew the laws of heroic or
dramatick poesy, nor faith to write true English neither.


Ant. It Is very much, I hope Sir your heroic play goes on.


Tut. As fast as a piece of that exactness can. I Will only leave a pattern to
the world for the succeeding ages and have done.


Ped. Oh Sir you will wrong the world.


Tut. No faith Sir I grow weary of applause.


Ant. Will you give me leave to ask the way for others to attain to your
perfection?


Tut. I will not say but that it may be done, but trust me you will find it hard
Gentlemen, and since you are my friends I Will tell you.


Ped. You will oblige us Sir.


Tut. First I speak of Tragedy, which let the world say what it will and dote
on little things, I scrible now and then, as good faith they do Gentlemen
strangely; you shall have them -- but I don't love to praise my self. Tragedy I
says my Masterpiece.


Ant. Every tthing you do seems so.


Tut. Nay, nay, pray forbear Gentlemen -- To go on: I take a subject, as
suppose the Siege of Candy, or the conquest of Flanders, and by the way Sir let
it always be some warlike action; you cannot imagine what a grace a Drum and
Trumpet give a Play. Then Sir I take you some three or four or half a dozen
Kings, but most commonly two or three serve my turn, not a farthing matter
whether they lived within a hundred years of one another, not a farthing
Gentlemen, I have tried it, and let the Play be what it will, the Characters
are still the same.


Pis. Trust me Sir, this is a secret of your art.


Tut. As Sir you must always have two Ladies in Love with one man, or two men
in love with one woman; if you make them the Father and the Son, or two
Brothers, or two Friends, 'twill do the better. There you know is opportunity
for love and honor and Fighting, and all that.


Ped. Very well Sir.


Tut. Then Sir you must have a Hero that shall fight with all the world; yes
i'gad, and beat them too, and half the gods into the bargain if occasion serves.


Ant. This method must needs take.


Tut. And does Sir. But give me leave and mark it for infallible, in all you
write reflect upon religion and the Clergy; you cannot imagine how it tickles,
you shall have the Gallants get those verses all by heart, and fill their
letters with them to their Country friends; believe me this one piece of art
has set off many an indifferent Play, and but you are my friends --


Ant. You honor us.


Tut. Last of all, be sure to raise a dancing singing ghost or two, court the
Players for half a dozen new scenes and fine clothes (for take me if there
ben't much in that too) put your story into rhyme, and kill enough at the end of
the Play, and Probatum est your business is done for Tragedy.


Pis. A'n 't you weary?

Aside.
Ped. No prithee let him run on.

Aside.
Tut. Then as for Comedy, which I was saying my Genius does not lead me to,
but that the world may know I can at idle hours when I please out-vvrite
them, I do venture at.


Pis. And with success Sir too, believe it.


Tut. And faith Gentlemen I Will tell you, there is your French Nation, Pox on 't
a kind of Jack-pudding wit, yet hang me if their Plays be well picked, as a
scene here and a scene there, it will do it, it will in faith, I have tried it.


Ped. Well Sir proceed.


Tut. But your true English and my way, is to write your Plays with double
sense and brisk meaning Songs. Take me, you shall have the Ladies laugh at a
little bawdy jest as if they would bepiss themselves, and the young Mounsieurs
clap as if they meant to wear their hands out in the service; and if you
consider, this is easy and a large subject, especially to one that will be at
the charge to keep a wench that understands her trade, you cannot imagine what
hints and pretty things she will pick up. Now Sir, if you can but maintain two
or three of those Characters, no matter what your plot is, your love and honor
will do here again, and it is but saving alive and marrying those that you would
kill in Tragedy, and you have done.


Ant. We give you thanks for these instructions, and shall endeavor to improve
Sir.


Tut. Nay, I have not done yet, but if you promise secrecy will let you know my
great Arcanum.


All. We do.


Tut. It Is this, when I have writ a Play, I pick some Lady out of general
acquaintance, or favorite at the Court, that would be thought a wit, and send
it in pretense for to submit it to her judgment. This she takes for such a
favor -- and raises her esteem so much -- she talks of nothing else but Mr.
such a ones new Play, and picks out the best on 't to repeat, so half the town
by this means is engaged to clap before they come.


Ped. Excellent!


Tut. Besides this, I take some half a dozen youngsters of the town, People
that pride themselves in one of my nods or a shaking by the hand at the
Coffee-house, and let them have a copy of a Song or two, or promise of the
Prologue, which does so much oblige, that I have all the faction of the town
that makes a noise on my side.


Ant. Trust me Sir these are very great rules.


Tut. And such as never fail, but I am resolved to leave, and having made a
pattern for the world so long deceived in their opinion of wit and Language.


Ped. For heaven sake pity us now Pisauro, and persuade him to keep this for
his Aside Preface to the next new Play.


Pis. Not I, since you have wound him up, may you be deaf with noise.


Ant. Here comes one that will release us then.


Enter Leandro. Pis. We must keep him in talk a while.

Aside. Leandro here! that is a miracle, where have thou been for heavens sake?
thou might have found the North passage to the Indies since I saw thee.


Lean. Troth Gentlemen I have found out as difficult a one to as pleasant a
place, and am just going to reap the benefit of my adventure.


Ant. We may all share I hope.


Lea. No, I Am for c'd to monopolise for all the sweets and treasures of the
place, if once they are blowed upon or touched by more than one, lose all their
value and delight.


Ped. Are you the first discoverer that you challenge such propriety?


Lea. I Have reason to think so, for the accesses were all guarded by a watchful
dragon.


Ant. In plain language Sir.


Lea. I Will tell you then because I am in have; since I left you I have been
with old Camillo, drawn up writings, agreed every thing between us, and only
want a Priest (which is just going thither) to make Ismena mine; was not my
passage shorter than ordinary, Gentlemen, and the Island worth discovery? Pray
Gentlemen how does the Reformation go forward?


Pis. But have thou no remorse, no pricking all this time?


Lean. For what prithee?


Pis. Is thy zeal for the solemn covenant so soon forgot? how dares thou sin
after this rate and rob a woman of her liberty which thou have sworn to defend
at least, if not procure?


Ped. You are too hasty Pisauro, without question he will give her all she
wishes and the Reformation asks.


Lean. No, you're deceived Sir, though I was English when a batchelour, I Will be
a true Italian and my self, when married. I value her credit and my quiet too
much to do otherwise.


Pis. Then may all Cupids curses light upon thee.


Lean. I dare venture ten times more than that blind boy is able to inflict for
such a prize, farewell Gentlemen.


Ant. Nay, stay and take all with you, may thou be impotent in the height of
all thy wishes.


Ped. Be jealous, yet never have a cause.


Pis. Run mad with dotage and she scorn thee.


Lean. Leave, leave I shall grow fat with cursing.


Pis. Thou shall have enough to burst thee then.


Ant. May thou have Sons, yet never dare to own them, and they beg their
bread.


Ped. May thy daughters be so rank to dote on Monkeys.


Pis. May thou live to see all this and hang thy self.


Lean. Laughs I Am pleased to see you envy me; and you have cause, for I shall
have delights lawful and wholesome too, when I shall meet you trayling of your
legs after you or walking upon crutches with but one nose among you. Adieu
laughs or will you go with me and believe your eyes?


Ant. We will, lead us; and if fair means don't, force shall.

Aside.
Exeunt Ant. Ped. Lean. Pis. Come Tutor, as we go I Will tell you my design which
you must further.


Exeunt. Enter Camillo, Mariana, Ismena, Nurse. Came. Come it is in vain to
whine, I will not sleep till I have don't.


Ism. You may be deceived for all this yet.

Aside. Courage Sister he begins to yawn already.


Came. I Will see whether a Nunnery and a husband can reclaim you. Nor shall it go
much better with your gewgaw Brother. Are you so rampant, you must make a decoy
of my own house to catch your wild fowl in?


Ma. Give me some little time for to prepare my self.


Ca Oh you have done that to the purpose, sinner enough to spend the rest of
your life in penitence.

yawns.
Ism. There Is another, it will do.

Aside. Pray Sir let me live there and bear her company.


Came. No, though you're both naught, I Would willingly keep one of you to breed
on, and it shall be you, a Nunnery will give you too much liberty.


Is. If I must marry give me leave to chose.


Ca. Your choice is likely to be good by the company you keep; but I Have
provided for you, you shall be kept so close you scarcely shall have light
enough yawns to read your prayers by.


Is. That Is too cruel, I would pray for you.


Ca. It must be backward then; thy youth is all the reason I can give to think
you are not a witch; OF my conscience thou can fly, but I Will have your wings
clipped, and you put into a Cage for better security.


Nur. They have been wild indeed yawns took I what care I could.

yawns.
Came. Why do thou yawn so, thou infects me too.

yawns.
Nur. You see Ladies though I have no teeth I can find my tongue.


Is. I prophecy that you will lose it yet e're long, for vvronging of the
innocent.


They both yawn. Enter Leandro, Anto. Pedro, Pisauro. Came. Welcome Son, I was
waiting for you.


Lean. I Have brought my friends along, the Gallants of the Reformation, to see
me happy and to take their leave.


Came. I shall take care to reform my daughters from keeping them company, yawns
you have spoiled a Son of mine too among you


Ant. Who do you speak Sir to?


Came. To you all.

yawns.
Nur. To you Sir, since you are so brisk yawns this is the very Royster that
gagged and bound me Sir.

yawns.
Pis. Let Us look, thou gap'st as if thou had a gag there yet.


Lean. How is it Sir, you look not well; your eyes are heavy too.


Came. Only a little weary and faint yawns with chiding of these wicked girls.


Lean. Will It please you sit? A Chair there.

Sits down.
Nur. How is it Sir?

yawns.
Came. Pray take away this gaping woman yawns and let us fin -- fin -- fin --
ish --

Sleeps.
Nurs. Will It please you to have a little yawns cordial water, or yawns some
aqua mi -- mirabilis, or -- or.


Falls a sleep leaning on Came. Lean. To Ism. Believe me Madam, it proceeded all
from Love.


Ism. I must obey Sir.


Pis. He Is fast, he is fast Madam.


Ism. Then I am free.


Ma. And I shall scarcely say my Prayers in a Nunnery to day; how lovingly they
sleep!


Lean. How Is this! you have not murdered him.


Ant. Nothing but a gentle sleep Sir, which does our business as well.


Ped. Was you so ignorant to think we would let thee carry it thus?


Pis. What my wise Coffee-drinker over-reacht?


Lean. This is beyond all sufferance, what say you Madam? will you refuse me
too?


Ism. Oh Sir, I would not marry without my Fathers leave for all the world.


Ant. Send you joy Sir, we believe our own eyes.


Lean. I Will never stay for to be baited thus.


Ant. Nay, prithee stay a while, and let me tell you a secret, you will want news
else. We gave this sleeping portion to Camillo and the Nurse, to gain an
opportunity of going out to laugh and dance: Remember Sir: and kept you in
discourse till this time, when we were sure it would work, for to prevent your
marriage: Do you mark Sir? some few hours hence he wakes, and then you may
come again and tell your story.


Lea. Yes, and be revenged.


Pis. If you dare make a second trial, this is but purgatory, you know the
next punishment.


Lean. Sunk in the height of all my hopes.


Exit Leandro. Pis. Well Gallants, I Will before and leave you to wait upon the
Ladies.


Ant. But whither prithee?


Pis. To Lysandro's here hard by.


Ped. He Is not at home.


Pis. But his wife is, that is as good.


Ant. Nay it is much better; does your furnace stand there?


Pis. Ladies I shall wait you.


Exit. Ma. Whose within there?

Enter Tutor. Pray Tutor call some body to carry these in and set them warm.


Enter Servants, carry off Came. Nurse. Ant. Now have I a strange design comes
into my head.


Ped. What is it?


Ant. You know Gallants I promised to reform the old men; what if we should
shave Camillo, head and chin, and let him wake in a great white wig?


Ism. For heavens sake, that would make him irreconcilable.


Ped. No, No, that is driving on too fast, we are pretty well advanced.


Ant. I only do propose. Come Ladies shall we go?


Mar. Yes Sir, I wish our mirth ends well.


Is. Fie Sister to think of that before it does begin.


Exeunt. Enter Pacheco, Lelia. Pa. I vow to gad Madam nothing but an affair of
this moment and that --


Lel. Oh Sir you have honored me.


Pa. Oh Gad Madam the honor -- and but that I know your goodness Dear Madam --
let me perish but -- one minute returns me as much your humble Servant, as --
your Servant Madam, your servant.


Exit Pacheco. Scena Secunda.
Juliana and Lelia laughing. Jul. I Am glad to find your new gallant tickles so.


Lel. He would make a Nun laugh that is just professed, and that is the
sorrowful'st laughs time I can think of; all I wonder at is, that I live.


Jul. What Is the matter? did he stand upon his head or conjure, that he is such
a miracle?


Lel. I know not what you mean by conjuring, but all the juglers at a Carnival
have not so many tricks.

laughs.
Jul. I must get some music for thee, OF my conscience thou art stung wench,
prithee leave and speak.


Lel. Why Madam all the Painters since the art was found out, never drew half
the postures he was in, in less than half an hour, he goes as puppets do by
wiers. Pray Madam have a little patience and I Will show you. After a shrug and a
salute, which he tells me is the new mode, he gives his little whalebone a
twirle or two.


Jul. Well then I make my curtsy.


Lel. Right Madam, then the Devil refuse him. But mine is the pleasant'st seat
in Venice, and that gives him opportunity to take as strut or two to view the
room; but all this time the wig and shirt is ordered, and as soon as e're the
looking glass was spied, out comes the comb, and I had twenty tunes begun and
never ended, or ended and never begun.


Jul. But what must I do all this while?


Lel. Admire Madam, then the posture's altered, and off goes the glove which
shovvs the diamond ring, and out comes the gold Watch, which must be placed
with art, for fear the chain hang not out enough to be seen.


Jul. You Are a Devil to abuse him thus.


Lel. Next he approaches and knovvs I am a wit by the chosing of my ribbons,
and rails at the poor Country Madam, for making him sweat in Summer with her
hot colors. Next subject of discourse was the alteration of the mode in
Laces; commends my work, and calls all the stitches by their proper names, and
in the midst of this begins a new tune, svvears it is good, and from thence
takes occasion to run over all the Plays and his acquaintance with the Poets.


Jul. Could thou desire better company?


Lel. Nay he has not done yet Madam; then he talks over all the women of the
town, and how Tom such a one, had turned off Betty, and Dick such another kept
Mall, and called them all by their names as freely as if he had been Pimp to
all the company.


Jul. And ten to one their names is all he knows them by, but you must know
it is modish and a great attainment.


Lel. At last when he came into the discourse of travel, I concluded we should
never have done, but all of the sudden he makes me three or four cringes of
several fashions, begs leave for to dispatch some great affair (which I suppose
was to look upon some new wig he had bespoke) and he would be here immediately.


Jul. And what do thou think of him after all this?


Lel. You must needs guess Madam, as of a most egregious Fop. I Am beholden to
Pisauro for his good vvishes.

Enter Pisauro. And here he comes in time for to receive my thanks.


Jul. I am ashamed to hear thee talk thus, what blessing can thou imagine
greater than a husband that is a fool and rich?


Lel Heaven forbid Madam.


Jul. You Are an Idiot: Is It not better to have him busy himself with points
and ribbons, toys and laces, than to be always grave and melancholy, which in
a while will make him jealous too and mark your very looks.


Pis. It Is odds but that you're locked up, and see the Sun but once a
twelvemonth, and have no other company but some old woman that does the office
of a deaths head and puts you in mind of dying.


Jul. You see what arts I Am forced to use to cheat Lysander with, such a man
as this will manage all your purpose himself.


Lel. I will be ruled by you Madam.


Pis. 'Twas well said, how did he behave himself?


Jul. I have had that at full, no more now I beseech you.


Pis. How did you carry it?


Lel. I took your directions, and had as many modish postures as I then could
think on, sometimes thus, then thus.


Pis. That must needs take him, did he speak any thing of Love?

She acts several ridiculous conceited postures.
Lel. I cannot tell how to answer you, or what his way of courtship is when he is
in earnest, but he commended me as if I was to sell, gripped my hand and kissed
it, talked of the power of love and women, and all the time screwed up and down
as if he had been netled.


Pis. These are good signs, I shall know all as soon as e're I see him: Pacheco
sings within. hark! I believe he is coming, yes it is he I hear him sing, pray
withdraw; the Ladies will be here immediately.


Exeunt Jul. Lelia. Enter Pacheco. Pis. Save you Sir, you're got off alive I
see.


Pa. Yes faith, and that is all; hang me Pisauro if she is not the first woman
that has moved me on this side England.


Pis. I thought 'twas she must nick your humor.


Pa. Take me if she has not wit too and demean, understands address and all
that.


Pis. This character from you will raise her in my esteem.


Pa. You must give me leave to understand a little.


Pis. You are the only judge, Sir.


Pa. Believe me she has the true Court air, takes every thing that is new and
modish. I Will svvear to you, I have sometimes cast an afternoon away, run
through all my common places of discourse, and at the last been thought
ridiculous.


Pis. You must meet with women that have been barbarous then.


Pa. No Sir, 'twas want of breeding and converse, not one in ten that has the
least of it. Alas Sir, there is a particular mine, languishing look, and je ne
scay quoy, as we say, and all this she has in perfection. Take me, if I don't
think there is a perfect sympathy between us. But this thing of friends.


Pis. You are Melancholy of the sudden.


Pa. No Sir, I am only contriving something to advance our Reformation, and to
make us perfect.


Pis. It will do.

Aside.
Pa. And it shall be hard but I Will outdo you all.


Enter Anto. Pedro, Tutor, Juliana, Mariana, Ismena, Lelia. Jul. All the
entertainment I can promise is your freedom, Gallants, and that you're in a
house where you have all things at command.


Ant. There Is nothing can be added Madam.


Pis. Now you honor me, I have invited you to an English treat, Ladies, room
and music, you bring the mirth and company with you.

Some Chairs there.

Chairs set out.
Pa. I have been so rude as to increase your company without your knowledge,
Sir, to day I swore a stranger and invited him, he promised me to bring his
Mistress too.


Pis. The least acquaintance Sir with you must challenge welcome.


Pa. I know you will like his humor, it is free beyond any thing I ever met on this
side the Alps. I in a moment found that we were made for one another's company.


Jul. That free humor which you speak of brings a welcome with it.


Ped. This looks well, we were made for this.


Ism. Methinks we begin to live now, we did but dream away our time before,
Sister.


Ma. It was not half so pleasant; but now you speak of dreaming, Heaven keep my
Father fast.


Ism. I resolve to think of nothing here but mirth.


Pis. Bravely said Madam. Come let us be frolic then.


Pa. My Tutor has provided us a dance was made to set off his new last Play in
England.


Ant. Pray let us have it then, 'tmust be as proper here as there.


Tut. I Will step out and get it ready.


Pis. Will it please you sit Ladies? Some wine there.


They go to set two women together. Pac. Two women together! let us never begin
our Reformation with such a sin, come I Will teach you better, and as Master will
begin an English health. Here, here stand a Lady and a Gallant. Now Madam a
health to my Mis and your Gallant.


Lel. Here Sir, here is a health to my Gallant and your Mis.


Ant. Right, Right, fill it about.


Pac. So now all hands.

Fill round the healths good natured and free,
Let your Statesmen politic be,
No custom our joys shall defer.
This is bliss.
Each Lady has her Gallant, each man has his Mis,
On this side and this,
Let us kiss, let us kiss, A la mode d'Angle terre.

Jul. If this be an English custom, it is a mighty kissing country, this is too
much.


Ant. Right! I knew she that liked it best would be the first that should
complain.

Aside.
They all sit a man and a woman. Enter Tutor. Tut. Strike up there.

Dance of Anticks.
Pis. Come Sir have you never another health?


Pa. A thousand.


As he is going to drink, Enter Lysander, Emilia. Lys. Shall I keep my
resolution?

Aside.
Em. Yes prithee do for my sake.

Aside.
Pa. Dear heart! I wish authority can bid you welcome now.


Lys. I thank you Sir, but I can make my self so.


Pis. 'Slife thou have undone us man, why this is husband to the Lady in whose
house we are.

To Pac.
Pa. What then he is sworn, and it is as common for a wife to make a ball without
her husbands knowledge, as for a Nun to say her Prayers; is it not Tutor?


Tut. Yes Sir, it is nothing, or with their konwledge either: Lysander all this
time compliments the Ladies. More, the good man rather than his wife shall lose
a kiss, takes her by the hand and tells the next man that comes, my wife Sir,
and then she is slaver'd round the company.


Ant. This must be Lysander, what can this come to?


Ped. At the worst we must resolve to carry off the Ladies safe.


Lys. 'Twas kindly done to comfort up the widow Gentlemen, come never disturb
your selves, I Am a sworn Brother.


Pis. Resolve to carry't off briskly, there is no other way left.

To Juliana.
Jul. Art' come dearest? ten thousand vvelcomes, you ee what shift I Am forced
to make to comfort me in solitude; but all is too little for to make amends for
one Lysander.


Lys. Dear rogue thou can not think how much I vvanted thee too, you see
what paultry shift I was forced to make.


Shows Emilia. Pa. She Is vvondrous fair, Madam --

Goes toward her.
Lys. Hold, hold, Sir, though I allow all freedom with my wife, you know the
English fashion is to keep my Mistress to my self.


Pa. I beg your pardon Sir, 'tvvas well remembered.


Jul. I see you're angry, but I was forced to seek to ease my grief by any
way when you was absent.


Lys. Not I, never trouble your self to make this excuse, I love this mirth;
but prithee chuck tell me, which of these is thy Gallant? or do they take it by
turns, come prithee do, good faith I count my self beholden to him, he eases me.


Jul. weeps I see no faithfulness can e're oblige you.


Lys. Now thou art too modest, for shame Pisauro own her, I know I pay for
all that finery.


Jul. weeps. Lys. Nay we will be man and wife still in any place but bed, and
that want you have provided for your self, never trouble your self. If you do
more than e're I could Pisauro, and she prove fruitful, I promise here to be a
Godfather. If I have the same success here, I expect the like kindness from you
Juliana.


Tut. This is true love.


Pa. Now our Reformation goes forvvard in good earnest.


Ma. It amazes me; would I were free from hence once.


Lys. Come, come, Gentlemen, be frolic, you seem troubled; Is not this better
than slitting of noses or a stab Gentlemen? we can call chuck and joy and
twenty such pretty names still, as well as the very best of them.

They offer to go out. Nay faith Ladies one dance more for my sake, I shall
grieve that I disturbed you else.

Music there

Dance.
Lys. Now be but pleased to take a small collation in the next room, and I
shall believe you think your selves welcome.


Ant. We Will wait you Sir.


Ma. Yet I Am impatient till I Am gone.


Ped. There Is no danger Madam.


Ism. I fear none Sir.


Pac. Let me perish else.

To Lelia.
Lel. You make me blush Sir.


Pa. Let me die if any thing's more serious.


Lys. Come how is it joy?


Jul. Thank thee Dearest.


Lys. The world may laugh, and names of scorn invent,
But to be Cuckolds nothing if content.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Lysander. Lys. It Is strange that we can fasten no such thing as honor upon the
Sex, whereas a man's lies every where. Twinge him by the nose, his honor's
there, and presently must be redeemed.

Kick him, and it is removed to's backside, and must be engaged.

But this of womankind is really nothing. For if one unmarried chance to kick
up her heels, the reproach returns upon the family.

Or if a wife prove gamesome more than ordinary, she is thought a wit, and
cunning; and it is the husband's branded with the name of scorn.

Now should I go kill Pisauro to redeem my honor: and if I do, die honorably
by an Executioner, or fly my Country: Or if I fall my self, they will cry there
died a silly cuckold, worth the while. I thank my stars I Am less nice in these
points, and have found out a safer way.

Enter Juliana. Welcome dearest, I was sending for thee.


Jul. I feared you might be angry.


Lys. What for such petty faults?


Jul. Nay now you speak as if you did not think me honest.


Lys. Not honest? Why you know I have no reason to the contrary: Prithee no
more on it, I would make a bargain with thee.


Jul. With me Sir? What do you mean?


Lys. In short, what is it you're willing to take a year for alimony?


Jul. This is harder than the first.


Lys. It Is that, that must be understood, for I resolve to carry on my part in
the Reformation by this means. Consult your self and friends, for I would have
you live in credit still.


Jul. Pray Sir be plain.


Lys. Why thus.

Write me down so much for clothes, so much for diet, and lodgings: something
too for pleasure I Will allow; it is the saving English way, and it is but
reasonable when a wife proves false, she should be stinted, and the overplus
should keep a Miss. Come, come, I Am out of my frollick humor now, and am
serious.


Jul. Now you are cruel, will you quite ruin me?


Lys. No such matter, I Will be as civil too as any man, only retrench some small
sums you used to spend in charitable uses, as forty pound to such a Nunnery,
alias for a new suit; twenty unto such a Monastery, alias a new Wigg: why
should you be lavish in your good deeds? There Is scarce a Covent in the town
but's bound to pray for you.


Jul. Pray pardon me, you used to say you loved me.


Lys. I pardon you with all my heart; but I Will take care that you shall sin no
more with my purse, nor let Pisauro brave it with my wealth, as I know he does;
come, it is in vain for to deny.


Jul. Nay if you grow angry once, Emilia does so to; why should not I have the
same liberty?


Lys. There are some thirty and odd reasons to the contrary, besides the common
practice; but that which must satisfy you is, I will not have it so, and it is
in my power to hinder it, remember what I say.


Exit Lysander. Enter Pisauro and Lelia. Jul. Oh Pisauro, we are undone.


Pis. Come, no such matter, I have overheard it all, if Pacheco marry Lelia, as
it is almost out of doubt, this sore will soon be healed; besides my fortune's
not so very low, but I can live, and your allowance will be fair, I dare
promise.


Jul. But will you still love me?


Pis. I Will double it if possible.


Jul. All that troubles me is, I shall want my wealth to serve you with.


Pis. Prithee no more, we lose time, Lelia be careful not to seem too coy, but
if he comes to steal you let him carry off the prize: Friends, or the grave
will soon reconcile Camillo: I must thither and see how affairs go, come
courage Madam we can never want.


Jul. I fear nothing but losing my Gallant.


Lel. I Am resolved to make sure of mine.


Exeunt Omnes. Scena Secunda.
Pacheco, Tutor. Pa. Am I exact in every thing? the colors suited? and my
clothes cut with the modish air?


Tut. To a thought: You see what it is to employ a Tailor knowing in the
fashion. There Is nothing like your French cut Sir, you shall have a country
Gentleman come to town, and throw away a years revenue on a suit on purpose to
be laughed at, hang me if a Livery been't more creditable.


Pac. Then there is much in the wearing of them too, why here now, what would
this belt be valued at, without I wore it? Now it imploys the hands, and gives
a grace to all the gate.


Tut. I joy to see you thus improved, you may read to me shortly. Oh dear Pupil.


Pac. Then there is the cock of the hat, tying of the shirt, fashions of
crevats, the wearing of a Wig that is friz'd or curled, things that alter daily,
and that these poor fools can never pretend to.


Tut. You amaze me Sir, I shall grow proud of my success.


Pa. Take me if I had not rather pass a judgment of a man, from a shake a la
mode, wearing of a Mistresses faver, or the tying of a knot (there is a perfect
Genius shown in that) than from a months converse.


Tut. You have reason Sir; these are the things men travel for, trust me you
may be a pattern to the very Author of the fashion. Nay if you're once resolved
I know you must needs carry her, but --


Pa. No more objections good Tutor.


Tut. Not I Sir, I see she is fair, believe her virtuous and a fortune, but yet
--


Pa. More but's yet? now I begin to think thou enviest me, it is certain I will
do something shall make me chief; truth is, Lysander bid fair for the command,
but at the last I Have found it, and defy him, and all the rest, to think of
Conquest.


Tut. May I know it?


Pa. Yes on condition you will not speak a word to hinder my design.


Tut. Since you are so resolute I engage.


Pa. Then thus. I will to Lelia thus dressed as I am, which certainly must do it,
and without the least enquiry after fortune, or consent of friends marry her
for love; the height of Gallantry, and top of Reformation, hah?


Tut. I may Sir.


Pach. Not a word.


Tut. I may go with you Sir.


Pac. No, I Will have the honor of the action my self, when I return expect me
conqueror.


Tut. No doubt of that, you will find but little opposition.


Pac. I can but think when it is done what pleasures I shall have, and blessed
occasions of new words; As, my Joy, my chuck, my dear, my sweet honeycomb, and
she answers in as good a style; for I resolve to teach her all the English
words. Adieu.


Exit Pacheco. Tut. Send you a fair wind, I Have gold depends upon your good
success.


Enter Pisauro. Pis. Well met Tutor, where is Pacheco? we must not let him cool.


Tut. There Is no fear: he just now left me, with a Resolution to conclude
before he will return.


Pis. Then we are happy: his swearing of Lysander was unlucky.


Tut. It must be pardoned, 'twas perfect zeal and ignorance.


Antonio, Pedro, Mariana, Ismena. Ant. Save ye Gentlemen: what news from
Camillo, Tutor?


Tut. They were both fast within this half hour.


Pis. It Is much about the time they are to wake.


Mar. Shall we beg a favor from you then Sir?


Tut. You may command it Madam.


Mar. It Is that you would watch my Father, and give us notice when he stirs.


Tut. I fly to serve you.


Exit Tutor. Ant. 'Twas bravely carried by Lysander.


Ped. That, that pleased me was, he nickt the Reformation too.


Ant. To a thought: There if the women be displeased, it is but finding a
pretense of quarrel, sue their husbands, and the law gives them the thirds of
the Estate to keep Gallants with.


Pis. I can hardly recover my self though I know I Am out of danger: I would
have parted with the little of my Estate to any man breathing for a new Song.


Ant. Faith at the best 'twas but a lease, and that fairly forfeited to the
Lord too.


Ped. What will you take for it now it is renewed Pisauro?


Pis. Not renewed upon so good terms as you imagine; but I Will not part with
it, whilst the ground bears any crop.


Mar. To Ism. It Is strange the very being women should oblige us to dissemble
thus.


Ism. You see it is true, for my part I do confess I love and would give all the
world to marry my Antonio.


Mar I Pedro. Know it is the only remedy for our misfortunes, yet must not let
them know it.


Ant. Fie Ladies not out of your fright yet!


Mar. Yes Sir we were talking of a greater danger; for though I Am naturally
devout, I don't love to say my prayers on force.


Ism. And though I have no hatred against mankind, yet to have one thrust upon
me thus, goes a little against the hair.


Ant. We have proposed a way, that will prevent both dangers, would you follow
it.


Ism. I run the same hazard of a husband.


Mar. And I one worse than that, of being Nun.


Ped. Why Madam, can you think it better to trifle time away in telling beads,
and change your youth and briskness for Melancholy looks and wrinckles?


Ant. And you resolve to sigh away your life some three stories high, make
complaints, and talk to the men it'h' Arras? That must be your fortune if you
wed Leandro.


Ism. Suppose all this true, how can you have the confidence to ask us for to
marry you? Is it necessary we must break our necks to avoid drowning? Or to
shun my fathers making us slaves go shackle up our selves?


Ant. As for liberty, you shall make your own propositions.


Mar. Which you will keep religiously until you have married us, and then break
at pleasure.


Ped. How can you imagine to avoid this danger?


Ism. Pugh, that we will think on when it comes, at present we are free.


Pis. But to be serious Ladies be your own Judges, is there not something in
the Society of men you much desire?


Ism. Confessed, but never will purchase it at such a rate as marriage.


Pis. Why then you must resolve to be kind without it. It Is a hard case if you
neither lead nor drive.


Ant. That we must be stretched upon a rack, for no fault too, without the least
hope of ease.


Ism. What can you desire more than this freedom?


Ant. Very much: That is the very thing destroys our hopes, were you but
simpring, mimping, bridling Ladies, you were sure prize; those sort of cattle
are so little used to speak, they think it modesty not to deny you.


Pis. Or what do you think of a down demure look?


Ped. That never fails neither, I always challenge them, and what they mean for
bashfulness, conclude a certain sign of guilt.


Ism. You're obliging Gentlemen, there is half womankind condemned already.


Ant. Then there is your devout souls, that sigh and whine, have something of
Religion in their very gate; and never speak but in a tone of zeal and purity.


Pis. Pox on them, I must be hungry indeed to feed there; they are too common,
and usually belong to a whole fraternity: If they can but learn to call their
sins by new names, they pass for virtues; and she that sins deepest is the
truest Saint.


Ant. No, no, they are your brisk Ladies that are the hardest conquest. It Is
true you give us so much freedom, we cannot find confidence to ask more, yet
when we cast it all up it signifies -- just nothing.


Ped. Or if we do venture to ask, it is but lost labor, you will never understand
us, but wheadle't off with a laugh or some odd story.


Mar. Well Gentlemen we are beholden to you that our Honor's safe in your
opinions.


Ped. And that acknowledgment is all the recompense we are like to have.


Mar. For all I can perceive Sir.


Pis. But consider a little: is there no little inclinations, no beatings here
-- Madam more than ordinary?


Ism. No Sir I can find no such matter.


Ant. But suppose that to your freedom I should offer that, which uses to be
sweeter to your Sex, Revenge too?


Ism. Revenge would do something could I get shut of you once, but I swear
you're grown so troublesome.


Ant. In short then, Madam, you resolve to lose both, desert the public cause,
and --


Ism. I have no natural inbred hatred to your person; and Revenge does tempt a
little. But --

Let me die, if I can make objections, I shall hold out no longer.

Aside.
Enter Antonio's Boy in woman's clothes. Pis. Whom do you seek Lady?


Boy. Antonio Sir.


Ant. Your Servant Madam, hang me if I knew you at the first glance. Thou
come luckily: be sure not to be amazed at whatsoever I say or do, but answer
me in my own strain.


Ant. kisses his hand. Ism. Who is this? they are mighty well acquainted Sir
methinks.


Pis. Faith Madam I cannot guess, she is very fair.


Ism. But well: I know some Ladies will not be ashamed to show their faces in
her company. Would I could blast that little beauty that she has.

Aside.
Ant. I thought our loves would never admit of jealousy, but thou art too
kind.

Aloud.
Boy. It Is you have made me so, I were ungrateful Sir indeed should I not
endeavor to return your love.


Ism. Aside Hovv's this? Return his love? then I am vvretched.


Pis. You seem angry Madam.


Ism. Not I Sir, it is not in the power of man to make me so, Aside but that
woman does.


Boy. Aloud You think me Sir too free I fear.


Ant. No dearest, our old love may challenge this and more.


Ism. May they poison thee.

Salutes her
Ped. Aside I smell it, it is Antonio's Boy he courts. And she must love by her
concern. Now I Will strike home.


Ant. You have your story ready for Camillo.


Boy. Yes Sir.


Ant. Aloud And you will not fail to meet me there Dearest?


Boy. I shall never deny my self a happiness.


Mar. To Ped. But are you sure my Sister will be found so easy as to yield?


Ped I only beg the promise that you will follow her example.


Mar. I may have confidence enough in her to grant, and yet show little
kindness. Aside at worst it saves my blushes.


Ped. That little's all I ask, Madam.


Ant. I Will only end a formal compliment or two.


Ism. Aside Treacherous base man!


Ant. Pisauro, shall I beg you would conduct this Lady?


Pis. You honor me with the trust.


Exeunt Pisauro, Boy. Ism. Will you go Sister?


Ant. You Will give me leave to wait on you Madam.


Ism. No Sir, you have your hands full I see already, and may spare your formal
compliments. Would you fail your assignation with so great a beauty?


Am. Aside As I could wish. She is not ugly Madam.


Ism. I don't intend a quarrel on the subject. It Is indifferent to me what she
is.


Ant. I see it is Madam; nor could you blame me for courting her, when I found
you so cruel.


Ism. I blame you? Why did you not leave Pisauro here, and go your self?
there is no body so fond of your company. Come Sister. to Pedro I hope Sir you will
be so kind as to show us the way home.


Mar. Nay fie Sister part friends. to Pedro You see Sir we are like to meet.


Ped. I Will take my fortune Madam, Aside and know I have a sure card to play.


Ant. It Is pretty to fall from the discourse of marriage into this of chiding.


Ism. Marriage? I Will rather be shut up with Leandro in a grave, than ever have
a thought of you.


Ant. But I Am sure you will; more, know you must. Nay what is more yet, am
confident 'twill be a match.


Ism. Now you're impudent. Did I ever show the least kindness to you?


Ant. Confessed, but this anger makes me think you have had no unkindness for me.


Ism. To vex you, I will confess it true, but add to it, that I hate you now.


Ant. It Is very strange, all that you can say, can never make me believed.


Ism. I tell you I should hate my self, should I ever have the least good
thought of you. Nay I shall hate all mankind for your sake, scarce spare my
Brother for beginning our acquaintance.


Ant. This still confirms me more in my opinion.


Mar. This is mad courtship.


Ped. I know it must succeed, for nothing heightens love so much as a
misgrounded jealousy.


Ant. What if I would promise, I would love no woman besides you? is there no
hopes of pardon?


Ism. No, I scorn it now.


Ant. If I swear I never did love a woman?


Ism. Nothing. I know it false, and if I doated on you, should hate you for
this lie.


Enter Tutor: Tut. Ladies, you must thist for yourselves, and that with speed:
your Father is awake, has sent for Leandro; and to the Senate, that he may
force you home, where e're he finds you.


Ped. You know your old retreat.


Ism. I Will die first.


Mar. And I Will be as good as my word, and follow my Sister.


Ant. Now I begin to find I Am wretched.

If this unlucky woman had not come I had been happy.


Ism. And I more miserable far than now. Come Sister let us fly any whither from
these men.


Ant. Pray stay Madam, since I have work't you to a height, and am confirmed
you love me by this jealousy, know that Lady was my Boy, dressed in that habit
to procure your liberty. I knew I had no other way to make this blessed
discovery. Will you yet give me leave?


Ism. I am worse angry than before to be betrayed by this trick.


Ant. Consider Madam you would better do it, I Will make good my promise, liberty and
Revenge.


Ism. No, no such matter: it may be I Will vouchsafe to hear your story out.


Tut. A minutes stay will ruin all.


Mar. What do you resolve on Sister?


Ism. Only that I will not have Leandro.


Ped. My hopes are fair yet Madam.


Mar. You know the grounds on which they stand.


Tut. Away I say. I easily guess where this quarrel will end.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter Camillo, Leandro. Came. Never plead for them, to be made
the talk and story of all the town, Sung in Ballads, for it will come to that;
The careful father gulled, or old Camillo's dream, I can, nor will hear no more.


Lean. Threatening will but make them fly your fury: whereas a promise of pardon
brings them with submission into your power, and then you may contrive their
punishment.


Came. Contrive? do you hear me?

For the first I Will have a dungeon so dark and straight that she shall grope
the way unto her mouth, and have no other air but sighs to live on. The second
you should never wed, did I not believe you would invent some lasting terrors
unto all that are or shall be Wives.


Lea. Trust me with that: but first it is necessary, I seek'em out, and bring
them home.


Came. If they refuse, use force; the Senate cannot deny their power to so just
designs.


Lea. I hope we shall not need it.


Exit Leandro. Came. Never was man at my age so rid.

To be rock't asleep like a great Baby, whilst they are all a revelling. Well,
I shall meet with these dap-chicks: That Jay my son, with the Owl his Tutor,
and if I do --

Enter Boy, in woman's clothes. Hah! who have we here?


Boy. You may wonder at a strangers rudeness Sir, and why a woman thus intrudes.


Came. By my troth so I do, but the Divel's in you all for impudence.


Boy. When you know I have necessity and Justice on my side, I cannot doubt but
you will relieve my misery.


Came. A beggar in this garb! be gone, I have no time to hear long stories, nor
will to supply your wants.


Boy. To relieve my wants will never make you poorer Sir.


Came. The right religious Cant to? you know the way, be gone.


Boy. Pray hear me out, and then I know you will have pity.

Camillo turns away, she kneels. If e're you had a Mother, you owed a duty to,
or wife you loved.


Came. It Is a pretty tone this.

turns away.
Boy. If you have daughters, as I know you have, whose honor you would preserve
from stain: if any thing that is yet more dear, by all I do conjure you to hear
me out.


Came. Now am I such a Coxcomb, that though I know it is a cheat, yet I must
listen, come rise and begin then.


Boy. This most unhappy woman that you see, whose little beauty tears and grief
have turned to ruins, yet was once thought fair, till perjury and all that is
false weeps O false Leandro!


Came. How! was it not Leandro that she named? What can this mean?


Boy. Till he false man by force and treachery, had ravished all my wealth, and
left me thus neglected.


Came. Come pray be plain, I Will hear you now with patience.


Boy. As soon as grief will let me Sir.


Came. There Is no trust in woman kind if this be false.


Boy. My Father was a Merchant, and accounted rich, his place of living Candy,
whilst alive, Heaven rest his soul.


Came. This must be true, it moves me too. His name?


Boy. Fabricio. When the enemy approacht our walls, he was commander for this
State, and in their Services lost his life. 'Twas that unhappy minute, when I
saw Leandro first, whose seeming goodness might have tempted one more wife,
than miserable me.


Came. Pray on. I long to hear thee out.


Boy. In short, my Mother trusted him with all concerns, her wealth, her self,
and me. He lived a while a faithful Guardian. And I (for it must out) too soon
loved.


Came. Your name Lady?


Boy. Fabia, in a word.

He promised to convey our family, and riches to this town, did so, but in the
voyage, after a thousand vows of Marriage, which we could not then consummate,
stole my honor, and ever since has left me to my grief.

weeps.
Came. Blessed discovery, trust me now I pity thee.


Boy. If you pity, help me Sir and save your self, this same Leandro still
must needs be false, and will you throw away a Virgin on a perjured man? And if
she marries him, I Am lost for ever.


Came. If I find this story true, I Will promise that your Father's name's
Fabritio, yours Fabia.

Hold, I think I hear him coming.

Enter Leandro, Antonio, Pedro, Mariana, Ismena. Mar. Ism. kneel. Away, away, I
have nothing to say to you. Nor you neither, you may return.


Ant. We have business Sir that much concerns you.


Came. Let it be what it will I have no leisure: if you will stay, come not near
my daughters, but go you to that corner of the room, you to this; so the
Divel's in you if you play tricks at this distance. My business is with Leandro.


Lea. Your Pleasure Sir.


Came. Only a little scruple, I remember I have sworn, never to match my
daughter with a man that had not hazarded his life to serve the State.


Lea. That can be no Obstacle. I Have served it long, and when our Candy was
besieged, sent numbers of the infidels to seek their Prophet in the other
world. This my friends can witness.


Came. You knew Fabritio then?


Ant. Aside How it works?


Lea. Fabritio was my leader Sir, and trained me up to Arms, many a bold sally
has he made, and brought back Victory, nor did he tamely lose his life, but
fell encompassed with an host of slaughtered enemies.


Came. Aside Thus far we do agree. How fared it with his wife and daughter Sir?
I have heard he left both.


Lea. He did, and both patterns to the Sex. They shared the common fortune, and
when the town was yielded up set sail for Venice.


Came. Aside Right yet.

How was the daughter called?


Lea. Fabia. (What can all this mean?

Aside.
Came. Aside. I am confirmed.

Do you know this Lady?


points to the Boy. Lea. No Sir, nor till this minute ever saw her face.


Boy. O Perjured man! is Fabia so soon forgot? false, false Leandro.


Came. Pray look again.


Lea. May I never enjoy the thing I love on earth, or when I die heaven --


Came. Aside His strong denials make me confident. Consider once again, is not
this Fabia?


Fabia whom you have wronged?


Lea. Neither Sir if you require oaths.


Boy. If oaths could have obliged, I never had become thus wretched.


Lea. Heavens, that e're such impudence should wear the shape of women! were
thou not so --


Came. Come, no threats Sir.

She Is in a sanctuary in my house. Take her, and make amends for all your
former injuries.


Lea. What injuries? you will distract me Sir, give me but a minute for to
clear my self.


Came. No, I am satisfied already, and will not be cheated, nor let my daughter
run her self to certain ruin. I Will in, and fetch the writing you have given.


Exit Camillo. Lea. Hell and Furies.


Ant. Save you Sir, how do you like your Island?


Lea. Will you never leave your tortures?


Ped. This is the hell we told you of, if you ventured to sin again.


Ant. As for your new discovery I have taken possession, and it is like to be
called by my name; in short I am married to Ismena, Pedro to Mariana, and this
Fabia is the Boy dressed up to amuse Camillo.


Ped. Here take him, you're so much an Italian, you need not lose your Mistress.


Lea. You shall find me more by my Revenge.


Exit Leandro. Ant. Thus far our plot succeeds.


Boy, do you steal away and get undrest: I would not have Camillo find that
cheat yet.


Exit Boy. Mar. He Is coming: To our places.


Enter Camillo with writings. Came. Here, here, where is Leandro?


Mar. Gone Sir.


Came. And Fabia?


Mar. Yes Sir but not together.


Came. Then these must be sent.

Now I have leisure to come to you, Runagates, for though you have escaped this
danger, you must not think to go free. I have provided for ye both, it is not
your powder that can find another remedy, I will not eat nor drink till it is
performed. I guess your business Gentlemen, but you may spare your pains.


Enter Pacheco, Lelia, Pisauro, Juliana. Came. What can this prove?


Pacheco Lelia kneel. We kneel for blessing Sir.


Came. I give it you; but who is this?


Pac. Your Daughter, whilst I call her wife.


Came. Still more wretched? Go fool thou have undone thy self, and shall live
nor pitied nor relieved by me.

That I should ever be a Father!

But I Will study to forget the name.

These a Nunnery if possible shall save from ruin. In I say.


Ant. Ped. That we forbid Sir.


Came. What shall I not rule my own family in my own house? In I say.


Ant. They may with justice disobey, they leave their husbands here.


Ant. Who thus in duty ask your blessing.


Came. Blessing? e'ne the downright Devil take you all, I am gulled, cheated,
fooled.


Exit Camillo. Mar. Oh Pedro, we can never prosper if a fathers blessing be
denied.


Ped. Never fear Madam, a little patience reconciles all.


Enter Lysander, Tutor. Lys. Joy Gallants. Three vveddings in a day? the State
can never want Soldiers.


Pac. There Is little joy belongs to me. The Reformation goes on too fast now;
for though I like this marrying for love, I hate this damned English way of
disinheriting.


Lys. What can this mean?


Ant. Nay faith the old Gentleman's strangely angry, prithee try what you can
do Lysander, your acquaintance has been great.


Lys. I will, I Am confident when once he knovvs your qualities, he will think
his daughters well bestovv'd, and an only Sons pardon is soon obtained.


Exit Lysander. Ism. However it succeed, I Would rather run a thousand dangers
than be slave to Leandro's jealousy. This was a brave revenge done like a
Master of your Art.


Ant. That part of my promise is fulfilled then; but now 't's too late to
bargain for your liberty, you're at my mercy still.


Ism. I thought it best to trust you.

I knevv a promise was sooner broke, than your good nature turned.


Ant. Hovvever of my own accord I here engage to be true, until I find you
false, and then I^le take Lysander's pattern.


Ism. Then here I promise for you, that you always shall be true. I ever loved
the talk of liberty, more than the thing it self.


Ped. You Mariana, may challenge all the freedom that you will take.


Mar. I shall take the less, for your giving me so much.


Enter Nurse just awake. Nurse. I have found my tongue again, and if I don't
rail you all deaf --


Ped. Say you so, I have the other gag for you.


Exit Nurse. Pis. Pray Gentlemen, reckon it a considerable piece of
Reformation, that we have found out two infallible remedies, to cure an old
woman's talking.


Enter Lysander. Ant. How is it? where is he?


Lys. He Is come unto himself again, now he considers who you are, and follows
me.

Enter Jul. Well met Madam, I hope you're pleased.


Jul. Since you are so cruel as to part, I must allow you truly noble.


Lys. I doubt Pisauro some of these fine feathers must molt.


Pis. You're deceived Sir, with these I intend to purchase a rich wife, and pay
some of my old scores to Juliana.


Enter Camillo. They kneel. Came. Heaven bless you; and if you can live on that,
do. But I am so much a Reformer, as not to part with a farthing of money,
without settlement, Gentlemen.


Ant. That shall never breed a difference.


Came. I knew your Father well Antonio; if you prove as well, my daughter's
happy.

Yours Pedro, for so I 'me told you're called, is my peculiar friend, and if he
likes the match, I will do any thing that is just.

To Pac. But what can you pretend to, with your Gimcracks and travels, hah?


Pac. I married Sir for love and Virtue, and have heard you say it was your
fault (if it may be accounted one) when you took my Mother; I only followed
your example.


Tut. Well nick't Pupil.


Came. H'as found my weak side, it must not be denied. Well, you shall be upon
your good behavior.


Pac. Aside If it comes to that I know I shall soon win him.


Tut. Aside I Will give you Lectures for it to morrow.

To Pis. My gold's good Sir.


Pis. Yes this little Pinnace sails to fetch it home.

Aside.
Lel. And will bring it too, I Will warrant you.

Aside
Came. Come you shall all dine with me, we will be so long friends at least.

If two of these adventures come off well, I have made a saving voyage.


Ant. I have something to do still, which is the Reforming of you Mounsieur
Tutor. Nay never shrink, for one of these things must be subscribed to, either
choose to renounce your interest in the Society.


Tut. That Is hard.


Ant. Or your pretense to Poetry, and acquaintance with the Muses as you called.


Tut. Harder yet.


Ant. Or engage in three months, to produce a Play which shall have nothing
in it borrowed, nor improbable, nor profane, nor bawdy.


Tut. This is almost impossible, but yet I Will venture, and if my Play
miscarries here, set sail for England, where any one of these qualities will
make it famous.


Ped. Now it is perfect, Antonio.

We Are married, yet can know no jealousy.

Mar. And Sister we are wives, and yet are free.


Ant. Blessed Reformation!

All Is right, we should have nothing left to do,
Could we Reform one English custom too,
That Is the damned trade of censuring in you.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
(Spoken by Mr. Smith.)
HOw do you like our Reformation now?
Come, we are amongst our selves. Here are Wits too. pointing to Pacheco and
Tutour.

Or shall's to the Coffee-house and there debate,
Each take his Chair and Pipe and judge in State?
Lord how they wait a Wit that is famed in Town!
He looks about him with a scornful frown,
Then picks his Favorite out and sits him down.
Take me how is it? Have you seen our new Play?
Yes faith; and how? a half Crown thrown away,
Pox on it he cries, I Droll'd and Slept it out;
'Twas some Raw Fop: Then proudly stares about;
Then shrugs and whispers, laughs, then swears aloud.
The whilst there is silence kept by all the Crowd.
At length he nods and cocks, is heard to say,
D -- me it is true, and thus he damns the Play,
Rises, looks big and combs, then goes his Way.
It Is strange to think how absolute they are,
When looks, half Words and Oaths, destroy or spare.
We can expect no favor; these are known
Foes unto every thing that is not their own.
And rather too, than that shall want applause,
They Will clap themselves and that way gain the cause.
By such like Arts they rule the stage and you,
And what was Favor first, now claim as due.
For shame use your Authority and free
Your selves from these usurpers Tyranny,
Never wait their censure more, but let them know
You have the power that they pretended to.
They wheedle you to clap bad plays they write:
To be revenged do you clap this to night.
But Ladies you our Author hopes to find
In your own Cause and for your own sakes kind,
Since it is the first design of's Poetry
Both how to gain and give you Liberty.

