A great Wonder in HEAVEN: OR, A lively Picture of the Militant CHURCH, Drawn
by a divine Pencill.

REVEL. 12. 1, 2.

Discoursed on in a SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at
Margarets Westminster, on the last Monthly Fast Day, January 27. 1646/7.

By John Arrowsmith; B. D.

John 16. 20, 21. -- Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy.

A woman when she is in travel has sorrow because her hour is come; but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish, for
joy that a man is born into the world.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for SAMUEL MAN dwelling at the Swan in Paul's
Churchyard, 1647.

ECCLESIAE nutritiis, REIPUBLICAE fulcris, PIETATIS energeticae

Asseclis simul and patronis: H. E.

Selectis e populo ANGLICANO Senatoribus WESMONASTERII Congregatis, Qui ut
nobis posterisque consulerent Se per sexennium prodegere, Conciunculam hanc
qualemcunque

(Intra cujus ambitum CHRISTI Sponsam Mariti sui radiis coruscantem, Mundi tum
illecebras rum minas calcantem, Evangelica veritate redimitam, Laborantem
tamen, and puerperarum more Periclitantem cernere est)

Coram ipsis habitam, Avidisque nuper exceptam auribus, Oculis propitiis
perlustrandam, Si quando negotia deferbuerint, Perquam humiliter OFFERT D. D. Q.

Ad obsequium illis in DOMINO pro virili exhibendum paratissimus Joannes
Arrowsmith.

Die Mercurii, 27 January, 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Sir Anthony Irby do from
this house give thanks unto Master Arrowsmith for the great pains he took in
his Sermon he preached before the House of Commons on this day, at Margarets
Westminster, and that he do desire him to print his Sermon, wherein he is to
have the like privilege in Printing of it, as others in the like kind usually
have had.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

I Appoint Samuel Man to Print my Sermon,

JOHN ARROWSMITH.

Errata.
Page 4. lin. 4. for came r. come in some, p. 17. lin. 13. for in. r. through
ibid. lin. 14. for of r. with p. 19. lin. 12. for word r. world, p. 27. lin. 8.
r. Apostolical for Aposticall in some few copies. p. 34. l. 10. for do r.
did ibid. l. 14. for 65 r. 66. and l. 18. for child r. children. p. 3^ l. 9.
for which r. with p. 37. r. wrangling.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS at their late Solemn
Fast.
REVEL. 12. 1, 2. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed
with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve
Stars.

And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered.


THe new Testament which exceeds the old in many respects, may not be thought
to come short of it in any essential, or integrall part; that is made up of
Histories, Psalms, Dogmaticall, and Prophetical passages; none whereof are
wanting in this. Its Historians are the Evangelists; Its Psalmists, Mary,
Zachariah, and Simeon whose Songs are recorded in the first and second of Luke:
Its dogmaticall Writers, those that penned the several Epistles; Its Prophet
John: who indeed was all four. For ye have Evangelicall Histories in his
Gospel; Dogmaticall truths in his three Epistles; and besides sacred Hymns (as
that of the four and twenty Elders, Chap. 5. and that of Moses and of the
Lamb, Chap. 15.) Prophetical Visions every where throughout his Apocalypse.
This is my Text is none of the least. There appeared a good wonder in heaven, a
woman clothed with the Sun, (...)

While the bush burned with fire, and was not consumed, Moses turning a side to
see that great sight, was called upon to put off his shoos before he approached.
Exodus 3. 3, 5.
That which is here held forth is a wonder, a great wonder, and that in heaven;
your looks speak a desire to see it: But let me tell you, Honorable and
Beloved, the view will neither be full, nor comfortable, unless ye put off
earthly wisdom and carnal affections. That being done, Come and see.

The words are veiled with some obscurity, by reason of variety of metaphors:
But much of the veil will be taken off, by a right discerning of their scope,
which is briefly this, to represent the Church of Christ in her Militant state,
especially during the Primitive times.

The Militant Church, which is elsewhere impared to such things as are weak in
themselves and in danger to be ruined, as to a ship tossed with tempests, to a
vineyard exposed to wild beasts, and to Isa. 54. 11. Psalm. 80. 13. Math. 10.
16.
a flock of sheep among wolves; is here upon the same grounds represented by a
woman in travel. Her appearing indeed was in heaven, for reasons to be
hereafter specified, but that which she was designed to signify, is not the
state of the Church as triumphant (for there is no travail, no crying ou^ no
pain in heaven) but as militant here below, chiefly in her first age after the
Word was made flesh. So Interpreters Certum est mihi hic agi de Ecclesia
primogenita, etc. Alcasar in loc.

Forbes. Paraeus. Mede.
Typus est mulier, haec parturiens Ecclesiae Christi nascentis and
adolescentis, qualis fuit ante ortum Antichristi primis 600 annis inde a
Christi natalibus ad ortum usque bestiae, Riccard. in Apoc. p. 426.


not a few. One passes it with a Certum est, To me (says he) it is certain,
that the first begotten Church of Christ is here meant. The Woman (says
another) is the Apostolical Church. A type of the Church which was newborn
under the New Testament, So a third. An excellent picture of the childebearing
Primitive Church, So a fourth. A fifth extends the representation to the first
six hundredth years, from the birth of Christ to the rising of Antichrist.

Having thus set up a light in the porch, let us now enter in at the door of
this magnificent building: wherein we shall find the apparition laid before
us, First, more generally, as a great wonder in heaven, Secondly, more
distinctly, as a woman, described two ways,

1 By her rare perfections, which are three, Being clothed with the Sun, Having
the Moon under feet, Having a Crown of twelve stars upon her head.
2 By her weak and perilous condition, in that being with child she cried,
traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered.
I begin with that which first offers it self, intending to proceed to the
rest in order as they lie in the Text.

There appeared. It has always been the custom of God to manifest himself in
special manner to special favorites. 2 Samuel 12. 25. 1 Kings 11. 9. Dan 9.
23. and Chap. 10, 11.
Solomon was named Jedidiah, because the Lord loved him, and to him the Lord
appeared twice; Daniel a man greatly beloved, and upon him visions were
multiplied; John the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and to him John 20. 2.
there appeared great wonders in heaven.

When his favorites came to be sufferers for his name, he is then wont to
visit them more then at other seasons. The Spirit of Christ is with his Saints
at all times, but in such cases the Spirit of God and of glory rests upon
them, as Peter speaks, that is the spirit of 1 Pet. 4. 14.
God in a more glorious way. This was John's case. Ye have his experiment
registered here, Chap. 1. ver. 9, 10. I John who also am your brother, and
companion in tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was
in the Isle that is called Patmos, for the Word of God, and for the testimony
of Jesus Christ; I was in the Spirit on the Lords day. It Is thought that
English Annotat. on Revel. 4. 1.
all contained in this book was revealed to him on that one day. Who ever spent
a Sabbath so well? who ever had so many discoveries in so short a time? how was
his banishment sweetened herewith, and his Patmos turned into a paradise? How
excellent is thy loving kindness O Lord! how glorious are thine influences upon
suffering Saints! what Psalms does David indite in the cave! what Epistles
does Paul write in the prison! See the title of Psalm. 57. and of Psalm. 142.
Ephesians. 4. 1. Philem. 9.
what apparitions does John see in a desolate Island! there appeared A great
wonder.

The more lightsome any thing is, the more glorious; the more glorious any
thing is, the more wonderful. Glorious things are spoken of thee, o thou City
Psalm. 87. 3.
of God, says the Psalmist, of the Church: which is therefore a great wonder,
because all the Luminaries of heaven concur to the making up of the glory
thereof; and that in a posture suitable to the stations they hold in the
firmament. There the highest lights are the stars, the lowest the Moon, the Sun
in the midst. So here; the stars are allotted to the Churches head, the Moon to
her feet, the Sun to those parts of the body that are between both. She is all
over glorious, and consequently altogether admirable, because lightsome all
over; for her head is crowned with stars, her body apparelled with the Sun, and
she has the Moon for her footstool, so as to tread in paths of light.

If any here discern no glory in the Church to be wondered at, but say of her,
as they of Christ, Isa. 53. 2. she has no form or comeliness; and when we
shall see her, there is no beauty that we should desire her: it is not for want
of light in her, but of spiritual sight in them. A skillful painter, to an
ignorant man that wondered at his gazing so much on a curious piece, said,
Friend; Si meos oculos haberes, had thou mine eyes, thou would be ravished
with the sight of this picture as I am; and instead of wondering at me, fall a
wondering with me. So, if we had the eyes and spirit of John, the Church of
Christ would appear a great wonder to us, as it did to him. A great wonder in
heaven.

We read of a door opened in heaven, and of a call that John had to come up
thither, Chap. 4. 1. That was the Scene of all his Visions; there did this
great wonder appear to his mental eyes. And well it might, seeing, the Church
(whose hieroglyphick it is) has her original from heaven, her tendency to
heaven, her conversation in heaven, and her dependence upon heaven.

1 Her original from heaven. Except a man be born (...) (which may be rendered
from above) he shall not see the kingdom of God, John. 3. 3. Converts are all
born of God, John 1. 13. and Jerusalem, which is above, is the mother of them
all, Gal. 4. 26. Mihi patria Coelum, may be the motto, of every Saint during
his pilgrimage in the World, Heaven is my Country, there I was born, and I am
returning thither, which is the next thing.

2 Her tendency to heaven. Those Martyrs and Confessors, Heb. 11. 14, 16.
declared plainly that they sought an heavenly country. All Saints, as Saints,
naturally Zanchy being himself stricken in years, and writing to S^urmius then
a decrepit old man, has these words. Tempus iam est, ut ad Christum and Coelum
a terra properemus; scientes nos ibi propediem cum Domino suturos.
move to this center of rest; and because their motion is natural, it commonly
proves swiftest at last. As the approches of a needle are so much the more
quick by how much it draws nearer to the loadstone; and rivers run with a
stronger stream, when they are about to empty themselves into the Ocean whence
they came: so true believers, when their bodies smell most of earth (as toward
death they are wont to do) have the strongest sent of heaven in their souls.

3 Her conversation in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. (...), the phrase imports their
living and trading as denizens of heaven, there being governed by the local
statutes, and municipall Laws of that City; their conversing with God in
Christ, and having fellowship with the Spirit here below: whence it is that
when death comes, the godly are said to change their place, but not their
company.

4 Her dependence upon heaven, knowing as she does that every good and perfect
gift is from above, Jam. 1. 17. she accordingly expects from thence supplies of
grace to help in every time of need. When the German Princes in a Diet at
Norimberg had framed certain Decrees against the Protestant cause; Luther
comforted himself and his Patron the Duke of Saxony, Seiat Celsitudo vestra,
and nihil dubitet, long aliter in coelo, qua^ Norimbergae de hoc negotio
conclusum esse. Videbimus enim eos qui se iam putant Evangelium totum devorasse
nondum Benedicite absolvisse Scult. Annal. Decad. 1. p. 106.
to whom he wrote, with this weighty consideration, That the Princes at
Norimberg had concluded one thing in that business, but God had decreed
another in heaven; and the Counsel of the Lord that should stand.

Let us now proceed to show more distinctly, what this great wonder in heaven
was, viz. A woman.

(...) a married woman. That Is the importance of the word in other places, as
in Chapter 21 of this book Verse 9; Come hither and I will show thee the bride,
the Lambs wife, (...). Yea the (...), the decency of the allegory requires it
should be so taken here, because we find the woman with child, and in her
travel. Being so taken it imports a mystery, one of the greatest in all
Divinity, viz. the Churches relation to Christ as her husband. Paul who was
well skild in Gospel-secrets (to which the depths of other Sciences are but
shallows) gives the title of great only to two Evangelicall mysteries: that of
our Saviors incarnation, 1 Timothy 3. last. Without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh, and this of the Churches
marriage to Christ. Ephesians. 5. 31, 32 For this cause shall a man leave his father
and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.
This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. That
which was one of Paul's great mysteries, might well be part of John's great
wonder. But I forbear to enlarge upon it, because I hasten to a discovery of
this woman's rare perfections; the first whereof is her being Clothed with the
Sun.

That which some Platonists say has savor in it, Lumen est umbra Dei, Deus
est lumen luminis. The light is but the shadow of God, God is he that
inlighteneth light it self. Now of all visible lights there is none so radiant
as the Sun: Scripture accordingly styleth God a Sun and a shield, Psalm. 84. 11.
and Christ is called the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. He it is, and no
other person or thing, whom we are to understand by the Sun in my Text. The
resemblances are many. Christ and the Sun agree.

1 In point of Sovereignty. The Sun is the Prince of Planets; a body so
glorious that all admire, many adore it for a God, because they see more
Majesty in it, then any thing else that can be seen. Whence it is, that the
idolatrous Chaldeans (as Bodin observes) gave Bodin. theatr. Nature. lib. 5. p.
617.
it the name of Baal a Lord; whereas the Hebrews, with whom were the Oracles of
God, call it Shemes, which signifies a servant; for so it is to him that made
it. Christ took upon him the form of a servant, but is indeed the Lord of
all. And as God made the Sun to rule by day, and to diversifie seasons of the
year Psalm. 136. 8.
by its approches and recesses: So has the Father appointed Christ to be King
of Saints; and upon his various aspects depend the Churches Summer and Revel.
15. 3.
Winter, the souls Spring and Fall, the seed-time of grace and harvest of glory.

2 In point of singularity. There is but one Sun in the firmament, which made
that great Conqueror say, The heaveus could neither bear two Suns, nor the
earth two Alexanders. Look to Christ's person, it is Plutarch.
but one; although there be two natures in him. When the light which was
created the first day, did, as it were, assume a star three days after, that
star and the light made but one Sun; so when the Word, who was God from all
eternity, assumed flesh, in fullness of time the Word and flesh made but one
Christ. Look to his office, he is so a Mediator, as not to admit of any
copartnership in the work. To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things
and we by him, 1 Cor. 8. 6. One God, and one Mediator between God and man,
the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. Is Christ divided? says Paul elsewhere. We
may say, is Jesus multiplied? 1 Cor. 1. 13.
No verily: As but one Sun, so but one Savior. None but Christ (as the Martyr
cried) None but Christ.

3 In point of necessity. When men would express the removal of somewhat
absolutely necessary, they use to say, this were Solemn e mundo tollere, to take
the Sun out of the World. If that were removed, how would all beauty vanish,
and (as some think) all motion cease? The potters wheel (say they) could not
turn upon earth, if the Sun should not move in heaven. So take Christ from a
soul, it is impotent to all good, Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5.
Were it not for the Sun it would be perpetual night in the world,
notwithstanding all the torches that could be lighted; yea notwithstanding all
the light of the moon and stars. It is neither the torch-light of natural
parts and creature comforts; nor the starlight of civil honesty and common
gifts; nor the moonlight of temporary faith and formal profession, that can
make it day in the soul, till the Sun of righteousness arise and shine there.
Once indeed there was a time, when fruits were produced without a Sun; when
God, to prevent the idolizing of this creature as the only cause of all
fertility, enabled the earth to bring forth on the third day, whereas the Sun
was not made till the fourth: But never was there any the least moment of time
since the fall, wherein man could bring forth fruit to God without the
cooperation of Christ. (...) that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5. 12.
Neither can any vital action be performed but by his special grace.

4 In point of purity. Other creatures admit of some defiling mixtures, the sun
does not. It looks upon filth, but contracts none. Christ is a lamb without
blemish, and without spot. Such as cast aspersions upon 1 Pet. 1. 19.
him in the days of his flesh, calling him glutton, winebibber, and friend of
Publicans and sinners, did but act the mad man's part, throwing dirt at the Sun,
which none could possibly fasten upon. He came indeed into a sinful world, but
as a Physician among his sick patients, to cure them without taking the
sickness of them, being antidoted by his Divinity against all infection. He
has an hand even in sinful acts; as they are acts (for in him we move) but
not in the sinfulness of them: shines into the noisome dunghils of our Acts
17. 28.
hearts with beams of grace, yet continues most pure. He was borne of a sinner,
lived and conversed with sinners, dyed with and for sinners, yea as a sinner,
yet had not in himself the least sin of his own to answer for.

5 In point of sufficiency. There is in the Son a fullness of created glory.
All the light that had been dispersed throughout the great fabric of the
newborn world for the first three days, was gathered together on the fourth
into that one body. So it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell in
Christ: And the Col. 1. 19.
several graces that shined in the Patriarks, Fathers and Prophets of old
under the Law, were all to be (...) once in him. The innocence of Abel,
perseverance of Noah, obedience of Abraham, devotion of (...), chastity of
Joseph, patience of Job, meekness of Moses, courage of Joshua, zeal of David,
and whatsoever any of them excelled in, was an ingredient (...) that fullness
of grace and truth which was found in Christ, Quae divisabeatos efficient,
conjunctatenet. Each of them had the fullness of a star, he the sufficiency of
a Sun that filled them all, and had a fullness beyond them all.

6 In point of efficiency. The efficacy of the Sun appears in imparting three
things, Light, Heat, and Influence,. Each whereof is so qualified, as to
resemble the grace of Christ in sundry particulars.

First, The Sun imparts light, a discovering, guiding, cheering, growing light.

1 Discovering what was hid from our sight before. Desine cur nemo videat sine
Numine Numen mirari, solemn quis sine sole videt?
But for it we should neither see the Sun it self, nor any thing else in
heaven or earth. Without irradiati^^ from Christ men would for ever continue
igno^^ of the only true God, and of their Redeemer; we should never know either
our sins or our duties, our dangers or our privileges but for Christ. With him
only is the fountain of life, and in his light we see light. Psalm. 36 9.


2 Guiding. Luke 1. 78, 79. The dayspring from in high has visited us, to
give light to them that sit in darkness and the shadow of death, and to guide
our feet into the way of peace. The dim light of nature in common people shines
a little, but is not strong enough to guide, like that of a gloworm or rotten
stick. The light of worldly wisdom and policy in men of great parts, but
profane spirits shines more strongly, but misguides; like the meteor, which
Philosophers call Ignis fatuus, we the Lanternman. There is a third kind of
light that shines strongly, and guides too, but the head only, not the feet; I
mean that of hypocrites, who contemplate things of God, but reduce not their
brain knowledge to practice. Yea a fourth, that guides both head and feet, yet
but into a way of formality; namely that wherewith they are enlightened who
have a form of godliness, but deny the power of it: whereas this, we are
speaking of, does not only shine but guide, not the head only but the feet, and
that not into the way of formality, but of faith, which is the only way of
peace both with God and with conscience.

3. Cheering. Eccles. 11. 7. truly light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is
for the eyes to behold the Sun. How sweet are the discoveries made by Christ to
believing souls! what a pleasant thing is it for spiritual eyes to behold the
Sun of righteousness, moving and shining in the spirit of a convert, as in its
own proper Sphere! Such as are dark are accounted melancholy rooms: well may
they be melancholy souls that want the cheering light of Christ. But blessed is
the people Psalm. 89. 15. that know the joyful sound; they shall walk, O Lord,
in the light of thy countenance. We may invert it, and say, Blessed are the
people, O Lord, that walk in the light of thy countenance; they shall know the
joyful sound: they shall enjoy a continual jubilee in their hearts.

4 Growing. It increases more and more from break of day, and is in this
respect a fit emblem of that grace which Christ communicates to his members,
the nature whereof is to be growing till it come to arrive at perfection. That
in Esaias 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no light (no morning) in them, intimates a
remarkable difference between (...)
the knowledge of Saints and Hypocrites; the former is like the morning light,
that shines more and more to the perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. But evil men and
seducers (as Paul foretold) wax worse and worse; 2 Timothy 3. 13.
whereby it appears that theirs was but an evening light, which shines less
and less, till it end in the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 13.

In the second place, the sun imparts Heat, a melting, inflaming, quickening
heat.

1 Melting. When the surface of the water is glazed with ice, the Sunbeams
dissolve it. The grace of Christ has a like operation upon frozen hearts;
which are never truly melted into contrition but by Evangelicall beams. The
Law, like a hammer, may break ice in pieces; but what remaynes is ice still:
the Gospel dissolves it into water; it is no longer ice then. They shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, Zech. 12. 10. No such
kindly mourners, as they that have hearts melted with Christ's heat, and heated
with sense of Christ's love. She in Luke 7th, the end, who had much forgiven
her, loved much, and wept much.

2 Inflaming. The Sunbeams falling upon a burning-glasse create a fire. So
does the Spirit of Christ (who is therefore called a spirit of burning, Isa. 4.
4.) when he falls upon the spirit of man. Did not our hearts burn within us,
while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the Scriptures?
Luke last, 32. The burnt child, we use to say, dreads the fire: but there is a
fire, which whosoever has truly felt, will long to be so burnt again. Bernard
having been well warmed with the consideration of that passage, Subito tanta de
me suborta siducia, and insusa laetitia est, ut visus sim tanquam unus ex illis
heatis esse. O si durasset! Iterum, iterumque visita me Domine salutari tuo.
Bern. Sermon. 23. in Cantic.
Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered, professes he was seized upon with unspeakable joy, and assurance of
his own share in that blessedness; after the feeling whereof he cries out, O^s^
durasset! I would to God it had been continued. Lord, do thou visit me so again
and again with thy salvation.

3 Quickening. Some creatures have no other father, but the sun, nor other
mother but the slime. This perhaps is one reason why the sun is compared to a
bridegroom, Psalm. 19. because his beams are prolificall. The grace of Christ is
so much more, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. he
that has the son has life, 1 John 5. 12. yea, a double life (for no less
will serve his turn) the one of righteousness, all being naturally dead in law
by reason of guilt; the other of holiness, all being dead in sins and
trespasses, till quickened by him, the end of whose coming was that we might
have life, and that we might have it more abundantly, Joh. 10. 10.

A third thing, which the Sun communicates, is its influence; the strength, and
universality whereof are considerable here, we have an intimation of both,
Psalm. 19, 4, 5, 6. In the heavens has God set a tabernacle for the Sun; which
is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to
run his race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven; and his circuit
unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

1. It is a strong influence, as may be evidenced by the Suns concocting of
such solid bodies, as gold and precious stones are, in places that are so
remote from his own sphere. Were not the influence of Christ exceeding
forcible, how could it possibly rectify crooked, purify filthy, soften hard,
and raise dead souls, as it uses to do, all on the sudden? It Is Fortiter, sed
suaviter.
true indeed, that the operations of his grace are incomparably sweet; but it
is no less true, that they are withal incomparably strong. To make use of the
Psalmists Metaphores; Our Lord Jesus, in respect of the former, may be said to
come as a bridegroom out of his chamber, clothing himself with all sweetness
of carriage on his wedding day: of the latter, to rejoice as a strong man to run
a race, bearing down whatever opposes him in the way.

2 It Is universal. No visible creature but shares more or less in the
benefits of this influence. So Christ being the light that lightneth every one
that t^nes into the world. John 1. there is no man but partakes of his
goodness in one kind or other, though with much variety in the success. For
as the sun has different operations upon different objects, e. g. wax and
clay, softning the one, hardening the other; a chicken and a toad, increasing
the wholsomnesse of the one, the poison of the other: so upon several men
within the pale of a visible Church, Christ preached to all has several
works. Some are made softer, some harder; the spirits of foam are sweetened by
the Ministry of the Gospel, of others imbittered. One, with the Amalekites
servant refreshed 1 Samuel 30. 13, 15.
by David, becomes isntrumental against the enemies of his refresher: Another,
with the snake in the fable, warmed by the husbandmans care and compassion,
becomes an enemy to the author of that warmth; turns apostate, and falls to
stinging Christ in his members so much the more, by how much he was the more
enlightened with common grace.

You have had enough, and (I hope) not too much, of this metaphorical sun in
the text: see now in what regard the woman is said to be clothed therewith.
Surely because the Lord Jesus Christ is of the same use to his Church, that
apparel is of to the body of man. It serves for covering, shelter, and
ornament. In like manner.

1 Christ covers the Church with his graces. I will greatly rejoice in the
Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of Rom 13 13, 14.
Induamus Christum, dixit, potius quam induamus temperantiam, etc. quia nisi
Christum ipsiusque iustitiam nobis imputatam per fidem primo loco arctissime
amplectamur and retincamus, ut ex hoc son^ evirtutem ad recte agendum
hauriamus, iustitia nostra non superabit philosophorum aut Pharisaeorum
iustitiam, etc. Dicson in loc.
righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. That which Job speaks of himself in a natural,
is true of him and all men else in a spiritual sense, naked came I into the
world: and there is none but continues so till he come to be apparelled by
Christ, who therefore advises the Church of Laodicea, to buy of him white
raiment, that she might be clothed, Revel. 3. 18. Paul having exhorted the
Romans to walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envy; instead of adding, put on
temperance, chastity, and such other graces, as have in them a contrariety to
the forementioned sins, chooses rather to say (as a late interpreter well
observes) put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, because he is the only fountain of
all grace, and without the putting on of his righteousness first by an hand of
faith, ours will never exceed that of Philosophers and Pharisees: yea because
even when the Spirit of God has enabled us to good, we have need of Christ to
hide the deformity of our best performances.

2 Christ shelters the Church by his merits from the wrath of God, as apparel
does our bodies from the cold and injuries of the weather. Jesus is he which
delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. last. Paul therefore desires to
be found in Christ, Phil. 3. 9. as one would to be found in his clothes, when a
biteing frost comes, which if he were naked, would pinch him to death. Christ
is so beloved of God, and God is so well pleased with Christ, as in him to
love, and in him to be well pleased with all his members, even of that whole
mystical body whereof he is head.

3 Christ adornes his Church, putting upon her a comeliness far beyond that of
other Societies spoken of Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thy renown went forth among the
heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my comeliness which I had
put upon thee, says the Lord God. That excellency of Jacob by which God
swears, Amos 8. 7. is not to be understood of the Temple at Jerusalem, as some
would have it, for God uses not Per excellentiam Iacobi ^. ^. Christum, in quo
gloria nostr^ est. Iun. in loc.
to swear by creatures (that were to practice what he has forbidden us) but
by himself, Heb. 6. 13. Junius therefore expounds it of Christ, whose essence
is the same with the Fathers, and who is indeed the Churches excellency. He it
is that makes the Kings daughter to be all glorious within, Psalm. 45. that
renders a poor Saint in his russet, fuller of bravery then a profane son of
Belial in his scarlet: one of their souls being apparrelled with Christ
himself, whilst the others is clad only with the rags of the first, not robes
of the second Adam.

I go on to another rare perfection of this woman, which is her having The Moon
under her feet.

In explication whereof, I shall follow the stream of Expositours, who (some
few only excepted) make the moon here an emblem of the world; and not (...)
fitly, seeing it is

1 Full of spots; Insomuch as the Saints, whose main care is to be found of God
in peace without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. find it a very difficult
matter and an high point of Religion, while they walk and converse in the
world; to keep themselves unspotted from it, Jam. 1. last. The heirs of heaven
come to be maculated more or less, notwithstanding their watchfulness. As for
worldlings (whose spot is not the sp^^ of Gods children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.) no
Leopard is more spotted then they. Can the Ethiopian change his skin Ier. 13.
23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good th^^ are accustomed to do
evil. That beast (they say* though it be stead, will appear spotted still, the
spots inhering in its flesh, as well as its skin. Such are these men without
and within, in conversation and in heart, all over full of spots.

2 Subject to many changes, never continuing long in a shape; sometimes an
horned, sometimes (...) Hence it is that Horace calls the Moon Diva triformis
and Virgil mentions Trigeminamque He^^^^^, tria virginis ora Di^^^^.
half, and sometimes a full moon. So the world is a stage of vicissitudes,
constant only in its inconstancy. The fashion of this world passes away, 1
Cor. 7. 31. It is never long in one garb. As soon may the moon be suited with
a coat that will always fit it, as the world with any accommodation that will
always give content; with any condition that will always last. The fool
changes as the moon, faith the son of Ecolus 27. 11.
Syrach. And as worldlings are changlings, so the world it self passes away,
and the lusts thereof, 1 John 2. 17.

3 The cause of many diseases, especially of the filling-sicknesse. Scripture
speaking of such as were troubled therewith, calls them (...) Lunaticks Mark 9.
17. Luke 9. 39. Vide hac de re Scult. Exercit. Evangel. l. 2. cap. 12.
or moon-struck, Mat. 4. 24. The symptoms of falling sometimes into the fire,
sometimes into the water, of tearing, foaming, gnashing, expressed by the
Evangelists, clearly show what disease the man had of whom his father said
(...). Mat. 17. 15. The word in like manner renders the soul apt to be
troubled with a spiritual falling sickness; nothing exposing men to apostasy
more then worldliness. Demas (says Paul) has forsaken me, having loved this
present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. and again, The love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, 1 Timothy
6. 10. Many fearing the world would fall out with them, fall off from God.
Spira revolted, merely in hope to preserve his estate, and so lost himself.

But why is the moon said to be under the woman's feet? that must now be our
next enquiry.

The phrase imports victory over, and contempt of persons or things. Thus in
Psalm. 47. 3. He shall subdue the people under us, and the Nations under our
feet. Josh. 10. 24.
You know how the five Kings were used by Joshua; how Tamberlane served
Bajazet, and what was prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy foot stool. So
as the woman's having the moon under her feet, seems to imply the Churches being
enabled by Christ, to overcome and trample upon the Elements, the Affronts, and
the enjoyments of this world.

1 The elements of the world, spoken of Gal. 4. 3, 9. which one of great
insight into this mystical book of the Revelation, understanding both of
Mosaicall ceremonies and of heathenish worship, makes account that the clause
in my Text which we are now discoursing of, relates to that victory which the
Primitive Mede Comment. Apocalypt. p. 163.
Church got over both; in that she, not only saw the abolition of legal
ceremonies (which, says he, might well be signified by the moon, seeing all
the feasts of the Jews, and whole course of their Idem p. 161.
Ecclesiastical year depended upon and were regulated by the motion of that
Planet) but also the extirpation of those Idols, which the heathens formerly
worshipped. For then did Satan fall down like lightning from heaven, Luke 10.
18. he fell from being adored as God, to being slighted as an Impostor, yea
abominated as a wicked spirit. Then was fulfilled that which is written, Revel.
12. 9. The great Dragon was cast out, the old Serpent, called the Devil and
Satan, which deceived the whole world; he was cast out into the earth, and his
Angels were cast out with him. Yea then was that promise in part fulfilled, the
language whereof has great affinity with the phrase in my Text, The God of
peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.

2 The affronts of the world. The Church got these under her feet, when she
gloried in tribubation, was above Rom 5. 3.
her persecutors, and had patience to endure as much as their malice and
cruelty could inflict. I take pleasure (says Paul) in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake:
for when I am weak then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. The Apostles rejoiced that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ, Act. 5. 41.
They in Heb. 10. 34. took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they had in heaven a better and an enduring substance.
Laurentius the Martyr when they laid H^s ego epulas semper optavi. Istae
flammae mihi refrigeriura praestant. Nolite mihi beatam spem invidere. Quanto
plus tormentorum accesserit, tanto plus referam praeminorum.
his body upon a gridiron with a purpose to broile him to death, is reported to
have said, I have always longed for such cheer as this: To me these very
flames are cooling, and refreshments rather then torments. Gordius desired his
Executioners not to grudge him overmuch happiness; telling them, that the more
they tormented him, the more GOD would reward him.

3 The enjoyments of the World. 1 John 5 4. Whatsoever is born of God overcomes
the world: and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.
Carnal reason paints the things of this life, and sets them out in beautiful
colors; but faith washes off the complexion, and then their deformity
appears. Those Christians in the primitive times that laid their estates at the
Apostles feet, had first Satis si non dic^ntur malum, etc. Hieron. in Ephesians. 4.
28. Delicatus es Christian, si and in seculo voluptatem concupiscis, (...)
stultus, si hoc ex^st^m^^ vn^^^^tatem, Tertul de spectac. c. p. 28.
got them under their own; learnt to trample upon, and to have a low esteem of
them in their most serious thoughts. Take the goodliest things in the world,
there have been some in all ages found, that were above them. One of the
Fathers will not allow temporal riches the name of Goods, but accounts it
enough if we forbear to call them evils. Another thinks him too dainty for a
Christian, that desires pleasure on this side heaven: too foolish, that
imagines carnal delights to be real pleasures. A third being tempted with
preferments to a revolt, said, Dictum Basslii in eius vi^. ^.
Offer them to children, not to Christians: As for me, I can part with life,
but not with truth. Many such instances there are, wherein ye may clearly
discern the Moon under the woman's, the World under the Churches feet.

Her third and last perfection follows, to wit, having Upon her head a Crown of
twelve Stars.

That is, holding fast the pure doctrine of the Gospel, first preached by the
twelve Apostles, and after them by succeeding Ministers, which is as a Crown on
the Churches head.

So as here three things are to be made out.

First, That the Apostles are here meant, and such faithful Ministers as
succeeded them not excluded. The number expressed points us directly to the
Apostles, who are often called the twelve in Scripture. There were no more
chosen at first, Luke 6. 13. and when Judas was fallen from his Apostleship,
Matthias was substituted in his room to make up the number: yea though there
was a superaddition of Paul and Barnabas, yet, in memory of the first election,
Vide Molin^i Vates l. 2. cap 4
they are still spoken of as twelve, long after that, in the Apocalypse. I will
not trouble you with discoursing of the twelve stones taken up out of the midst
of Jordan, the twelve Spies sent out to search the land of Canaan, the twelve
Oxen under the brazen Sea, the twelve Lions that supported Solomon's Throne, the
twelve Officers appointed by him to provide for his household; all which are by
some made types of the twelve Apostles. Neither will I insist upon that notion
which Hierom presumes to be unquestionable, and sets a nec dubium est upon,
viz. Nec dubium est quin de 12 Apostolis sermo sit, de quorum fontibus
derivatae aqu^ totius mundi sic citatem rig^^^t, etc. Hieron.
that those twelve wells of water, and seventy palm trees at Elim, Exodus 15.
last, did undoubtedly prefigure the twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples. It
may perhaps be worthy of more consideration, that as the Jewish Church had
twelve Patriarks, from whom the twelve Tribes of Israel descended; so Christ
ordained twelve Apostles to be as fathers of his Israel under the Gospel, the
Christian Church: And that the Spirit in Revel. 4. 4. where mention is made of
twenty four seats, and twenty four Elders sitting upon them, alludes both to
the twelve Patriarks and the twelve Apostles, which put together make up those
twenty four, by whom the whole Church under both Testaments is represented. It
appears by what has been said, that the Apostles are certainly meant in this
place. The reason why I conceive other Ministers not excluded, is because the
Angels of the seven Churches are called stars, Revel. I. l^st. as well as the
twelve Apostles here. Which is The second thing to be cleared, viz. That the
Apostles and all faithful Ministers are like stars. Wherein it were easy to
be large, seeing they and the stars resemble each other in many things. But I
will content my self with a few.

1 As the stars are heavenly bodies shining, but with a borrowed light; so the
Apostles of old were, and all godly Ministers ever since have endeavored to be
men of an heavenly conversation; heavenly men and earthly Angels, as Paul was
styled by Chrysostom. They shine as lights in the world, acknowledging all the
light they have to be derived from Christ, as the Sun, of whose fullness they
all receive. That which one of the German Divines made his Motto, fully speaks
every one of their hearts. Dan. Crameru^.
Nil scio, nil possum, nil sum quoque; quod tamen esse, Scire, and posse
aliquid dicor, id omne Dei est.

They are most ready to profess that of themselves they know nothing, can do
nothing, are nothing that good is: and that whatsoever good they are, or do, or
know, they owe it wholly to the free grace of God in Christ.

2 As the Stars are in continual motion for the good of the Universe: so were
the Apostles for the good of the Church. Paul ceased not to warn every (...)
quasi (...), Etymol.
one night and day with tears. Acts 20. 31. went from Jerusalem round about to
Illyricum, preaching the Gospel, Romans 15. 19. Succeeding Ministers have
accordingly in their places acquainted themselves with continual labors;
which Scripture calls upon them for. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, Isa. 58 1. Durante pugna non cessat tuba; the trumpet must be
sounding all the while the battle is in fighting. Now there is no end of the
Christian Warfare, and therefore none of the Ministers pains. The Church is
Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. 9. her Ministers his husbandmen. Redit agricolis
labor actus in orbem. The husbandman has never quite done his work; but the
end of one task is still the beginning of another. So it fares with painful
Ministers. One while their employment is instructing poor ignorant souls; then
are they like Stars that shine in a cold Winter-night. Another while convincing
gainsayers and Heretics; then are they like those stars in their courses that
fought against Sisera, Judge. 5. The most benign Constellation is not more
promising to the World, than their Associations are unto the Church.

3 As the stars are said to differ one from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 45. So
the Apostles excelled other Ministers, in the universality of their commission,
the immediatnesse of their call, the infallibility of their doctrine, together
with many other privileges. And among succeeding Ministers there has been
found very great difference in regard of their parts, gifts, and graces; such
as there is among Stars of the first, second, and third magnitude, Melancthon
speaking of the Divines of his age, said, Pomeranus is a Grammarian, I a
Logitian, Justus Jonas an Orator, but Martin Luther is all these; a miracle of
men, and one that penetrates the heart in whatsoever he speaks, or writes.
(...) est Grammaticus and verborum vim explanat; ego sum Logicus, monstro
contextum rerum, and argumenta; Iustus Jonas esto Orator, copiose and ornate
disserit, sed Lutherus est omnia in omnibus, est miraculum inter homines:
quicquid dicit, quicquid scribit, id in animos penetrat, and ^^irificos
relinquit aculeos in cordibus hominum, Melch. Adam in vit. Germ. Theolog. p.
170.
Beza comparing the three famous Ministers of Geneva, says that Farellus
excelled in Fervency, Viretus in Eloquence, Calvin in Sententiousnesse: and
that the concurrence of these endowments in any one man would have rendered him
a complete Evangelicall P^stour. Sane iucundissimum erat spectaculum, tres
istos tantos in Ecclesia Dei viros, usque adeo in opere divino consentientes,
eosque diversis donis florentes cernere and audire. Excellebat quadam animi
magnitudine Farell^s, cuius vel audire absque tremore tonitrua, vel
ardentissimas preces percipere nemo posset, quin in ipsum poene coelum
subveheretur. Viretus fac^ndiae suavitate sic excellebat, ut auditores ab
illius ore necessario penderent. Calvinus quo^ sonabat verba tot
gravissimus-sententiis auditoris mentem explebat, ut saepe mihi in mentem
venerit, perfectum quodammodo videri-posse pastorem, qui ex tribus illis esset
conflatus. Beza in vita Calvini.


The third thing which I am to clear is, That Evangelicall doctrine is as a
crown to the Church of Christ. The prudent are crowned with knowledge, says
Solomon, Proverbs 14. 18. Now there is no knowledge saving, but this of
Evangelicall truth; and therefore no such crown as that. It Is our Saviors
counsel to the Church of Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 11. hold that fast which thou
have, that no man take thy crown. Some false Apostles, it should seem, had been
tampering with this Church; Christ commends her for keeping the word of his
patience, ver. 10. i. e. the Gospel, which declares the sufferings of Christ,
and excites to patience by his example: whereupon he adds the forementioned
word of advice. It would save much labor in debating one of the Arminian
points, if the place might be interpreted (as for ought I know it may) to this
sense. As if he had said, O Philadelphia, keep that truth, which has been
taught by those that planted thee at first. That truth is thy crown; let no man
take it from thee, no tyrant rob, no seducer cheat thee of it. A crown, thou
know, is the most principal ornament: take it from me, evangelicall truth
is the most principal crown.

I believe you expect some application of what has bin already delivered,
before we close with the second verse; and will therefore briefly infer
somewhat, first from the whole vision, then from the woman's several
perfections, and lastly from the order of those perfections.

1 Inferences from the whole vision. Which are two.

1 That besides the natural, there is a spiritual use to be made of all the
creatures. The Sun here points to Christ, the Moon to the World, the Stars to
the Ministers of the Gospel. Man's soul is an Alembeck, in which when the
creatures are laid like so many herbs, if there be any fire of devotion within,
many sweet meditations may be distilled. Natural hearts are apt to make a
sensual use of divine things: but spiritual hearts have an art of making
divine uses even of natural things, which we should all do well to learn.

2 That the Whore of Babylon differs much from the woman in my Text; the
Apostaticall Church of Rome, from the Apostolical Church of Christ: As not
being clothed with the Sun, but with outward pomp, Revel. 17. 4. She was
arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones,
more for state then for Christ; refusing to accept of him for her only
covering, shelter and ornament, and going about to establish a righteousness
of her own. Not having the Moon under her feet, but in her heart, loving the
world, maintaining her Non habent fulgentes stellas in capite, sed aureas
bullas. Brightman. in loc. Council. Trident* Sess. 4.
greatness by carnal policy, and making prosperity a sign of the Church.
Not being crowned with these twelve stars, but with the inventions and
traditions of men, recommended by the Council of Trent, as worthy to be
received with the same affections and reverence, which are due to the Holy
Scriptures. So as indeed the Moon is her crown, and the Stars her footstool.

2 Inferences from the several perfections here ascribed to the woman.

Her being clothed with the Sun lets us see,

1 The All-sufficiencie of Christ. Jacob desired but bread to eat and raiment
to put on. Having food and Gen 28* 29.
raiment (says Paul) let us be therewith content. Now besides spiritual meat
and drink which Christ affords 1 Timothy ^ 8.
us, John 6. 55. my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, he
himself becomes apparel to us, Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

2 The true fountain of all that wisdom, zeal, and grace which appears in the
conversation of true Saints. They are clothed with Christ, as with the Sun, and
he if is that communicates to them light of wisdom, heat of zeal, and influence
of grace. Such as have really put on him, make not provision for the Romans 13.
ult. Recent Christi sanguis tunc in cordibus hominum servebat; body in nostris
cordibus antiquatus deserbuit, and gelatus est, Hieron.
flesh (as others do) to fulfill the lusts thereof: although but too many,
while they profess a being clothed with the Sun, give just occasion to renew a
sad complaint made by one of the Fathers, viz. That the blood of Christ when
newly shed, did as it were boil in believers hearts, whereas now it is almost
frozen in ours. So much do we come short of the first love of those Primitive
times.

Her having the Moon under her feet, shows us how very ill it becomes the
genuine issue of this woman to love the world; the friendship whereof is enmity
with God, Jam. 4. 4. Mundus in maligno positus, 1 John 5. 19. next after Satan,
this present evil world is the great Malignant. Look as the Moon, when she is
at the full, is then in most direct opposition to the Sun; so it is the temper
of the world to be most opposite to, and rebellious against Christ, when it
receives the most light of prosperity from him, and is fullest of the blessings
of his goodness. Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: then he forsook God which made
him; and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation: Deuteronomy. 32. 15. I spoke to
thee in thy prosperity, but then said I will not hear, Ier. 32. 21. why
should Christians then be friends to that world, which is such an enemy both to
their salvation, and to their Savior?

Her being crowned with twelve Stars may serve

1 To beget in us honorable thoughts of the Ministers calling. How mean soever
their persons be, yet are they Stars, and that in the right hand of Christ,
Revel. 1. 20. an expression that argues affection to them (as when Jacob called
the son whom he meant to love for his dying mothers sake, by the name of
Benjamin, or the son of his right hand) nor only so, but care of them according
to that, Psalm. 17. 7. Show thy Genesis 35. 18.
mavelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right hand: and that
Psalm. 80. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of
man whom thou made strong for thy self. I know there are many wandering stars
(as Jude calls the false teachers of that age; in the 13th. verse of his
Epistle; men that made a fair show, but had no substance of truth in them: and
are therefore in that and the foregoing verse compared to clouds but without
water, to trees but without fruit, and to stars but without light. I am far
from taking upon me to plead for any such, but fear not to profess my self an
advoca^e for all those, that are godly, gifted, and faithful in the work of
their ministry throughout the Land: the rather, because there was never more,
never so much contesting against their Office as now. But who are they that
think themselves able to wrest from Christ, that which he holds in his right
hand; and do not rather fear lest he stretch out this hand of his; to the
crushing of all those, that go about to crush his stars? Godly Ministers when
they are slighted and injured most, may comfort themselves, by considering that
it is the fate of stars to appear much less to the eyes of men, then indeed
they are: and that they, who during life are as Stars in Christ's right hand,
favored and protected by him, shall after death be as stars at his right hand,
glorified with him, according to that Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise (or they
that be teachers) shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, (...)
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.
There will soon be an end of their labors and sufferings, but none of their
glory.

2 To put us all upon prizing Apostolical doctrine as the Crown of our Church
and Nation. Let Italy boast of her rich Copes, stately Altars, curious Images
(which are so far from adorning a Church, as that they do indeed defile it)
the Crown and glory of England is, that she has maintained the truth of
Christ, and enjoyed the light of the twelve Stars; deposited in this blessed
book. Did I only say she has maintained the truth of Christ? may I not
venture to assert that she does maintain it? If not, the next assertion must
be that of the Lamentations, Chap. 5. 16, The crown is fallen from our heads,
not unto us. But I hope better things of the Kingdom, and such as accompany
Reformation, though I thus speak. Doubtless the Confession of Faith, lately
presented to the Honorable Houses by the Assembly of Divines (who have therein
expressed the sense of many millions beside themselves) will abundantly
manifest to the world, that this crown is not wholly fallen from Englands head:
yet I fear there is cause enough to acknowledge, that it does not stand so fast
on as heretofore, by reason of the many Opinionists, whose main employment is
to shake it. Verily whosoever bears a loyal heart to Jesus Christ, cannot but
grieve to see the jewels of that crown, which he has provided for his Churches
head, pawned and sold, and embezled as they are: to see not only Arminians,
Libertines, and Socinians gratified in abundance of their principles; but even
Mahumetans closed with by some, in what they hold concerning the authority of
Scripture, and concerning the deity of Jesus Christ, and of God the Holy Ghost.
Yet notwithstanding, would we all in the strength of Christ, set our selves for
time to come, to buy the truth (which Proverb 23. ^3
none should sell) and, when truth has been sold by others to redeem it; I
doubt not but within a while that would become applyable to England, which the
Prophet speaks of Zion, Isa. 62. 3. Thou shall also be a Crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of thy God.

3 Inferences from the order of these perfections.

1 That men will never contemn the world till they have learned to put on
Christ. The woman is first clothed with the Sun, then gets the Moon under her
feet, not till then. The world tastes bitter to a soul that has got the
relish of Christ, and is amiable Cui incipi^ Christus dulcescere ei necesse est
amarescere mundum. Bern.
only to such as know him not. The stars that shine with some luster all the
night, when the sun rises in the morning hide their heads and appear not,
being so out-shined, as to be obscured by that more glorious light. Such are
all worldly excellencies to a soul wherein Christ is risen. A man can then
slight the things, for which he formerly valued himself. To Zacheus gold is
not the same thing after conversion and before it. Now he makes restitution,
and cares not how little he leave himself, so he be not left by Christ.

2 That men will never prize the Gospel as their Crown, till they have learned
to contemn the world. The Moons being under the woman's feet, goes before her
having a crown of twelve stars upon her head. Those in the parable who had no
mind to come to the marriage supper, but desired to be excused, Luke 14. 13,
19, 20.
fetch all their excuses from worldly affairs. That in Psalm. 119. 36. Incline
my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to covetousness, implies that an heart
inclined to covetousness will never give the Oracles of God their due esteem.
Luther, who gloried in nothing more then the Gospel of Christ, and ventured all
for it, is reported to have professed that he was never so much as tempted by
Satan to that sin. The Pope tried to win him by money (which it seems was more
rhen the Devil had done) but upon trial made, the answer which his agents
returned was, Germana haec bestia non curat aurum.
That the German beast cared not for gold.

Hitherto of the first Verse. Come we now to that other part of the
description, which concerns the Churches weak and perilous condition, laid
down in the second. And she being with child, cried traveling in birth, and
pained to be delivered

Where there is a kind of gradation, the steps whereof will help to bound, and
likewise to methodize our discourse, after this manner. She is with child,
her being with child introduces a travel; that travailing is attended with
pains, those pains force her to cry.

1 The woman was with child. This Apocalypse being the last piece of
Scripture, has a retrospect to the former canonical books, well nigh in all
the passages of it. Most of the phrases in this chapter seem to be allusions,
either to the story of Israel, as related by Moses; or of Christ as reported by
the Evangelists. For example, the woman's crying may look back to the doleful
cry of Israel in Egypt, by reason of bondage; her flying into the desert and
nourishment there, to the wilderness into which Israel was led, and where
Manna was sent them from heaven to feed upon. Her being delivered of a
man-child, to the Virgin Mary's bringing forth of Christ; being watched by a
Dragon ready to devour her child, to Herod's lying in wait to murder Christ,
the child's being caught up to God and his Throne, to our Saviors Ascension,
and sitting at the right hand of the Majesty on high. In conformity to which
notions it may be said, that as the Virgin Mary conceived Christ, when she had
been over-shadowed with the Holy Ghost; so when the Spirit came down at
Pentecost upon the Apostles, the Primitive Church fell with child. The words
are (...) having in her womb. Never was the Church more pregnant; for she
then had in her womb all those converts that were brought forth to God in the
several Nations of the world, by the ministry of the first Evangelicall
teachers, and of their immediate successors.

2 This being with child brought her in time unto her travel, which consisted
partly in the pious endeavors of zealous Christians to bring in others to
Nascitur indigne per quem non nascitur alter.
Christ, (it being a principle with such, that he walks unanswerably to his
new birth, who does not desire and labor to see others newborn) whence it is
that Augustine commends his mother Monica for putting Maiore sollicitudine me
parturiebat spiritu, quam carne pepererat. Aug. Confessed. l. 5. c. 9
her self to more trouble in being isntrumental to his regeneration, then
she had been at in bringing him forth into the world: partly and especially,
in the great and uncessant labors of her Apostles, Evangelists, and other
Officers, to disperse the Gospel throughout the world for its conversion to the
faith, and making good of that prophecy, Isa. 54. 1. Sing barren, thou that
do not bear; break forth into singing; and cry aloud thou that did not
travel with child for more are the children of the desolate, then the children
of the married wife, says the Lord. As also of that, Isa. 65. 8. Who has
heard such a thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth (...) made to
bring forth in one day, or shall a nation be borne at once? for as soon as Zion
traveled she brought forth her child. Ye have to this purpose a most
emphaticall speech of Paul, Gal. 4. 19. My little children of whom I travel in
birth again, until Christ be formed in you.

3 Her travel was accompanied with sore pains, which were increased by the
opposition she met withal from two sorts of men, Persecutors and Heretics.
That which arose from the one sort was more violent, that which came from the
other more fraudulent; but both exceeding dolorous. The former had more of the
Lion in it, that term Scripture puts upon Tyrants; Jer. 4. 7. The Lion is come
up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; the
latter more of the Fox, which is the name given to seducers, Cant. 2. 15. Take
us the Foxes. Satan in the one showed himself a Dragon, and a Serpent in the
other. Lion and Fox, Dragon and Serpent, all conspire to enlarge the Churches
sorrows.

4 Being thus in pain she could not hold from crying out;

1 To God in her prayers. As Acts 4. from the 24th Verse to the 31. They lift
up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God, etc. Of a
truth against thy holy child Jesus whom thou have anointed, both Herod and
Pontius Pilate, which the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered
together. And now, Lord, behold their threatenings, etc.

2 To men in her Apologies. Those of Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, those of
Justin Martyr, Tertullian and others afterward, what were they else but the
cries of this woman, traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered? This may
suffice for a brief explication of the words.

The way to improve them in this Auditory will be to accommodate these
materials to the State of things among our selves.

AFter some overtures of a Match in the Reign of Applicat.
King Henry the Eighth, the Reformed Church in this Kingdom was solemnly
married to Jesus Christ, when the Scepter was swayed by Edward the Sixth: that
godly young Prince (as became the Bridegrooms friend) rejoicing greatly because
of the Bridegrooms voice. The famous nine and thirty Articles of her Confession
then framed, were an evident sign of her being with child, and that a through
Reformation was then conceived, though but conceived. Many and fore were the
breeding fits she conflicted with in Queen Mary's days, and such as gave
occasion to fear that she would have miscarried. But God sent her ease from
heaven under the succeeding Princes: in which condition she went on for a long
while, drawing still nearer and nearer her time. Six years ago, after this
Parliament had sat awhile it was generally believed that she was false into
her travel. And, in the midst of all those sorrows which have befaln England
since, her friends encouraged themselves with this hope, that the quicker and
sharper her pains grew, the liker she was to be speedily delivered of that
man-child, which was by them so greedily expected. But, behold, as if all these
had been but forerunners of her labor, not bearing-throws, she continues
still in pain: insomuch as they now begin to think she has not gone her full
time, and earnestly to desire she may; because they fear nothing more than an
abortive Reformation.

However, evident it is, not only that her pains are multiplied, but that they
are caused, partly by the malignity of her enemies, who have embroyled her in a
bloody Civil War, and thereby given her occasion to breath out the Prophets
complaint, Jer. 4. 19, 20. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart;
my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard,
o my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of War. Destruction upon
destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled. Partly from the
animosities and disagreement of her members, then which nothing is more
dolorous to quiet spirits. Let me tell you how a great Scholar once prosest
himself affected with the like times. I know not (says he) what pleasure Quam
aliis arrideat hoc seculum nescio, mihi certe magnopere displicet, sic serveut
partium studia, etc. malim ergo vel olitor esse, tranqui^litate Christiana
fruens, ac Spiritus Evangeli^i simplicitate gaudens, quam terqne quaterque
maximus theologus huiusmodi disidiis involutus. Erasmus in Epist. praefix.
libro cui titulus Ratio verae Theologiae.
other men may take in this age, but I am extremely troubled at it; because
there is such contention and siding, such wrrngling and jangling on every side.
For my part I had rather be a seller of herbs and roots, or a man of the
meanest profession under heaven, enjoying Christian tranquillity, and
Gospel-simplicity, then a Divine of greatest note and reputation deeply engaged
in such divisions.

Our Churches condition being such as has been described, or rather such as no
description of mine can possibly reach the perplexity of; who can think it
strange, if (besides her crying to God, as in Is. 26. 17, 18. Like as a woman
with child that draws near the time of her delivery is in pain, and cries
out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, o Lord. We have bin with
child, we have bin in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind: And to
men, as in Lament. 1. 12. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold
and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger) she make her special addresses
to you, Honorable Senators, whom God has now called to the Midwives office?
No loving neighbor but would rise at midnight to help a poor woman in
travel: No tender Christian but would put on bowels of mercy toward a Church
in such a case. O what care! what bowels! what help is expected from you, who
above all men are bound with all your might and skill to promote the birth of
such a child, as may cause the woman to forget all her sorrows!

Would you obstetricate, as ye ought? I know you would, yet think it not
presumption in me, if in pursuance of the allegory which my Text puts me upon,
I take liberty to suggest three or four things by way of humble advice, before
I conclude.

1 Imitate Tamars midwife, Genes. 38. The story is this from Verse 27. to the
end of the Chapter. It came to pass in the time of her travel, that behold
twins were in her womb. And it came to pass when she traveled, that the one
put out his hand, and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet
third, saying, This came out first. And it came to pass as he drew back his
hand, that behold his brother came out, and she said, How have thou broken
forth? this breach be upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez, And
afterward came out his brother that had the scarlet third about his hand, and
his name was called Zarah. The different judgments of Professors throughout
the Land, show that our Church has twins in her womb. So much of Truth as
has been already owned by Parliament, Zarah-like has put forth the hand; None
can but say, This came out first, for you have marked it with the scarlet third
of a civil Sanction. Yet is there a Pharez a Division or Separation (as the
word properly signifies) whose breakings out are notoriously known; as also his
challeng of primogeniture. Our hopes are that Zarah will in due time be fully
born, notwithstanding this interposition: and that you will say to the party
that separates in Doctrinal principles (for of them it is I now speak) by
maintaining opinions that are destructive, and prey upon the vital spirits of
Religion, as the midwife then did to Pharez, Upon thee be this breach and not
upon us; May it never come to be upon you; may you never come to be partakers
of other men's sins in so high a degree. Hitherto the damnable heresies and
daring blasphemies, which have been vented every where, may be thought to stand
on the private account of such as vent them: But if representative England
(which God forbid) should espouse their crimes, by overmuch connivence at
them, the guilt would then become National, and too heavy for us to bear.

The Apostate Julian, who made it his business to destroy the Christian
Religion, betook himself to the use of two principal means; the one whereof
was obstructing the ways of liberal education, by putting down Schools of
learning, that Christians being kept in ignorance might sooner be cheated of
their faith, and less able to resist the Heathens sophistry: Ne Christianorum
pueri Graecis disciplinis imbuerentur, aut Poetas Scriptoresque eorum legerent,
aut Scholas public. is frequentarant lege cavit. Ne linguis eorum, inquit,
acumine perpolitis, facile disputationibus nostris resistere, and sacra quidem
sua aedificare and amplificare, religionem autem nostram facile refellere
queant. Niccphorus l. 10. cap. 25. Vide etiam Sozom. lib. 5. c. 17.
The other, indulgence to all kind of Sects and heresies, in hope by
countenancing them to create such a distraction amongst Christians, as should
bring speedy destruction, not only upon the Orthodox party, but upon the very
profession of Christianity. Dissedentes Christianorum-antistites cum plebe
discissa in palatium in: romissos monebat, ut, civilibus discordiis consopitis,
quisque nullo vetante religioni suae serviret intrepidus. Quod agebat ideo
abstinate, ut dissentiones augente licentia, non timeret unanim^ntem postea
plehem: nullas infestas hominibus bestias, ut sunt sibi fera'es pl rique
Christianorum, expertus. Ammianus Marcellinus l. 22. non procul ab initio.


I am fully assured that you abhor nothing more then the end at which Julian
aimed, and therefore doubt not but the God of all wisdom and grace, will
preserve in you an abhorrencie of the means which he used. As ye desire to
have Religion flourish among us, give encouragement to learning, and continue
nursing fathers to the nurseries of it. If notwithstanding the pleasantness of
situation, the water be naught and the ground barren, in either or both our
Universities (as of old at Jericho, where there was a 2 Kings 2. 19, 20, 21.
School of the Prophets) make speedy provision of fitting salt; let it be cast
into the spring that the waters may be healed. And as ye desire to answer the
expectation of Christendom, yea, of Christ, and to fulfill the vows of God that
are upon you, speedily raise up some bank against the inundation of blasphemies
and heresies, which are like to overflow us. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus
is twice commended Revel. 2. 3, 6.
for his patience, yet noted withal for his not being able to bear such as
were evil; and particularly, for his hating the deeds of the Nicolaitans, who
were a pack of lascivious Heretics. Patience it self cannot bear with such.

But there is not the same spirit in all that dissent from truth; neither is
every parcel of truth of the same importance. There may be some godly and
peaceable persons, who yet cannot thoroughly close with every thing, which you
perhaps may see a necessity of establishing, my next word of advice is, that
toward such you would

2 Do as the Egyptian midwives did, Exodus 1. Spare them for they are Hebrew
children, and such as belong to the Israel of God, though Jacob like they have
their haltings. This with me is a maxim, Every one that is truly conscientious
will as really tender the public peace of that Church and State wherein he
lives, as he desires to have the private peace of his conscience tendered by
that Church and State. Now unto such as are indeed so qualified, although they
may perhaps have gathered some peccant humors, there should be no churlish
physic given. Lenitives may serve the turn; seeing there is a divine nature in
them, which will not only preserve them from all mortal diseases, but work out
those slight distempers by degrees. I often think of that prayer, Romans 15. 5,
6. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be likeminded one
toward another according to Christ Jesus: that ye may with one mind and one
mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Why the God of
all patience? Surely to imply, that unless God be pleased to beget mutual
patience, and forbearance of one another in some things, Christians will never
be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus; neither will our
heavenly Father ever be glorified by all his own children, with one mind and
one mouth, according to their duty. In an Army, where the several Regiments
are distinguished by several colors, yet all under command of one General,
and engaged in one common cause, if the soldiers by reason of some diversity
in their colors, should mistake one another for foes, and accordingly charge
every one upon those of the Regiment next adjoining; how inevitable would the
ruin of such an host of men be? The Church of Christ is an Army with Banners,
there always has been, and Cantic. 6. 4.
will always be some variety of opinion even among the good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ: But so long as they are all obedient to the known commands of the
Captain General of their salvation (as the Scripture styles Christ) this
variety should not engage them in (...) Heb. 2. 10.
the destruction of one another, lest thereby the Armies of the living God come
to be destroyed, and preyed upon by the common enemy.

3 Encourage the woman in her travel, as Rachels midwife once did, Gen 35. 16,
17. Rachel traveled, and she had hard labor, and it came to pass when she
was in hard labor, that the midwife said unto her, fear not, thou shall have
this son also. She had born Joseph before, now the midwife puts her in hope of
Benjamin. We have already through the unspeakable blessing of God upon your
Counsels and Forces, obtained deliverance from a mighty adverse power, that
would have ruined us. Reformation is that which we are now groaning for: what
satisfaction would it give to hear you saying to England, Fear not, thou shall
have this son also? The Church (as I intimated before) is said to travel in
the labor of those, her agents, that are called to employments of the greatest
moment and difficulty; such are Magistrates, Ministers, Soldiers, and to the
first of these sorts it belongs to encourage the other two. Hezekiah was a
great reformer, and it may be observed, that there is mention twice made of his
speaking comfortably to certain persons, 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. Hezekiah spoke
comfortably to all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the Lord: And
again, Chap. 32. 6. He set Captains of War over the people, and gathered them
together, and spoke comfortably to them. If our faithful and valiant Soldiers
have not received due encouragement, let them have it, I beseech you, to the
full: and let me have leave to speak a few words in behalf of our godly
Ministers; whose assistance (how useless soever it may be accounted in other
affairs) cannot be spared in Ecclesiastical Reformations. Israel was not
brought out of Egypt, but by the concurrence of Moses and Aaron; nor the second
Temple built, but by joint endeavors of Zerubbabel and Joshuah. It has bin
formerly said by one out of this Pulpit, that you have nothing at all to do in
reforming the Church; by another, that none but you have to do in the
government of it. I fear not to call both these extremes, and beg your
attention to those that take the middle way; whose unanimous voice to the
Parliament of England, concerning extirpation of Heresies, and removal of
abuses out of the Church, is that of She^^aniah to Ezra, Arise, for THIS MATTER
E^ra 104.
BELONGS TO THEE, we also will be with thee: be of good courage and do it. We
live in an age wherein are many that do evil with both hands earnestly, as
the Prophet speaks, Micah 7. 3. There is therefore need that both our hands
should be employed in doing good. Now the two hands of a Christian Kingdom are
the Magistracy and Ministry thereof. The business of Reformation calls for
both. As we commonly use our hands for the washing and cleansing of each other.
So if the Minister be extravagant, the Magistrate may correct him; then the
right hand washes the left: If the Magistrate do amiss, the Minister may
admonish him, then the left hand cleanses the right. But he that makes use of
one hand to cut off the other with, destroys his body: such would our condition
be, if either Ministers should suffer the Magistracy to be cried down; or
Magistrates permit the Ministry to be debased. Scripture and experience bid us
hope, that Amalek shall then be foiled, and Israel prevail, when faith in
Christ, and zeal for truth shall support both these hands, as Aaron and Hur did
those of Moses upon the mount.

Lastly, for a conclusion of all, let the prayer of faith be of greatest
activity when the woman is found to be in greatest extremity. Time was when
things were at such a pass even with Jerusalem in a day of trouble, rebuke and
blasphemy, that the children were come to the birth, but (...) was no strength
to bring forth, Isa. 37. 3. The case may pe^haps be ours at present, though I
will not say it is. (...) am, the wisest course we can possibly take, is to
follow (...) ^zekiahs good example; who, upon that sad occasion, (...) not only
pray himself, verse: 15. but send to Isaiah, req^^ring him to lift up a Prayer
for the remnant that was (...) verse. 4. Verily, Honorable and beloved, there
is as (...) need of fasting and prayer at this day, as ever there (...) since
our troubles began. But the assembling of our (...) from month to month will
be in vain, unless that whi^^ is tendered to God be the fasting of sincerity
and prayer (...) faith. If while we fast our lusts be surfeited, and (...)
outcry our devotion, we must expect to have it much lon^er yet ere the child
be borne. Wherefore to add streng^^ to our faith, and alacrity to our prayers,
let us feed (...) those interrogations, which have the force of a promise (...)
them, Isa. 66 9. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause (...) bring forth,
says the Lord? I that cause to bring forth shall I shut the womb says thy
God? For my part when (...) consider that Temple-worke has been always
accomplished not by might or by power, but by the spirit of the Lord Zech. 4.
6, 7.
and call to mind how many mountains are already (...) before his Zerubbabels:
I am filled with hopes, (...) you the Worthies of our Israel, whose souls have
(...) all this while to bring forth a Reformation, shall (...) day see the
travel of your souls, and be fully satisfied: (...) as Jesus Christ would not
save his people by halves (...) leave the work of purchasing redemption for
them (...) had brought it to a Consummatum est, so he will not (...) his Church
by halves, but carry on the blessed work (...) Reformation till, not we only
but, all they through^^^ the world, whose expectations are fastened upon it,
sha^^ cause to rejoice and say, It is finished.

FINI^

