The Army's Martyr: OR A more full RELATION of the barbarous and illegal
Proceedings of the Court-Martiall at WHITE HALL UPON Mr. ROBERT LOCKIER: Who
was shot to death in Paul's Churchyard, upon the 27 day of April, 1649.

And a brief Narrative of the Cause thereof.

With his Christian carriage and deportment, and his dying SPEECHES to all his
fellow soldiers at the time of his Execution, as an everlasting witness of
his integrity to the Rights and Freedoms of the COMMONWEALTH.

WITH A PETITION Of diverse well-affected persons, AND A LETTER Of Lieut. Col.
Jo. Lilburn, and M. Ri. Overton, Presented To the GENERAL in his behalf.

1 KING. 2.5, 6. The blood of War shed in the time of Peace,
Cries out for vengeance; or our Freedoms cease.
Printed at London in the Year 1649.

THE ARMIES MARTYR, etc.
WHereas I have been truly informed from many honest and conscientious persons
of the life and death of this gallant man M. Lockier) I thought good out of
that duty I owe unto him, for to give a perfect and full Relation of the whole
matter and cause of his death, for the full satisfaction of all persons that
desire to be truly informed: And knowing that it is the duty of every man that
lives in a Commonwealth to be as isntrumental as he can, in discovering any
thing that may be of Public concernment; And considering that it is the common
practice of Machiavils to color over their cruel and unjust actions with the
vizor of some great good, or prevention of some great evil to the Nation or
place where the thing was committed, the better to deceive the simple, and
wellminded people; And to keep on that veil of hypocrisy which they have cast
over the face of the Commonwealth that they might not question their
abominable actions, both toward this poor innocent, and their juglings with
the whole Nation; I have therefore taken a little pains to put forth a
Narrative of the cause of this their bloody proceedings against him; that
people may be possessed that their holinesses may err and be guilty of as much
innocent blood, if they continue in the courses they have walked in of late, as
ever Queen Mary or any Tyrants before her: Thus then to the matter: on Tuesday
April the 24. 1649. there came orders for the Troop to march forth of the
City; and the Soldiers being unwilling to march forth without money to defray
their Quarters: desired pay to put them in a capacity to pay their Quarters
there, and be enabled to give satisfaction to the Country which they were to
march into: which desires of theirs being not fulfild, they went unto the four
Swannes where their Colors were, and secured them for the present, until they
had the pay that was due to them; being invited by some of Cap. Groves Troop
who had secured their colors before them: well then here was a months pay
provided for them; but the Clark affirmed that there was 11 days pay due more
to them then that months, and would have laid five pound with the Quartermaster
of the truth of it: But when Col. Whaley came and they disputed how much they
were behind, he came down the yard and said there was but five days pay due to
them: But whether this was a plot of his to cause this stir or trouble, I
know not; but surely it was the trick of a knave in so doing; but to the
matter; while they were in dispute about their marching away, there came a
fortnights pay out of Essex for them; and on Tuesday night there was an alarm
in their quarters about some plot as they say to destroy the General and some
Officers, and some papers cast abroad to that effect, a mere plot of the
Grandees as is conceived the better to countenance their illegal proceedings
on some Citizens that night; which because the Soldiers did not march were not
ashamed to put it upon them, though they never knew of it; at which time of the
alarm, or as they were to go to their quarters, Captain Savage told them that
they should come and receive a fortnights pay more betimes in the morning that
they might march away; whereupon they prepared for the march, some having
received their moneys; but when some came for it, he told them they could not,
nor should not receive it, though other Troops had, because they refused to
march the day before; whereupon they kept their Colors and would not march
except they were made up equal in pay with the rest of the Regiment: But yet
so reasonable they were in their demands that they told Col. Whaley and M.
Swallow and their Capt. that if they might have but the fives days pay which
they acknowledged was due to them, with an engagement from their Officers to
pay them a days pay every day as they were upon the march till they were made
up equal with the Regiment, and a passing by what had been done on both sides,
they would march away presently; No, they should not have it because they did
not march out to a Rendevouz of the Regiment the day before to Mile-end green,
although there were not many above 40 of the three Troops that marched forth
and came in again; Yet at length Col. Whaley said that if their Captain should
draw out six men of them and carry them before the General, they should have
it: but they were unwilling that any should be taken out, seeing all had
refused marching: being forced thereunto by their unjust command, in commanding
them to march without their pay to satisfy their quarters: at length the
General and Lieutenant General came very furiously breathing forth nothing
but death to them all, being fetched and animated on by that forsworn and
perjured tyrannical Knave Chillington, who can take what he please out of the
Soldiers pay for to maintain him in his Domineering courses. But oh how bloody
and red did Cromwell look! and the General told them that they should be hanged
all, and that they did deserve to be hanged presently in the Court: whereupon a
Soldier or two went down the Gallery, and desired his Execellency to hear
their just desires: No, he would not hear them there; but they must march away
presently to White Hall with those Troops that came to guard them thither;
there being no resistance offered on the Soldiers part, nor sword drawn,
though they have reported since, there were: but Whaley drew his, and
Chillington drew his to cut a Soldier, from whose back he rent his cloak. But
so much do they thirst after the blood of those that shall dispute a command of
theirs, whether right or wrong, all is a case to them, when it comes to
diminish from their lawless wills (for it was disputed and affirmed by an
Officer of the Army at the Spittle, that soldiers must obey their commands,
and not question it, though it be to kill a man, or steal an horse) that to
prison they must, and the next day to a Council of War, as they call it, where
their most implacable and bloody enemies were their Accusers and Witnesses, if
not their Judges; who, when they had sworn many things against some of them
which they never did (as can sufficiently be proved by good hands) made
constructions and consequences on the things done and sworn, whispering in the
ears of them that sat in the Council (no question but to stir up their holy
zeal against those that most opposed their ungodly practices.) Now though there
were many witnesses of taking the Colors from the four Swans, and carrying
them into the Bul-yard; yet none swore, or at least could swear, that he above
any other did lay hands on them first, because there were about 40 that huddled
or compassed the Colors about at one time: And though they say he did confess
himself he did it; I say, its no such matter* all that he said, was, that he
had a hand in it as well as others. Besides, Capt. Savage would have sworn that
M. Joyce had done it; for he came to him, and said, Mr. Joyce, I will take my
oath that you were the first man that laid hands on my Colors: But the
Gentleman being not able to bear such a gross Lie, told him, he was at the
Generals Quarters that day till almost night to get leave to go see his friends.

But such was their former malice at this gallant man (for his former appearing
in the Agreement of the People, when they murdered Mr. Arnold at Ware; and
because he would often oppose or dispute their unjust actions) that right or
wrong, their Saint-like thirst could be satisfied with nothing but his blood.
Well, die he must the next day by two of the clock, so was the Sentence;
nothing could work upon any of them [for as David says, There is none of them
that does good, no not one;] for when diverse Citizens went with a Petition,
desiring his Excellencies mercy and clemency to mitigate the Sentence, and
reprieve him but one day more; showing from the Statutes of the Land, that it
could be no less then murder to exercise Martial Law in a time of peace; yet
this could not prevail with him, the Law is but a dead letter to them, when
they must exalt their wills above it; for they make no more conscience of
destroying the life of our lives, that is to say, the Law, then a dog does of
eating a shoulder of mutton; for their will is their Law, and their Sword their
Justice. Another went to Col. Whaley in the behalf of this poor Innocent, and
found him come lately out of bed in his Skie-colour satin wastcoat laced with
silver lace, and his pantophles dawbed with silver lace, and did present a
Petition to his Honor, beseeching his Honor, that he would be pleased to
remember mercy to this poor Gentleman, and mitigate the Sentence to any other
punishment, so as it was not to the taking away of his life: But after many
things passed between them, at last he said, that if it lay in his power to
save him, he would not. The like most humble Petition that could be framed by a
man, was sent in to the Council on his behalf, and the rest that were to draw
lots for their lives; But nothing would satisfy but his blood; many persons
came to visit him that formerly knew him much lamenting his most sad condition,
being condenmned for nothing but asking his pay: And indeed that was the thing
which did most troubled him, that so small a thing as contending for his pay,
should give his enemies occasion to take away his life; which as he often said,
had it been for the freedom and liberties of this Nation for which he had
engaged these 7 or 8 years, it would have much added to his comfort; Though he
was satisfied well enough, that this in asking his pay was far inconsiderable
to the taking away of his life in the eyes of God and all unprejudiced men: for
he knew it was malice that prevailed over him and not justice; for one would
have thought that there being no swords drawn nor affronts to any offered, that
if it was such a fault and of such a nature, that a casheerment of the Army, or
banishment of the Kingdom would have been punishment enough for his first
failling, and faithful and valiant services performed by him for these seven
or eight years; They well knowing that for his duty he has ever been ready to
perform; and never held with any that was unwilling to do that duty which was
required of him and his due to perform. Concerning his conversation, he was a
man honest, just and faithful, being able to render an account of his faith in
God, and hope of eternal life; and was also able to make good the Cause for
which he so long had engaged: which is a difficult thing to many simple g^ls
now in arms, that like so many sheep, will be commanded to kill and do any
violence and never question it: for indeed this is that sweet temper these
Machavils have so long labored after; namely the casting forth of all honest
and deserving Soldiers that would be active for common good, and listing of
such as will kill a man for a morsel of bread; for his civil courtesy, and
loving carriage and disposition at all times and to all persons, he may
challeng respect from any that knew him; for I think he was beloved of many,
and scarce hated of any; he was a man that did extremely desire the freedom of
the Commonwealth, as can be witnessed by diverse who knew his forwardness in
promoting any thing tending thereunto: as when the agreement of the people was
broken off at Ware; (by these that pretended it was not Gods time, because they
had not gotten to that height of honor which now they say Providence has
brought them) oh how sad was his poor spirit, riding up and down the fields
with one or two, where he manifested so much love to the liberties of his
native Country, as that he could have lost his life there to have procured it.

For his valor in the field, I scorn to equalize it with the proudest of his
enemies that sat in Council or bore false witness against him: he did much
scorn to engage any man for his life, but he would endeavor his utmost to
perform it: [Not like Whaly when he engaged Major Bethell to charge a party of
the Kings Horse, commanded by the Lord Goring near Oxford; and promised to
charge them with his division at another place; the Major Bethell asked him
again and again whether he would do it; he told him he would; who afterward
stood still and never charged at all, but suffered 9 troops to fall on 3 broken
troops, where the Major was taken, and many killed and most desperately wounded;
and for which he received a sufficient check from Crumwel] he was much grieved
to see such Taxes, Excise, Tithes and Free Quarter to lie upon the Country, and
would not be so exact as many self seeking officers are (when they lie at Free
quarter on the poor Country) of their accommodation, either for himself or his
horse; I need not blaze his good esteem he had of all persons that knew him;
for they do, and can speak more then I can of him, and for him: In his dealing
with all men he was just, ever approving of that rule of Christ, that what we
would have others do to us, we should to them; and I dare pawn my Salvation
upon this truth, that he did as much as could be be discerned, walk by it:
failings I will not say but he was subject to as well as others; but if told of
his failings, he indevoured amendment; and if any be without sin let him cast
the first stone at him: sure I am, he was more conscionable in serving his
Nation then Captain Savage that holy man, whose holiness can admit of three
men, or two men and a boy to be mustered, and receive pay for them, and send
them home to his father in laws house with their horses and let them do their
work, and the Commonwealth to pay them: But I Will warrant the good man will
tell you it is a privilege that we Officers have, being fetched from the
practice of mercenaries beyond the sea; but this is not the first cheat he has
served the state, neither is he alone but many more Officers in the Army,
especially those that are married, who can make it their trade to be with their
wives more then with their troops and companies; though themselves have denied
that to others before they were in that Condition, telling them that he that
warreth a warfare intangleth not himself with the things of the world. But now
it is no marvel they asperse and envy every man that desires but to look into
the mystery of their iniquity; they may do what they please and no man question
them for it; as Captain Tounsell took Mr. Sawyer and cast him into White Hall
after he had abused him sufficiently in his own Chamber, there commiting him
without any order or charge against him, where he might die and perish for want
of food if good people did not relieve him; so I say marvel not at their
actions; for whatsoever is pleasing in their own eyes, that they will do to
any, as they have done to this true friend to his Countries Freedom. Therefore
his blood I will require at Colonel Whaley's and Savage's hand, because said
Whaley I knew him two years before this time; and Savage knew he desired
Justice on him when the troops charged him for dissenting at New Market; and
other articles belonging thereunto; and now have they their desires on him.

And thus have I given you a brief narrative of the cause of this murder,
which was executed on him in Paul's Churchyard, where were many hundred if not
thousands, weeping eyes and shreking voices lamenting so gallant a creature
should lose his life. What he said to diverse there and in his Coach coming to
his execution is here inserted verbatim, or as far as can be remembered.

Mr. Shaw and Mr. Atkinson being come to Paul's, met with M. Lockier coming up
Ludgate-hil with a strong guard of Soldiers of Col. Hewsons Regiment before
and behind, and he with a friend or two in a Coach, to which they addressed
themselves, and acquainted him with what had passed between them and the
General; to which he answered, Dear friends, (he scarce knowing us) I am ready
and willing to dye for my Country and Liberty, and I bless God I am not afraid
to look death in the face in this particular cause God has called me to.

M. Atkinson.] After that I met him in the yard where he was to suffer, he said
the same words, and to the same effect; and then the Guard driving all his
friends away, and him, I could not hear what he said.

But I heard (getting to him through favor of an Officer) Colonel Okey to
challenge him with untruth, in that he confessed before the Council of War,
that he was guilty of what was charged upon him in reference to mutiny, and
now he denied it: to which he answered that it was not so; Okey said it was,
and he could produce many to witness the same. Lockier replied that he knew
what he had said well enough, and that ever since he knew what it was to draw a
sword he never intended any thing but merely for the Privileges and Liberties
of the people, and in that he would live and die, and Major Swallow and others
said something to him then which I did not hear, but Major Carter made up that
discourse and said that it was convenient that this little time he had to
spend, it was requisite that he spent it in the best way he thought meet and if
he desired to retire himself he might, to which he replied he did desire to
retire himself in private, and that though he did do or think nothing but what
he would have every man to hear, for as his actions from the first to the last
have been for public good, he desired his death might be, and so he knew it
would be: For God would make his blood speak Liberty and Freedom to all
England; And then he drew to the wall, and there prayed about a quarter of an
hour, and after goes and makes water, and then comes and had discourse with
many of the Officers, but what it was I could not well hear, but thus much I
heard how he with a courageous and willing heart did undergo what ever was
laid upon him because it was in the behalf of his Country.

Then I took him by the hand, and he began to say in this manner: friends here
I am to suffer what it pleases God to lay upon me, and truly that for my
Countries good, and how great a comfort this is to me I am not able to
express, and therefore friends it is a good, sweet and comfortable thing for
to serve God; for he has set us in a condition to serve him, and given us a
rule, and has purchased for us not only Liberty and Freedom here through his
Son, but peace and tranquillity hereafter, and a means he has set down in his
word, which we ought to take heed ^^; For in that he has declared that Christ
is sufficient for all our sins, and God would provide fully for all those
that sought to God by him: it was not any thing would commend us to God, but
pure and undefiled actions in the sight of God through the power of Christ and
his Word which I fully own and believe declared the same, unto which we do well
to take heed; for if we will we may do well here and hereafter: here we must
serve him in standing up for our Countries Liberties and Freedoms, and they
will make much for hereafter, for if we do well we shall be well rewarded.
Therefore my dear friends and fellow soldiers, I desire you all to serve God
and love him, and honor him: And for me to pray as long as you see me live,
that God would carry forth my heart as now you see me carried forth: to which I
answered I am overjoyed M Lockier to hear such expressions come from you in
which I saw so much Religion, as that it was for me a good pattern ^o learn by:
and not take upon me to instruct one so able as you are* Lockier said, The Lord
stablish and strenthen you, and fit you for his work: And not only you, but
all my dear friends, to whom I desire you to commend me dearly; to and for whom
I shall pray while I breathe, that God would enable them to stand up faithfully
and courageously for the good of their Country and Liberties: And I pray you
let not this death of mine be a discouragement, but rather an encouragement;
for never man died more comfortably then I do. And after he and I had embraced
each other, he spoke a few words to the Officers, and then he desired to speak
with his Sister and Cousins, but what passed betwixt them I know not.

And then I heard not what he said to them; but from good hands of them that
were close to him, he said thus, Fellow soldiers, I am here brought to suffer
in behalf of the People of England, and for your Privileges and Liberties, and
such as in conscience you ought to own and stand to: But I perceive you are
appointed by your Officers to murder me; and I did not think that you had had
such heathenish and barbarous principles in you, as to obey your Officers in
murdering of me, when I stand up for nothing but what is for your good. And
then I heard Colonel Okey say, with other Officers, What, do you endeavor to
make the soldiers mutiny? Martial, away with him: And setting him in the
place where he was to suffer, he pulled off his loose Jacket, and Coat, and
Belt, and gave them some to one, and some to another: and after that he went to
prayer again in his shirt without his dublet, and after prayer he stood in the
place of execution, and all this while, with abundance of courage and
undauntedness; for when I desired him to put something upon his face and cover
it, he thanked me for my love, but he said, his cause was so just, as that he
feared not the face of death; and therefore he stood looking with a gallant
courage in their faces, and then came up to the men that were to shoot him,
which were six Musketeers, he lifted up his eyes to God, and desired that when
he gave them a sign they should shoot, which was the lifting up of both his
hands; and immediately he lifting up his hands, they all six shot off their
Muskets, and so died this gallant Heart.

M. Watson.] I asked him how it was with him in relation to his eternal
condition, and whether that which he had done was not out of passion? and told
him that he was to depart this life, the hour of his death was very near,
therefore I desired him if any thing lay upon his Spirit that he would declare
it to me; he replied, I have been a servant to them a long time, and been
faithful, I am burdened in my Spirit because of their unjust proceedings, and
for my condition at present, I praise God it is well with me, and I praise God
out of obedience to God, I have served my Country and for that I first engaged,
I little thought that they would have proceeded so harsh against me to single
me from the rest of my fellows, the fault being one and the same; not that I am
sorry that I am singled out by my self, for I am joyful that I must dye to
excuse them, but I see their aim is at my blood, and when they have it they
may then be satisfied, though that will give them little satisfaction as to
righteousness, yet I praise God I am fitted for it and have a witness from
God that I have served my generation with uprightness so far as I had
understanding, and seeing God has been so pleased to dispose of me, let it
come and welcome, death is nothing, it stops my progress from sorrow to
sorrow, I am sure I have a smiling conscience within me and the love of the
Father made out to me through the Son, and for death I praise God I fear it
not, and so dear friend I leave thee to the disposal of the Almighty hoping to
meet thee in word, I mean in spirit, though now we are divided by death; I
desire you would join in prayer with me, which we did.

Mr. Bunting told him, That he had heard very well of him, that he was an
honest conscientious man, and that much of God appeared in him, for which he
was glad; now he was appointed to die, it was good for him to make preparation,
he having been one of the chief promoters of the late mutiny, which might have
occasioned the shedding of much blood, for which he was sentenced by the
Council of War to be shot; and said that the Council was very tender in their
dealing toward them, and that they desired not to shed blood; though there
were 14 more guilty, yet but him to die: however his intention might be good,
yet a Mutiny being of such an high nature, could be adjudged no less then
death.

Ans. Sir I am condemned, or brought here to dye, I bless my God I can freely
submit unto it, having learned to look death in the face, hoping by the merits
of the Lord Jesus to have life and salvation; I have done nothing whereof I am
accused; I am sentenced as I think by their sixth Article to suffer. An Officer
then stepped in and said that he did before the Council acknowledge that he was
the chief of the mutiny; which mutiny deserved death: which presently was
denied, saying that he was no more concerned then the rest, and for them to
take away his life, was very partial and unjust; but I pray God forgive them,
and us all our sins, that it be not laid to their charge; I am sure their
dealings with me is bloody for them to take away my life for a supposed crime,
for that which might happen; besides I never went forth to uphold a Martial
Law to be executed in a time of peace, it being too cruel for any freeborn
Englishman to live under: I went voluntarily forth being invited by
declarations of Parliament, to stand by them in the defense of the just rights
and freedoms of this Nation, for which I have engaged my life, and for the
freedoms and liberties of the people, I now suffer. An Officer steps in and
said it was in your own choice you might have left the Army if you would, for
why should you continue under the power of it and not to obey. Ans. I am sure I
have been faithful I never betrayed my trust. Several of the Officers desiring
him to retire, if possible they might disturb him, it may be he would be
private, the time is but short, therefore think of death. I bless the Lord I
can willingly submit to dye; he then withdrew for a while and prayed, and came
again discoursing a little with the Officers; called for his Sister and Friends
there, came to the Soldiers that were to shoot him, and said, I freely forgive
you and all the world; I pray sister forgive them. I am sorry to see that you
should be brought to obey your officers to murder me, for you stand as if you
were the men appointed to murder me; I pray God forgive you I do: Whereupon
the Officers thrust him away, and said he would make a mutiny among the
Soldiers take him away; so being not permitted to speak to them, they shot
him, etc. saying they were sorry to see him dye so. A mutineer he lived, and so
he died.

But as he was honorable in his life and at his Death; so he was as honorably
buried to the trouble of many of his enemies, who could have been contented to
have his memorial to be buried in oblivion, that their wickedness might not
be had in remembrance: But I believe he did not so much offend them in his
life, but his death shall be a greater terror to them in crying for vengeance
on their heads: the guilt of whose blood does trouble many of them already as I
hear: However he is gone to his grave in peace with confidence in Gods love tto
him through Jesus Christ, where he shall rest in his grave and at last stand up
in his Lot having his Portion amongst the Just, and crowned with the loving
kindnesses and enjoyment of God.

To his Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX General of the English Forces. The
humble addresses of diverse well affected persons, in behalf of all those that
are under restraint or censure of the Council of War, or Law-Martiall.
May it please your Excellency,
FOrasmuch as the Petition of Right, and other the known Laws of the Land do
expressly provide against the exercise of Martial Law upon Soldiers or others
in times of peace, all Courts of Justice being open, and that the deprivation
of life thereby in such times has been adjudged in Law no less then murder.

And forasmuch as you have declared to all the world, That the Army under Your
Excellency's Command was not a mere mercinary Army, hired to serve the
Arbitrary ends of a State; but that they took up arms in judgment and
conscience, for your own and the Peoples just Rights, the principal whereof
are contained in the foresaid Laws and Petition of Right.

And finding nevertheless those our undoubted Liberties never more encroached
upon by the Military power and Law-Martial, Soldiers and others of late being
frequently seized, restrained and adjudged to death, and to reproachful
punishments without any regard to the Law of the Land, and trial of twelve
sworn men of the neighborhood: as is manifest in your present proceedings
against those Soldiers and others now under restraint, and censure of the
Council of war.

Hereupon we conceive our selves bound in conscience in behalf of the Liberties
of the people of England to entreat and claim the benefit of those Liberties
contained in the Petition of Right, and other the good Laws of this Land: and
that all persons now under restraint or censure of the Council of War or
Martial Law, may be remitted to the trial of twelve sworn men of the
neighborhood, and be proceeded against by due process of Law; which I humbly
conceive your Excellency and the whole army, are both by Law, and your many
Declarations engaged to perform, and whereby only you will render your self
acceptable to the present, and honorable to future Generations.

Robert Shaw Thomas Moulson George Atkinson Thomas Hawes Thomas Frisbe Walter
Allen.

April 27. 1649.
M. Robert Shaw and the rest went with this Petition, and after that came to
White Hall, and there related to the prisoners what they had done in the
business, and then M. Atkinson addressed himself, at M. Lockiers request to the
Marshall General, and acquainted him with the particular carriage in the
business how they had drawn up a Petition to the General, and did desire he
would stay till they had an Answer. He replied, that if so, they should wait
upon the General for an answer, and meet him at Paul's, for there he was
appointed to suffer. And to that end Mr. Shaw, Mr. Atkinson and others went to
the General, whom they found at Grays Inn in Sir Thomas Withringtons Lodgings,
and with much ado were admitted to speak with him: Unto whom Mr. Atkins spoke
to this effect; May it please your Excellency, We are come in the behalf of a
poor distressed man that is appointed this day, and almost ready to die: in
whose behalf we only desire your Excellency be pleased to pardon, or but to
reprieve him till to morrow. And we are the rather encouraged thereunto by
Reason of your wonted mercy in this particular. To whom he replied, You come
here about the saving of a soldier, who is already condemned by the Council
of Officers under me, and for a great crime of mutiny, wherein were engaged
many more besides him, at least 15; and I think, in such a high business as
this is, you never knew a General to pardon so many as I have done; and now he
is to suffer by course of Martial Law, and it being past, it cannot be
recalled. To which we answered, Your Excellency has shown much mercy to poor
men in the like nature, that did deserve more to die then he did: Therefore we
were imboldened to sue to your Excellency for him, to which he answered, That
he conceived he deserved to suffer as he did, and that it did behove us, if we
were his friends, to prepare him for another world; and not to do as we do, to
countenance him in any thing that is not regular nor safe; for he had like to
have made a great fraction in the City and Army, and for that he is to die, and
it lies not in my power to preserve him. Then we did beseech his Excellency to
reprieve him but till to morrow: but he would not condescend to neither. And so
much passed to this effect, but nothing at all obtained from him.

The Copy of a Letter written to the General, from Lieut. Col. Jo. Lilburn and
M. Rich. Overton, Arbitrary and Aristocratical prisoners in the Tower of
London, the 27 of April 1649, in behalf of Mr. Robert Lockier, tyrannically
ordered to be murdered by the pretense of Martial Law by the Council of War at
White Hall: M. George Ash, M. Joseph Hockley, M. Robert Osburn, Mr. Matthew.
Heyworth, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, all of Captain Savage his Troop in Col. Whaley's
Regiment; who by the said Council were adjudged to cast lots for their lives,
and one of them to die.
In which it is by Law fully proved, That it is both Treason and Murder, for
any General or Council of War to execute any Soldier in time of Peace, by
Martial Law.
May it please your Excellency,
We have not yet forgot your Solemn Engagement of June 5. 1647, whereby the
Armies continuance as an Army was in no wise by the will of the State, but by
their own mutual Agreement: and if their standing were removed from one
Foundation to another (as is undeniable) then with the same they removed from
one Authority to anoother; and the Ligaments and Bonds of the first were all
dissolved, and gave place to the Second; and under, and from the head of their
first Station, viz. By the will of the State, the Army derived their Government
by Martial Law; which in Judgment and Reason could be no longer binding then
the Authority (which gave being thereto) was binding to the Army: for the
denial of the authority is an Abrogation and Nulment of all Acts, Orders, or
Ordinances by that Authority, as to them: And upon this account your Excellency
with the Army long proceeded upon the Constitution of a new Council and
Government, contrary to all Martial Law and Discipline, by whom only the Army
engaged to be ordered in their prosecution of the ends, to wit, Their several
Rights both as Soldiers and Commoners, for which they associated; Declaring,
agreeing, and promising each other, not to Disband, Divide, or suffer
themselves to be Disbanded or Divided, without satisfaction, and security, in
relation to their Grievances and desires in behalf of themselves and the
Commonwealth, as would be agreed unto by their Council of Agitators. And by
virtue, and under color of this Establishment, all the extraordinary Actions by
your Excellency, your Officers, and the Army have past: Your refusal to
Disband, disputing the Orders of Parliament; Impeachment and ejection of Eleven
Members; your First and Second March up to London; your late violent Exclusion
of the major part of Members out of the House, and their imprisonment without
Cause declared, etc. which can no way be justified from the guilt of high
Treason, but in the accomplishment of a righteous end, viz. The enjoyment of
the benefit of our Laws and Liberties, which we hoped long ere this to have
enjoyed from your hands: Yet when we consider, and herewith compare many of
your late carriages both toward the Soldiery and other Free-People; and
principally your cruel exercise of Martial Law, even to the Sentence and
execution of Death upon such of your Soldiers as stand for the Rights of that
Engagement, etc. And not only so, but against others not of the Army; we cannot
but look upon your Defection and Apostasy in such dealings, as of most
dangerous consequence to all the Laws and Freedoms of the People.

And therefore, although there had never been any such solemn Engagement by the
Army, as that of June 5. 1647. which with your Excellency in point of duty and
conscience ought not to be of the meanest obligation, We do protest against
your Exercise of Martial Law, against any whomsoever, in times of Peace, where
all Courts of Justice are open, as the greatest encroachment upon our Laws and
Liberties that can be acted against us; And particularly, against the Trial of
the Soldiers of Captain Savage's Troop yesterday, by a Court Martial, upon
the barbarous Articles of War, and sentencing of two of them to death; and
for no other end (as we understand) but for some dispute about their pay: And
the reason of this our Protestation, is from the Petition of Right, made in the
third year of the late King, which declares, That no person ought to be judged
by Law Martial, except in times of War; And that all Commissions to execute
Martial Law in times of Peace, are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the
Land. And it was the Parliaments complaint, That Martial Law was then commanded
to be executed upon Soldiers for Robbery, Mutiny, or Murder. Which Petition of
Right, this present Parliament in their late Declarations of the 9. of Feb. and
the 17 of March 1648, commend, as the most excellent Law in England, and there
promise to preserve inviolably, it, and all other the fundamental Laws and
Liberties, concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties and Liberties
of the People, with all things incident thereunto. And the Exercise of Martial
Law in Ireland, in time of Peace, was one of the chiefest Articles for which
the Earl of Strafford lost his head; as appears Article 1, in the case of the
Lord Mount-Norris (yet alive:) the same by this present Parliament being judged
high Treason. And the Parliament it self, neither by Act nor Ordinance, can
justly or warrantably destroy the fundamental Liberties and Principles of the
Common Law of England: It being a maxim in Law and Reason both, That all such
Acts and Ordinances are ipso facto null and void in Law, and bind not at all,
but ought to be resisted and stood against to the death. And if the supreme
Authority may not presume to do this, much less may You, or Your Officers
presume thereupon; for where remedy may be had by an ordinary course in Law, the
party grieved shall never have his recourse to extraordinary. Whence it is
evident, That it is the undoubted Right of every Englishman (Soldier or other)
that he should be punishable only in the ordinary Courts of Justice, according
to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm in the time of Peace, as now it is (there
being no declared enemy in arms either in field or garrison ready to destroy
the Nation with fire and sword, and by their fury and power stop or dam up the
ordinary administration of the Law) and the extraordinary way by Court
Martial, in no wise to be used.

Yea, the Parliaments Oracle, Sr. Ed. Cook, Declares in the third part of his
Institutes Cap. of Murder, fol. 52. that for a General or other Officers of an
Army in time of Peace to put any man, (although a Soldier,) to death, by
color of Martial Law, it is absolute murder in that General, or Council of
War, etc. Because, says he, this is against Magna Charta, ch 29. and is done
by such power and strength as the party cannot defend himself: and here the Law
implies malice; vide Pasch. 14 fol 3. in Scaccario, The Abbot of Ramsey's
Case, in a Writ of Error, in part abridged by Fitzh. tit. Scire fac. 112 for
time of peace. Thomas Earl of Lancaster being taken in an open Insurrection,
was by judgment of Martial Law put to death: in anno 14. Ed. 4. this was
adjudged to be unlawful, because (says he) he was not arraigned or put to
answer in the time of peace; and because the Chancery, and all other Courts of
the Kings were then open; in which Law was done to every man, as it wont to be;
and that against the Charter of Liberties, because the said Thomas being a Peer
and Noble of the Kingdom, should not be imprisoned, nor should the same King
pass Sentence upon him, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers: yet in the
time of peace, and without Arraignment or Answer, or lawful Judgment of his
Peers, he was adjudged to death. Therefore erecting of Martial Law, now, when
all Courts of Justice are open, and stopping the free current of Law, which
sufficiently provides for the punishment of Soldiers as well as others (as
appears by 18. H. 6: Chapter 18, 19. and 2, and 3. Ed. 6. Chapter 2. 4 and 5. P. and M.
Chapter 3. and 5. Eliz. 5. and 1. Jam. 25.) is an absolute destroying of our
Fundamental Liberties, and the razing of the Foundation of the Common Law of
England; the which out of duty and Conscience to the Rights and Freedoms of
this Nation (which we value above our lives) and to (...) You and all Your
Council without all excuse, we are moved to present unto your Excellency:
Earnestly pressing you, well to consider what you do, before you proceed to
the taking away the lives of those men by Martial Law; least the blood of the
Innocent, or the blood of War shed in the time of peace (and so palpable
subversion of the Laws and Liberties of England) bring the reward of just
vengeance after it upon you, as it did upon Joab the Son of Zerviah, 1 King. 2.
ver. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. and the Earl of Strafford: for innocent blood God
will not pardon, Genesis 9.5, 6. and Rev. 13.10. and which cannot be expiated but
by the blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35.33. Deuteronomy 19.11, 12, 13. and 2 Samuel
11.12. and 1 King. 21.19. and 2 King. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 26, 33, 36, 37. and chap.
24.2, 3, 4. and what the people may do (in case of such violent subversion of
their Rights) we shall leave to your Excellency to Judge, and remain

Sir, Your Excellencies most watchful observers John Lilburn. Richard Overton.

From our Causeless, unjust, and Tyranical Captivity in the Tower of London,
April 27. 1649.

The POSTSCRIPT to the READER.
Dear Countryman,
WE desire thee to take notice, that M. Robert Shaw, M. Thomas Moulson, M.
George Atkinson, M. Thomas Harris, M. Thomas Frisby, and M. Walter Allen,
delivered a Petition to the Generals own hands, to the effect of this Letter,
diverse hours before the execution of the foresaid gallant and honest M. Robert
Lockier; which Petition and the Generals answer, you may at large read in the 3
and 4 pages of the Book called the Armies Martyr: But nothing would satisfy
the General but his innocent blood; and therefore according to the Law of his
will, he caused him to be murdered or shot to death in Paul's Churchyard; for
whose innocent blood, both by the Law of God and the Kingdom the Generals
ought to go without mercy or compassion; and not only his but also all the rest
of his Judges and Executioners, for which by the Law of England they are
indictable (by any honest English man) in the County where the murder was
committed. And that this Act in shooting precious Master Lockier to death, is
not only wilful mutrher in the eye of the law of England, but also Treason,
is plainly and undeniably proved, in C. John Ingrams plea, M. Will. Tompsons
plea, and M. Io. Crosinans plea, all of which are printed at large in
Lieutenant Col. John Lilburns Book, Printed, Feb, 1647. and called, The Peoples
Prerogative, page 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56. And also
in his additions to his second Edition of his Book called, The Picture of the
Council of State: And therefore let us tell the General, It may prove in time
a vain thing to him and his officers to protect themselves with their swords
from the due course and proceedings of Law; least the people come to preach the
same doctrine to the General and his Tyrannical officers, that their darling
friend the present Lord Chief Justice St. John preached to the Earl of
Strafford in the latter end of his Argument of Law Printed for John Bartlet,
and made against him when he was upon his Trial, whose words are these, That
he in vain calls for the help of the Law, that walks contrary unto Law, and
from the Law of life for life; he that would not have others to have law, why
should he have any himself? why should not that be done unto him, which he
himself would have done to another? It is truth says he, we give law to Hares
and Deer, because they be Beasts of Chase; but it was never accounted either
cruelty or foul play to knock Foxes or Wolves on the head as often as they can
be found, because they be beasts of prey; The warrenner sets traps for Polcats
and other vermin for the preservation of the warren,

JOHN LILBURN. RICHARD OVERTON

Tower, May, 4, 1649.
FINIS

