THE ARRIVAL and WELCOME OF Mr. GEORGE WALKER, Late Governor of LONDONDERRY,
in IRELAND.
NO Poet's left? are they all sent to Play?
And do the Muses now keep holy day?
Can WALKER, Derry's Governor be here?
And none salute Him? None in Print appear?
Ungrateful Age! I doubt we do inherit,
Like Bays, too much of the Red-Letter'd Spirit,
I Will venture out, though late, what'ere comes on it,
Without regard to malice, or affront:
WALKER's Arrival, shall with me prevail,
And I Am resolved to pay him, his first Hail.
Hail mighty Man, to King and Kingdom true,
Great Son of Mars, and of Minerva too.
Thou Man of double strength, of tongue, and hand,
Can Preach with one, with the other can Command.
Saint Peter's Keys, and Saint Paul's two edged Sword,
Did never better in one Soul accord.
Doctor, or Hero, oh! What shall I call
This Divine Man, who is both these, and all.
Welcome, thrice welcome to our English shore,
Surely our Ships did make their Cannons roar,
For joy they brought so great a Cargo'ore.
Welcome once more unto the British Coast,
Thou who so bravely did defend thy Post.
And do the work of the great Lord of Host.
Our Bells should busy be, with their loud voice,
And flames in streets, to make us all rejoice,
Te Deum's in our Churches should be sung,
And all the Irish Harps now newly strung,
But amidst all the Consort, it is the heart,
Should bear the largest, and the longest part.
Thus Voices, Arts, and Hearts, should we advance,
To praise our God for thy Deliverance,
Since WALKER's work in Derry's brave Defense,
Was Scotland's Rampart, and was England's Fence.
What was more great? What could be yet more brave?
Then by one Act, three Kingdoms thus to save?
Cease, Greece, and Rome, your Worthyes then to boast,
Should we Compare, yours would be wholly lost;
Candia of her long Seige must silent be,
And Stetin too bears not the bell from Thee.
Buda, that baffled one Campaign must yield,
And Belgrade likewise will resign her shield;
These fought, and bravely too, but yet did fall,
WALKER kept Derry, and out did them all,
And yet their Greifs, were mounted to our price,
To be reduced to Catts, and Ratts, and Mice;
Dog's head in Porridge pott, made us good Broth,
And was no empty Sign, but real Troth;
We thought, like Tartars, Horses very good,
Scarce potted Ven'son, to be better food;
By which extrems, we were so sharply tried,
That, to speak truth, We neither lived, nor died;
Yet, as in sleep, we see grim Death, and live,
So were our miseries, Death's Perspective;
So once the Mighty Prophet in the Den,
So the three Children died, and lived again;
And so did we, when every dismal hour,
Some of us Death did kindly too devour;
Here some lay starved, others the're happyer shot;
Such were our Objects, still upon the spot.
And yet we fought, and raised our spirits so,
That we despised, repelled, and slay'd the Fo;
So little were our Strengths, our Numbers less,
We sometimes blushed at our own great Success,
Which we near feared, the Cause had such strange odds,
Their's was all empty Idol, our's all God's.
Then Peer these acts, amongst all ancient story,
And show the Man, that deserves greater glory.
It Is WALKER then, who Ireland has preserved,
And the great Miter there for this deserved,
And for whom Heavenly treasures are reserved.
Now, that our WALKER is gone off the Stage,
Enter Great SCHOMBERG, I error of the Age,
March Thundering Marshal, with thy conquering Arms,
Thy Name's a Spell, and give's thy Army Charms.
The Holy War like WALKER led the van,
May Thou as prosperous end, as he began;
We know, fear is all stranger unto Thee,
Thou know not, whether such a Passion be;
Or if there be, Thou leave it to thy Foes,
And such dull heads, as dare thy Arms oppose.
Vict'ries thy Conduct always did attend,
Triumphs ought now to Crown its latter end;
This Work's beneath thee, Ireland will not bleed,
Thy very word, almost, will do the Deed.
Hunt them to Death, for to do Dear-Joyes right,
They know, what it is to fly, not what to fight.
Then Chat no more, Ireland's already wone.
SCHOMBERG has conquered, Talbot's work's undone.
Thus make Dispatch, That heigthen'd France may feel,
The sharpened Edge of thy Victorious Steel,
There, make Descent, and when thou do invade,
To their great greifs, They Will find their Lillies fade:
And since they did great part of Dutchland burn,
Advance to Paris, and make that, an Urn:
But once appear, and they will quickly yield,
You Are Marshal there, and ought Command in Field.
Thus Conquer on, and restore England's Glory,
That both with Grandeur may be read in Story;
England for these last eight and twenty Years,
Has still declined, and yet ought be in tears;
Rouse Her now Dormant Lions from their Den,
And make them at least passant once again;
So may thou to thy own Name, Honor bring,
Glory to Her, and Her Most Graci'ous KING,
And then for All, We will due Praises Sing.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, Jun. and Sold by R. Tailor, 1689.


